Associative Memory in Iterated Overparameterized Sigmoid Autoencoders

Yibo Jiang 1 Cengiz Pehlevan 2

Abstract
Recent work showed that overparameterized autoencoders can be trained to implement associative memory via iterative maps, when the trained
input-output Jacobian of the network has all of
its eigenvalue norms strictly below one. Here,
we theoretically analyze this phenomenon for sigmoid networks by leveraging recent developments
in deep learning theory, especially the correspondence between training neural networks in the
infinite-width limit and performing kernel regression with the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK). We
find that overparameterized sigmoid autoencoders
can have attractors in the NTK limit for both training with a single example and multiple examples
under certain conditions. In particular, for multiple training examples, we find that the norm of
the largest Jacobian eigenvalue drops below one
with increasing input norm, leading to associative
memory.

1. Introduction
The mechanisms behind memory have been a long interest
of neuroscientists. Hopfield’s seminal work proposed that
associative memory can be implemented by attractor neural dynamics (Hopfield, 1982), and has been the dominant
model that shapes thinking in this domain (Hertz, 2018).
Recently, Radhakrishnan et al. (2019; 2018) proposed an
alternative mechanism and showed that overparameterized
autoencoders trained with gradient descent could also implement associative memory in an iterative fashion. These
networks are reported to be easy to train and to not suffer
from spurious attractors, unlike Hopfield networks (Amit &
Treves, 1989; Hertz, 2018). The potential benefits of this
approach make a theoretical account of it necessary, which
we aim to provide here.
1
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 Center for Brain Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence
to: Cengiz Pehlevan <cpehlevan@seas.harvard.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

We study auto-encoders in a limit of neural networks that
makes theoretical analysis possible. Specifically, as the
width of the hidden layers of a feedforward neural network
is taken to infinity with a particular initialization scheme,
its training dynamics simplifies and can be described by
ridgeless kernel interpolation with a kernel called the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) (Jacot et al., 2018). Working
in the NTK limit, we examine the input-output Jacobian
matrices of the trained networks as they control the stability
of trained fixed points. We focus on networks with sigmoid
activation functions, but our results can be extended to other
sigmoidal functions such as erf and tanh using similar techniques. We make a distinction between the cases of a single
training example and multiple training examples, which
exhibit different memory behaviors.
Our main contributions and results are summarized below:
• First, we analyze autoencoders in the NTK limit trained
on a single training example. We argue that the trained
Jacobian will stay close to initialization under certain
conditions. Therefore, if the initial Jacobian has all eigenvalue norms smaller than 1, this training example will be
an attractor.
• Next, we specialize to 2-layer networks. We show that
when the norms of training examples are small, attractor
formation can fail due to the presence of eigenvalue 1 in
the spectrum of trained Jacobian matrices.
• We show that a 2-layer network can have attractors when
the norms of training examples are large as the induced
NTK relies more on the non-linear, saturated region of
the activation function. This suggests that the network
transitions from a regime where attractor formation fails
to a regime where it succeeds as the input norm grows.
• We verify the predictions of our theoretical results in
simulations.
Many previous works on generalization (Allen-Zhu et al.,
2019; Cao & Gu, 2019) and training (Jacot et al., 2018; Du
et al., 2018; Allen-Zhu et al., 2018) in the NTK limit focus
on input data on the unit sphere which is violated in practice
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012). We highlight how the input norm
can set trained neural networks in different learning regions
with respect to the trained input-output Jacobian.
Associative memory behavior induced by training overparameterized autoencoders could provide insights into the

