Radioactive Data: Tracing Through Training
Alexandre Sablayrolles 1 2 Matthijs Douze 1 Cordelia Schmid 2 Hervé Jégou 1

Abstract
Data tracing determines whether particular data
samples have been used to train a model. We
propose a new technique, radioactive data, that
makes imperceptible changes to these samples
such that any model trained on them will bear
an identifiable mark. Given a trained model, our
technique detects the use of radioactive data and
provides a level of confidence (p-value). Experiments on large-scale benchmarks (Imagenet),
with standard architectures (Resnet-18, VGG-16,
Densenet-121) and training procedures, show that
we detect radioactive data with high confidence
(p <0.0001) when only 1% of the data used to
train a model is radioactive. Our radioactive mark
is resilient to strong data augmentations and variations of the model architecture. As a result, it
offers a much higher signal-to-noise ratio than
data poisoning and backdoor methods.

1. Introduction
The availability of large-scale public datasets has fuelled
the development of machine learning. The Imagenet collection (Deng et al., 2009) and challenge (Russakovsky et al.,
2015) contributed to the success of deep learning architectures (Krizhevsky et al., 2012). The annotation of precise instance segmentations on the large-scale COCO dataset (Lin
et al., 2014) enabled large improvements of object detectors
and instance segmentation models (He et al., 2017).
Machine learning and deep learning models are trained to
solve specific tasks (e.g. classification, segmentation), but as
a side-effect reproduce the bias in training datasets (Torralba
et al., 2011). Such a bias is a weak signal that a particular
dataset has been used to solve a task. Our objective in this
paper is to enable the traceability of datasets. By introducing
a specific mark in a dataset, we want to provide a strong
1

Facebook AI Research, Paris 2 Inria, Grenoble.
Correspondence to:
Alexandre Sablayrolles <alexandre.sablayrolles@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Vanilla data
Training
CNN

Detection with
statistical test
Radioactive data

Training
CNN

Figure 1. Illustration of our approach: we want to determine
through a statistical test (p-value) whether a network has seen a
marked dataset or not. The distribution (shown on the histograms)
of a statistic on the network weights is clearly separated between
the vanilla and radioactive CNNs. Our method works in the cases
of both white-box and black-box access to the network.

signal that this dataset was used to train a model. We thus
slightly change the dataset, effectively substituting the data
for similar-looking marked data (radioactive isotopes).
Let us assume that this image data, as well as other collected data, is used by a third party to train a convolutional
neural network (convnet). After training, the model is inspected. The convnet is accessed either (1) explicitly when
the model and corresponding weights are available (whitebox setting), or (2) implicitly if only the decision scores are
accessible (black-box setting). From that information, we
assess whether the training set contained any radioactive
data, or none. We want to provide a statistical guarantee
with the answer, in the form of a p-value.
Passive techniques to infer set membership (Shokri et al.,
2017; Sablayrolles et al., 2019) require to know the trained
architecture, as well as held-out data following the same
distribution as that of the training set. Different membership
inference methods can improve detection of data usage, but
they do not increase the effect that data has on a model and
they have overall a low confidence.

