Continuous-Time Bayesian Networks with Clocks

Nicolai Engelmann 1 Dominik Linzner 1 Heinz Koeppl 1 2

Abstract
Structured stochastic processes evolving in continuous time present a widely adopted framework
to model phenomena occurring in nature and engineering. However, such models are often chosen to satisfy the Markov property to maintain
tractability. One of the more popular of such memoryless models are Continuous Time Bayesian
Networks (CTBNs). In this work, we lift its restriction to exponential survival times to arbitrary
distributions. Current extensions achieve this via
auxiliary states, which hinder tractability. To
avoid that, we introduce a set of node-wise clocks
to construct a collection of graph-coupled semiMarkov chains. We provide algorithms for parameter and structure inference, which make use of
local dependencies and conduct experiments on
synthetic data and a data-set generated through a
benchmark tool for gene regulatory networks. In
doing so, we point out advantages compared to
current CTBN extensions.

1. Introduction
Dynamics on networks are abundant. Examples span from
small scales as in gene regulatory networks (Stella et al.,
2014) to large scales as in population or opinion dynamics
on social networks (De et al., 2016). All these processes
depend on some form of memory. Genes interact via expression of molecules with maturation times that are not
exponentially distributed (Klann & Koeppl, 2012), neuronand social dynamics depend on past events (Pillow et al.,
2008).
While models with non-Markovian behavior exist, e.g.
Hawkes processes (Linderman et al., 2016), they either
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology, Technische Universitat Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany
2
Department of Biology, Technische Universitat Darmstadt,
Darmstadt, Germany. Correspondence to: Nicolai Engelmann
<nicolai.engelmann@bcs.tu-darmstadt.de>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

follow a fixed parametrization that hinders their expressiveness, or are defined in discrete time as Dynamic Bayesian
Networks (Dagum et al., 1992) and are thus heavily over
parametrized if no natural time scale exists. An expressive,
but Markovian model in continuous time are Continuous
Time Bayesian Networks (CTBNs) (Nodelman et al., 1995).
There have been several attempts in extending CTBNs to
model non-Markovian behavior (Nodelman et al., 2005;
Gopalratnam et al., 2005; Liu et al., 2018). However, in
these extensions, a CTBN has to be inflated with arbitrary
many auxiliary states. This hinders the scalability of such
models.
In this manuscript, we consider a different extension based
on CTBNs, where we augment each local node of the network with its own clock process. This clock keeps track of
the history of the node and determines the survival time of
the nodes state. The dynamics of the clocks can be instantiated by arbitrary survival time distributions.
We derive augmented CTBNs with clocks as a novel generative model along with likelihoods for a complete observed
process in section 2. In section 3, we show how the exact
parameter and structure inference can be performed. Finally,
in sections 4 and 5 we show not only tractable parameter and
structure learning for two example parametric survival time
distributions, but as well demonstrate at hand of controlled
synthetic experiments that CTBNs can fail as structure classifiers if provided data is non-Markovian, while augmented
CTBNs perform well.
1.1. Continuous Time semi-Markov and Markov
Chains
We begin by laying out relevant key characteristics of homogeneous continuous time semi-Markov chains (CTSMC’s)
and explore their memoryless special case, continuous time
Markov chains (CTMC’s). A CTSMC is a non-Markovian
jump processes with a renewal property evolving over continuous time, taking values in a countable state space X .
It can be completely described by a set of transition rates
λ : X ˆ Rě0 ˆ Rě0 ˆ X Ñ Rě0 , where λpx, τ, t; x1 q
denotes the instantaneous rate of the process transitioning from state x to x1 at time t if its last transition happened at timeřt ´ τ . Using them, we define the exit rate
λpx, τ, tq ” x1 ‰x λpx, τ, t; x1 q. A CTSMC is homoge-

