Operation-Aware Soft Channel Pruning using Differentiable Masks

Minsoo Kang 1 Bohyung Han 1

Abstract
We propose a simple but effective data-driven
channel pruning algorithm, which compresses
deep neural networks in a differentiable way by
exploiting the characteristics of operations. The
proposed approach makes a joint consideration
of batch normalization (BN) and rectified linear
unit (ReLU) for channel pruning; it estimates how
likely the two successive operations deactivate
each feature map and prunes the channels with
high probabilities. To this end, we learn differentiable masks for individual channels and make soft
decisions throughout the optimization procedure,
which facilitates to explore larger search space
and train more stable networks. The proposed
framework enables us to identify compressed
models via a joint learning of model parameters
and channel pruning without an extra procedure
of fine-tuning. We perform extensive experiments
and achieve outstanding performance in terms of
the accuracy of output networks given the same
amount of resources when compared with the
state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved state-of-the-art performance on various visual recognition tasks including image
classification (He et al., 2016a; Huang et al., 2017; Tan &
Le, 2019), image segmentation (Noh et al., 2015; Chen et al.,
2018), object detection (He et al., 2017a; Li et al., 2019), and
visual tracking (Nam & Han, 2016). However, despite their
outstanding accuracy, the applicability of the models based
on deep neural networks to resource-hungry systems, e.g.,
mobile or portable devices, is still limited due to their computational or physical costs in terms of model sizes, FLOPs,
and power consumption. Consequently, model compres1

Computer Vision Laboratory, Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering & ASRI, Seoul National University, Korea.
Correspondence to: Bohyung Han <bhhan@snu.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Not Updated
Binary Masks

1.0

0.0

Feature Map

Updated

strong

Differentiable Masks

weak

Feature Map

Masked
Feature Map

Masked
Feature Map

(a) Previous Methods

(b) Our Method

Figure 1. Illustration of the difference between the previous channel pruning methods and our approach. The previous methods
often make hard decision for channel pruning and eliminate pruned
channel permanently while our algorithm trains model parameters
and masks jointly via soft channel pruning. Note that the pruned
networks identified by the previous methods should be fine-tuned
later but it may not be effective to achieve competitive accuracy because the pruned models are obtained from poor local optima due
to greedy decisions during training procedure. On the other hand,
the proposed method achieves good performance without separate
procedure of fine-tuning because we learn the model parameters
and the pruning masks in a unified way based on a differentiable
optimization framework.

sion, a research problem to reduce the sizes of deep neural
networks, has been investigated actively in the community.
There is a large volume of research related to the compression of deep neural networks. Early methods often rely
on mathematical analysis of weight matrices such as matrix decomposition (Denton et al., 2014; Jaderberg et al.,
2014; Tai et al., 2016). These approaches focus on reducing
FLOPs of neural networks using the low-rank factorizations of pretrained weight matrices or tensors. Another
line of research in model compression is network quantization (Courbariaux et al., 2015; Han et al., 2016; Rastegari
et al., 2016; Zhu et al., 2017; Polino et al., 2018), which
learns the low-bit representations of model parameters and
is often employed for hardware integration of deep neural
networks. On the other hand, pruning approaches (Han et al.,
2015; Molchanov et al., 2017; Wen et al., 2016; Li et al.,
2017; Luo et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2017; He et al., 2017b;
2018; Zhao et al., 2019; He et al., 2019) remove unnecessary weights or activations through heuristics, optimization
techniques, or learning processes.
We are interested in a structured pruning technique that removes channels from deep neural networks. Most of the ex-

