Sequential Transfer in Reinforcement Learning with a Generative Model

Andrea Tirinzoni 1 Riccardo Poiani 1 Marcello Restelli 1

Abstract
We are interested in how to design reinforcement
learning agents that provably reduce the sample
complexity for learning new tasks by transferring knowledge from previously-solved ones. The
availability of solutions to related problems poses
a fundamental trade-off: whether to seek policies that are expected to achieve high (yet suboptimal) performance in the new task immediately
or whether to seek information to quickly identify
an optimal solution, potentially at the cost of poor
initial behavior. In this work, we focus on the
second objective when the agent has access to a
generative model of state-action pairs. First, given
a set of solved tasks containing an approximation
of the target one, we design an algorithm that
quickly identifies an accurate solution by seeking
the state-action pairs that are most informative
for this purpose. We derive PAC bounds on its
sample complexity which clearly demonstrate the
benefits of using this kind of prior knowledge.
Then, we show how to learn these approximate
tasks sequentially by reducing our transfer setting
to a hidden Markov model and employing spectral methods to recover its parameters. Finally,
we empirically verify our theoretical findings in
simple simulated domains.

1. Introduction
Knowledge transfer has proven to be a fundamental tool
for enabling lifelong reinforcement learning (RL) (Sutton &
Barto, 1998), where agents face sequences of related tasks.
In this context, upon receiving a new task, the agent aims
at reusing knowledge from the previously-solved ones to
speed-up the learning process. This has the potential to
achieve significant performance improvements over standard RL from scratch, and several studies have confirmed
this hypothesis (Taylor & Stone, 2009; Lazaric, 2012).
1
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy. Correspondence to: Andrea Tirinzoni <andrea.tirinzoni@polimi.it>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

A key question is what and how knowledge should be transferred (Taylor & Stone, 2009). As for the kind of knowledge
to be reused, a variety of algorithms have been proposed
to transfer experience samples (Lazaric et al., 2008; Taylor
et al., 2008; Yin & Pan, 2017; Tirinzoni et al., 2018b; 2019),
policies (Fernández & Veloso, 2006; Mahmud et al., 2013;
Rosman et al., 2016; Abel et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2019;
Feng et al., 2019), value-functions (Liu & Stone, 2006; Tirinzoni et al., 2018a), features (Konidaris et al., 2012; Barreto
et al., 2017; 2018), and more. Regarding how knowledge
should be transferred, the answer is more subtle and depends
directly on the desired objectives. On the one hand, one
could aim at maximizing the jumpstart, i.e., the expected
initial performance in the target task. This can be done by
transferring initializers, e.g., policies or value-functions that,
based on past knowledge, are expected to immediately yield
high rewards. Among the theoretical studies, Mann & Choe
(2012) and Abel et al. (2018) showed that jumpstart policies can provably reduce the number of samples needed for
learning a target task. However, since these initializers are
computed before receiving the new task, the agent, though
starting from good performance, might still take a long time
before converging to near-optimal behavior. An alternative
approach is to spend some initial interactions with the target
to gather information about the task itself, so as to better
decide what to transfer. For instance, the agent could aim
at identifying which of the previously-solved problems is
most similar to the target. If the similarity is actually large,
transferring the past solution would instantaneously lead
to near-optimal behavior. This task identification problem
has been studied by Dyagilev et al. (2008); Brunskill &
Li (2013); Liu et al. (2016). One downside is that these
approaches do not actively seek information to minimize
identification time (or, equivalently, sample complexity), in
part because it is non-trivial to find which actions are the
most informative given knowledge from related tasks. To
the best of our knowledge, it is an open problem how to
leverage this prior knowledge to reduce identification time.
Regardless of how knowledge is transferred, a common
assumption is that tasks are drawn from some fixed distribution (Taylor & Stone, 2009), which often hides the
sequential nature of the problem. In many lifelong learning
problems, tasks evolve dynamically and are temporally correlated. Consider an autonomous car driving through traffic.

