Multi-step Greedy Reinforcement Learning Algorithms
Manan Tomar * 1 Yonathan Efroni * 2 Mohammad Ghavamzadeh 3

Abstract
Multi-step greedy policies have been extensively
used in model-based reinforcement learning (RL),
both when a model of the environment is available
(e.g., in the game of Go) and when it is learned. In
this paper, we explore their benefits in model-free
RL, when employed using multi-step dynamic
programming algorithms: -Policy Iteration (PI) and -Value Iteration (-VI). These methods
iteratively compute the next policy (-PI) and
value function (-VI) by solving a surrogate decision problem with a shaped reward and a smaller
discount factor. We derive model-free RL algorithms based on -PI and -VI in which the surrogate problem can be solved by any discrete or
continuous action RL method, such as DQN and
TRPO. We identify the importance of a hyperparameter that controls the extent to which the
surrogate problem is solved and suggest a way to
set this parameter. When evaluated on a range of
Atari and MuJoCo benchmark tasks, our results indicate that for the right range of , our algorithms
outperform DQN and TRPO. This shows that our
multi-step greedy algorithms are general enough
to be applied over any existing RL algorithm and
can significantly improve its performance.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms solve sequential
decision-making problems through repeated interaction with
the environment. By incorporating deep neural networks
into RL algorithms, the field has recently witnessed remarkable empirical success (e.g., Mnih et al., 2015; Lillicrap
et al., 2015; Levine et al., 2016; Silver et al., 2017). Much
of this success has been achieved by model-free RL algorithms, such as Q-learning and policy gradients. These
algorithms are known to suffer from high variance in their
*

Equal contribution 1 Facebook AI Research, Menlo Park, USA
Technion, Haifa, Israel 3 Google Research, Mountain View, USA.
Correspondence to: Manan Tomar <manan.tomar@gmail.com>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

estimations (Greensmith et al., 2004) and to have difficulties
in handling function approximation (e.g., Thrun & Schwartz,
1993; Baird, 1995; Van Hasselt et al., 2016; Lu et al., 2018).
These issues are intensified in decision problems with long
horizon, i.e., when the discount factor, , is large. Although
using smaller values of addresses the discount factordependent issues and leads to more stable algorithms (Petrik
& Scherrer, 2009; Jiang et al., 2015), it does not come for
free, as the algorithm may return a biased solution, i.e., it
may not converge to an optimal (or good) solution for the
original decision problem (the one with larger value of ).
Efroni et al. (2018a) recently proposed another approach
to mitigate the -dependant instabilities in RL in which
they study multi-step greedy versions of the well-known
Dynamic Programming (DP) algorithms: Policy Iteration
(PI) and Value Iteration (VI) (Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1996).
They also proposed an alternative formulation of the multistep greedy policy, called -greedy policy, and studied the
convergence of the resulted PI and VI algorithms: -PI and
-VI. These algorithms iteratively solve a -discounted
decision problem, whose reward has been shaped by the
solution of the decision problem at the previous iteration.
Unlike the biased solution obtained by solving the decision
problem with a smaller value of (discussed above), by iteratively solving decision problems with a shorter  horizon,
the -PI and -VI algorithms could converge to an optimal
policy of the original decision problem.
In this paper, we derive model-free RL algorithms based on
the -greedy formulation of multi-step greedy policies. As
mentioned earlier, the main component of this formulation is
(approximately) solving a surrogate decision problem with a
shaped reward and a smaller discount factor. Our algorithms
build on -PI and -VI, and solve the surrogate decision
problem with the popular deep RL algorithms: Deep QNetwork (DQN) (Mnih et al., 2015) and Trust Region Policy
Optimization (TRPO) (Schulman et al., 2015). We call the
resulting algorithms -PI-DQN, -VI-DQN, -PI-TRPO,
and -VI-TRPO, and empirically evaluate and compare
them with DQN, TRPO, and Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE) (Schulman et al., 2016) on Atari (Bellemare
et al., 2013) and MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012) benchmarks. Our results indicate that for the right range of , our
algorithms outperform DQN and TRPO. This suggests that
the performance of these two deep RL algorithms can be

