On Conditional Versus Marginal Bias in Multi-Armed Bandits
Jaehyeok Shin 1 Alessandro Rinaldo 1 Aaditya Ramdas 1 2

Abstract
The bias of the sample means of the arms in multiarmed bandits is an important issue in adaptive
data analysis that has recently received considerable attention in the literature. Existing results
relate in precise ways the sign and magnitude of
the bias to various sources of data adaptivity, but
do not apply to the conditional inference setting
in which the sample means are computed only
if some specific conditions are satisfied. In this
paper, we characterize the sign of the conditional
bias of monotone functions of the rewards, including the sample mean. Our results hold for
arbitrary conditioning events and leverage natural monotonicity properties of the data collection
policy. We further demonstrate, through several
examples from sequential testing and best arm
identification, that the sign of the conditional and
marginal bias of the sample mean of an arm can
be different, depending on the conditioning event.
Our analysis offers new and interesting perspectives on the subtleties of assessing the bias in data
adaptive settings.

1. Introduction
In modern data analysis, it is often the case that both the
data collection and the selection of the target for statistical
inference are determined adaptively, i.e. in a manner that
depends on the realization of the data observed so far. In
these fairly common data-adaptive scenarios, the validity
of traditional procedures for statistical inference (that were
designed to work in nonadaptive or in i.i.d. settings) can be
severely affected.
This issue is perhaps best exemplified within the stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) framework (Robbins, 1952).
1
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Carnegie Mellon University 2 Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: Jaehyeok Shin <shinjaehyeok@cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

The data are collected sequentially in stages, during which
the analyst draws a sample from one among finitely many
unknown distributions or arms. At each stage, the determination of whether no more samples are to be acquired
(adaptive stopping), the choice of the arm to draw from
(adaptive sampling) and the selection of the target arm to
analyze once the experiment has terminated (adaptive choosing) are all made based on previously observed data.
The combined effect of these sources of data adaptivity will
impact the correctness of standard, nonadaptive statistical
procedures in ways that are generally difficult to discern and
to quantify. The recent literature on adaptive data analysis
in MAB settings has focused primarily on the fundamental
problem of mean estimation (Xu et al., 2013; Villar et al.,
2015; Bowden & Trippa, 2017; Nie et al., 2018; Shin et al.,
2019a). It is now known that the sample mean of an arm
is a biased estimator of the true mean and that the sign and
magnitude of the bias can be related to adaptive sampling,
stopping and choosing in precise ways.
The current theoretical understanding of the bias in MAB
experiments is, however limited in two aspects. First, virtually all results concern the bias in mean estimation and
do not cover other functionals of the arms. Secondly, and
perhaps more interestingly, the existing guarantees cover
only the marginal bias of the sample mean, i.e., the bias
obtained by accounting for all possible outcomes of the
MAB experiment. However, in practice, one is often interested in the sample means of the arms only when certain
outcomes have occurred. For instance, the analyst may wish
to evaluate the sample mean of a given arm only when that
arm was identified as the best arm or, in a sequential framework corresponding to a MAB experiment with only one
arm, when the null hypothesis has been rejected or when the
random criterion for determining whether enough samples
have been collected has been met. In all these cases, it is
of interest to compute the conditional bias, i.e., the bias of
the sample mean given a certain conditioning event, such
as that the arm of interest turned out to be the best arm. A
priori, it is not at all clear how the sign of the conditional
bias is affected by the choice of the conditioning event and
by other sources of data adaptivity (e.g., sampling and stopping), or whether the signs of the marginal and conditional
bias should match. See Figure 1 for illustrations of marginal
and conditional biases.

