On Validation and Planning of An Optimal Decision Rule
with Application in Healthcare Studies

Hengrui Cai 1 Wenbin Lu 1 Rui Song 1

Abstract
In the current era of personalized recommendation, one major interest is to develop an optimal
individualized decision rule that assigns individuals with the best treatment option according to
their covariates. Estimation of optimal decision
rules (ODR) has been extensively investigated recently, however, at present, no testing procedure
is proposed to verify whether these ODRs are
significantly better than the naive decision rule
that always assigning individuals to a fixed treatment option. In this paper, we propose a testing
procedure for detecting the existence of an ODR
that is better than the naive decision rule under
the randomized trials. We construct the proposed
test based on the difference of estimated value
functions using the augmented inverse probability
weighted method. The asymptotic distributions of
the proposed test statistic under the null and local
alternative hypotheses are established. Based on
the established asymptotic distributions, we further develop a sample size calculation formula for
testing the existence of an ODR in designing A/B
tests. Extensive simulations and a real data application to a schizophrenia clinical trial data are
conducted to demonstrate the empirical validity
of the proposed methods.

1. Introduction
In the current era of personalized recommendation, one
major interest is to develop an optimal individualized decision rule that assigns individuals with the best treatment
option according to their covariates. Due to individuals’
heterogeneity in outcome to different treatment options, it
is common that there may not exist a unified best deci1

Department of Statistics, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, USA. Correspondence to: Hengrui Cai
<hcai5@ncsu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

sion for all individuals. A number of methods have been
developed for estimating optimal decision rules (ODR),
which include Q-learning (Watkins & Dayan, 1992; Zhao
et al., 2009), A-learning (Murphy, 2003; Robins, 2004; Shi
et al., 2018a), direct value search methods (Zhang et al.,
2012; 2013), outcome-weighted learning (Zhao et al., 2012;
Zhou et al., 2017), targeted minimum loss-based estimator
(TMLE) (van der Laan & Luedtke, 2015), concordanceassisted learning (Fan et al., 2017; Liang et al., 2017), and
maximin-projection learning (Shi et al., 2018b). Although
estimation of ODRs has been extensively studied in recent
years, to the best of our knowledge, testing the existence
of an ODR that is better than the naive decision rule which
always assigning individuals to a fixed treatment has been
less studied. Moreover, it lacks a simple sample size calculation method for designing randomized trials to test such a
hypothesis.
In this paper, we propose a test for the existence of an ODR
that is better than always assigning individuals to a fixed
treatment (the naive decision rule) in terms of values and
derive its associated sample size calculation method. Here,
we are interested in the randomized trial settings where
the likelihood of assignment is assumed known as constant.
Our test statistic is constructed based on the difference of
estimated value functions under the estimated ODR and
the naive decision rule. Here, the value functions under a
given decision rule are estimated nonparametrically using
the augmented inverse probability weighted (AIPW) estimator proposed by Zhang et al. (2012), and the decision rule is
searched within a class of the basis function of the baseline
covariates. However, a challenge is that the asymptotic distributions of the corresponding value difference based test
statistic may become degenerate under the null hypothesis
that there does not exist an ODR. To overcome this difficulty, we modify the way of estimating the value function
under the naive decision rule so that asymptotic normal distributions of the resulting test statistic can be derived under
both the null and local alternative hypotheses. Based on
the established asymptotic distributions, we also derive the
sample size calculation method.
Our contributions can be summarized in the following aspects:

