On Implicit Regularization in β-VAEs

Abhishek Kumar 1 Ben Poole 1

Abstract
While the impact of variational inference (VI) on
posterior inference in a fixed generative model
is well-characterized, its role in regularizing a
learned generative model when used in variational
autoencoders (VAEs) is poorly understood. We
study the regularizing effects of variational distributions on learning in generative models from
two perspectives. First, we analyze the role that
the choice of variational family plays in imparting uniqueness to the learned model by restricting
the set of optimal generative models. Second,
we study the regularization effect of the variational family on the local geometry of the decoding model. This analysis uncovers the regularizer implicit in the β-VAE objective, and leads
to an approximation consisting of a deterministic autoencoding objective plus analytic regularizers that depend on the Hessian or Jacobian of
the decoding model, unifying VAEs with recent
heuristics proposed for training regularized autoencoders. We empirically verify these findings,
observing that the proposed deterministic objective exhibits similar behavior to the β-VAE in
terms of objective value and sample quality.

1. Introduction
Variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014;
Rezende et al., 2014) and variants such as β-VAEs (Higgins
et al., 2017; Alemi et al., 2018) have been widely used
for density estimation and learning generative samplers of
data where latent variables in the model may correspond
to factors of variation in the underlying data-generating
process (Bengio et al., 2013). However, without additional
assumptions it may not be possible to recover or identify
the correct model (Hyvärinen & Pajunen, 1999; Locatello
et al., 2019).
1

Google Research, Brain Team.
Correspondence to:
Abhishek Kumar <abhishk@google.com>, Ben Poole
<pooleb@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

We study the regularizing effects of variational distributions
used to approximate the posterior on the learned generative
model from two perspectives. First, we discuss the role of
the choice of variational family in imparting uniqueness
properties to the learned generative model by restricting the
set of possible solutions. We argue that restricting the variational family in specific ways can rule out non-uniqueness
to a corresponding set of transformations on the generative
model. Next, we study the impact of the variational family
on the geometry of the decoding model (pθ (x|z)) in β-VAEs.
Assuming that the first two moments exist for the variational
family, we can relate the structure of the variational distribution’s covariance to the Jacobian matrix of the decoding
model. For a Gaussian prior and variational distribution, we
further use this relation to derive a deterministic objective
that closely approximates the β-VAE objective.
We perform experiments to validate the correctness of our
theory and accuracy of our approximations. On the MNIST
dataset, we empirically verify the relationship between variational distribution covariance and the Jacobian of the decoder. In particular, we observe that block-diagonal variational distribution covariance encourages a block diagonal
structure on the matrices Jg (z)> Jg (z) where Jg (z) is the
decoder Jacobian matrix. This generalizes the results from
recent work (Rolinek et al., 2019), which showed (for Gaussian observation models) that diagonal Gaussian variational
distributions encourage orthogonal Jacobians, to general observation models and arbitrary structures on the covariance
matrix. We also compare the objective values of the original
β-VAE objective with our derived deterministic objectives.
While our deterministic approximation holds for small β, we
empirically find that the two objectives remain in agreement
for a reasonably wide range of β, verifying the accuracy
of our regularizers. We also train models using a tractable
lower bound on the deterministic objectives for CelebA and
find that trained models behave similar to β-VAE in terms
of sample quality.

2. Latent-variable models and identifiability
We begin by discussing inherent identifiability issues
with latent-variable models trained using maximum loglikelihood alone.

