LP-SparseMAP: Differentiable Relaxed Optimization
for Sparse Structured Prediction

Vlad Niculae 1 André F. T. Martins 1 2 3

Abstract
Structured predictors require solving a combinatorial optimization problem over a large number of structures, such as dependency trees or
alignments. When embedded as structured hidden layers in a neural net, argmin differentiation
and efficient gradient computation are further required. Recently, SparseMAP has been proposed
as a differentiable, sparse alternative to maximum a posteriori (MAP) and marginal inference.
SparseMAP returns an interpretable combination
of a small number of structures; its sparsity being the key to efficient optimization. However,
SparseMAP requires access to an exact MAP oracle in the structured model, excluding, e.g., loopy
graphical models or logic constraints, which generally require approximate inference. In this paper, we introduce LP-SparseMAP, an extension
of SparseMAP addressing this limitation via a local polytope relaxation. LP-SparseMAP uses the
flexible and powerful language of factor graphs
to define expressive hidden structures, supporting coarse decompositions, hard logic constraints,
and higher-order correlations. We derive the forward and backward algorithms needed for using
LP-SparseMAP as a structured hidden or output
layer. Experiments in three structured tasks show
benefits versus SparseMAP and Structured SVM.

1. Introduction
The data processed by machine learning systems often has
underlying structure: for instance, language data has interword dependency trees, or alignments, while image data
can reveal object segments. As downstream models benefit
1
Instituto de Telecomunicações, Lisbon, Portugal 2 Unbabel,
Lisbon, Portugal 3 Instituto Superior Técnico, University of Lisbon,
Portugal. Correspondence to: Vlad Niculae <vlad@vene.ro>,
André F. T. Martins <andre.t.martins@tecnico.ulisboa.pt>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

BUDGET factor

sleep the clock around

TREE factor

sleep→the

sleep→clock

sleep→around

the→sleep

the→clock

the→around

clock→sleep

clock→the

clock→around

around→sleep

around→the

around→clock

fg = TorchFactorGraph()
u = fg.variable_from(arc_scores)
fg.add(DepTree(u))
for k in range(n):
fg.add(Budget(u[:, k], budget=5))
fg.solve()

Figure 1: Parsing model with valency constraints: each
“head” word is constrained to have at most k “modifiers”.
LP-SparseMAP is the first method for tractable, differentiable decoding in such a model. Below: abridged implementation using our library (more in App. F).

from the hidden structure, practitioners typically resort to
pipelines, training a structure predictor on labelled data,
and using its output as features. This approach requires
annotation, suffers from error propagation, and cannot allow
the structure predictor to adapt to the downstream task.
Instead, a promising direction is to treat structure as latent,
or hidden: learning a structure predictor without supervision, together with the downstream model in an end-to-end
fashion. Several recent approaches were proposed to tackle
this, based on differentiating through marginal inference
(Kim et al., 2017; Liu and Lapata, 2018), noisy gradient
estimates (Peng et al., 2018; Yogatama et al., 2017), or both
(Corro and Titov, 2019a;b). The work in this area requires
specialized, structure-specific algorithms either for comput-

