Individual Calibration with Randomized Forecasting

Shengjia Zhao 1 Tengyu Ma 1 Stefano Ermon 1

Abstract
Machine learning applications often require calibrated predictions, e.g. a 90% credible interval should contain the true outcome 90% of the
times. However, typical definitions of calibration
only require this to hold on average, and offer
no guarantees on predictions made on individual samples. Thus, predictions can be systematically over or under confident on certain subgroups, leading to issues of fairness and potential vulnerabilities. We show that calibration for
individual samples is possible in the regression
setup if the predictions are randomized, i.e. outputting randomized credible intervals. Randomization removes systematic bias by trading off
bias with variance. We design a training objective to enforce individual calibration and use it
to train randomized regression functions. The resulting models are more calibrated for arbitrarily
chosen subgroups of the data, and can achieve
higher utility in decision making against adversaries that exploit miscalibrated predictions.

1. Introduction
Many applications of machine learning, such as safetycritical systems and medical diagnosis, require accurate
estimation of the uncertainty associated with each prediction. Uncertainty is typically represented using a probability distribution on the possible outcomes. To reflect the
underlying uncertainty, these probabilities should be calibrated (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006; Vovk et al., 2005;
Guo et al., 2017). In the regression setup, for example, the
true outcome should be below the predicted 50% quantile
(median) roughly 50% of the times (Kuleshov et al., 2018).
However, even when the probability forecaster is cali1
Computer Science Department, Stanford University.
Correspondence to: Shengjia Zhao <sjzhao@stanford.edu>,
Tengyu Ma <tengyuma@stanford.edu>, Stefano Ermon <ermon@stanford.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

brated, it is possible that the true outcome is always below
the predicted median on a subgroup (e.g., men), and always
above the predicted median for another (e.g., women). In
other words, the standard notion of calibration is a property that needs to hold only on average across all predictions made (i.e., on the set of all input data points). The
predicted probabilities can still be highly inaccurate for individual data samples. These predictions can lead to unfair or otherwise suboptimal decisions. For example, a
bank might over-predict credit risk for one gender group
and unfairly deny loans, or under-predict credit risk for a
group that can then exploit this mistake to their advantage.
Group calibration (Kleinberg et al., 2016) partly addresses
the short-comings of average calibration by requiring calibration on pre-specified groups (e.g. men and women). In
particular, (Hébert-Johnson et al., 2017) achieves calibration on any group that can be computed from input by a
small circuit. However, these methods are not applicable
when the groups are unknown or difficult to compute from
the input. For example, groups can be defined by features
that are unobserved e.g. due to personal privacy.
Ideally, we would like forecasters that are calibrated on
each individual sample. Our key insight is that individual calibration is possible when the probability forecaster
is itself randomized. Intuitively, a randomized forecaster
can output random probabilistic forecasts (e.g., quantiles)
— it is the predicted quantile that is randomly above or below a fixed true value with the advertised probability (see
Figure 1). Randomization can remove systematic miscalibration on any group of data samples. Useful forecasters
also need to be sharp — the predicted probability should
be concentrated around the true value. We design a concrete learning objective that enforces individual calibration.
Combined with an objective that enforces sharpness, such
as traditional log-likelihood, we can learn forecasters that
trade-off calibration and sharpness Pareto optimally. The
objective can be used to train any prediction model that
takes an additional random source as input, such as deep
neural networks.
We assess the benefit of forecasters trained with the new
objective on two applications: fairness and decision making under uncertainty against adversaries. Calibration on
protected groups traditionally has been a definition for fairness (Kleinberg et al., 2016). On a UCI crime prediction

