Strategyproof Mean Estimation from Multiple-Choice Questions

Anson Kahng 1 Gregory Kehne 2 Ariel D. Procaccia 3

Abstract
Given n values possessed by n agents, we study
the problem of estimating the mean by truthfully
eliciting agents’ answers to multiple-choice questions about their values. We consider two natural
candidates for estimation error: mean squared error (MSE) and mean absolute error (MAE). We
design a randomized estimator which is asymptotically optimal for both measures in the worst
case. In the case where prior distributions over
the agents’ values are known, we give an optimal,
polynomial-time algorithm for MSE, and show
that the task of computing an optimal estimate
for MAE is #P-hard. Finally, we demonstrate
empirically that knowledge of prior distributions
gives a significant edge.

1. Introduction
Organizations often desire accurate estimates of population
statistics (e.g., the mean of a set of values) in settings where
eliciting exact values from agents is costly or impractical.
For instance, suppose that you sit on an admissions committee, and your committee’s task is to accurately estimate
the number of candidates who will accept their admission
offer, perhaps in order to decide how many more admissions
offers to extend (concretely, consider the problem of admitting students in two waves corresponding to early action
and regular admission). This is a consequential problem;
there are significant direct and indirect costs associated with
having many more or fewer matriculants than intended.1
Without more information either about or from the admits,
this is hopeless. One potential approach is to ask each
1
Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon University
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University 3 School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University. Correspondence to: Anson Kahng <akahng@cs.cmu.edu>,
Gregory Kehne <gkehne@andrew.cmu.edu>, Ariel D. Procaccia
<arielpro@cs.cmu.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
In fact, our work on this paper originated from thinking about
ways to address this problem in our institution.

admit to provide an estimate of the probability pi that the
admit matriculates, but this is problematic because each
admit may not know their own exact probability of accepting
the offer, and coming up with exact probabilities places
nontrivial cognitive loads on participants. Therefore, it
is more reasonable to ask a multiple-choice question of
the form, “How likely are you to accept this offer?" with
choices “High,” “Medium," and “Low." The task for the
university, then, is to reconstruct an accurate estimate of the
number of students who will accept their offers based on the
coarse-grained information yielded by these multiple-choice
queries. Specifically, the question is
“What collection of multiple-choice questions
should you ask, and how should you interpret
the answers so as to estimate the expected number
of matriculants as accurately as possible?”
1.1. Our Approach and Results
Consider n agents, where each agent i has a value pi ∈ [0, 1]
and p := (p1 , . . . , pn ) is the vector ofPall agents’ values. We
n
are interested in estimating kpk1 = i=1 pi .
We interpret multiple-choice questions as forming a partition
of [0, 1] into subsets X1 , . . . , Xk , and asking agent i for
the index j such that pi ∈ Xj . It is known (Lambert &
Shoham, 2009) that in order for multiple-choice questions to
elicit truthful responses, each Xj must itself be an interval.
Moreover, intervals are easier to interpret than arbitrary
subsets; for example, the choice “Low” can be defined as
pi ∈ [0, 1/3]. Therefore, we restrict our multiple-choice
questions to this framework.
Our goal is to design an estimator that consists of a set
of (possibly different) multiple-choice questions which are
posed to the agents, together with a function that outputs
an estimate of kpk1 based on the agents’ answers to the
multiple-choice questions; we denote the output of the estimator by q(p). We measure the accuracy of the estimator
using the mean squared error (MSE) E[(kpk1 − q(p))2 ] or
the mean absolute error (MAE) E[|kpk1 − q(p)|].2
We consider two settings corresponding to different levels of
2

Throughout, we evaluate additive error with respect to estimating the sum of the pi , from which the additive error with respect
to mean estimation can easily be derived.

