Quantized Decentralized Stochastic Learning over Directed Graphs
Hossein Taheri 1 Aryan Mokhtari 2 Hamed Hassani 3 Ramtin Pedarsani 1

Abstract
We consider a decentralized stochastic learning
problem where data points are distributed among
computing nodes communicating over a directed
graph. As the model size gets large, decentralized learning faces a major bottleneck that is
the heavy communication load due to each node
transmitting large messages (model updates) to its
neighbors. To tackle this bottleneck, we propose
the quantized decentralized stochastic learning
algorithm over directed graphs that is based on
the push-sum algorithm in decentralized consensus optimization. We prove that our algorithm
achieves the same convergence rates of the decentralized stochastic learning algorithm with exactcommunication for both convex and non-convex
losses. Numerical evaluations corroborate our
main theoretical results and illustrate significant
speed-up compared to the exact-communication
methods.

1. Introduction
In modern machine learning applications we typically confront solving optimization problems with massive data sets
which demands utilizing multiple computing agents to accelerate convergence. Furthermore, in some applications
each processing agent has its own local data set. However, communicating data among different workers is often
impractical from multiple aspects such as privacy and bandwidth utilization. In such settings, computing nodes rely on
their own data to run (stochastic) gradient descent algorithm
while exchanging parameters with other workers in each
iteration to ensure converging to the optimal solution of the
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, USA.
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA. 3 Department of
Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. Correspondence to: Hossein Taheri <hossein@ucsb.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

(global) objective. More precisely, the goal of decentralized
learning is to optimize a function f : Rd ! R defined as the
average of functions fi (·), i 2 [n] of all computing nodes,
i.e.,
(
)
n
1X
b := arg min f (x) =
x
fi (x) .
(1)
n i=1
x2Rd
Here, each local function fi (·) can be considered as the loss
incurred over the local data-set of node i:
m

fi (x) :=

i
1 X
`(x, ⇣ji ),
mi j=1

(2)

0

where ` : Rd ⇥ Rd ! R is the loss function, mi is the dataset size of node i, and ⇣ji denotes the d0 -dimensional local
data points. Classical decentralized setting consists of two
steps. First each computing node i runs (stochastic) gradient
descent algorithm on its local function fi (·) using its local
parameter xi (t) and local data-set. Then the local parameters are exchanged between neighbor workers to compute
a weighted average of neighbor nodes’ parameters. Local
parameters of every node i at iteration t + 1 is then obtained
by a combination of the weighted average of neighboring
nodes solutions and a negative descent direction based on
local gradient direction. In particular, if we define xi (t) as
the decision variable of node i at step t, then its local update
can be written as
xi (t + 1) =

n
X
j=1

aij xj (t)

⇣
⌘
↵(t)rFi xi (t), ⇣i,t . (3)

Here ↵(t)
0 is the stepsize and rFi is the stochastic
gradient of function fi evaluated using a random sample of
data-set of node i. Matrix A represents the weights used in
the averaging step and in particular aij is the weight that
node i assigns to node j. It can be shown that under some
conditions for the weight matrix A, the iterates of the update
b when local funcin (3) converge to the optimal solution x
tions fi (·) are convex (Yuan et al., 2016) and to a first-order
stationary point in the non-convex case (Lian et al., 2017).
Most commonly in these settings, workers communicate
over an undirected connected graph G = {V, E}, and to
derive these theoretical results the weight matrix A should
have the following properties:

