Is Local SGD Better than Minibatch SGD?
Blake Woodworth 1 Kumar Kshitij Patel 1 Sebastian U. Stich 2 Zhen Dai 3 Brian Bullins 1
H. Brendan McMahan 4 Ohad Shamir 5 Nathan Srebro 1

Abstract
We study local SGD (also known as parallel
SGD and federated averaging), a natural and
frequently used stochastic distributed optimization method. Its theoretical foundations are currently lacking and we highlight how all existing error guarantees in the convex setting are
dominated by a simple baseline, minibatch SGD.
(1) For quadratic objectives we prove that local
SGD strictly dominates minibatch SGD and that
accelerated local SGD is minimax optimal for
quadratics; (2) For general convex objectives we
provide the first guarantee that at least sometimes
improves over minibatch SGD; (3) We show that
indeed local SGD does not dominate minibatch
SGD by presenting a lower bound on the performance of local SGD that is worse than the minibatch SGD guarantee.

cluding in data center and “Federated Learning” settings
(Kairouz et al., 2019). Local SGD uses M parallel workers
which, in each of R rounds, independently execute K steps
of SGD starting from a common iterate, and then communicate and average their iterates to obtain the common
iterate from which the next round begins. Overall, each
machine computes T = KR stochastic gradients and executes KR SGD steps locally, for a total of N = KRM
overall stochastic gradients computed (and so N = KRM
samples used), with R rounds of communication (every K
steps of computation).

1. Introduction

Given the appeal and usage of local SGD, there is significant value in understanding its performance and limitations
theoretically, and in comparing it to other alternatives and
baselines that have the same computation and communication structure. That is, other methods that are distributed
across M machines and compute K gradients per round
of communication for R rounds, for a total of T = KR
gradients per machine and R communication steps. This
structure can also be formalized through the graph oracle
model of Woodworth et al. (2018, see also Section 2).

It is often important to leverage parallelism in order to
tackle large scale stochastic optimization problems. A
prime example is the task of minimizing the loss of machine learning models with millions or billions of parameters over enormous training sets.

So, how does local SGD compare to other algorithms with
the same computation and communication structure? Is local SGD (or perhaps an accelerated variant) optimal in the
same way that (accelerated) SGD is optimal in the sequential setting? Is it better than baselines?

One popular distributed approach is local stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Coppola, 2015; Stich, 2018; Zhou and
Cong, 2018; Zinkevich et al., 2010), also known as “parallel SGD” or “Federated Averaging”1 (McMahan et al.,
2016), which is commonly applied to large scale convex and non-convex stochastic optimization problems, in-

A natural alternative and baseline is minibatch SGD (Cotter
et al., 2011; Dekel et al., 2012; Shamir and Srebro) – a simple method for which we have a complete and tight theoretical understanding. Within the same computation and communication structure, minibatch SGD can be implemented
as follows: Each round, calculate the K stochastic gradient estimates (at the current iterate) on each machine, and
then average all KM estimates to obtain a single gradient estimate. That is, we can implement minibatch SGD
that takes R stochastic gradient steps, with each step using
a minibatch of size KM —this is the fair and correct minibatch SGD to compare to, and when we refer to “minibatch
SGD” we refer to this implementation (R steps with minibatch size KM ).

1
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago 2 EPFL 3 University
of Chicago 4 Google 5 Weizmann Institute of Science. Correspondence to: Blake Woodworth <blake@ttic.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
Federated Averaging is a specialization of local SGD to the
federated setting, where (a) data is assumed to be heterogenous
(not i.i.d.) across workers, (b) only a handful of clients are used in
each round, and (c) updates are combined with a weighted average
to accommodate unbalanced datasets.

Local SGD seems intuitively better than minibatch SGD,
since even when the workers are not communicating, they

