Non-Autoregressive Neural Text-to-Speech

Kainan Peng∗ 1 Wei Ping∗ 1 Zhao Song∗ 1 Kexin Zhao∗ 1

Abstract
In this work, we propose ParaNet, a nonautoregressive seq2seq model that converts text
to spectrogram. It is fully convolutional and
brings 46.7 times speed-up over the lightweight
Deep Voice 3 at synthesis, while obtaining reasonably good speech quality. ParaNet also produces stable alignment between text and speech
on the challenging test sentences by iteratively improving the attention in a layer-by-layer manner.
Furthermore, we build the parallel text-to-speech
system and test various parallel neural vocoders,
which can synthesize speech from text through
a single feed-forward pass. We also explore a
novel VAE-based approach to train the inverse
autoregressive flow (IAF) based parallel vocoder
from scratch, which avoids the need for distillation from a separately trained WaveNet as previous work.

1. Introduction
Text-to-speech (TTS), also called speech synthesis, has long
been a vital tool in a variety of applications, such as humancomputer interactions, virtual assistant, and content creation. Traditional TTS systems are based on multi-stage
hand-engineered pipelines (Taylor, 2009). In recent years,
deep neural networks based autoregressive models have attained state-of-the-art results, including high-fidelity audio
synthesis (van den Oord et al., 2016), and much simpler
seq2seq pipelines (Sotelo et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2017;
Ping et al., 2018b). In particular, one of the most popular
neural TTS pipeline (a.k.a. “end-to-end") consists of two
components (Ping et al., 2018b; Shen et al., 2018): (i) an autoregressive seq2seq model that generates mel spectrogram
from text, and (ii) an autoregressive neural vocoder (e.g.,
WaveNet) that synthesizes raw waveform from mel spectro*
Equal contribution . 1 Baidu Research, 1195 Bordeaux Dr,
Sunnyvale, CA. Speech samples can be found in: https://
parallel-neural-tts-demo.github.io/. Correspondence to: Wei Ping <weiping.thu@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

gram. This pipeline requires much less expert knowledge
and only needs pairs of audio and transcript as training data.
However, the autoregressive nature of these models makes
them quite slow at synthesis, because they operate sequentially at a high temporal resolution of waveform samples and
spectrogram. Most recently, several models are proposed
for parallel waveform generation (e.g., van den Oord et al.,
2018; Ping et al., 2018a; Prenger et al., 2019; Kumar et al.,
2019; Bińkowski et al., 2020; Ping et al., 2020). In the endto-end pipeline, the models (e.g., ClariNet, WaveFlow) still
rely on autoregressive component to predict spectrogram features (e.g., 100 frames per second). In the linguistic featurebased pipeline, the models (e.g., Parallel WaveNet, GANTTS) are conditioned on aligned linguistic features from
phoneme duration model and F0 from frequency model,
which are recurrent or autoregressive models. Both of these
TTS pipelines can be slow at synthesis on modern hardware
optimized for parallel execution.
In this work, we present a fully parallel neural TTS system by proposing a non-autoregressive text-to-spectrogram
model. Our major contributions are as follows:
1. We propose ParaNet, a non-autoregressive attentionbased architecture for text-to-speech, which is fully convolutional and converts text to mel spectrogram. It runs
254.6 times faster than real-time at synthesis on a 1080
Ti GPU, and brings 46.7 times speed-up over its autoregressive counterpart (Ping et al., 2018b), while obtaining
reasonably good speech quality using neural vocoders.
2. ParaNet distills the attention from the autoregressive
text-to-spectrogram model, and iteratively refines the
alignment between text and spectrogram in a layer-bylayer manner. It can produce more stable attentions
than autoregressive Deep Voice 3 (Ping et al., 2018b) on
the challenging test sentences, because it does not have
the discrepancy between the teacher-forced training and
autoregressive inference.
3. We build the fully parallel neural TTS system by combining ParaNet with parallel neural vocoder, thus it can
generate speech from text through a single feed-forward
pass. We investigate several parallel vocoders, including
the distilled IAF vocoder (Ping et al., 2018a) and WaveGlow (Prenger et al., 2019). To explore the possibility
of training IAF vocoder without distillation, we also

