A Markov Decision Process Model for Socio-Economic Systems Impacted by
Climate Change

Salman Sadiq Shuvo 1 Yasin Yilmaz 1 Alan Bush 1 Mark Hafen 1

Abstract
Coastal communities are at high risk of natural
hazards due to unremitting global warming and
sea level rise. Both the catastrophic impacts, e.g.,
tidal flooding and storm surges, and the long-term
impacts, e.g., beach erosion, inundation of low lying areas, and saltwater intrusion into aquifers,
cause economic, social, and ecological losses.
Creating policies through appropriate modeling
of the responses of stakeholders, such as government, businesses, and residents, to climate change
and sea level rise scenarios can help to reduce
these losses. In this work, we propose a Markov
decision process (MDP) formulation for an agent
(government) which interacts with the environment (nature and residents) to deal with the impacts of climate change, in particular sea level
rise. Through theoretical analysis we show that a
reasonable government’s policy on infrastructure
development ought to be proactive and based on
detected sea levels in order to minimize the expected total cost, as opposed to a straightforward
government that reacts to observed costs from
nature. We also provide a deep reinforcement
learning-based scenario planning tool considering
different government and resident types in terms
of cooperation, and different sea level rise projections by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA).

1. Introduction
The consequences of global warming and sea level rise have
been widely documented, examined, and forecasted (Sallenger Jr et al., 2012; Hapke et al., 2013; Pachauri et al.,
2014; Plant et al., 2016; Hine et al.; Burke et al., 2019). The
coastal communities will undergo multiple threats, includ1
University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620, USA. Correspondence to: Yasin Yilmaz <yasiny@usf.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

ing recurring hurricanes, storm surge, and heavy rainfall as
a result of sea level rise (Wahl et al., 2015). This intensifies
social vulnerability, especially in underprivileged neighborhoods (Kashem et al., 2016; Schrock et al., 2015); induces
coastal hazards (Nicholls, 2011; Wahl et al., 2014); and
affects regional economies by influencing property values,
taxation, and the insurance cost (Fu et al., 2016). Due to sea
level rise, coastal inhabitants are exposed to many of these
consequences and need to develop the adaptive capability
and resilience frameworks to counter these stressors through
adequate planning and decision support (Beatley, 2012).
The governments, planners, coastal administrators, and
personnel in a variety of agencies require substantial information for effective interaction, decision making, and
adaptation planning (Beatley, 2012; Fu et al., 2017; Research Council, 2009). This demands the support of key
actors to relate the science, the variability, and the hazard
of various outlines to stakeholders (Tribbia & Moser, 2008).
Explicitly modeling these agents’ reaction to sea level rise
scenarios can serve in the creation of strategies tailored to
local impacts and resilience management and requires a
mixture of social engagement and planning tools, including
scenario planning (Berke & Stevens, 2016; Drogoul, 2015;
Potts et al., 2017).
In this paper, for planning sea level rise scenarios, we study
the interactions between a government, residents, and the
nature around the sea level rise problem. Specifically, we
use probabilistic models to simulate their behaviors and interactions between them. Focusing on the economic cost of
the sea level rise-related natural events (e.g., flooding, hurricane) and government investments (e.g., infrastructure improvement) we propose a Markov decision process (MDP)
framework to analyze the decision policies for government
together with the reactions of the nature and residents.
We specialize the proposed MDP framework to the sea level
rise problem and illustrate it using available economic data,
sea level projections, and community partner feedbacks 1
for the Tampa Bay region in Florida. However, the proposed
MDP framework can be easily adapted to simulating other
1

A list of community partners can be seen at Acknowledgements.

