Reinforcement Learning for Non-Stationary Markov Decision Processes:
The Blessing of (More) Optimism
Wang Chi Cheung 1 David Simchi-Levi 2 Ruihao Zhu 2

Abstract
We consider un-discounted reinforcement learning (RL) in Markov decision processes (MDPs)
under drifting non-stationarity, i.e., both the reward and state transition distributions are allowed
to evolve over time, as long as their respective
total variations, quantified by suitable metrics, do
not exceed certain variation budgets. We first
develop the Sliding Window Upper-Confidence
bound for Reinforcement Learning with Confidence Widening (SWUCRL2-CW) algorithm, and
establish its dynamic regret bound when the variation budgets are known. In addition, we propose
the Bandit-over-Reinforcement Learning (BORL)
algorithm to adaptively tune the SWUCRL2-CW
algorithm to achieve the same dynamic regret
bound, but in a parameter-free manner, i.e., without knowing the variation budgets. Notably, learning non-stationary MDPs via the conventional optimistic exploration technique presents a unique
challenge absent in existing (non-stationary) bandit learning settings. We overcome the challenge
by a novel confidence widening technique that
incorporates additional optimism.

1. Introduction
Consider a general sequential decision-making framework,
where a decision-maker (DM) interacts with an initially unknown environment iteratively. At each time step, the DM
first observes the current state of the environment, and then
chooses an available action. After that, she receives an instantaneous random reward, and the environment transitions
to the next state. The DM aims to design a policy that max1

Department of Industrial Systems Engineering and Management, National University of Singapore 2 MIT Institute for Data,
Systems, and Society. Correspondence to: Wang Chi Cheung
<isecwc@nus.edu.sg>, David Simchi-Levi <dslevi@mit.edu>,
Ruihao Zhu <rzhu@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

imizes its cumulative rewards, while facing the following
challenges:
• Endogeneity: At each time step, the reward follows a
reward distribution, and the subsequent state follows a
state transition distribution. Both distributions depend
(solely) on the current state and action, which are influenced by the policy. Hence, the environment can be fully
characterized by a discrete time Markov decision process
(MDP).
• Exogeneity: The reward and state transition distributions
vary (independently of the policy) across time steps, but
the total variations are bounded by the respective variation
budgets.
• Uncertainty: Both the reward and state transition distributions are initially unknown to the DM.
• Bandit/Partial Feedback: The DM can only observe the
reward and state transition resulted by the current state
and action in each time step.
It turns out that many applications, such as real-time bidding in advertisement (ad) auctions, can be captured by this
framework (Cai et al., 2017; Flajolet & Jaillet, 2017; Balseiro & Gur, 2019; Guo et al., 2019; Han et al., 2020).
Besides, this framework can be used to model sequential decision-making problems in transportation (Zhang &
Wang, 2018; Qin et al., 2019), wireless network (Zhou &
Bambos, 2015; Zhou et al., 2016), consumer choice modeling (Xu & Yun, 2020), ride-sharing (Taylor, 2018; Gurvich
et al., 2018; Bimpikis et al., 2019; Kanoria & Qian, 2019),
healthcare operations (Shortreed et al., 2010), epidemic control (Nowzari et al., 2016; Kiss et al., 2017), and inventory
control (Huh & Rusmevichientong, 2009; Bertsekas, 2017;
Zhang et al., 2018; Agrawal & Jia, 2019; Chen et al., 2019a).
There exists numerous works in sequential decision-making
that considered part of the four challenges. The traditional
stream of research (Auer et al., 2002a; Bubeck & CesaBianchi, 2012; Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2018) on stochastic
multi-armed bandits (MAB) focused on the interplay between uncertainty and bandit feedback (i.e., challenges 3
and 4), and (Auer et al., 2002a) proposed the classical Upper
Confidence Bound (UCB) algorithm. Starting from (Burnetas & Katehakis, 1997; Tewari & Bartlett, 2008; Jaksch
et al., 2010), a volume of works (see Section 3) have been

