On Second-Order Group Influence Functions for Black-Box Predictions

Samyadeep Basu 1 Xuchen You 1 Soheil Feizi 1

Abstract
With the rapid adoption of machine learning systems in sensitive applications, there is an increasing need to make black-box models explainable.
Often we want to identify an influential group of
training samples in a particular test prediction for
a given machine learning model. Existing influence functions tackle this problem by using firstorder approximations of the effect of removing a
sample from the training set on model parameters.
To compute the influence of a group of training
samples (rather than an individual point) in model
predictions, the change in optimal model parameters after removing that group from the training set
can be large. Thus, in such cases, the first-order
approximation can be loose. In this paper, we
address this issue and propose second-order influence functions for identifying influential groups
in test-time predictions. For linear models, across
different sizes and types of groups, we show that
using the proposed second-order influence function improves the correlation between the computed influence values and the ground truth ones.
We also show that second-order influence functions could be used with optimization techniques
to improve the selection of the most influential
group for a test-sample.

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been a rapid and significant success in
applying machine learning methods to a wide range of applications including vision (Szeliski, 2010), natural language
processing (Sebastiani, 2002), medicine (Lundervold and
Lundervold, 2018), finance (Lin, Hu, and Tsai, 2012), etc.
In sensitive applications such as medicine, we would like to
explain test-time model predictions to humans. An important question is : why the model makes a certain prediction
for a particular test sample. One way to address this is
1

Department of Computer Science, University of MarylandCollege Park.
Correspondence to:
Samyadeep Basu
<sbasu12@cs.umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

to trace back model predictions to its training data. More
specifically, one can ask which training samples were the
most influential ones for a given test prediction.
Influence functions (Cook and Weisberg, 1980) from robust
statistics measure the dependency of optimal model parameters on training samples. Previously (Koh and Liang, 2017)
used first-order approximations of influence functions to
estimate how much model parameters would change if a
training point was up-weighted by an infinitesimal amount.
Such an approximation can be used to identify most influential training samples in a test prediction. Moreover, this
approximation is similar to the leave-one-out re-training,
thus the first-order influence function proposed in (Koh and
Liang, 2017) bypasses the expensive process of repeated
re-training the model to find influential training samples in
a test-time prediction.
In some applications, one may want to understand how
model parameters would change when large groups of training samples are removed from the training set. This could
be useful to identify groups of training data which drive
the decision for a particular test prediction. As shown
in (Koh, Ang, Teo, and Liang, 2019a), finding influential
groups can be useful in real-world applications such as diagnosing batch effects (Yang, Li, Qian, Wilhelmsen, Shen,
and Li, 2019), apportioning credit between different data
sources (Arrieta-Ibarra, Goff, Jiménez-Hernández, Lanier,
and Weyl, 2018), understanding effects of different demographic groups (Chen, Johansson, and Sontag, 2018) or in a
multi-party learning setting (Hayes and Ohrimenko, 2019).
(Koh et al., 2019a) approximates the group influence by sum
of first-order individual influences over training samples in
the considered group. However, removal of a large group
from training can lead to a large perturbation to model parameters. Therefore, influence functions based on first-order
approximations may not be accurate in this setup. Moreover,
approximating the group influence by adding individual
sample influences ignores possible cross correlations that
may exist among samples in the group.
In this paper, we relax the first-order approximations of
current influence functions and study how second-order
approximations can be used to capture model changes when
a potentially large group of training samples is up-weighted.
Considering a training set S and a group U ⊂ S, existing

