Inferring DQN structure for high-dimensional continuous control

Andrey Sakryukin 1 Chedy Raı̈ssi 2 3 Mohan S. Kankanhalli 1

Abstract
Despite recent advancements in the field of Deep
Reinforcement Learning, Deep Q-network (DQN)
models still show lackluster performance on problems with high-dimensional action spaces. The
problem is even more pronounced for cases with
high-dimensional continuous action spaces due
to combinatorial increase in the number of the
outputs. Recent works approach the problem by
dividing the network into multiple parallel or sequential (action) modules responsible for different
discretized actions. However there are drawbacks
to both the parallel and the sequential approaches,
i.e. parallel module architectures lack coordination between action modules, leading to extra
complexity in the task, while a sequential structure can result in the vanishing gradients problem and exploding parameter space. In this work
we show that the compositional structure of the
action modules has a significant impact on the
model performance, we propose a novel approach
to infer the network structure for DQN models operating with high-dimensional continuous actions.
Our method is based on uncertainty estimation
techniques and yields substantially higher scores
for MuJoCo environments with high-dimensional
continuous action spaces, as well as a realistic
AAA sailing simulator game.

1. Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) has gained special attention from the research and practitioners community after demonstrating its ability to handle problems with highdimensional input spaces (Mnih et al., 2015). Following that,
a number of works applying RL in various areas, including
Robotics (Polydoros & Nalpantidis, 2017), Computer Vision
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computing, National University of Singapore 2 INRIA Nancy Grand Est, France
3
Ubisoft, Singapore. Correspondence to: Andrey Sakryukin
<asakryukin@u.nus.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

(Yun et al., 2017), NLP (Li et al., 2016) and others, were
published. One of the main focuses of recent RL research
has been tackling complex input spaces and/or compound
problems. Off-policy models such as DQN are of special
interest in the field, thanks to their sample efficiency, ease
of implementation, and training time. However, in spite of
its success with high-dimensional input spaces and complex
tasks, increase in the number of actions brings a lot of challenges to their training process. High-dimensional action
spaces lead to the problem of maximization of an arbitraty
function over the set of possible actions. The problem is
even more challenging for the case of high-dimensional continuous actions, requiring fine-grained control. In this case
a set containing m actions to be discretized by b bins would
result in an action space of size bm .
Recent works, focusing on the problem of high-dimensional
continuous action spaces, approach the problem by separating the network into multiple action specific sub-networks
(denoted action modules) connected to a shared component,
which results in a linear growth in the number of network
outputs. Existing works, applying sequential (Metz et al.,
2017) or parallel (Tavakoli et al., 2018) module composition, assume that the set of actions modules follows either
(i) a total order or (ii) that their order has no significant
impact on the network performance. In this work we show
that agent actions sub-networks can be partially ordered
and that a modular composition architecture indeed affects
the model performance. The use of a modular architecture
allows extra information to flow to specific sub-networks,
while mitigating problems such as vanishing gradients (e.g,
with a sequential architecture). While in some tasks, like
human locomotion, the composition architecture might be
intuitive (e.g, knees and ankles are more important than
shoulders for a walking task), in others, like boat sailing, it
might not be trivial (how are sail trimming, sail steering and
boat steering actions related to a run downwind?).
To determine such an architecture, we propose a simple
approach relying on the generic uncertainty estimation of
action modules. The key insight is that the overall performance is improved by placing modules with high uncertainty lower in the network so that they can leverage extra
information coming from more confident modules.
At a high level our algorithm uses one of two novel strategies

