Deep Isometric Learning for Visual Recognition

Haozhi Qi 1 Chong You 1 Xiaolong Wang 1 2 Yi Ma 1 Jitendra Malik 1
https://haozhiqi.github.io/ISONet

Abstract
Initialization, normalization, and skip connections
are believed to be three indispensable techniques
for training very deep convolutional neural networks and obtaining state-of-the-art performance.
This paper shows that deep vanilla ConvNets without normalization nor skip connections can also
be trained to achieve surprisingly good performance on standard image recognition benchmarks.
This is achieved by enforcing the convolution kernels to be near isometric during initialization and
training, as well as by using a variant of ReLU that
is shifted towards being isometric. Further experiments show that if combined with skip connections, such near isometric networks can achieve
performances on par with (for ImageNet) and better than (for COCO) the standard ResNet, even
without normalization at all. Our code is available
at https://github.com/HaozhiQi/ISONet.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (ConvNets) have achieved
phenomenal success in computer vision (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2015; Szegedy et al., 2015;
He et al., 2015; Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015; He et al., 2016; Xie
et al., 2017b; Huang et al., 2017). While shallow ConvNets
with a few layers have existed for decades (LeCun et al.,
1989; Denker et al., 1989; LeCun et al., 1990; 1998), it
is only until recently that networks with hundreds or even
thousands of layers can be effectively trained. Such deep
ConvNets are able to learn sophisticated decision rules for
complex practical data, therefore are usually indispensable
for obtaining state-of-the-art performance.
Training deep ConvNets is inherently difficult (Pascanu
et al., 2013; Glorot & Bengio, 2010). Despite widespread
interests in this problem, it has not been made possible un1
UC Berkeley 2 UC San Diego. Correspondence to: Haozhi Qi
<hqi@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

(optional)
skip connection

Convolution

b=1
b = -1
b = -3

𝜙(𝑥)

SReLU
Convolution

x

SReLU

Figure 1. A basic block of an Isometric Network (ISONet). Each
block contains only convolution and nonlinear activation layers,
with an identity skip connections (for R-ISONet only). The convolution is initialized as the (Kronecker) delta kernel and regulated
to be (near) orthogonal during training. The activation is Shifted
ReLU (SReLU) φ(·) with a learnable parameter b for obtaining
a balance between nonlinearity and isometry. The figure shows
three examples of the SReLU with b = 1, −1 and −3.

til the development of proper weight initialization (Glorot
& Bengio, 2010; He et al., 2015), feature map normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015), and residual learning techniques (He et al., 2016; Srivastava et al., 2015). Following
these initial works, a wide variety of network architectural
components including novel nonlinear activation, weight
initialization, weight regularization, and residual learning
techniques have been purposed in the literature (see Section 4 for an overview). Such techniques are motivated
and justified from diverse perspectives, such as prevention
of dead neurons (Maas et al., 2013), promotion of selfnormalization (Klambauer et al., 2017), reduction of filter
redundancy (Wang et al., 2020), improvement of generalization (Jia et al., 2019), to name a few.
The abundance of existing architectural components and the
diversity of their design principles posit ConvNets architectural design a difficult task. After all, which combination of
components should one use for their networks? Such a challenge motivates us to pose the following question: Is there a
central guiding principle for training very deep ConvNets?
Isometric learning. We show that the isometric property,
where each layer of the network preserves the inner product

