Linear Convergence of Randomized Primal-Dual Coordinate Method for
Large-scale Linear Constrained Convex Programming

Daoli Zhu * 1 Lei Zhao * 2

Abstract

is additive with respect to the space decomposition

Linear constrained convex programming has
many practical applications, including support
vector machine and machine learning portfolio
problems. We propose the randomized primaldual coordinate (RPDC) method, a randomized
coordinate extension of the first-order primal-dual
method by (Cohen & Zhu, 1984) and (Zhao &
Zhu, 2019), to solve linear constrained convex
programming. We randomly choose a block of
variables based on a uniform distribution, linearize, and apply a Bregman-like function (core
function) to the selected block to obtain simple
parallel primal-dual decomposition. We then establish almost surely convergence and expected
O(1/t) convergence rate, and expected linear convergence under global strong metric subregularity.
Finally, we discuss implementation details for the
randomized primal-dual coordinate approach and
present numerical experiments on support vector
machine and machine learning portfolio problems
to verify the linear convergence.

U = U1 × U2 · · · × UN , ui ∈ Ui ⊂ Rni and

(2)
Each Ji is a convex but possibly non-smooth function on
Ui ⊂ Rni ; A = (A1 , A2 , · · · , AN ) ∈ Rm×n is an appropriate partition of A, where Ai is an m × ni matrix and
b ∈ Rm is a vector.
1.1. Motivation
Linear constrained convex programming is an important and
challenging application problem class. We present several
example applications to demonstrate the reasons for interest
in type (P) problems.
1.1.1. S UPPORT VECTOR MACHINE
Support vector machine (SVM) is a popular supervised
learning method (Boser et al., 1992; Cortes & Vapnik,
1995), widely used for pattern recognition (Burges, 1998;
Schölkopf et al., 2000) and classification (Chang & Lin,
2011). The SVM problem can be expressed as
(SVM)

This paper considers linear constrained convex programming (LCCP),
(1)

where G is a convex smooth function on the closed convex
set U ⊂ Rn ; and J is a convex, possibly non-smooth
N
P
function on U ⊂ Rn . We assume that J(u) =
Ji (ui )
i=1
*

ni = n.

i=1

1. Introduction

(P): min F (u) = G(u) + J(u)
s.t
Au − b = 0
,
u∈U

N
X

1

Equal contribution Antai College of Economics and Management and Sino-US Global Logistics Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China 2 School of Naval Architecture, Ocean
and Civil Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
China. Correspondence to: Lei Zhao <l.zhao@sjtu.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

min

1 >
>
2 u Qu − 1n u

s.t.

y> u = 0

u∈[0,c]n

,

where u ∈ Rn are the decision variables, Q ∈ Rn×n is
a symmetric and positive-definite matrix, c ∈ R is the
upperbound of all variables, y ∈ {−1, 1}n is the vector of
labels, and 1n is an n-dimensional vector of 1s.
1.1.2. M ACHINE LEARNING PORTFOLIO PROBLEM
Portfolio optimization (PO) via machine learning has received increased attention recently. PO aims to invest in a
group of financial assets with instructions by machine, based
on financial principles and optimization strategies. Since
this requires considerable quantitative calculation, machine
learning methods are essential to reduce human mistakes
and biases for real-world investment. (Brodie et al., 2009;
Lai et al., 2018; Li et al., 2016; Ho et al., 2015; Shen et al.,
2014) The machine learning portfolio (MLP) problem can

