Reverse-Engineering Deep ReLU Networks

David Rolnick 1 Konrad P. Körding 1

Abstract
The output of a neural network depends on its architecture and weights in a highly nonlinear way,
and it is often assumed that a network’s parameters cannot be recovered from its output. Here,
we prove that, in fact, it is frequently possible to
reconstruct the architecture, weights, and biases
of a deep ReLU network by observing only its
output. We leverage the fact that every ReLU network defines a piecewise linear function, where
the boundaries between linear regions correspond
to inputs for which some neuron in the network
switches between inactive and active ReLU states.
By dissecting the set of region boundaries into
components associated with particular neurons,
we show both theoretically and empirically that
it is possible to recover the weights of neurons
and their arrangement within the network, up to
isomorphism.

1. Introduction
A deep neural network computes a function from inputs
to outputs, and the architecture and weights of the network
determine the function that is expressed. While every parameter influences the overall function, this influence is highly
nonlinear, and the effects of different neurons within the
network would appear, at least superficially, to be hopelessly
entangled. Consequently, it has often been supposed that it
is impossible to recover the parameters of a network merely
by observing its output on different inputs.
Were it possible to reverse-engineer a neural network from
the function it computes, there could be serious implications
for security and privacy. In many deployed deep learning
systems, the output is freely available but the network used
to generate that output is not. The ability to recover a confidential network could even potentially expose the data
used to train the network, and could also make it easier to
1
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Correspondence to: David Rolnick <drolnick@seas.upenn.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

construct adversarial attacks.
The related question of reverse-engineering biological neural networks is of foundational interest in neuroscience.
Within the brain, it is often possible to record the activity of
a cell but not the presynaptic cells that drive it, and therefore experimental neuroscientists must infer full activity
and weights from partial recordings. Our understanding of
the brain would be greatly improved if it were possible to
identify the internal components of a neural circuit based
on recordings of the output of that circuit.
In this work, we show mathematically and empirically that it
is, in fact, often possible to recover the architecture, weights,
and biases of a deep ReLU network by querying it. Our approach leverages the fact that a ReLU network is piecewise
linear and transitions between linear pieces when one of the
ReLUs of the network transitions from its inactive to its active state. For neurons in the first layer of the network, such
transitions occur along hyperplanes through input space; the
equations of these hyperplanes determine the weights and
biases of the first layer (up to sign and scaling). For neurons
in subsequent layers, transitions occur along “bent hyperplanes” that bend where they intersect bent hyperplanes
associated with earlier layers. Measuring the intersections
between bent hyperplanes allows us to recover the weights
between the corresponding neurons.
Our principal contributions are:
• We prove that the architecture, weights, and biases of
a deep ReLU network can be recovered (up to isomorphism) from the arrangement of regions on which the
network is linear.
• We describe an algorithm to recover the network by
approximating the boundaries between these linear regions, with the only information given about the network being its output on specified queries.
• We demonstrate that our algorithm succeeds in reconstructing both trained and untrained ReLU networks.
Each of these contributions significantly advances the state
of the art. No prior work has, to our knowledge, been able
to reverse-engineer even the first layer of a network with
2 hidden layers. By contrast, our theoretical results and

