Stabilizing Differentiable Architecture Search via
Perturbation-based Regularization
Xiangning Chen 1 Cho-Jui Hsieh 1

Abstract
Differentiable architecture search (DARTS) is a
prevailing NAS solution to identify architectures.
Based on the continuous relaxation of the architecture space, DARTS learns a differentiable architecture weight and largely reduces the search cost.
However, its stability has been challenged for
yielding deteriorating architectures as the search
proceeds. We find that the precipitous validation
loss landscape, which leads to a dramatic performance drop when distilling the final architecture,
is an essential factor that causes instability. Based
on this observation, we propose a perturbationbased regularization - SmoothDARTS (SDARTS),
to smooth the loss landscape and improve the generalizability of DARTS-based methods. In particular, our new formulations stabilize DARTSbased methods by either random smoothing or
adversarial attack. The search trajectory on NASBench-1Shot1 demonstrates the effectiveness of
our approach and due to the improved stability, we
achieve performance gain across various search
spaces on 4 datasets. Furthermore, we mathematically show that SDARTS implicitly regularizes
the Hessian norm of the validation loss, which
accounts for a smoother loss landscape and improved performance.

1. Introduction
Neural architecture search (NAS) has emerged as a rational
next step to automate the trial and error paradigm of architecture design. It is straightforward to search by reinforcement
learning (Zoph & Le, 2017; Zoph et al., 2018; Zhong et al.,
2018) and evolutionary algorithm (Stanley & Miikkulainen,
2002; Miikkulainen et al., 2019; Real et al., 2017; Liu et al.,
2017) due to the discrete nature of the architecture space.
1
Department of Computer Science, UCLA. Correspondence to:
Xiangning Chen <xiangning@cs.ucla.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

However, these methods usually require massive computation resources. Recently, a variety of approaches are proposed to reduce the search cost including one-shot architecture search (Pham et al., 2018; Bender et al., 2018; Brock
et al., 2018), performance estimation (Klein et al., 2017;
Bowen Baker, 2018) and network morphisms (Elsken et al.,
2019; Cai et al., 2018a;b). For example, one-shot architecture search methods construct a super-network covering all
candidate architectures, where sub-networks with shared
components also share the corresponding weights. Then the
super-network is trained only once, which is much more efficient. Based on this weight-sharing technique, DARTS (Liu
et al., 2019) further builds a continuous mixture architecture
and relaxes the categorical architecture search problem to
learning a differentiable architecture weight A.
Despite being computationally efficient, the stability and
generalizability of DARTS have been challenged recently.
Many (Zela et al., 2020a; Yu et al., 2020) have observed that
although the validation accuracy of the mixture architecture
keeps growing, the performance of the derived architecture
collapses when evaluation. Such instability makes DARTS
converge to distorted architectures. For instance, parameterfree operations such as skip connection usually dominate
the generated architecture (Zela et al., 2020a), and DARTS
has a preference towards wide and shallow structures (Shu
et al., 2020). To alleviate this issue, Zela et al. (2020a) propose to early stop the search process based on handcrafted
criteria. However, the inherent instability starts from the
very beginning and early stopping is a compromise without
actually improving the search algorithm.
An important source of such instability is the final projection step to derive the actual discrete architecture from
the continuous mixture architecture. There is often a huge
performance drop in this projection step, so the validation
accuracy of the mixture architecture, which is optimized by
DARTS, may not be correlated with the final validation accuracy. As shown in Figure 1(a), DARTS often converges to
a sharp region, so small perturbations will dramatically decrease the validation accuracy, let alone the projection step.
Moreover, the sharp cone in the landscape illustrates that
the network weight w is almost only applicable to the current architecture weight A. Similarly, Bender et al. (2018)

