Emergence of Separable Manifolds in Deep Language Representations

Jonathan Mamou * 1 Hang Le * 2 Miguel A Del Rio 2 Cory Stephenson 1
Hanlin Tang 1 Yoon Kim 3 SueYeon Chung 2 4

Abstract

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown much
empirical success in solving perceptual tasks
across various cognitive modalities. While they
are only loosely inspired by the biological brain,
recent studies report considerable similarities
between representations extracted from taskoptimized DNNs and neural populations in the
brain. DNNs have subsequently become a popular
model class to infer computational principles underlying complex cognitive functions, and in turn,
they have also emerged as a natural testbed for
applying methods originally developed to probe
information in neural populations. In this work,
we utilize mean-field theoretic manifold analysis, a recent technique from computational neuroscience that connects geometry of feature representations with linear separability of classes, to
analyze language representations from large-scale
contextual embedding models. We explore representations from different model families (BERT,
RoBERTa, GPT, etc.) and find evidence for emergence of linguistic manifolds across layer depth
(e.g., manifolds for part-of-speech tags), especially in ambiguous data (i.e, words with multiple
part-of-speech tags, or part-of-speech classes including many words). In addition, we find that
the emergence of linear separability in these manifolds is driven by a combined reduction of manifolds’ radius, dimensionality and inter-manifold
correlations.1

*

Equal contribution 1 Intel Labs 2 Massachusetts Institute of
Technology 3 Harvard University 4 Columbia University. Correspondence to: SueYeon Chung <sueyeon@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).
1
Code is available at https://github.com/
schung039/contextual-repr-manifolds.

1. Introduction and Related Work
Many recent studies show notable similarities between representations extracted from task-optimized deep neural networks (DNNs) and neural populations in the brain in sensory
systems (Yamins et al., 2014; Khaligh-Razavi & Kriegeskorte, 2014). Computational neuroscience community is increasingly relying on utilizing DNNs as a framework for
studying neural correlates underlying complex cognitive
functions (Cichy & Kaiser, 2019; Kriegeskorte, 2015). Addressing the question of "how a population of neural units
transform representations across multilayered processing
stages to implement a cognitive task" is a key challenge in
both neuroscience and deep learning. Consequently, developing the techniques to provide insight into neural representation and computation have been an active area of research
in both fields (Barrett et al., 2019).
Much prior work on characterizing how information is encoded in DNNs and the brain has focused on the geometric
structure underlying the data. In neuroscience, representational similarity analysis (Kriegeskorte & Kievit, 2013)
captures the similarity between the stimuli in the geometry
of the neural data and deep network representations. Other
geometric measures such as geodesics (Hénaff & Simoncelli, 2015), curvature (Hénaff et al., 2019; Fawzi et al.,
2018), intrinsic dimension (Ansuini et al., 2019), and canonical correlation analysis (Raghu et al., 2017) have been used
to empirically study the complexity of neural population
and learned representations in DNNs.
In natural language processing (NLP), recent advances in
contextualized word representations such as ELMo (Peters
et al., 2018) and BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) have led to
significant empirical improvements across many tasks. Concomitant with these advances is an emergent line of work,
colorfully referred to as BERTology, exploring what aspects
of language are being captured by these contextual representations (Zhang & Bowman, 2018; Blevins et al., 2018;
Tenney et al., 2019a). One popular approach for analysis
is also through the lens of the geometry: Hewitt & Manning (2019) report evidence of a geometric representation
of parse trees in embedding from BERT, and Coenen et al.
(2019) study the geometric representation of word senses
via visualization techniques such as UMAP. Another popu-

