Dual-Path Distillation: A Unified Framework to Improve Black-Box Attacks

Yonggang Zhang 1 Ya Li 2 Tongliang Liu 3 Xinmei Tian 1

Abstract
We study the problem of constructing black-box
adversarial attacks, where no model information
is revealed except for the feedback knowledge
of the given inputs. To obtain sufficient knowledge for crafting adversarial examples, previous
methods query the target model with inputs that
are perturbed with different searching directions.
However, these methods suffer from poor query
efficiency since the employed searching directions
are sampled randomly. To mitigate this issue, we
formulate the goal of mounting efficient attacks as
an optimization problem in which the adversary
tries to fool the target model with a limited number of queries. Under such settings, the adversary
has to select appropriate searching directions to
reduce the number of model queries. By solving
the efficient-attack problem, we find that we need
to distill the knowledge in both the path of the
adversarial examples and the path of the searching directions. Therefore, we propose a novel
framework, dual-path distillation, that utilizes the
feedback knowledge not only to craft adversarial
examples but also to alter the searching directions
to achieve efficient attacks. Experimental results
suggest that our framework can significantly increase the query efficiency.

1. Introduction
Recent studies have shown that neural networks exhibit vulnerability to adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2014),
which are constructed to fool models by adding imperceptible perturbations to normal examples. A host of methods
have been developed to craft adversarial examples, and
they can be utilized to analyze the weakness of machines
1

Department of Electronic Engineering and Information Science, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
iFLYTEK, Hefei, China 3 UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, University of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. Correspondence to:
Xinmei Tian <xinmei@ustc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

(Athalye et al., 2018), evaluate model robustness (Carlini &
Wagner, 2017; Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016) and devise
robust neural networks (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Madry
et al., 2018). However, most of them are white-box attacks
where the target models are transparent to the adversary.
Black-box attacks can be more practical and valuable in
real-world applications as long as the intrinsic details of the
black box can be omitted.
From the view of an attack, accessing all the information of
the target model may not be realistic in many real-world situations (Ilyas et al., 2018). In restrictive black-box settings,
some works (Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016; Dong et al.,
2018; Poursaeed et al., 2018; Papernot et al., 2017; Zhang
et al., 2020) build a transparent surrogate model to generate
adversarial examples to attack the target, which are termed
transfer-based attacks. Recent works (Bhagoji et al., 2018;
Chen et al., 2017; Tu et al., 2019; Ilyas et al., 2018; 2019;
Cheng et al., 2019) propose accessing the target model with
inputs perturbed by different searching directions and utilizing the feedback knowledge to craft adversarial examples,
which are termed query-based attacks.
However, current black-box attack methods suffer from
either a low attack success rate or a high query complexity. It is shown that transfer-based attacks suffer from low
attack success rates (Chen et al., 2017), because they construct adversarial examples either for a local surrogate model
(Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016; Dong et al., 2018; Poursaeed
et al., 2018; Papernot et al., 2017) or in an unsupervised
approach (Zhang et al., 2020) without sufficient knowledge
of the target models. In query-based attacks, the adversary
requires extensive model queries to search the data space.
The demand for extensive queries stems from the fact that
searching directions employed by existing methods lack the
ability to adjust the target model. Hence, the problem of
improving query efficiency still falls short of full mitigation.
Existing works improve the query efficiency mainly from
two directions, either finding a more efficient gradient estimation algorithm (Chen et al., 2017; Bhagoji et al., 2018;
Tu et al., 2019; Ilyas et al., 2018) or utilizing more prior
information (Ilyas et al., 2019; Cheng et al., 2019). All
these methods estimate the gradient with respect to the input images by randomly sampling the searching directions.
Although these randomly selected searching directions can

