Do We Really Need to Access the Source Data? Source Hypothesis Transfer for
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation

Jian Liang 1 Dapeng Hu 1 Jiashi Feng 1

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) aims to
leverage the knowledge learned from a labeled
source dataset to solve similar tasks in a new unlabeled domain. Prior UDA methods typically
require to access the source data when learning
to adapt the model, making them risky and inefficient for decentralized private data. This work
tackles a practical setting where only a trained
source model is available and investigates how
we can effectively utilize such a model without
source data to solve UDA problems. We propose a simple yet generic representation learning framework, named Source HypOthesis Transfer (SHOT). SHOT freezes the classifier module
(hypothesis) of the source model and learns the
target-specific feature extraction module by exploiting both information maximization and selfsupervised pseudo-labeling to implicitly align representations from the target domains to the source
hypothesis. To verify its versatility, we evaluate
SHOT in a variety of adaptation cases including
closed-set, partial-set, and open-set domain adaptation. Experiments indicate that SHOT yields
state-of-the-art results among multiple domain
adaptation benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable success
in a variety of applications across different fields but at
the expense of laborious large-scale training data annotation. To avoid expensive data labeling, domain adaptation
(DA) methods are developed to fully utilize previously labeled datasets and unlabeled data on hand in a transductive
manner, which have obtained promising results in object
recognition (Long et al., 2015; Tzeng et al., 2017), semantic
1

Department of ECE, National University of Singapore (NUS).
Correspondence to: Jian Liang <liangjian92@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

segmentation (Zhang et al., 2017; Hoffman et al., 2018), etc.
Over the last decade, increasing efforts have been devoted
to deep domain adaptation, especially under the vanilla unsupervised closed-set setting (Panareda Busto & Gall, 2017)
where two domains share the same label space but the target
data are not labeled. One prevailing paradigm is to mitigate
the distribution divergence between domains by matching
the distribution statistical moments at different orders (Sun
et al., 2016; Zellinger et al., 2017; Peng et al., 2019a). For
example, the most-favored Maximum Mean Discrepancy
(MMD) (Gretton et al., 2007) measure minimizes a certain
distance between weighted sums of all raw moments. Another popular paradigm leverages the idea of adversarial
learning (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and introduces an additional domain classifier to minimize the Proxy A-distance
(Ben-David et al., 2010) across domains.
Nowadays, data are distributed on different devices and
usually contain private information, e.g., those on personal
phones or from surveillance cameras. Existing DA methods need to access the source data during learning to adapt,
which is not efficient for data transmission and may violate the data privacy policy. In this paper, we address an
interesting but challenging unsupervised DA setting with
only a trained source model provided as supervision. It differs from vanilla unsupervised DA in that the source model
instead of the source data is provided to the unlabeled target domain. Such a setting helps protect the privacy in the
source domain (e.g., individual hospital profiles), and transferring a light trained model is much efficient than heavy
data transmission. For example, as shown in Table 1, the
storage size of a trained model is much smaller than that of
a compressed dataset.
Table 1. Storage size. The backbone networks of source models
are LeNet (LeCun et al., 1998) and ResNet-101 (He et al., 2016),
respectively. † (Hoffman et al., 2018), ‡ (Peng et al., 2017).
Storage size (MB)

Digits†

VisDA-C‡

Source Dataset
Source Model

33.2
0.9

7884.8
172.6

In terms of privacy protection, this setting seems somewhat
similar to a recently proposed transfer learning setting in Hypothesis Transfer Learning (HTL) (Kuzborskij & Orabona,

