Duality in RKHSs with Infinite Dimensional Outputs:
Application to Robust Losses

Pierre Laforgue 1 Alex Lambert 1 Luc Brogat-Motte 1 Florence d’Alché-Buc 1

Abstract
Operator-Valued Kernels (OVKs) and associated
vector-valued Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces
provide an elegant way to extend scalar kernel
methods when the output space is a Hilbert space.
Although primarily used in finite dimension for
problems like multi-task regression, the ability of
this framework to deal with infinite dimensional
output spaces unlocks many more applications,
such as functional regression, structured output
prediction, and structured data representation.
However, these sophisticated schemes crucially
rely on the kernel trick in the output space, so
that most of previous works have focused on the
square norm loss function, completely neglecting
robustness issues that may arise in such surrogate
problems. To overcome this limitation, this paper
develops a duality approach that allows to solve
OVK machines for a wide range of loss functions.
The infinite dimensional Lagrange multipliers are
handled through a Double Representer Theorem,
and algorithms for -insensitive losses and the
Huber loss are thoroughly detailed. Robustness
benefits are emphasized by a theoretical stability
analysis, as well as empirical improvements on
structured data applications.

1. Introduction
Due to increasingly available streaming and network data,
learning to predict complex objects such as structured
outputs or time series has attracted a great deal of attention
in machine learning. Extending the well known kernel
methods devoted to non-vectorial data (Hofmann et al.,
2008), several kernel-based approaches have emerged to
deal with complex output data. While Structural SVM
1

LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France.
Correspondence to: Pierre Laforgue <pierre.laforgue@telecomparis.fr>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

and variants cope with discrete structures (Tsochantaridis
et al., 2005; Joachims et al., 2009) through structured
losses, Operator-Valued Kernels (OVKs) and vector-valued
Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces (vv-RKHSs, Micchelli
and Pontil (2005); Carmeli et al. (2006; 2010)) provide a
unique framework to handle both functional and structured
outputs. Vv-RKHSs are classes of functions that map
an arbitrary input set X to some output Hilbert space Y
(Senkene and Tempel’man, 1973; Caponnetto et al., 2008).
Primarily used with finite dimensional outputs (Y “ Rp )
to solve multi-task regression (Micchelli and Pontil, 2005;
Baldassarre et al., 2012) and multiple class classification
(Dinuzzo et al., 2011), OVK methods have further been
exploited to handle outputs in infinite dimensional Hilbert
spaces. This has unlocked numerous applications, such as
functional regression (Kadri et al., 2010; 2016), structured
prediction (Brouard et al., 2011; Kadri et al., 2013), infinite
quantile regression (Brault et al., 2019), or structured data
representation learning (Laforgue et al., 2019). Nonetheless,
these sophisticated schemes often come along with a basic
loss function: the output space squared norm, neglecting
desirable properties such as parsimony and robustness.
In nonparametric modeling, model parsimony boils down
to data sparsity, e.g. reducing the number of training data
points on which the model relies to make a prediction. Such
a property is highly valuable (Hastie et al., 2015): not only
does it prevent overfitting but it also alleviates the inherent
computational load of optimization and prediction, allowing
to scale to larger datasets. Another appealing property of a
regression tool is robustness to outliers (Huber, 1964; Zhu
et al., 2008). Real data may suffer from incorrect feature
measurements and spurious annotations, leading to training
datasets contaminated with outliers. Then, minimizing the
squared loss is inappropriate as the least-squares estimates
behave poorly when the residuals distribution is not normal,
but rather heavy-tailed. In (scalar) kernel methods, these
two properties – data sparsity and robustness to outliers –
are imposed through the choice of appropriate losses. Data
sparsity is leveraged by using -insensitive losses, exploited
in the well known Support Vector Regression (Drucker et al.,
1997) while robust regression (Fung and Mangasarian, 2000)
can be obtained by minimizing the Huber loss function
(Huber, 1964). Driven by three emblematic learning tasks,

