Towards Accurate Post-training Network Quantization via Bit-Split and
Stitching

Peisong Wang 1 Qiang Chen 1 Xiangyu He 1 Jian Cheng 1

Abstract
Network quantization is essential for deploying
deep models to IoT devices due to its high efficiency. Most existing quantization approaches
rely on the full training datasets and the timeconsuming fine-tuning to retain accuracy. Posttraining quantization does not have these problems, however, it has mainly been shown effective for 8-bit quantization due to the simple optimization strategy. In this paper, we propose a
Bit-Split and Stitching framework (Bit-split) for
lower-bit post-training quantization with minimal
accuracy degradation. The proposed framework
is validated on a variety of computer vision tasks,
including image classification, object detection,
instance segmentation, with various network architectures. Specifically, Bit-split can achieve
near-original model performance even when quantizing FP32 models to INT3 without fine-tuning.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been demonstrated to be
effective in a wide range of computer vision tasks, including
image recognition (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014; Chatfield et al., 2014; He et al., 2016), object
detection (Girshick et al., 2014; Ren et al., 2015; Liu et al.,
2016), segmentation (Long et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2019)
and so on. At the same time, the high complexity including
the huge parameter size and computing operations as well
as the power consumption have hindered the deployment
of deep networks to real-world applications. Thus network
compression (Han et al., 2015; Wu et al., 2016; Wang &
Cheng, 2016; Romero et al., 2014) has drawn great attention of researchers. Among these compression techniques,
network quantization is widely used no matter on special
1

NLPR & AIRIA, Institute of Automation, Chinese
Academy of Sciences.
Correspondence to: Jian Cheng
<jcheng@nlpr.ia.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

hardware like TPU or general hardware like CPU and GPU.
By turning the floating-point values within the networks to
low-bit integers, the complex floating-point operations can
be replaced by more efficient integer operations.
Despite its efficiency, training low-bit neural networks is
nontrivial. In (Krishnamoorthi, 2018), the authors proposed
two basic network quantization paradigms, i.e., quantizationaware training and post-training quantization. Most of current quantization approaches belong to the former, where
low-bit networks are trained with quantization operations
inserted. Quantization-aware training can achieve higher
accuracy because the learned weights could be adjusted during training to fit the quantization operations. On the other
hand, quantization-aware training has several drawbacks. It
relies on the full training data and large computing resources
like GPUs. Moreover, the tedious and time-consuming retraining procedure has posed high requirements in domain
knowledge and experience for the users, which is hindering
the application of quantization techniques.
By contrast, post-training quantization has many desirable
properties. It does not need the training dataset, except for a
very small amount of data for calibration, thus no privacy
or data transmission problems will be caused. Moreover,
post-training quantization is network architecture free, backpropagation free, and does not require domain knowledge or
any optimization tricks. It is for this reason that post-training
quantization is supported and preferable to accelerate the inference of many libraries and devices, such as the TensorRT
(Migacz, 2017) on GPU, TF-Lite (Krishnamoorthi, 2018)
on TPU and the SNPE on Qualcomm devices.
Despite the advantages of post-training quantization, it has
the problem of significant accuracy degradation, especially
when both activations and weights are quantized into very
low-bit integers. Thus for current post-training quantization
in TensorRT and TF-Lite as well as the SNPE, only 8-bit
quantization is supported for the weights and activations.
However, for hardware accelerators, every bit saving could
result in significant resource reduction, including storage,
computing units and more importantly the energy consumption (Horowitz, 2014). To this end, ZeroQ (Cai et al., 2020)
utilizes knowledge distillation and mix-precision quantization, i.e., allowing different channels and filters to be quan-

