High-dimensional Robust Mean Estimation via Gradient Descent

Yu Cheng * 1 Ilias Diakonikolas * 2 Rong Ge * 3 Mahdi Soltanolkotabi * 4

Abstract
We study the problem of high-dimensional robust mean estimation in the presence of a constant fraction of adversarial outliers. A recent line
of work has provided sophisticated polynomialtime algorithms for this problem with dimensionindependent error guarantees for a range of natural distribution families. In this work, we show
that a natural non-convex formulation of the problem can be solved directly by gradient descent.
Our approach leverages a novel structural lemma,
roughly showing that any approximate stationary point of our non-convex objective gives a
near-optimal solution to the underlying robust
estimation task. Our work establishes an intriguing connection between algorithmic highdimensional robust statistics and non-convex optimization, which may have broader applications
to other robust estimation tasks.

1. Introduction
Learning in the presence of outliers is an important goal in
machine learning that has become a pressing challenge in a
number of high-dimensional data analysis applications, including data poisoning attacks (Barreno et al., 2010; Biggio
et al., 2012; Steinhardt et al., 2017) and exploratory analysis
of real datasets with natural outliers, e.g., in biology (Rosenberg et al., 2002; Paschou et al., 2010; Li et al., 2008). In
both these application domains, the outliers are not “random” but can be arbitrarily correlated, and could exhibit
rather complex structures that is essentially impossible to
accurately model. Hence, the goal in these settings is to
design computationally efficient estimators that can tolerate

a small constant fraction of arbitrary outliers.
Throughout this paper, we focus on the following data contamination model that generalizes several existing models,
including Huber’s contamination model (Huber, 1964).
Definition 1.1 (Strong Contamination Model). Given a parameter 0 <  < 1/2 and a distribution family D on Rd ,
the adversary operates as follows: The algorithm specifies
the number of samples N , and N samples are drawn from
some unknown D ∈ D. The adversary is allowed to inspect
the samples, remove up to N of them and replace them
with arbitrary points. This modified set of N points is then
given as input to the algorithm. We say that a set of samples
is -corrupted if it is generated by the above process.
The parameter  in the above definition is the fraction of
corrupted samples and quantifies the power of the adversary.
Intuitively, among our samples, an unknown (1 − ) fraction
are generated from a distribution of interest and are called
inliers, and the rest are called outliers.
The statistical foundations of outlier-robust estimation were
laid out in early work by the robust statistics community,
starting with the pioneering works of Tukey (1960) and
Huber (1964). In contrast, until fairly recently, even the
most basic algorithmic questions were poorly understood.
Specifically, even for the basic task of high-dimensional
mean estimation, all known robust estimators had runtime
exponential in the dimension, rendering them ineffective in
high-dimensional settings.

Equal contribution 1 University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago,
IL, USA 2 University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI,
USA 3 Duke University, Durham, NC, USA 4 University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Correspondence
to: Yu Cheng <yucheng2@uic.edu>, Ilias Diakonikolas <ilias@cs.wisc.edu>, Rong Ge <rongge@cs.duke.edu>, Mahdi
Soltanolkotabi <soltanol@usc.edu>.

Recently, Diakonikolas et al. (2016); Lai et al. (2016) gave
the first efficiently computable robust estimators for highdimensional unsupervised learning tasks, including mean
and covariance estimation. Specifically, Diakonikolas et al.
(2016) obtained the first polynomial-time robust estimators
with dimension-independent error guarantees, i.e., with error
scaling only with the fraction of corrupted samples  and not
with the dimensionality of the data. Since the dissemination
of these works, there has been a flurry of research activity
on algorithmic aspects of high-dimensional robust statistics;
see, e.g., Diakonikolas & Kane (2019) for a recent survey
on the topic.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Despite this exciting progress, the design of efficient robust
estimators in high dimensions remains challenging. The
difficulty, of course, lies in the non-convexity of the under-

*

