Neural Network Control Policy Verification with Persistent Adversarial
Perturbations
Yuh-Shyang Wang 1 Tsui-Wei Weng 2 Luca Daniel 2

Abstract
Deep neural networks are known to be fragile to
small adversarial perturbations, which raises serious concerns when a neural network policy is
interconnected with a physical system in a closed
loop. In this paper, we show how to combine recent works on static neural network certification
tools with robust control theory to certify a neural network policy in a control loop. We give a
sufficient condition and an algorithm to ensure
that the closed loop state and control constraints
are satisfied when the persistent adversarial perturbation is `∞ norm bounded. Our method is
based on finding a positively invariant set of the
closed loop dynamical system, and thus we do
not require the continuity of the neural network
policy. Along with the verification result, we also
develop an effective attack strategy for neural network control systems that outperforms exhaustive
Monte-Carlo search significantly. We show that
our certification algorithm works well on learned
models and could achieve 5 times better result
than the traditional Lipschitz-based method to certify the robustness of a neural network policy on
the cart-pole balance control problem.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have become state-of-the-arts in a
variety of machine learning tasks, including control of a
physical system in the reinforcement learning setting. For
example, in guided policy search (Zhang et al., 2016), a
neural network policy is used to replace the online model
predictive control policy to directly control a physical system in a feedback loop. Yet, recent studies demonstrate that
1
Argo AI, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA 2 Department
of EECS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence to: Yuh-Shyang Wang
<yswang@argo.ai>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

neural networks are surprisingly vulnerable to adversarial
examples and attacks (Huang et al., 2017; Szegedy et al.,
2013; Xie et al., 2017; Jia & Liang, 2017). For applications
that are safety-critical, such as self-driving cars, the existence of adversarial examples in neural networks has raised
severe and unprecedented concerns – a small perturbation
on the neural network input may cause significant change in
control actions, which could possibly destabilize the system
or drive the system state to an unsafe region. Therefore, it is
crucial to develop a verification tool that can provide useful
certificate (such as safety or robustness guarantees) for a
dynamical system with a neural network policy in the loop.
Recently, much research effort has been devoted to developing verification methods to quantify the robustness of neural
networks against adversarial input perturbations (Katz et al.,
2017; Ehlers, 2017; Kolter & Wong, 2018; Ruan et al., 2018;
Weng et al., 2018; Dvijotham et al., 2018; Bunel et al., 2018;
Boopathy et al., 2019; Royo et al., 2019). Specifically, given
a neural network policy u = π(y), these verifiers can certify
that u = π(y) ∈ U for all y ∈ Y for some sets U and Y.
However, these verifiers are developed in a static setting,
where the neural networks do not interact with a dynamical system. When a neural network policy is deployed to
a dynamical system (Zhang et al., 2016; Kiumarsi et al.,
2017), the neural network output u can affect the neural
network input y in the future via a feedback loop. To certify
a neural network policy in closed loop, it is necessary to
extend the static neural network certification tools to the
dynamic setting.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework to verify neural
network policies in a closed loop system by combining the
aforementioned static neural network certification tools with
robust control theory. We consider a realistic and strong
threat model where the adversaries can manipulate observations and states at every time step over an infinite horizon
(the so-called persistent perturbations). Our key idea is to
leverage the static neural network certification tools to give
a tight input-output characterization of the neural network
policy, consequently allowing us to find a positively invariant set of the closed loop dynamical system when combined
with robust control theory. Our contributions are summarized as below:

