Distance Metric Learning with Joint Representation Diversification

Xu Chu 1 2 Yang Lin 1 2 Yasha Wang 2 3 Xiting Wang 4 Hailong Yu 1 2 Xin Gao 1 2 Qi Tong 2 5

Abstract
Distance metric learning (DML) is to learn a representation space equipped with a metric, such that
similar examples are closer than dissimilar examples concerning the metric. The recent success of
DNNs motivates many DML losses that encourage the intra-class compactness and inter-class
separability. The trade-off between inter-class
compactness and inter-class separability shapes
the DML representation space by determining
how much information of the original inputs to retain. In this paper, we propose a Distance Metric
Learning with Joint Representation Diversification (JRD) that allows a better balancing point
between intra-class compactness and inter-class
separability. Specifically, we propose a Joint Representation Similarity regularizer that captures different abstract levels of invariant features and diversifies the joint distributions of representations
across multiple layers. Experiments on three deep
DML benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Distance metric learning (DML) is a class of approaches that
learns a mapping from original high-dimensional feature
space to a compact representation space where the metric directly corresponds to a measure of semantic similarity. With
proper training, the learned mapping could generalize to
unseen classes so that DML has been found especially useful for visual open-set classification tasks such as zero-shot
learning (Weston et al., 2011; Frome et al., 2013), retrieval
1
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science,
Peking University, Beijing, China 2 Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies, Ministry of Education, Beijing,
China 3 National Engineering Research Center of Software Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, China 4 Microsoft Research
Asia, Beijing, China 5 School of Software and Microelectronics,
Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Yasha
Wang <wangyasha@pku.edu.cn>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. The architectures of embedding loss methods and classification loss methods. The embedding losses measure the intra-class
compactness by computing intra-class distance d(xi , xj ) between
DML representations xi and xj . The classification losses measure the intra-class compactness by computing distance d(xi , wyi )
between DML representation xi and the correct class proxy wyi .
The explicit penalization on intra-class distances of DML representations in embedding losses imposes stronger restrictions on
intra-class compactness than classification losses.

(Zhou et al., 2004; Yang et al., 2018), and face recognition
(Chopra et al., 2005; Schroff et al., 2015).
In the conventional DML methods (Xing et al., 2003; Weinberger et al., 2006; Davis et al., 2007), examples are represented by hand-crafted features in RD . For similar examples
represented by xi , xj ∈ RD , one commonly used mapping
is parameterized by a projection matrix P ∈ Rd×D such
that ||Pxj − Pxj ||2 is minimized under certain regularization constraints (Xie, 2015). Recently, the success of deep
neural networks (DNNs) (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) motivates
more data-driven deep DML methods that learn representations by DNNs from raw data, leading to a substantial
boost in classification performance of visual tasks (Schroff
et al., 2015). In general, there are two goals of deep DML
optimization objectives: 1) the inner-class compactness and
2) the inter-class separability. The trade-off between interclass compactness and the inter-class separability shapes
the DML representation space by determining how much
information of the original inputs to retain.
There are mainly two categories of deep DML loss functions: 1) the embedding losses (Chopra et al., 2005; Schroff

