Random extrapolation for primal-dual coordinate descent

Ahmet Alacaoglu 1 Olivier Fercoq 2 Volkan Cevher 1

Abstract

2017), optimization with large number of constraints (Patrascu & Necoara, 2017; Fercoq et al., 2019), and total variation (TV) regularized problems (Chambolle et al., 2018;
Fercoq & Bianchi, 2019).

We introduce a randomly extrapolated primaldual coordinate descent method that adapts to
sparsity of the data matrix and the favorable structures of the objective function. Our method updates only a subset of primal and dual variables
with sparse data, and it uses large step sizes with
dense data, retaining the benefits of the specific
methods designed for each case. In addition to
adapting to sparsity, our method attains fast convergence guarantees in favorable cases without
any modifications. In particular, we prove linear
convergence under metric subregularity, which
applies to strongly convex-strongly concave problems and piecewise linear quadratic functions. We
show almost sure convergence of the sequence
and optimal sublinear convergence rates for the
primal-dual gap and objective values, in the general convex-concave case. Numerical evidence
demonstrates the state-of-the-art empirical performance of our method in sparse and dense settings,
matching and improving the existing methods.

The classic choice for solving problem (1) is to use primaldual methods (Chambolle & Pock, 2011; Vũ, 2013; Condat,
2013). These methods utilize the proximal operators for
g, h∗ and gradient of the differentiable component f . Randomized versions that we refer to as primal dual coordinate
descent (PDCD), are proposed in several works (Zhang &
Xiao, 2017; Dang & Lan, 2014; Gao et al., 2019; Fercoq &
Bianchi, 2019; Chambolle et al., 2018; Latafat et al., 2019).
First advantage of coordinate-based methods is that they
access to blocks of A and update a subset of variables,
resulting in cheap per iteration costs. Moreover, they utilize
larger step sizes depending on the properties of the problem
in selected blocks.
Existing PDCD methods fail to retain both these advantages,
as sparsity of A varies. In particular, methods that have
cheap per-iteration costs with sparse A (Fercoq & Bianchi,
2019; Latafat et al., 2019), are restricted to use small step
sizes with dense A. On the other hand, methods that can
use large step sizes with dense A (Chambolle et al., 2018),
have high per-iteration costs with sparse A.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider the problem
min f (x) + g(x) + h(Ax),

x∈X

(1)

where f, g : X → R ∪ {+∞} and h : Y → R ∪ {+∞} are
proper, lower semicontinuous, convex functions, A : X →
Y is a linear
X and Y Q
are Euclidean spaces such
Qoperator.
n
m
that X = i=1 Xi , and Y = j=1 Yj . Moreover, f is
assumed to have coordinatewise Lipschitz continuous gradients and g, h admit easily computable proximal operators.
Problem (1) is a general template that covers many problems
in different fields, such as regularized empirical risk minimization (Shalev-Shwartz & Zhang, 2013; Zhang & Xiao,
1

EPFL, Switzerland 2 LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France. Correspondence to: Ahmet Alacaoglu
<ahmet.alacaoglu@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Contributions. In this paper, we identify random extrapolation as the key to design a method that combines the benefits
of the methods in two camps and propose the primal-dual
method with random extrapolation and coordinate descent
(PURE-CD). PURE-CD exhibits the advantages of (Fercoq
& Bianchi, 2019; Latafat et al., 2019) in the sparse setting
and the advantages of (Chambolle et al., 2018) in the dense
setting simultaneously, achieving the best of both worlds.
As PURE-CD has the favorable properties in both ends of
the spectrum, it has the best performance in the regime in between: moderately sparse data. Table 1 compiles a summary
for the comparison of PURE-CD and previous methods.
In addition to adapting to the sparsity of A, we prove that
PURE-CD also adapts to unknown structures in the problem,
and obtains linear rate of convergence, without any modifications in the step sizes. Our linear convergence results
apply to strongly convex-strongly concave problems, linear
programs, and problems with piecewise linear quadratic

