Self-Attentive Associative Memory

Hung Le 1 Truyen Tran 1 Svetha Venkatesh 1

Abstract
Heretofore, neural networks with external memory are restricted to single memory with lossy representations of memory interactions. A rich representation of relationships between memory pieces
urges a high-order and segregated relational memory. In this paper, we propose to separate the
storage of individual experiences (item memory)
and their occurring relationships (relational memory). The idea is implemented through a novel
Self-attentive Associative Memory (SAM) operator. Found upon outer product, SAM forms a set
of associative memories that represent the hypothetical high-order relationships between arbitrary
pairs of memory elements, through which a relational memory is constructed from an item memory. The two memories are wired into a single
sequential model capable of both memorization
and relational reasoning. We achieve competitive
results with our proposed two-memory model in
a diversity of machine learning tasks, from challenging synthetic problems to practical testbeds
such as geometry, graph, reinforcement learning,
and question answering.

1. Introduction
Humans excel in remembering items and the relationship
between them over time (Olson et al., 2006; Konkel & Cohen, 2009). Numerous neurocognitive studies have revealed
this striking ability is largely attributed to the perirhinal
cortex and hippocampus, two brain regions that support
item memory (e.g., objects, events) and relational memory
(e.g., locations of objects, orders of events), respectively
(Cohen et al., 1997; Buckley, 2005). Relational memory
theory posits that there exists a representation of critical
relationships amongst arbitrary items, which allows inferential reasoning capacity (Eichenbaum, 1993; Zeithamova
1
Applied AI Institute, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia.
Correspondence to: Hung Le <thai.le@deakin.edu.au>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

et al., 2012). It remains unclear how the hippocampus can
select the stored items in clever ways to unearth their hidden
relationships and form the relational representation.
Research on artificial intelligence has focused on designing item-based memory models with recurrent neural networks (RNNs) (Hopfield, 1982; Elman, 1990; Hochreiter
& Schmidhuber, 1997) and memory-augmented neural networks (MANNs) (Graves et al., 2014; 2016; Le et al., 2018a;
2019). These memories support long-term retrieval of previously seen items yet lack explicit mechanisms to represent
arbitrary relationships amongst the constituent pieces of the
memories. Recently, further attempts have been made to
foster relational modeling by enabling memory-memory interactions, which is essential for relational reasoning tasks
(Santoro et al., 2017; 2018; Vaswani et al., 2017). However,
no effort has been made to model jointly item memory and
relational memory explicitly.
We argue that dual memories in a single system are crucial
for solving problems that require both memorization and
relational reasoning. Consider graphs wherein each node is
associated with versatile features– as example a road network structure where each node is associated with diverse
features: graph 1 where the nodes are building landmarks
and graph 2 where the nodes are flora details. The goal
here is to reason over the structure and output the associated
features of the nodes instead of the pointer or index to the
nodes. Learning to output associated node features enables
generalization to entirely novel features, i.e., a model can
be trained to generate a navigation path with building landmarks (graph 1) and tested in the novel context of generating
a navigation path with flora landmarks (graph 2). This may
be achieved if the model stores the features and structures
into its item and relational memory, separately, and reason
over the two memories using rules acquired during training.
Another example requiring both item and relational memory
can be understood by amalgamating the N th -farthest (Santoro et al., 2018) and associative recall (Graves et al., 2014)
tasks. N th -farthest requires relational memory to return a
fixed one-hot encoding representing the index to the N th farthest item, while associative recall returns the item itself,
requiring item memory. If these tasks are amalgamated to
compose Relational Associative Recall (RAR) – return the
N th -farthest item from a query (see § 3.2), it is clear that

