Understanding the Impact of Model Incoherence on Convergence of
Incremental SGD with Random Reshuffle
Shaocong Ma 1 Yi Zhou 1

Abstract

the sample loss of the i-th data sample. Such a problem
formulation covers a variety of machine learning problems
including support vector machine, logistic regression, matrix
completion and neural network training, etc. The common
approach is minimizing the error of a predictive model over
all data samples in a dataset, an i.i.d. assumption on the data
typically decomposes the error into a sum of sample errors.

Although SGD with random reshuffle has been
widely-used in machine learning applications,
there is a limited understanding of how model
characteristics affect the convergence of the algorithm. In this work, we introduce model incoherence to characterize the diversity of model
characteristics and study its impact on convergence of SGD with random reshuffle under weak
strong convexity. Specifically, minimizer incoherence measures the discrepancy between the
global minimizers of a sample loss and those
of the total loss and affects the convergence error of SGD with random reshuffle. In particular,
we show that the variable sequence generated by
SGD with random reshuffle converges to a certain
global minimizer of the total loss under full minimizer coherence. The other curvature incoherence measures the quality of condition numbers
of the sample losses and determines the convergence rate of SGD. With model incoherence, our
results show that SGD has a faster convergence
rate and smaller convergence error under random
reshuffle than those under random sampling, and
hence provide justifications to the superior practical performance of SGD with random reshuffle.

A standard and widely-applied algorithm that solves the
problem (P) is the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm, which has been well studied in both convex optimization (Bottou et al., 2018; Robbins & Monro, 1951;
Nemirovski et al., 2009; Lan, 2012) and nonconvex optimization (Bottou et al., 2018; Ghadimi et al., 2016; Ghadimi
& Lan, 2016). In these works, the SGD adopts a random
sampling with replacement scheme (referred to as random
sampling) and its analysis is based on a bounded stochastic variance assumption. Although such an SGD framework yields theoretically optimal convergence rate (Rakhlin
et al., 2012), it cannot fully explain the superior practical
performance of SGD in modern machine learning applications where the models are typically over-parameterized and
SGD usually adopts the incremental sampling with random
reshuffle scheme (referred to as random reshuffle). Hence,
it is desired to develop novel SGD frameworks that provide
better understanding of the superior practical performance
of SGD with random reshuffle.

1. Introduction
We study the following finite-sum optimization problem that
covers many important machine learning applications.
n

min f (θ) :=

θ∈Rd

1X
`i (θ),
n i=1

(P)

where θ ∈ Rd corresponds to the model parameters, f :
Rd → R denotes the total loss and each `i corresponds to
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, United States of America. Correspondence to: Yi Zhou <yi.zhou@utah.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Toward this goal, some existing works have proposed various novel analysis frameworks that lead to improved convergence rates of SGD with random sampling. In specific,
(Tseng, 1998; Solodov, 1998) introduced a strong growth
condition that bounds the maximum sample loss gradient
norm in terms of the total loss gradient norm. Under such
a condition, (Schmidt & Roux, 2013) established a sublinear convergence rate and a linear convergence rate for
SGD with random sampling in convex and strongly convex
optimization, respectively. More recently, (Vaswani et al.,
2018) proposed a more relaxed weak growth condition and
established similar convergence rate results for SGD with
random sampling. In another recent work, (Ma et al., 2017)
considered an interpolation setting where the model overfits all the data points so that all the sample losses share a
unique global minimizer, and they showed that SGD with
random sampling achieves a linear convergence rate un-

