Implicit Generative Modeling for Efficient Exploration

Neale Ratzlaff * 1 Qinxun Bai 2 Li Fuxin 1 Wei Xu 2

Abstract
Efficient exploration remains a challenging problem in reinforcement learning, especially for
those tasks where rewards from environments are
sparse. In this work, we introduce an exploration approach based on a novel implicit generative modeling algorithm to estimate a Bayesian
uncertainty of the agent’s belief of the environment dynamics. Each random draw from our
generative model is a neural network that instantiates the dynamic function, hence multiple
draws would approximate the posterior, and the
variance in the predictions based on this posterior is used as an intrinsic reward for exploration.
We design a training algorithm for our generative
model based on the amortized Stein Variational
Gradient Descent. In experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of this exploration algorithm in both pure exploration tasks and a downstream task, comparing with state-of-the-art intrinsic reward-based exploration approaches, including two recent approaches based on an ensemble of dynamic models. In challenging exploration tasks, our implicit generative model
consistently outperforms competing approaches
regarding data efficiency in exploration.

1. Introduction
Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) has enjoyed recent
success in a variety of applications, including superhuman performance in Atari games (Mnih et al., 2013),
robotic control (Lillicrap et al., 2015), image-based control tasks (Hafner et al., 2019), and playing the game of
Go (Silver et al., 2016). Despite these achievements, many
recent deep RL techniques still suffer from poor sample efficiency. Agents are often trained for millions, or even bil1
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon, USA 2 Horizon
Robotics, Cupertino, California, USA. Correspondence to: Neale
Ratzlaff <ratzlafn@oregonstate.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

lions of simulation steps before achieving reasonable performance (Burda et al., 2018a). This lack of statistical efficiency makes it difficult to apply deep RL to real-world
tasks, as the cost of acting in the real world is far greater
than in a simulator. It is then a problem of utmost importance to design agents that make efficient use of collected
data. In this work, we focus on efficient exploration which
is widely considered to be one of the three key aspects in
building a data-efficient agent (Sutton & Barto, 2018).
In particular, we focus on those challenging environments
with sparse external rewards. In those environments, it is
important for an effective agent to methodically explore a
significant portion of the state space, since there may not
be enough signals to indicate where the reward might be.
Previous work usually utilize some sort of intrinsic reward
driven by the uncertainty in an agent’s belief of the environment state (Osband et al., 2018). Intuitively, agents
should explore more around states where they are not certain whether there could exist a previously unknown consequence – which could be an unexpected extrinsic reward.
However, uncertainty modeling from a deep network has
proven to be difficult with no approach (Snoek et al., 2019)
that is proven to be universally applicable.
In this work, we introduce a new framework of Bayesian
uncertainty modeling for intrinsic reward-based exploration in deep RL. The main component of our framework
is a network generator, each draw of which is a neural network that serves as the dynamic function for the environment. Multiple draws approximate a posterior of the dynamic model, and the variance in the future state predictions based on this posterior is used as an intrinsic reward
for exploration. In doing so, our framework characterizes
the uncertainty of the agent’s belief of the environment dynamics in a non-parametric manner, avoiding restrictive
distributional assumptions on the posterior, and explore a
significantly larger model space than previous approaches.
Recently, it has been shown (Ratzlaff & Fuxin, 2019) that
training these kinds of generators can be done in classification problems and the resulting network samples can represent a rich distribution of diverse networks that perform
approximately equally well on the classification task.
For our goal of training this generator for the dynamic function, we propose a new algorithm to optimize the KL di-

