Optimal Continual Learning has Perfect Memory and is NP- HARD

Jeremias Knoblauch 1 Hisham Husain 2 Tom Diethe 3

Abstract
Continual Learning (CL) algorithms incrementally learn a predictor or representation across
multiple sequentially observed tasks. Designing
CL algorithms that perform reliably and avoid
so-called catastrophic forgetting has proven a persistent challenge. The current paper develops a
theoretical approach that explains why. In particular, we derive the computational properties
which CL algorithms would have to possess in
order to avoid catastrophic forgetting. Our main
finding is that such optimal CL algorithms generally solve an NP- HARD problem and will require
perfect memory to do so. The findings are of
theoretical interest, but also explain the excellent
performance of CL algorithms using experience
replay, episodic memory and core sets relative to
regularization-based approaches.

1. Introduction
Continual Learning (CL) is a machine learning paradigm
which takes inspiration from the ways in which biological
organisms learn in the real world: Rather than observing
a set of independent and identically distributed observations, CL seeks to design algorithms that sequentially learn
from observations corresponding to different tasks. Unlike
biological organisms, the artificial neural networks used
for solving this problem suffer from catastropic forgetting
(McCloskey & Cohen, 1989). Simply put, this phenomenon
describes that sequentially learning on an increasing number
of tasks will eventually yield increasingly poor representations of and predictions on previously observed tasks.
CL algorithms are not only a challenging research topic,
they are also of tremendous practical importance (see e.g.
Diethe et al., 2018): Often, it is impractical or even impos1
Department of Statistics, Warwick University & The Alan
Turing Institute, London 2 Australian National University, Canberra & Data61, Sydney 3 Amazon. Correspondence to: Jeremias
Knoblauch <j.knoblauchwarwick.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

sible to re-train a model every time new data arrives. For
example, data may be too sensitive or expensive to store
long term. Even if the storage of data is not a problem,
increasingly complex models may make re-training computationally prohibitive.
While algorithms tackling the issue have steadily improved
over the last few years, the CL problem has remained a
persistently difficult challenge. In response, a growing body
of research has designed novel CL algorithms based on
different paradigms. In an attempt to structure the research
output of the field, several paper have sought to classify
these different paradigms (Parisi et al., 2019; Farquhar &
Gal, 2018; van de Ven & Tolias, 2019). Broadly speaking,
one can divide existing CL algorithms into one of three
families: Regularization-based approaches (e.g. Kirkpatrick
et al., 2017; Zenke et al., 2017; Schwarz et al., 2018; Ritter
et al., 2018; Chaudhry et al., 2018; Lomonaco et al., 2019),
replay-based approaches (Shin et al., 2017; Lopez-Paz &
Ranzato, 2017; Kamra et al., 2017; Rolnick et al., 2019) as
well as Bayesian and variationally Bayesian approaches (e.g.
Nguyen et al., 2017; Tseran et al., 2018; Moreno-Munoz
et al., 2019; Titsias et al., 2019). Other successful methods
include learning a set of new parameters per task without
discarding previously learnt ones (e.g. Rusu et al., 2016) as
well as methods inspired by nearest-neighbour type considerations (e.g. Rebuffi et al., 2017).
For the purposes of this paper, it is important to contrast
the CL setting with more traditional sequential learning
paradigms. The idea of learning inputs sequentially is all
but new—in fact, Lauritzen (1981) dates its origins as early
as the 1880s. In clear contrast to the CL setting however,
more traditional approaches rely on dependence assumptions between consecutive observations and tasks. For example, the work of Opper & Winther (1998) introduces an
approximately Bayesian algorithm for neural networks that
can be updated continuously in an on-line fashion. In clear
opposition to the CL paradigm, the algorithm assumes that
all observations were generated by the same and correctly
specified data generating mechanism. Though restrictive,
this also enables the authors to demonstrate asymptotic efficiency. Similarly, the contributions to sequential and streaming learning made by Honkela & Valpola (2003), Broderick
et al. (2013) or McInerney et al. (2015) are geared towards
streaming settings in which the differences in observations

