Double Trouble in Double Descent: Bias and Variance(s) in the Lazy Regime

Stéphane d’Ascoli * 1 Maria Refinetti * 1 Giulio Biroli 1 Florent Krzakala 1

Abstract
Deep neural networks can achieve remarkable
generalization performances while interpolating
the training data; rather than the U-curve emblematic of the bias-variance trade-off, their test error often follows a “double descent” curve — a
mark of the beneficial role of overparametrization. In this work, we develop a quantitative theory for this phenomenon in the context of highdimensional random features regression. We obtain a precise asymptotic expression for the biasvariance decomposition of the test error, and show
that the bias displays a phase transition at the interpolation threshold, beyond it which it remains
constant. We disentangle the variances stemming
from the sampling of the dataset, from the additive
noise corrupting the labels, and from the initialization of the weights. Following up on (Geiger
et al., 2019a), we demonstrate that the latter two
contributions are the crux of the double descent:
they lead to the overfitting peak at the interpolation threshold and to the decay of the test error
upon overparametrization. We quantify how they
are suppressed by averaging the outputs of independently initialized estimators, and compare this
ensembling procedure with overparametrization
and regularization. Finally, we present numerical
experiments on a standard deep learning setup
to show that our results are relevant to the lazy
regime of deep neural networks.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved breakthroughs
in a plethora of contexts, such as image classification (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; LeCun et al., 2015), speech
*

Equal contribution 1 Laboratoire de Physique de l’Ecole normale supérieure, ENS, Université PSL, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, Université de Paris, F-75005 Paris, France. Correspondence
to: Stephane d’Ascoli <stephane.dascoli@gmail.com>, Maria
Refinetti <mariaref@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

recognition (Hinton et al., 2012), and automatic translation (Sutskever et al., 2014). Yet, theory lags far behind
practice, and the key reasons underpinning the success of
DNNs remain to be clarified.
One of the main puzzles is to understand the excellent generalization performance of heavily overparametrized deep
neural networks able to fit random labels (Zhang et al.,
2016). Such interpolating estimators—that can reach zero
training error— have attracted a growing amount of theoretical attention in the last few years, see e.g. (Advani & Saxe,
2017; Belkin et al., 2018; Neal et al., 2018; Hastie et al.,
2019; Mei & Montanari, 2019). Indeed, classical learning theory suggests that generalization should first improve
then worsen when increasing model complexity, following
a U-shape curve characteristic of the bias-variance tradeoff. Instead, deep neural networks (Neyshabur et al., 2014;
Spigler et al., 2018; Nakkiran et al., 2019) as well as other
machine learning models (Belkin et al., 2018), follow a
different curve, coined double descent.
This curve displays two regimes : the classical U-curve is
superseded at high complexity by a modern interpolating
regime where the test error decreases monotonically with
overparametrization (Breiman, 1995). Between these two
regimes, i.e. at the interpolation threshold where training
error vanishes, a peak occurs in absence of regularization,
sometimes called the jamming peak due to similarities with
a well-studied phenomenon in the Statistical Physics litterature (Opper & Kinzel, 1996; Engel & Van den Broeck,
2001; Franz & Parisi, 2016; Spigler et al., 2018; Krzakala
& Kurchan, 2007; Zdeborová & Krzakala, 2007). The reasons behind the performance of deep neural networks in the
overparametrized regime are still poorly understood, even
though some mechanisms are known to play an important
role, such as the implicit regularization of stochastic gradient descent which allows to converge to the minimum norm
solution, and the convergence to mean-field limits (Rosset
et al., 2004; Advani & Saxe, 2017; Chizat et al., 2019; Arora
et al., 2019a; Mei et al., 2019).
Here we present a detailed investigation of the double descent phenomenon, and its theoretical explanation in terms
of bias and variance in the so-called lazy regime (Chizat
et al., 2019). This theoretically appealing scenario, where
the weights stay close to their initial value during train-

