A general recurrent state space framework for modeling neural dynamics
during decision-making

David M. Zoltowski 1 Jonathan W. Pillow 1 2 Scott W. Linderman 3 4

Abstract
An open question in systems and computational
neuroscience is how neural circuits accumulate
evidence towards a decision. Fitting models of
decision-making theory to neural activity helps
answer this question, but current approaches limit
the number of these models that we can fit to
neural data. Here we propose a general framework for modeling neural activity during decisionmaking. The framework includes the canonical
drift-diffusion model and enables extensions such
as multi-dimensional accumulators, variable and
collapsing boundaries, and discrete jumps. Our
framework is based on constraining the parameters of recurrent state space models, for which
we introduce a scalable variational Laplace EM
inference algorithm. We applied the modeling approach to spiking responses recorded from monkey parietal cortex during two decision-making
tasks. We found that a two-dimensional accumulator better captured the responses of a set of
parietal neurons than a single accumulator model,
and we identified a variable lower boundary in
the responses of a parietal neuron during a random dot motion task. We expect this framework
will be useful for modeling neural dynamics in a
variety of decision-making settings.

1. Introduction
Evidence accumulation is central to many models of perceptual decision-making (Gold & Shadlen, 2007; Ratcliff
& McKoon, 2008; Ratcliff et al., 2016). However, despite
progress in identifying neural correlates of decision-making
1
Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA 2 Department of Psychology, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ, USA 3 Department of Statistics, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, USA 4 Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, USA. Correspondence to: David
M. Zoltowski <zoltowski@princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

it remains an open question how evidence accumulation
is implemented in the brain (Brody & Hanks, 2016). One
approach to address this question is to formulate models of
decision-making behavior as generative models of neural
activity (Ditterich, 2006; Bollimunta et al., 2012; Latimer
et al., 2015; Zoltowski et al., 2019; DePasquale et al., 2019).
Fitting these models to single-trial neural responses during
decision-making tasks provides a direct test of how well the
theorized model explains neural dynamics.
However, there are a number of decision-making models
and features that are challenging to fit to neural activity using existing approaches. Most models of decision-making
behavior rely on either 1) approximations of analytic solutions of the joint distribution of a binary choice and decision
time (Wiecki et al., 2013, e.g.); or 2) numerical solutions to
stochastic differential equations with boundary constraints
(Brunton et al., 2013; Shinn et al., 2020, e.g.). Analytic solutions are not available for models of neural activity where
there are observations throughout the decision-period, and
numerical solutions are limited to low-dimensional accumulator models. Thus, there is a clear need for tractable methods for modeling neural dynamics during decision-making
that can accommodate multiple choice options and/or inputs
(Churchland et al., 2008; Brunton et al., 2013) and dynamics
governed by multi-dimensional accumulators (Scott et al.,
2015).
Here we propose a general framework for fitting decisionmaking models to neural activity.1 Our key observation is
that many decision-making models can be formulated as recurrent switching linear dynamical systems (rSLDS) models
(Linderman et al., 2017) with appropriate constraints. This
allows us to instantiate and fit a number of models of interest
including the classic drift-diffusion model (Ratcliff & McKoon, 2008), one- and multi-dimensional accumulator models
(Gold & Shadlen, 2007; Brunton et al., 2013), and the ramping and stepping models from (Latimer et al., 2015). The
framework naturally includes collapsing boundaries and trial
history effects (O’Connell et al., 2018; Lueckmann et al.,
2018; Urai et al., 2019). It also enables new extensions to
models with variable, probabilistic boundaries and with non1

Code is available at
davidzoltowski/ssmdm.

https://github.com/

