Maximum Likelihood with Bias-Corrected Calibration is Hard-To-Beat at
Label Shift Adaptation

Amr M. Alexandari * 1 Anshul Kundaje 1 2 Avanti Shrikumar * 1

Abstract
Label shift refers to the phenomenon where the
prior class probability p(y) changes between the
training and test distributions, while the conditional probability p(x|y) stays fixed. Label shift
arises in settings like medical diagnosis, where a
classifier trained to predict disease given symptoms must be adapted to scenarios where the baseline prevalence of the disease is different. Given
estimates of p(y|x) from a predictive model,
Saerens et al. proposed an efficient maximum
likelihood algorithm to correct for label shift that
does not require model retraining, but a limiting assumption of this algorithm is that p(y|x)
is calibrated, which is not true of modern neural
networks. Recently, Black Box Shift Learning
(BBSL) and Regularized Learning under Label
Shifts (RLLS) have emerged as state-of-the-art
techniques to cope with label shift when a classifier does not output calibrated probabilities, but
both methods require model retraining with importance weights and neither has been benchmarked
against maximum likelihood. Here we (1) show
that combining maximum likelihood with a type
of calibration we call bias-corrected calibration
outperforms both BBSL and RLLS across diverse
datasets and distribution shifts, (2) prove that the
maximum likelihood objective is concave, and
(3) introduce a principled strategy for estimating
source-domain priors that improves robustness to
poor calibration. This work demonstrates that the
maximum likelihood with appropriate calibration
is a formidable and efficient baseline for label
shift adaptation. See sec. 6 for links to code,
video, and blogpost.
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Stanford University 2 Departments of Genetics, Stanford University.
Correspondence to: Anshul Kundaje <anshul@kundaje.net>,
Avanti Shrikumar <avanti.shrikumar@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

1. Introduction
Imagine we train a classifier to predict whether or not a
person has a disease based on observed symptoms, and
the classifier predicts reliably when deployed in the clinic.
Suppose that there is a sudden surge in cases of the disease.
During such an outbreak, the probability of persons having
the disease given that they show symptoms rises, but the
symptoms generated by the disease do not change. How
can we adapt the classifier to cope with the difference in the
baseline prevalence of the disease?
Formally, let y denote our labels (e.g. whether or not a
person is diseased), and let x denote the observed symptoms. Let us denote the joint distribution (x, y) before the
outbreak (our “source” domain) using the letter P, and let
us denote the distribution during the outbreak (our “target”
domain, where we do not have labels) as Q. How can we
adapt a classifier trained to estimate p(y|x) (the conditional
probability in distribution P) so that it can instead estimate
q(y|x) (the conditional probability in distribution Q)? Absent assumptions about the nature of the shift between P
and Q, this problem is intractable. However, if the disease
generates similar symptoms regardless of spread, we can
assume that p(x|y) = q(x|y), and that the shift in the joint
distribution q(x, y) is due to a shift in the label proportion
q(y). Formally, we assume that q(x, y) = p(x|y)q(y). This
is known as label shift or prior probability shift (Storkey,
2008), and it corresponds to anti-causal learning (i.e. predicting the cause y from its effects x) (Schoelkopf et al.,
2012). Anti-causal learning is appropriate for diagnosing
diseases given observations of symptoms because diseases
cause symptoms.
Given estimates of p(y) and p(y|x), Saerens et al. (2002)
proposed a simple Expectation Maximization (EM) procedure to estimate q(y) without needing to estimate p(x|y).
However, estimates of p(y|x) derived from modern neural networks are often poorly calibrated (Guo et al., 2017),
and the lack of calibration can decrease the effectiveness
of EM. As an alternative, Lipton et al. (2018) developed a
technique called Black Box Shift Learning (BBSL) that can
work even when the predictions p(y|x) are not calibrated.
Azizzadenesheli et al. (2019) further improved upon BBSL
in a technique known as Regularized Learning under Label

