Deep Divergence Learning

Kubra Cilingir 1 Rachel Manzelli 1 Brian Kulis 1

Abstract
Classical linear metric learning methods have recently been extended along two distinct lines:
deep metric learning methods for learning embeddings of the data using neural networks, and
Bregman divergence learning approaches for extending learning Euclidean distances to more general divergence measures such as divergences over
distributions. In this paper, we introduce deep
Bregman divergences, which are based on learning and parameterizing functional Bregman divergences using neural networks, and which unify
and extend these existing lines of work. We show
in particular how deep metric learning formulations, kernel metric learning, Mahalanobis metric learning, and moment-matching functions for
comparing distributions arise as special cases of
these divergences in the symmetric setting. We
then describe a deep learning framework for learning general functional Bregman divergences, and
show in experiments that this method yields superior performance on benchmark datasets as compared to existing deep metric learning approaches.
We also discuss novel applications, including a
semi-supervised distributional clustering problem,
and a new loss function for unsupervised data
generation.

1. Introduction
The goal of metric learning is to use supervised data in order to learn a distance function (or more general divergence
measure) that is tuned to the data and task at hand. Classical
approaches to metric learning are generally focused on the
linear regime, where one learns a linear mapping of the
data and then applies the Euclidean distance in the mapped
space for downstream tasks such as clustering, ranking, and
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. Correspondence to: Kubra Cilingir <kubra@bu.edu>, Rachel Manzelli
<manzelli@bu.edu>, Brian Kulis <bkulis@bu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

classiﬁcation (Davis et al., 2007; Weinberger & Saul, 2009;
Goldberger et al., 2004). These methods, known as Mahalanobis metric learning approaches, have been analyzed
theoretically, are scalable, and usually involve convex optimization problems that can be solved globally (Kulis, 2013;
Bellet et al., 2015).
Classical metric learning methods have been extended along
various axes; two important directions are deep metric learning and Bregman divergence learning. Deep metric learning
approaches replace the linear mapping learned in Mahalanobis metric learning methods with more general mappings that are learned via neural networks (Hoffer & Ailon,
2015; Chopra et al., 2005). On the other hand, Bregman
divergence methods replace the squared Euclidean distance
with arbitrary Bregman divergences (Bregman, 1967), and
learn the underlying generating function of the Bregman
divergence via piecewise linear approximators (Siahkamari
et al., 2019) or convex combinations of existing basis functions (Wu et al., 2009). These two extensions of classical
metric learning are complementary and disjoint. For instance, Bregman divergence approaches can be utilized in
scenarios where one needs to compare distributions (the
well-known KL-divergence arises as a special case), but the
learning problems are not directly applicable to the deep
learning setting. Similarly, deep metric learning methods
still employ Euclidean distances, and are thus not directly
amenable to problems where one needs to compare distributions.
In this paper, we introduce a framework for studying Bregman divergences that can naturally be learned in the deep setting. Figure 1 gives a high-level overview of our approach,
which we term as deep Bregman divergences, in comparison
to existing metric learning approaches. These divergences
are based on functional Bregman divergences (Frigyik et al.,
2008), which were introduced as an extension of classical
Bregman divergences but with functional inputs instead of
vector inputs. In this functional setting, the underlying Bregman divergence is parameterized by a convex functional
whose input itself is a function.
We ﬁrst perform an analysis for the symmetric divergence
case. In this setting, we prove a result about the form for any
functional Bregman divergence and observe that many existing metric learning models can be seen to arise from special

