Closing the Convergence Gap of SGD Without Replacement

Shashank Rajput 1 Anant Gupta 1 Dimitris Papailiopoulos 1

Abstract
Stochastic gradient descent without replacement
sampling is widely used in practice for model
training. However, the vast majority of SGD analyses assumes data is sampled with replacement,
and when the function
minimized is strongly

convex, an O T1 rate can be established when
SGD is run for T iterations. A recent line of
breakthrough works on SGD without
replacement

(SGDo) established an O Tn2 convergence rate
when the function minimized is strongly convex and is a sum
 of n smooth functions, and an
1
n3
O T 2 + T 3 rate for sums of quadratics. On
the other hand,the tightest
 known lower bound
1
n2
postulates an Ω T 2 + T 3 rate, leaving open the
possibility of better SGDo convergence rates in
the general case. In this paper, we close this gap
and show that
replacement achieves
 SGD without

1
n2
a rate of O T 2 + T 3 when the sum of the functions is a quadratic, and offer a new lower bound
of Ω Tn2 for strongly convex functions that are
sums of smooth functions.

1. Introduction
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is a widely used first order optimization technique used to approximately minimize
a sum of functions
n

F (x) =

1X
fi (x).
n i=1

In its most general form, SGD produces a series of iterates
xi+1 = xi − α · g(x, ξi )
where xi is the i-th iterate, g(x, ξi ) is a stochastic gradient defined below, ξi is a random variable that determines
1
University of Wisconsin - Madison. Correspondence to:
Shashank Rajput <rajput3@wisc.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

the choice of a single or a subset of sampled functions
fi , and α represents the step size. With- and without replacement sampling of the individual component functions
are regarded as some of the most popular variants of SGD.
During SGD with replacement sampling, the stochastic gradient is equal to g(x, ξi ) = ∇fξi (x) and ξi is a uniform
number in {1, . . . , n}, i.e., a with replacement sample from
the set of gradients ∇f1 , . . . , ∇fn . In the case of without replacement sapling, the stochastic gradient is equal to
g(x, ξi ) = ∇fξi (x) and ξi is the i-th ordered element in a
random permutation of the numbers in {1, . . . , n}, i.e., a
without-replacement sample.
In practice, SGD without replacement is much more widely
used compared to its with replacement counterpart, as it
can empirically converge significantly faster (Bottou, 2009;
Recht & Ré, 2013; 2012). However, in the land of theoretical guarantees, with replacement SGD has been the focal
point of convergence analyses. This is because analyzing
stochastic gradients sampled with replacement are significantly more tractable. The reason is simple: in expectation,
the stochastic gradient is equal to the “true” gradient of F ,
i.e., Eξi ∇fξi (x) = ∇F (x). This makes SGD amenable
to analyses very similar to that of vanilla gradient descent
(GD), which has been extensively studied under a large variety of function classes and geometric assumptions, e.g., see
Bubeck et al. (2015).
Unfortunately, the same cannot be said for SGD without
replacement, which has long resisted non-vacuous convergence guarantees. For example, although we have long
known that SGD with replacement can achieve a O T1
rate for strongly convex functions F , for many years the
best known bounds for SGD without replacement did not
even match that rate, in contrast to empirical evidence. However, a recent series of breakthrough results on SGD without
replacement has established similar or better convergence
rates than SGD with replacement.
Gürbüzbalaban et al. (2015) established for the first time that
for sums of quadratics or smooth functions, there exist parameter regimes under which SGDo achieves an O(n2 /T 2 )
rate compared to the O(1/T ) rate of SGD with replacement
sampling. In this case, if n is considered a constant, then
SGDo becomes T times faster than SGD with replacement.
Shamir (2016) showed that for one epoch, i.e., one pass

