DROCC: Deep Robust One-Class Classification

Sachin Goyal 1 Aditi Raghunathan 2 * Moksh Jain 3 * Harsha Simhadri 1 Prateek Jain 1

Abstract
Classical approaches for one-class problems such
as one-class SVM and isolation forest require
careful feature engineering when applied to structured domains like images. State-of-the-art methods aim to leverage deep learning to learn appropriate features via two main approaches. The
first approach based on predicting transformations (Golan & El-Yaniv, 2018; Hendrycks et al.,
2019a) while successful in some domains, crucially depends on an appropriate domain-specific
set of transformations that are hard to obtain in
general. The second approach of minimizing a
classical one-class loss on the learned final layer
representations, e.g., DeepSVDD (Ruff et al.,
2018) suffers from the fundamental drawback of
representation collapse. In this work, we propose
Deep Robust One Class Classification (DROCC)
that is both applicable to most standard domains
without requiring any side-information and robust to representation collapse. DROCC is based
on the assumption that the points from the class
of interest lie on a well-sampled, locally linear
low dimensional manifold. Empirical evaluation
demonstrates that DROCC is highly effective in
two different one-class problem settings and on a
range of real-world datasets across different domains: tabular data, images (CIFAR and ImageNet), audio, and time-series, offering up to 20%
increase in accuracy over the state-of-the-art in
anomaly detection. Code is available at https:
//github.com/microsoft/EdgeML.

1. Introduction
In this work, we study “one-class” classification where the
goal is to obtain accurate discriminators for a special class.
*
Part of the work was done while interning at Microsoft
Research India. 1 Microsoft Research India 2 Stanford University 3 NITK Surathkal. Correspondence to: Prateek Jain <prajain@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Anomaly detection is one of the most well-known problems
in this setting where we want to identify outliers, i.e. points
that do not belong to the typical data (special class). Another
related setting under this framework is classification from
limited negative training instances where we require low
false positive rate at test time even over close negatives. This
is common in AI systems such as wake-word1 detection
where the wake-words form the positive or special class,
and for safe operation in the real world, the system should
not fire on inputs that are close but not identical to the wakewords, no matter how the training data was sampled.
Anomaly detection is a well-studied problem with a large
body of research (Aggarwal, 2016; Chandola et al., 2009).
Classical approaches for anomaly detection are based on
modeling the typical data using simple functions over the
inputs (Schölkopf et al., 1999; Liu et al., 2008; Lakhina
et al., 2004), such as constructing a minimum-enclosing ball
around the typical data points (Tax & Duin, 2004). While
these techniques are well-suited when the input is featurized
appropriately, they struggle on complex domains like vision
and speech, where hand-designing features is difficult.
In contrast, deep learning based anomaly detection methods
attempt to automatically learn features, e.g., using CNNs in
vision (Ruff et al., 2018). However, current approaches to do
so have fundamental limitations. One family of approaches
is based on extending the classical data modeling techniques
over the learned representations. However, learning these
representations jointly with the data modeling layer might
lead to degenerate solutions where all the points are mapped
to a single point (like origin), and the data modeling layer
can now perfectly “fit” the typical data. Recent works like
(Ruff et al., 2018) have proposed some heuristics to mitigate this like setting the bias to zero, but such heuristics
are often insufficient in practice (Table 1). The second line
of work (Golan & El-Yaniv, 2018; Bergman & Hoshen,
2020; Hendrycks et al., 2019b) is based on learning the
salient geometric structure of the typical data (e.g., orientation of the object) by applying specific transformations (e.g.,
rotations and flips) to the input data and training the discriminator to predict applied transformation. If the discriminator
fails to predict the transform accurately, the input does not
have the same orientation as typical data and is considered
1

audio or visual cue that triggers some action from the system

