Gradient Temporal-Difference Learning with Regularized Corrections

Sina Ghiassian * 1 Andrew Patterson * 1 Shivam Garg 1 Dhawal Gupta 1 Adam White 1 2 Martha White 1

Abstract
It is still common to use Q-learning and temporal difference (TD) learning—even though they
have divergence issues and sound Gradient TD
alternatives exist—because divergence seems rare
and they typically perform well. However, recent work with large neural network learning systems reveals that instability is more common than
previously thought. Practitioners face a difficult
dilemma: choose an easy to use and performant
TD method, or a more complex algorithm that is
more sound but harder to tune and all but unexplored with non-linear function approximation or
control. In this paper, we introduce a new method
called TD with Regularized Corrections (TDRC),
that attempts to balance ease of use, soundness,
and performance. It behaves as well as TD, when
TD performs well, but is sound in cases where
TD diverges. We empirically investigate TDRC
across a range of problems, for both prediction
and control, and for both linear and non-linear
function approximation, and show, potentially for
the first time, that Gradient TD methods could be
a better alternative to TD and Q-learning.

1. Introduction
Off-policy learning—the ability to learn the policy or value
function for one policy while following another—underlies
many practical implementations of reinforcement learning.
Many systems use experience replay, where the value function is updated using previous experiences under many different policies. A similar strategy is employed in asynchronous learning systems that use experience from several
different policies to update multiple distributed learners (Espeholt et al., 2018). Off-policy updates can also be used to
*

Equal contribution 1 Amii, Department of Computing Science,
University of Alberta. 2 DeepMind, Alberta. Correspondence
to: Sina Ghiassian <ghiassia@ualberta.ca>, Andrew Patterson
<ap3@ualberta.ca>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

learn a policy from human demonstrations. In general, many
algorithms attempt to estimate the optimal policy from samples generated from a different exploration policy. One of
the most widely-used algorithms, Q-learning—a temporal
difference (TD) algorithm—is off-policy by design: simply
updating toward the maximum value action in the current
state, regardless of which action the agent selected.
Both TD and Q-learning, however, have well documented
convergence issues, as highlighted in the seminal counterexample by Baird (1995). The fundamental issue is the combination of function approximation, off-policy updates, and
bootstrapping: an algorithmic strategy common to samplebased TD learning and Dynamic Programming algorithms
(Precup, Sutton & Dasgupta, 2001). This combination can
cause the value estimates to grow without bound (Sutton
& Barto, 2018). Baird’s result motivated over a decade of
research and several new off-policy algorithms. The most
well-known of these approaches, the Gradient TD methods
(Sutton et al., 2009), make use of a second set of weights
and importance sampling.
Although sound under function approximation, these Gradient TD methods are not commonly used in practice, likely
due to the additional complexity of tuning two learning
rate parameters. Many practitioners continue to use unsound approaches such as TD and Q-learning for good
reasons. The evidence of divergence is based on highly
contrived toy counter-examples. Often, many large scale
off-policy learning systems are designed to ensure that the
target and behaviour policies are similar—and therefore less
off-policy—by ensuring prioritization is mixed with random
sampling (Schaul et al., 2016), or frequently syncing the
actor policies in asynchronous architectures (Mnih et al.,
2016). However, if agents could learn from a larger variety
of data streams, our systems could be more flexible and
potentially more data efficient. Unfortunately, it appears
that current architectures are not as robust under these more
aggressive off-policy settings (van Hasselt et al., 2018). This
results in a dilemma: the easy-to-use and typically effective
TD algorithm can sometimes fail, but the sound Gradient
TD algorithms can be difficult to use.
There are algorithms that come close to achieving convergence and lower variance updates without the need to tune
multiple stepsize parameters. Retrace (Munos et al., 2016)

