Empirical Study of the Beneﬁts of Overparameterization
in Learning Latent Variable Models

Rares-Darius Buhai 1 Yoni Halpern 2 Yoon Kim 3 Andrej Risteski 4 David Sontag 1

Abstract
One of the most surprising and exciting discoveries in supervised learning was the beneﬁt of
overparameterization (i.e. training a very large
model) to improving the optimization landscape
of a problem, with minimal effect on statistical
performance (i.e. generalization). In contrast,
unsupervised settings have been under-explored,
despite the fact that it was observed that overparameterization can be helpful as early as Dasgupta
& Schulman (2007). We perform an empirical
study of different aspects of overparameterization in unsupervised learning of latent variable
models via synthetic and semi-synthetic experiments. We discuss beneﬁts to different metrics of
success (recovering the parameters of the groundtruth model, held-out log-likelihood), sensitivity
to variations of the training algorithm, and behavior as the amount of overparameterization increases. We ﬁnd that across a variety of models
(noisy-OR networks, sparse coding, probabilistic
context-free grammars) and training algorithms
(variational inference, alternating minimization,
expectation-maximization), overparameterization
can signiﬁcantly increase the number of ground
truth latent variables recovered.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised learning is an area of intense focus in recent
years. In the absence of labels, the goal of unsupervised
learning can vary. Generative adversarial networks, for
example, have shown promise for density estimation and
synthetic data generation. In commercial applications, unsupervised learning is often used to extract features of the
data that are useful in downstream tasks. In the sciences, the
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 Google 3 Harvard University 4 Carnegie Mellon University. Correspondence to: RaresDarius Buhai <rbuhai@mit.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

goal is frequently to conﬁrm or reject whether a particular
model ﬁts well or to identify salient aspects of the data that
give insight into underlying causes and factors of variation.
Many unsupervised learning problems of interest, cast as
ﬁnding a maximum likelihood model, are computationally
intractable in the worst case. Though much theoretical work
has been done on provable algorithms using the method
of moments and tensor decomposition techniques (Anandkumar et al., 2014; Arora et al., 2017; Halpern & Sontag,
2013), iterative techniques such as variational inference are
still widely preferred. In particular, variational approximations using recognition networks have become increasingly
popular, especially in the context of variational autoencoders
(Mnih & Gregor, 2014; Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende
et al., 2014). Intriguingly, it has been observed, e.g. by Yeung et al. (2017), that in practice many of the latent variables
have low activations and hence not used by the model.
Related phenomena have long been known in supervised
learning: it was folklore knowledge among practitioners
for some years that training larger neural networks can aid
optimization, yet not affect generalization substantially. The
seminal paper by Zhang et al. (2016) thoroughly studied this
phenomenon with synthetic and real-life experiments in the
supervised setting. In brief, they showed that some neural
network architectures that demonstrate strong performance
on benchmark datasets are so massively overparameterized
that they can “memorize" large image data sets (they can
perfectly ﬁt a completely random data set of the same size).
Subsequent theoretical work provided mathematical explanations of some of these phenomena (Allen-Zhu et al., 2018;
Allen-Zhu & Li, 2019). In contrast, overparameterization in
the unsupervised case has received much less attention.
This paper aims to be a controlled empirical study that measures and disentangles the beneﬁts of overparameterization
in unsupervised learning settings. More precisely, we consider the task of ﬁtting three common latent-variable models
– discrete factor analysis models using noisy-OR networks,
sparse coding (interpreted as a probabilistic model, see Section 2), and probabilistic context-free grammars. Through
experiments on synthetic and semi-synthetic data sets, we
study the following aspects:
• Latent variable recovery: We show that larger models

