Boosted Histogram Transform for Regression

Yuchao Cai * 1 2 Hanyuan Hang * 1 Hanfang Yang 2 Zhouchen Lin 3 1

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a boosting algorithm
for regression problems called boosted histogram
transform for regression (BHTR) based on histogram transforms composed of random rotations,
stretchings, and translations. From the theoretical
perspective, we first prove fast convergence rates
for BHTR under the assumption that the target
function lies in the spaces C 0,α . Moreover, if the
target function resides in the subspace C 1,α , for
the first time we manage to explain the benefits of the boosting procedure, by establishing the
upper bound of the convergence rate for the boosted regressor, i.e. BHTR, and the lower bound for
base regressors, i.e. histogram transform regressors (HTR). In the experiments, compared with
other state-of-the-art algorithms such as gradient
boosted regression tree (GBRT), Breiman’s forest,
and kernel-based methods, our BHTR algorithm
shows promising performance on both synthetic
and real datasets.

1. Introduction
Over the past two decades, boosting has become one of the
most successful algorithms in the machine learning community (Bühlmann & Yu, 2003). When the idea of iterative
utilizations of weak learners from a certain function space
to generate a strong one, which is called boosting, first came
out in Schapire (1990); Freund (1995), it gains a lot of attention, and a wealth of literature has applied it on a large
number of datasets.
During this period, many boosting algorithms with impressive performance have been proposed. Perhaps the first
boosting algorithm goes back to the Adaboost for classifi*

Equal contribution 1 AI Lab, Samsung Research China - Beijing (SRC-B), Beijing, China 2 School of Statistics, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China 3 Key Lab. of Machine Perception
(MoE), School of EECS, Peking University, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Hanfang Yang <hyang@ruc.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

cation by Schapire & Freund (1995); Freund & Schapire
(1997). Another important boosting algorithm for regression called Gradient Boosted Regression Tree (GBRT) is
proposed by Friedman (2001). GBRT takes advantages
of tree-based learners to capture complex data structure.
More recently, inspired by the second order method originated from Friedman (2001), Chen & Guestrin (2016) came
up with the eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost), which
achieves excellent experimental performance against overfitting with the help of certain regularization terms.
Due to the great success of these boosting algorithms, a lot
of attempts have been made to establish their theoretical
foundations. First of all, theoretical margin guarantees of
Adaboost have been well studied by Freund & Schapire
(1997); Koltchinskii & Panchenko (2002). Furthermore,
based on the view of gradient descent optimization, various versions of boosting algorithms have been shown to be
consistent in different settings, see Friedman et al. (2000);
Mannor et al. (2002); Bühlmann & Yu (2003); Lugosi &
Vayatis (2004); Zhang (2004). Moreover, Blanchard et al.
(2003) conducted a deeper investigation of the convergence
of regularized boosting classifiers through the restriction
on weights of the composite estimator. Finally, a different
method of achieving consistency and convergence rate results is through early stopping rule, which is designed to
prevent overfitting (Zhang & Yu, 2005), whereas Mease &
Wyner (2008) argued that in practice additional iterations
beyond the necessary number actually reduce the overfitting
that has already occurred.
Unfortunately, none of the above-mentioned boosting works
present a satisfactory explanation from the statistical optimization view (Mease & Wyner, 2008; Wyner et al., 2017).
Nevertheless, some of the boosting variants with specific base learners are more easily accessible for statistical
analysis. For example, Bühlmann & Yu (2003) derived an
exponential bias-variance trade-off for linear regression to
illustrate the almost resistance to overfitting for L2 -Boosting
in a fixed design setting. Moreover, Park et al. (2009) and
Lin et al. (2019) established the theoretical analysis of boosting methods using Nadaraya-Watson kernel estimates and
kernel ridge regression estimates as base learners, respectively. However, these methods are of little practical value
since they fail to capture the complex data dependencies in
applications. In addition, they did not show the benefits of

