The Non-IID Data Quagmire of Decentralized Machine Learning

Kevin Hsieh 1 2 Amar Phanishayee 1 Onur Mutlu 3 2 Phillip B. Gibbons 2

Abstract
Many large-scale machine learning (ML) applications
need to perform decentralized learning over datasets
generated at different devices and locations. Such
datasets pose a significant challenge to decentralized
learning because their different contexts result in significant data distribution skew across devices/locations.
In this paper, we take a step toward better understanding this challenge by presenting a detailed experimental study of decentralized DNN training on a common
type of data skew: skewed distribution of data labels
across devices/locations. Our study shows that: (i)
skewed data labels are a fundamental and pervasive
problem for decentralized learning, causing significant accuracy loss across many ML applications, DNN
models, training datasets, and decentralized learning
algorithms; (ii) the problem is particularly challenging for DNN models with batch normalization; and
(iii) the degree of data skew is a key determinant of
the difficulty of the problem. Based on these findings,
we present SkewScout, a system-level approach that
adapts the communication frequency of decentralized
learning algorithms to the (skew-induced) accuracy
loss between data partitions. We also show that group
normalization can recover much of the accuracy loss
of batch normalization.

1. Introduction
The advancement of machine learning (ML) is heavily dependent on the processing of massive amounts of data. The
most timely and relevant data are often generated at different devices all over the world, e.g., data collected by
mobile phones and video cameras. Because of communication and privacy constraints, gathering all such data for
centralized processing can be impractical/infeasible. For
example, moving raw data across national borders is subject
to data sovereignty law constraints (e.g., GDPR (European
Parliament, 2016)). Similar constraints apply to centralizing
private data from phones.
1

Microsoft Research 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 ETH Zürich.
Correspondence to: Kevin Hsieh <kevin.hsieh@microsoft.com>
and Phillip B. Gibbons <gibbons@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

These constraints motivate the need for ML training over
widely distributed data (decentralized learning). For example, geo-distributed learning (Hsieh et al., 2017) trains a
global ML model over data spread across geo-distributed
data centers. Similarly, federated learning (McMahan et al.,
2017) trains a centralized model over data from a large
number of mobile devices. Federated learning has been an
important topic both in academia (140+ papers in 2019) and
industry (500+ million installations on Android devices).
Key Challenges in Decentralized Learning. There are
two key challenges in decentralized learning. First, training
a model over decentralized data using traditional training
approaches (i.e., those designed for centralized data, often
using a bulk synchronous parallel (BSP) approach (Valiant,
1990)) requires massive amounts of communication. Doing
so drastically slows down the training process because the
communication is bottlenecked by the limited wide-area or
mobile network bandwidth (Hsieh et al., 2017; McMahan
et al., 2017). Second, decentralized data is typically generated at different contexts, which can lead to significant
differences in the distribution of data across data partitions.
For example, facial images collected by cameras would
reflect the demographics of each camera’s location, and
images of kangaroos can be collected only from cameras
in Australia or zoos. Unfortunately, existing decentralized
learning algorithms (e.g., (Hsieh et al., 2017; McMahan
et al., 2017; Smith et al., 2017; Lin et al., 2018; Tang et al.,
2018)) mostly focus on reducing communication, as they
either (i) assume the data partitions are independent and
identically distributed (IID) or (ii) conduct only very limited studies on non-IID data partitions. This leaves a key
question mostly unanswered: What happens to ML applications and decentralized learning algorithms when their
data partitions are not IID?
Our Goal and Key Findings. We aim to take a step to
further the understanding of the above key question. In this
work, we focus on a common type of non-IID data, widely
used in prior work (e.g., (McMahan et al., 2017; Tang et al.,
2018; Zhao et al., 2018)): skewed distribution of data labels
across devices/locations. Such skewed label partitions arise
frequently in the real world (see §2.2 for examples). Our
study covers various DNN applications, DNNs, training
datasets, decentralized learning algorithms, and degrees of
label skew. Our study reveals three key findings:

