On Approximate Thompson Sampling with Langevin Algorithms

Eric Mazumdar * 1 Aldo Pacchiano * 1 Yi-An Ma * 2 3 Peter L. Bartlett 1 4 Michael I. Jordan 1 4

Abstract
Thompson sampling for multi-armed bandit problems is known to enjoy favorable performance
in both theory and practice. However, its wider
deployment is restricted due to a significant computational limitation: the need for samples from
posterior distributions at every iteration. In practice, this limitation is alleviated by making use
of approximate sampling methods, yet provably
incorporating approximate samples into Thompson Sampling algorithms remains an open problem. In this work we address this by proposing two efficient Langevin MCMC algorithms
tailored to Thompson sampling. The resulting
approximate Thompson Sampling algorithms are
efficiently implementable and provably achieve
optimal instance-dependent regret for the MultiArmed Bandit (MAB) problem. To prove these
results we derive novel posterior concentration
bounds and MCMC convergence rates for logconcave distributions which may be of independent interest.

1. Introduction
Sequential decision making under uncertainty has become
one of the fastest developing fields of machine learning. A
central theme in such problems is addressing explorationexploitation tradeoffs (Auer et al., 2002; Lattimore and
Szepesvári, 2020), wherein an algorithm must balance between exploiting its current knowledge and exploring previously unexplored options.
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, USA 2 Google Research 3 Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute, University of California, San Diego, USA 4 Department of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of
California, Berkeley, USA. Correspondence to: Eric Mazumdar <mazumdar@berkeley.edu>, Aldo Pacchiano <pacchiano@berkeley.edu>, Yi-An Ma <yianma@google.com>, Peter Bartlett <peter@berkeley.edu>, Michael I. Jordan <jordan@cs.berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

The classic stochastic multi-armed bandit problem has
provided a theoretical laboratory for the study of exploration/exploitation tradeoffs (Lai and Robbins, 1985). A
vast literature has emerged that provides algorithms, insights, and matching upper and lower bounds in many
cases. The dominant paradigm in this literature has been
that of frequentist analysis; cf. in particular the analyses
devoted to the celebrated upper confidence bound (UCB) algorithm (Auer et al., 2002). Interestingly, however, Thompson sampling, a Bayesian approach first introduced almost
a century ago (Thompson, 1933) has been shown to be
competitive and sometimes outperform UCB algorithms in
practice (Scott, 2010; Chapelle and Li, 2011). Further, the
fact that Thompson sampling, being a Bayesian method,
explicitly makes use of prior information, has made it particularly popular in industrial applications (see, e.g., Russo
et al., 2017, and the references therein).
Although most theory in the bandit literature is focused
on non-Bayesian methods, there is a smaller, but nontrivial, theory associated with Thompson sampling. In particular, Thompson sampling has been shown to achieve
optimal risk bounds in multi-armed bandit settings with
Bernoulli rewards and beta priors (Kaufmann et al., 2012;
Agrawal and Goyal, 2013a), Gaussian rewards with Gaussian priors (Agrawal and Goyal, 2013a), one-dimensional
exponential family models with uninformative priors (Korda et al., 2013), and finitely-supported priors and observations (Gopalan et al., 2014). Thompson sampling has further been shown to asymptotically achieve optimal instanceindependent performance (Russo and Van Roy, 2016).
Despite these appealing foundational results, the deployment of Thompson sampling in complex problems is often
constrained by its use of samples from posterior distributions, which are often difficult to generate in regimes where
the posteriors do not have closed forms. A common solution
to this has been to use approximate sampling techniques
to generate samples from approximations of the posteriors (Russo et al., 2017; Chapelle and Li, 2011; GómezUribe, 2016; Lu and Van Roy, 2017). Such approaches have
been demonstrated to work effectively in practice (Riquelme
et al., 2018; Urteaga and Wiggins, 2018), but it is unclear
how to maintain performance over arbitrary time horizons
while using approximate sampling. Indeed, to the best of our
knowledge the strongest regret guarantees for Thompson

