Minimally distorted Adversarial Examples with a Fast Adaptive Boundary
Attack
Francesco Croce 1 Matthias Hein 1

Abstract
The evaluation of robustness against adversarial
manipulation of neural networks-based classifers
is mainly tested with empirical attacks as methods
for the exact computation, even when available,
do not scale to large networks. We propose in
this paper a new white-box adversarial attack wrt
the lp -norms for p ∈ {1, 2, ∞} aiming at fnding
the minimal perturbation necessary to change the
class of a given input. It has an intuitive geometric meaning, yields quickly high quality results,
minimizes the size of the perturbation (so that it
returns the robust accuracy at every threshold with
a single run). It performs better or similar to stateof-the-art attacks which are partially specialized
to one lp -norm, and is robust to the phenomenon
of gradient masking.

1. Introduction
The fnding of the vulnerability of neural networks-based
classifers to adversarial examples, that is small perturbations of the input able to modify the decision of the models,
started a fast development of a variety of attack algorithms.
The high effectiveness of adversarial attacks reveals the
fragility of these networks which questions their safe and
reliable use in the real world, especially in safety critical
applications. Many defenses have been proposed to fx this
issue (Gu & Rigazio, 2015; Zheng et al., 2016; Papernot
et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2016; Bastani et al., 2016; Madry
et al., 2018), but with limited success, as new more powerful attacks showed (Carlini & Wagner, 2017b; Athalye
et al., 2018; Mosbach et al., 2018). In order to trust the
decision of a model, it is necessary to evaluate the exact
adversarial robustness. Although this is possible for ReLU
networks (Katz et al., 2017; Tjeng et al., 2019) these techniques do not scale to commonly used large networks. Thus,
1
University of Tübingen, Germany. Correspondence to: F.
Croce <francesco.croce@uni-tuebingen.de>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

the robustness is evaluated approximating the solution of
the minimal adversarial perturbation problem through adversarial attacks.
One can distinguish attacks into black-box (Narodytska &
Kasiviswanathan, 2016; Brendel et al., 2018; Su et al., 2019),
where one is only allowed to query the classifer, and whitebox attacks, where one has full control over the network,
according to the attack model used to create adversarial
examples (typically some lp -norm, but others have become
popular as well, e.g. (Brown et al., 2017; Engstrom et al.,
2017; Wong et al., 2019)), whether they aim at the minimal
adversarial perturbation (Carlini & Wagner, 2017a; Chen
et al., 2018; Croce et al., 2019) or rather any perturbation
below a threshold (Kurakin et al., 2017; Madry et al., 2018;
Zheng et al., 2019), if they have lower (Moosavi-Dezfooli
et al., 2016; Modas et al., 2019) or higher (Carlini & Wagner,
2017a; Croce et al., 2019) computational cost. Moreover, it
is clear that due to the non-convexity of the problem there
exists no universally best attack (apart from the exact methods), since this depends on runtime constraints, networks
architecture, dataset, etc. However, our goal is to have
an attack which performs well under a broad spectrum of
conditions with minimal amount of hyperparameter tuning.
In this paper we propose a new white-box attack scheme
which performs comparably or better than established attacks and has the following features: frst, it aims at adversarial samples with minimal distance to the attacked point,
measured wrt the lp -norms with p ∈ {1, 2, ∞}. Compared
to the popular PGD (projected gradient descent)-attack of
(Madry et al., 2018) this has the clear advantage that our
method does not need to be restarted for every threshold 
if one wants to evaluate the success rate of the attack with
perturbations constrained to be in {δ ∈ Rd | kδkp ≤ }.
Thus it is particularly suitable to get a complete picture on
the robustness of a classifer with low computational cost.
Second, it achieves fast good quality in terms of average
distortion or robust accuracy. At the same time we show
that increasing the number of restarts keeps improving the
results and makes it competitive to or stronger than the
strongest available attacks. Third, although it comes with a
few parameters, these generalize well across datasets, architectures and norms considered, so that we have an almost
off-the-shelf method. Most importantly, unlike PGD and

