Bounding the Fairness and Accuracy of Classifiers from Population Statistics

Sivan Sabato 1 2 and Elad Yom-Tov 2

Abstract
We consider the study of a classification model
whose properties are impossible to estimate using a validation set, either due to the absence of
such a set or because access to the classifier, even
as a black-box, is impossible. Instead, only aggregate statistics on the rate of positive predictions in each of several sub-populations are available, as well as the true rates of positive labels
in each of these sub-populations. We show that
these aggregate statistics can be used to lowerbound the discrepancy of a classifier, which is
a measure that balances inaccuracy and unfairness. To this end, we define a new measure of
unfairness, equal to the fraction of the population
on which the classifier behaves differently, compared to its global, ideally fair behavior, as defined by the measure of equalized odds. We propose an efficient and practical procedure for finding the best possible lower bound on the discrepancy of the classifier, given the aggregate statistics, and demonstrate in experiments the empirical tightness of this lower bound, as well as its
possible uses on various types of problems, ranging from estimating the quality of voting polls to
measuring the effectiveness of patient identification from internet search queries. The code and
data are available at https://github.com/
sivansabato/bfa.

1. Introduction
Suppose that a health insurance company uses some unpublished method to decide whether a person should be classified as “at risk” for diabetes, for instance so as to offer
diabetes screening. Two desirable properties of such a classifier are accuracy and fairness. For this example, consider
1
Department of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University of
the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel 2 Microsoft Research, Herzelia, Israel.. Correspondence to: Sivan Sabato <sabatos@cs.bgu.ac.il>,
Elad Yom-Tov <eladyt@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

fairness with respect to the state of residence (assuming a
US-based population). Accuracy and fairness are easy to
estimate using a validation set; However, the only details
which are publicly available from the insurance company
are aggregate statistics on the number of people identified
as “at risk” in each state. In addition, the true proportions
of diabetes in each state are known. Based only on these
two types of aggregate statistics—the true positive rate in
each state, and the predicted positive rate in each state—
what can be inferred regarding the fairness and/or accuracy
of the classifier? Moreover, suppose that the company publishes some additional information about the accuracy of
the classifier, or about its fairness with respect to the state
of residence. Can this information be used to make any
inferences about the other property?
Note that in the scenario above we used “state-ofresidence” as an example of an attribute that partitions the
population; The same questions can be asked with respect
to any other attribute for which fairness is desired, such as
race, age, religion or gender (see, e.g., Chen et al., 2019).
The case of multi-valued attributes is more intricate, and is
the main focus of this work.
A similar question arises when a classifier is designed or
learned with little or no labeled training data, or when the
available training data is not representative of the target distribution. Various methodologies allow constructing a classifier in these cases, such as unsupervised learning, transfer
learning, and hand-crafting rules based on domain expertise. The challenge is to then estimate the quality of the
classifier without a validation set. Here too, we are interested in both the accuracy of the classifier and its fairness
with respect to an attribute of interest.
In this work, we show that the aggregate statistics described
above can be used to lower-bound the discrepancy of a classifier, a measure that balances inaccuracy and unfairness.
Following Hardt et al. (2016), we say that a binary classifier
is perfectly fair if it satisfies the property of equalized odds
(also termed disparate mistreatment; see, e.g., Zafar et al.,
2017a). This property requires that the false positive rate
(FPR) and the false negative rate (FNR), conditioned on the
value of the attribute, be the same for all values. It is well
known that fairness and accuracy in classification do not
always co-exist: in some cases, a more accurate classifier

