Batch Stationary Distribution Estimation
Junfeng Wen * 1 Bo Dai * 2 Lihong Li 2 Dale Schuurmans 1 2

Abstract
We consider the problem of approximating the stationary distribution of an ergodic Markov chain
given a set of sampled transitions. Classical
simulation-based approaches assume access to
the underlying process so that trajectories of sufficient length can be gathered to approximate stationary sampling. Instead, we consider an alternative setting where a fixed set of transitions has
been collected beforehand, by a separate, possibly
unknown procedure. The goal is still to estimate
properties of the stationary distribution, but without additional access to the underlying system.
We propose a consistent estimator that is based
on recovering a correction ratio function over the
given data. In particular, we develop a variational
power method (VPM) that provides provably consistent estimates under general conditions. In addition to unifying a number of existing approaches
from different subfields, we also find that VPM
yields significantly better estimates across a range
of problems, including queueing, stochastic differential equations, post-processing MCMC, and
off-policy evaluation.

1. Introduction
Markov chains are a pervasive modeling tool in applied
mathematics of particular importance in stochastic modeling
and machine learning. A key property of an ergodic Markov
chain is the existence of a unique stationary distribution;
i.e., the long-run distribution of states that remains invariant
under the transition kernel. In this paper, we consider a
less well studied but still important version of the stationary
distribution estimation problem, where one has access to a
set of sampled transitions from a given Markov chain, but
does not know the mechanism by which the probe points
were chosen, nor is able to gather additional data from the
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada 2 Google Brain. Correspondence to: Junfeng Wen <junfengwen@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

underlying process. Nevertheless, one would still like to
estimate target properties of the stationary distribution, such
as the expected value of a random variable of interest.
This setting is inspired by many practical scenarios where
sampling from the Markov process is costly or unavailable,
but data has already been collected and available for analysis. A simple example is a queueing system consisting of a
service desk that serves customers in a queue. Queue length
changes stochastically as customers arrive or leave after
being served. The long-term distribution of queue length
(i.e., the stationary distribution of the underlying Markov
chain) is the object of central interest for managing such a
service (Haviv, 2009; Serfozo, 2009). In practice, however,
queue lengths are physical quantities that can only be measured for moderate periods, perhaps on separate occasions,
but rarely for sufficient time to ensure the (stochastic) queue
length has reached the stationary distribution. Since the
measurement process itself is expensive, it is essential to
make reasonable inferences about the stationary distribution
from the collected data alone.
We investigate methods for estimating properties of the
stationary distribution solely from a batch of previously collected data. The key idea is to first estimate a correction
ratio function over the given data, which can then be used to
estimate expectations of interest with respect to the stationary distribution. To illustrate, consider an ergodic Markov
chain with state space X , transition kernel T , and a unique
stationary distribution µ that satisfies
Z
0
µ (x ) = T (x0 |x) µ (x) dx := (T µ) (x0 ) .
(1)
Assume we are given a fixed sample of state transitions, D =
n
(x, x0 )i=1 ⇠ T (x0 |x) p (x), such that each x has been
sampled according to an unknown probe distribution p, but
each x0 has been sampled according to the true underlying
transition kernel, x0 |x ⇠ T (x0 |x). Below we investigate
procedures for estimating the point-wise ratios, ⌧b (xi ) ⇡
µ(xi )
p(xi ) , such that the weighted empirical distribution
µ̂(x) :=

n
⇣X
i=1

⌧b (xi )

n
⌘ 1X
i=1

⌧b (xi ) I{x = xi }

can be used to approximate µ directly, or further used to
estimate the expected value of some target function(s) of x

