When Deep Denoising Meets Iterative Phase Retrieval

Yaotian Wang 1 Xiaohang Sun 1 Jason W. Fleischer 1

Abstract

developed (Candès et al., 2015a;b; Zhang & Liang, 2016;
Zhang et al., 2016; Chen & Candès, 2017; Wang et al., 2018).
Despite a solid theoretical foundation, generally provable
algorithms have overly restrictive requirements (e.g. the
statistics of measurement bases) that have limited their popularity. More progress has been made for Fourier phase
retrieval (FPR), in which A is the Fourier transform, i.e.
the measurements are the Fourier intensities. This is also
the most common type experimentally, mostly due to the
fact that diffraction in the far field is the Fourier transform
of the object (Goodman, 2005). Applications range from
astronomy (Dainty & Fienup, 1987) to coherent diffraction (Miao et al., 1999; Chapman & Nugent, 2010) and
speckle-correlation (Bertolotti et al., 2012; Katz et al., 2014)
imaging.

Recovering a signal from its Fourier intensity underlies many important applications, including
lensless imaging and imaging through scattering
media. Conventional algorithms for retrieving
the phase suffer when noise is present but display global convergence when given clean data.
Neural networks have been used to improve algorithm robustness, but efforts to date are sensitive
to initial conditions and give inconsistent performance. Here, we combine iterative methods from
phase retrieval with image statistics from deep
denoisers, via regularization-by-denoising. The
resulting methods inherit the advantages of each
approach and outperform other noise-robust phase
retrieval algorithms. Our work paves the way for
hybrid imaging methods that integrate machinelearned constraints in conventional algorithms.

1. Introduction
Phase is a fundamental component of complex signals and
often carries more information than amplitude (Oppenheim
& Lim, 1981). In many cases, however, only the amplitude
or intensity can be measured (e.g. conventional cameras can
only record the time-averaged light intensity). For such measurements, the recovery of the underlying signal requires
reconstruction of the missing phase. More formally, phase
retrieval (PR) is an inverse problem to recover an unknown
signal x ∈Rn or Cn from the phaseless measurement
y 2 = |Ax|2 + w

(1)

where A is a known linear transform and w is the noise in
the measurement.
In the past decade, the general PR problem has attracted
much attention from the optimization and statistics community and various algorithms with provable convergence were
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University,
Princeton, New Jersey, USA. Correspondence to: Jason W. Fleischer <jasonf@princeton.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

The most broadly used algorithms for FPR are iterative
methods, pioneered by Gerchberg-Saxton (Gerchberg &
Saxton, 1972) and later developed by Fienup (Fienup, 1982).
Though they lack theoretical proof of convergence, empirical use of Fienup algorithms and their variants (Bauschke
et al., 2003; Elser, 2003; Luke, 2004; Martin et al., 2012;
Rodriguez et al., 2013) has shown the avoidance of local
minima and convergence to global solutions from random
initialization. Together with the simplicity of their implementation, iterative phase retrieval methods have become
the workhorse of FPR (Miao et al., 2005; Bertolotti et al.,
2012; Katz et al., 2014).
It has been shown that applying the natural image prior to
FPR can increase robustness to noise and improve reconstruction quality (Venkatakrishnan et al., 2013; Heide et al.,
2016; Metzler et al., 2018; Işil et al., 2019). However, such
methods either have unsatisfying robustness when noise levels are high or are sensitive to initialization (thus relying on
other algorithms to supply initial points). Both cases return
us to the problem of poor reliability when the signal-to-noise
ratio in measurements is low.
Our major contribution here is to combine the benefits of
iterative FPR with natural image priors via Regularizationby-Denoising (RED) (Romano et al., 2017). The methods
we propose deliver greater robustness to noise than other
noise-robust FPR algorithms while relaxing the initialization
requirements. The application of image priors also alleviates
the stagnant mode issues in iterative phase retrieval (Fienup

