Black-Box Variational Inference as Distilled Langevin Dynamics

Matthew Hoffman 1 Yi-An Ma 1 2

Abstract
Variational inference (VI) and Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) are approximate posterior
inference algorithms that are often said to have
complementary strengths, with VI being fast but
biased and MCMC being slower but asymptotically unbiased. In this paper, we analyze gradientbased MCMC and VI procedures and find theoretical and empirical evidence that these procedures are not as different as one might think.
In particular, a close examination of the FokkerPlanck equation that governs the Langevin dynamics (LD) MCMC procedure reveals that LD
implicitly follows a gradient flow that corresponds
to a variational inference procedure based on optimizing a nonparametric normalizing flow. This
result suggests that the transient bias of LD (due
to the Markov chain not having burned in) may
track that of VI (due to the optimizer not having
converged), up to differences due to VI’s asymptotic bias and parameterization. Empirically, we
find that the transient biases of these algorithms
(and their momentum-accelerated counterparts)
do evolve similarly. This suggests that practitioners with a limited time budget may get more
accurate results by running an MCMC procedure
(even if it’s far from burned in) than a VI procedure, as long as the variance of the MCMC estimator can be dealt with (e.g., by running many
parallel chains).

1. Introduction
The central computational problem in Bayesian data analysis is posterior inference. Exact inference is usually intractable, so practitioners resort to approximations. Two
of the most popular classes of approximate inference algo1

rithms are Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) and variational inference (VI). VI chooses a family of tractable distributions, and tries to find the member of that family with
the lowest KL divergence to the posterior, whereas MCMC
simulates a Markov chain whose stationary distribution is
the posterior.
VI and MCMC are often said to have complementary
strengths: VI is faster but biased, whereas MCMC is slower
but asymptotically unbiased. But statements like this are imprecise; the question is not “how much longer does MCMC
take to converge than VI?” but “for a given computational
budget, will VI or MCMC give more accurate estimates?”
For that matter, the notion of a one-dimensional computation
budget is an oversimplification, since parallel computation
(especially on GPUs and TPUs) has become cheap but clock
speeds have remained nearly constant.
In this paper, we will be motivated by the following question: for a given parallel-compute budget, will VI or MCMC
reach a given level of accuracy faster? We examine this
question both theoretically and empirically for two popular
gradient-based VI and MCMC algorithms: reparameterized
black-box VI (BBVI; Ranganath et al., 2014; Kingma &
Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014; Roeder et al., 2017)
and Langevin-dynamics MCMC (LD; Roberts & Rosenthal,
1998). By reformulating LD as a deterministic normalizing
flow (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015) via the Fokker-Planck
equation (Jordan et al., 1998; Villani, 2003), we arrive at a
reinterpretation of BBVI as a parametric approximation to
the nonparametric LD MCMC procedure. This interpretation suggests that the transient bias (Angelino et al., 2016)
of BBVI (i.e., bias due to incomplete optimization rather
than approximations) may track the transient bias of LD
(i.e., bias due to the Markov chain not having warmed up),
and that claims that VI is faster than MCMC demand closer
scrutiny. Empirically, we find that BBVI’s transient bias
indeed tracks that of LD on several problems.
Our main results are:

2

Google Research Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute, University of California, San Diego, USA. Correspondence to:
Matthew Hoffman <mhoffman@google.com>, Yi-An Ma
<yianma@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

• We show theoretically that LD and BBVI both follow the same gradient flow, up to gradient noise and a
tangent field induced by the variational distribution’s
parameterization. We also analyze the effects of gradient noise in BBVI.

