Global Concavity and Optimization in a Class of
Dynamic Discrete Choice Models

Yiding Feng * 1 Ekaterina Khmelnitskaya * 2 Denis Nekipelov * 2

Abstract

Discrete choice models with unobserved heterogeneity are commonly used Econometric models
for dynamic Economic behavior which have been
adopted in practice to predict behavior of individuals and firms from schooling and job choices to
strategic decisions in market competition. These
models feature optimizing agents who choose
among a finite set of options in a sequence of
periods and receive choice-specific payoffs that
depend on both variables that are observed by the
agent and recorded in the data and variables that
are only observed by the agent but not recorded
in the data. Existing work in Econometrics assumes that optimizing agents are fully rational
and requires finding a functional fixed point to
find the optimal policy. We show that in an important class of discrete choice models the value
function is globally concave in the policy. That
means that simple algorithms that do not require
fixed point computation, such as the policy gradient algorithm, globally converge to the optimal
policy. This finding can both be used to relax
behavioral assumption regarding the optimizing
agents and to facilitate Econometric analysis of
dynamic behavior. In particular, we demonstrate
significant computational advantages in using a
simple implementation policy gradient algorithm
over existing “nested fixed point” algorithms used
in Econometrics.

*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA 2 Department of Economics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA. Correspondence to: Y.F. <yidingfeng2021@u.northwestern.edu>,
E.K. <eak5rf@virginia.edu>, D.N. <denis@virginia.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Dynamic discrete choice model with unobserved heterogeneity is, arguably, the most popular model that is currently
used for Econometric analysis of dynamic behavior of individuals and firms in Economics and Marketing (e.g. see
surveys in (Eckstein and Wolpin, 1989), (Dubé et al., 2002)
(Abbring and Heckman, 2007), (Aguirregabiria and Mira,
2010)). In this model, pioneered in Rust (1987), the agent
chooses between a discrete set of options in a sequence of
discrete time periods to maximize the expected cumulative
discounted payoff. The reward in each period is a function
of the state variable which follows a Markov process and is
observed in the data and also a function of an idiosyncratic
random variable that is only observed by the agent but is not
reported in the data. The unobserved idiosyncratic component is designed to reflect heterogeneity of agents that may
value the same choice differently.
Despite significant empirical success in prediction of dynamic economic behavior under uncertainty, dynamic discrete choice models frequently lead to seemingly unrealistic
optimization problems that economic agents need to solve.
For instance, (Hendel and Nevo, 2006a) features an elaborate functional fixed point problem with constraints, which
is computationally intensive, especially in continuous state
spaces, for consumers to buy laundry detergent in the supermarket.
At the same time, rich literature on Markov Decision Processes (cf. Sutton and Barto, 2018) have developed several
effective optimization algorithms, such as the policy gradient algorithm and its variants, that do not require solving for
a functional fixed point. The high-level takeaway message
“use police gradients” for dynamic discrete choice models
have been discussed in the machine learning community.
For example, Ermon et al. (2015) and Ho et al. (2016) justify
the advantage of policy gradient method by showing that
Dynamic Discrete Choice models are equivalent to Maximum Entropy IRL models under some conditions with an
algorithm close to policy gradient. However, the drawback
of the policy gradient and previous justification are that the
value function in a generic Markov Decision problem is
not concave in the policy. This means that gradient-based
algorithms have no guarantees for global convergence for

