Being Bayesian, Even Just a Bit,
Fixes Overconfidence in ReLU Networks
Agustinus Kristiadi 1 Matthias Hein 1 Philipp Hennig 1 2

Abstract
The point estimates of ReLU classification
networks—arguably the most widely used neural
network architecture—have been shown to yield
arbitrarily high confidence far away from the training data. This architecture, in conjunction with a
maximum a posteriori estimation scheme, is thus
not calibrated nor robust. Approximate Bayesian
inference has been empirically demonstrated to
improve predictive uncertainty in neural networks,
although the theoretical analysis of such Bayesian
approximations is limited. We theoretically analyze approximate Gaussian distributions on the
weights of ReLU networks and show that they
fix the overconfidence problem. Furthermore, we
show that even a simplistic, thus cheap, Bayesian
approximation, also fixes these issues. This indicates that a sufficient condition for a calibrated
uncertainty on a ReLU network is “to be a bit
Bayesian”. These theoretical results validate the
usage of last-layer Bayesian approximation and
motivate a range of a fidelity-cost trade-off. We
further validate these findings empirically via various standard experiments using common deep
ReLU networks and Laplace approximations.

1. Introduction
As neural networks have been successfully applied in ever
more domains, including safety-critical ones, the robustness and uncertainty quantification of their predictions have
moved into focus, subsumed under the notion of AI safety
(Amodei et al., 2016). A principal goal of uncertainty quantification is that learning machines and neural networks in
particular, should assign low confidence to test cases not
explained well by the training data or prior information (Gal,
1

University of Tübingen 2 MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen. Correspondence to: Agustinus Kristiadi
<agustinus.kristiadi@uni-tuebingen.de>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

2016). The most obvious cases are test points that lie “far
away” from the training data. Many methods to achieve this
goal have been proposed, both Bayesian (e.g. Blundell et al.,
2015; Louizos & Welling, 2017; Zhang et al., 2018) and
non-Bayesian (e.g. Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017; Liang
et al., 2018; Hein et al., 2019).
ReLU networks are currently among the most widely used
neural architectures. This class comprises any network that
can be written as a composition of linear layers (including
fully-connected, convolutional, and residual layers) and a
ReLU activation function. But, while ReLU networks often
achieve high accuracy, the uncertainty of their predictions
has been shown to be miscalibrated (Guo et al., 2017). Indeed, Hein et al. (2019) demonstrated that ReLU networks
are always overconfident “far away from the data”: scaling
a training point x (a vector in a Euclidean input space) with
a scalar δ yields predictions of arbitrarily high confidence
in the limit δ → ∞. This means ReLU networks are susceptible to out-of-distribution (OOD) examples. Meanwhile,
probabilistic methods (in particular Bayesian methods) have
long been known empirically to improve predictive uncertainty estimates. MacKay (1992a) demonstrated experimentally that the predictive uncertainty of Bayesian neural
networks will naturally be high in regions not covered by
training data. Although the theoretical analysis is still lacking, results like this raise the hope that the overconfidence
problem of ReLU networks, too, might be mitigated by the
use of probabilistic and Bayesian methods.
This paper offers a theoretical analysis of the binary classification case of ReLU networks with a logistic output layer.
We show that equipping such networks with a Gaussian approximate distribution over the weights mitigates the aforementioned theoretical problem, in the sense that the predictive confidence far away from the training data approaches
a known limit, bounded away from one, whose value is
controlled by the covariance. In the case of Laplace approximations (MacKay, 1992b; Ritter et al., 2018), this treatment
in conjunction with the probit approximation (Spiegelhalter
& Lauritzen, 1990; MacKay, 1992a) does not change the decision boundary of the trained network, so it has no negative
effect on the predictive performance (cf. Figure 1). Furthermore, we show that a sufficient condition for this desirable
property to hold is to apply a Gaussian approximation only

