Stochastic Gradient and Langevin Processes

Xiang Cheng 1 Dong Yin 1 Peter Bartlett 1 Michael Jordan 1

Abstract
We prove quantitative convergence rates at which
discrete Langevin-like processes converge to the
invariant distribution of a related stochastic differential equation. We study the setup where
the additive noise can be non-Gaussian and statedependent and the potential function can be nonconvex. We show that the key properties of these
processes depend on the potential function and
the second moment of the additive noise. We
apply our theoretical findings to studying the convergence of Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)
for non-convex problems and corroborate them
with experiments using SGD to train deep neural
networks on the CIFAR-10 dataset.

1. Introduction
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) is one of the workhorses
of modern machine learning. In many nonconvex optimization problems, such as training deep neural networks, SGD
is able to produce solutions with good generalization error;
indeed, there is evidence that the generalization error of an
SGD solution can be significantly better than that of Gradient Descent (GD) (Keskar et al., 2016; Jastrz˛ebski et al.,
2017; He et al., 2019). This suggests that, to understand the
behavior of SGD, it is not enough to consider the limiting
cases such as small step size or large batch size where it
degenerates to GD. In this paper, we take an alternate view
of SGD as a sampling algorithm, and aim to understand its
convergence to an appropriate stationary distribution.
There has been rapid recent progress in understanding the
finite-time behavior of MCMC methods, by comparing
them to stochastic differential equations (SDEs), such as the
Langevin diffusion. It is natural in this context to think of
SGD as a discrete-time approximation of an SDE. There
are, however, two significant barriers to extending previous
analyses to the case of SGD. First, these analysis are often
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
University of California, Berkeley. Correspondence to: Xiang
Cheng <x.cheng@berkeley.edu>.
th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

restricted to isotropic Gaussian noise, whereas the noise in
SGD can be far from Gaussian. Second, the noise depends
significantly on the current state (the optimization variable).
For instance, if the objective is an average over training data
with a nonnegative loss, as the objective approaches zero
the variance of minibatch SGD goes to zero. Any attempt
to cast SGD as an SDE must be able to handle this kind of
noise.
This motivates the study of Langevin MCMC-like methods
that have a state-dependent noise term:
√
w(k+1)δ = wkδ − δ∇U (wkδ ) + δξ(wkδ , ηk ),
(1)
where wt ∈ Rd is the state variable at time t, δ is the step
size, U : Rd → R is a (possibly nonconvex) potential,
ξ : Rd × Ω → Rd is the noise function, and ηk are sampled
i.i.d. according to some distribution over Ω (for example,
in minibatch SGD, Ω is the set of subsets of indices in the
training sample).
Throughout this paper, we assume that Eη [ξ(x, η)] = 0 for
all x. We define a matrix-valued function M (·) : Rd →
Rd×d to be the square root
p of the covariance matrix of ξ;
T
i.e., for all x, M (x) := Eη [ξ(x, η)ξ(x,
√ η) ], where for
a positive semidefinite matrix G, A = G is the unique
positive semidefinite matrix such that A2 = G.
In studying the generalization behavior of SGD, earlier
work (Jastrz˛ebski et al., 2017; He et al., 2019) propose that
(1) be approximated by the stochastic process y(k+1)δ =
√
ykδ − δ∇U (ykδ ) + δM (ykδ )θk where θk ∼ N (0, I), or,
equivalently:
dyt = −∇U (ykδ )dt + M (ykδ )dBt

(2)

for t ∈ [kδ, (k + 1)δ],
with Bt denoting standard Brownian motion (Karatzas &
Shreve, 1998). Specifically, the non-Gaussian noise ξ(·, η)
is approximated by a Gaussian variable M (·)θ with the
same covariance, via an assumption that the minibatch size
is large and an appeal to the central limit theorem.
The process in (2) can be seen as the Euler-Murayama discretization of the following SDE:
dxt = −∇U (xt )dt + M (xt )dBt .

(3)

