On Convergence-Diagnostic based Step Sizes for Stochastic Gradient Descent

Scott Pesme 1 Aymeric Dieuleveut 2 Nicolas Flammarion 1

Abstract
Constant step-size Stochastic Gradient Descent
exhibits two phases: a transient phase during
which iterates make fast progress towards the
optimum, followed by a stationary phase during
which iterates oscillate around the optimal point.
In this paper, we show that efficiently detecting
this transition and appropriately decreasing the
step size can lead to fast convergence rates. We
analyse the classical statistical test proposed by
Pflug (1983), based on the inner product between
consecutive stochastic gradients. Even in the simple case where the objective function is quadratic
we show that this test cannot lead to an adequate
convergence diagnostic. We then propose a novel
and simple statistical procedure that accurately
detects stationarity and we provide experimental
results showing state-of-the-art performance on
synthetic and real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
The field of machine learning has had tremendous success
in recent years, in problems such as object classification (He
et al., 2016) and speech recognition (Graves et al., 2013).
These achievements have been enabled by the development
of complex optimization-based architectures such as deeplearning, which are efficiently trainable by Stochastic Gradient Descent algorithms (Bottou, 1998).
Challenges have arisen on both the theoretical front – to
understand why those algorithms achieve such performance,
and on the practical front – as choosing the architecture of
the network and the parameters of the algorithm has become
an art itself. Especially, there is no practical heuristic to set
the step-size sequence. As a consequence, new optimization
strategies have appeared to alleviate the tuning burden, as
Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014), together with new learning rate
scheduling, such as cyclical learning rates (Smith, 2017) and
1
Theory of Machine Learning lab, EPFL 2 École Polytechnique.
Correspondence to: Scott Pesme <scott.pesme@epfl.ch>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

warm restarts (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2016). However those
strategies typically do not come with theoretical guarantees
and may be outperformed by SGD (Wilson et al., 2017).
Even in the classical case of convex optimization, in which
convergence rates have been widely studied over the last 30
years (Polyak & Juditsky, 1992; Zhang, 2004; Nemirovski
et al., 2009; Bach & Moulines, 2011; Rakhlin et al., 2012)
and where theory suggests to use the averaged iterate and
provides optimal choices of learning rates, practitioners
still face major challenges: indeed (a) averaging leads to
a slower decay during early iterations, (b) learning rates
may not adapt to the difficulty of the problem (the optimal
decay depends on the class of problems), or may not be
robust to constant misspecification. Consequently, the state
of the art approach in practice remains to use the final iterate
with decreasing step size a/(b + tα ) with constants a, b, α
obtained by a tiresome hand-tuning. Overall, there is a
desperate need for adaptive algorithms.
In this paper, we study adaptive step-size scheduling based
on convergence diagnostic. The behaviour of SGD with constant step size is dictated by (a) a bias term, that accounts for
the impact of the initial distance kθ0 − θ∗ k to the minimizer
θ∗ of the function, and (b) a variance term arising from the
noise in the gradients. Larger steps allow to forget the initial
condition faster, but increase the impact of the noise. Our
approach is then to use the largest possible learning rate
as long as the iterates make progress and to automatically
detect when they stop making any progress. When we have
reached such a saturation, we reduce the learning rate. This
can be viewed as “restarting” the algorithm, even though
only the learning rate changes. We refer to this approach
as Convergence-Diagnostic algorithm. Its benefits are thus
twofold: (i) with a large initial learning rate the bias term
initially decays at an exponential rate (Kushner & Huang,
1981; Pflug, 1986), (ii) decreasing the learning rate when
the effect of the noise becomes dominant defines an efficient
and practical adaptive strategy.
Reducing the learning rate when the objective function stops
decaying is widely used in deep learning (Krizhevsky et al.,
2012) but the epochs where the step size is reduced are
mostly hand-picked. Our goal is to select them automatically by detecting saturation. Convergence diagnostics date
back to Pflug (1983), who proposed to use the inner product

