Graphical Models Meet Bandits: A Variational Thompson Sampling Approach
Tong Yu 1 Branislav Kveton 2 Zheng Wen 3 Ruiyi Zhang 4 Ole J. Mengshoel 1 5

Abstract
We propose a novel framework for structured bandits, which we call an influence diagram bandit.
Our framework uses a graphical model to capture
complex statistical dependencies between actions,
latent variables, and observations; and thus unifies
and extends many existing models, such as combinatorial semi-bandits, cascading bandits, and
low-rank bandits. We develop novel online learning algorithms that learn to act efficiently in our
models. The key idea is to track a structured posterior distribution of model parameters, either exactly or approximately. To act, we sample model
parameters from their posterior and then use the
structure of the influence diagram to find the most
optimistic action under the sampled parameters.
We empirically evaluate our algorithms in three
structured bandit problems, and show that they
perform as well as or better than problem-specific
state-of-the-art baselines.

1. Introduction
Structured multi-armed bandits, such as combinatorial semibandits (Gai et al., 2012; Chen et al., 2013; Kveton et al.,
2015b), cascading bandits (Kveton et al., 2015a; Li et al.,
2016), and low-rank bandits (Katariya et al., 2017; Bhargava et al., 2017; Jun et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2018; Zimmert
& Seldin, 2018), have been extensively studied. Various
learning algorithms have been developed, and many of them
have provable regret bounds, good experimental results, or
both. Despite such significant progress along this research
line, the prior work still suffers from limitations.
A major limitation is that there is no unified framework or
general learning algorithms for structured bandits. Most existing algorithms are tailored to a specific structured bandit,
and new algorithms are necessary even when the modeling
1

Carnegie Mellon University 2 Google Research 3 DeepMind
Duke University 5 Norwegian University of Science and Technology. Correspondence to: Tong Yu <worktongyu@gmail.com>.

4

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

assumptions are slightly modified. For example, cascading
bandits assume that if an item in a recommended list is examined but not clicked by a user, the user examines the next
item in the list. CascadeKL-UCB algorithm for cascading
bandits (Kveton et al., 2015a) relies heavily on this assumption. In practice though, there might be a small probability
that the user skips some items in the list when browsing.
If we take this into consideration, CascadeKL-UCB is no
longer guaranteed to be sound and needs to be redesigned.
To enable more general algorithms, we propose a novel
online learning framework of influence diagram bandits.
The influence diagram (Howard & Matheson, 1984) is a
graphical model, which generalizes Bayesian networks by
adding decision and reward nodes. It can naturally represent structured stochastic decision problems, and elegantly
model complex statistical dependencies between actions,
latent variables, and observations. This paper presents a
specific type of influence diagrams (Section 2), enabling
many structured bandits, such as cascading bandits (Kveton
et al., 2015a), combinatorial semi-bandits (Gai et al., 2012;
Chen et al., 2013; Kveton et al., 2015b), and rank-1 bandits
(Katariya et al., 2017), to be formulated as special cases of
influence diagram bandits.
However, it is still non-trivial to efficiently learn to make
the best decisions online with convergence guarantee, in
an influence diagram with (i) complex structure and (ii)
exponentially many actions. In this paper, we develop a
Thompson sampling algorithm idTS and its approximations
for influence diagram bandits. The key idea is to represent
the model in a compact way and track a structured posterior
distribution of model parameters. We sample model parameters from their posterior and then use the structure of the
influence diagram to find the most optimistic action under
the sampled parameters. In complex influence diagrams,
latent variables naturally occur. In this case, the model
posterior is intractable and exact posterior sampling is infeasible. To handle such problems, we propose variational
Thompson sampling algorithms, idTSvi and idTSinc. The
algorithms are both statistically and computationally efficient, as they use our compact model representation and
the fact that the best action under a sampled model can be
computed using dynamic programming. We further derive
an upper bound on the regret of idTS under additional assumptions, and show that the regret only depends on the

