Learning Quadratic Games on Networks

Yan Leng 1 Xiaowen Dong 2 Junfeng Wu 3 Alex Pentland 4

Abstract
Individuals, or organizations, cooperate with or
compete against one another in a wide range of
practical situations. Such strategic interactions
are often modeled as games played on networks,
where an individual’s payoff depends not only on
her action but also on that of her neighbors. The
current literature has largely focused on analyzing
the characteristics of network games in the scenario where the structure of the network, which is
represented by a graph, is known beforehand. It
is often the case, however, that the actions of the
players are readily observable while the underlying interaction network remains hidden. In this
paper, we propose two novel frameworks for learning, from the observations on individual actions,
network games with linear-quadratic payoffs, and
in particular the structure of the interaction network. Our frameworks are based on the Nash
equilibrium of such games and involve solving a
joint optimization problem for the graph structure
and the individual marginal benefits. Both synthetic and real-world experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed frameworks, which
have theoretical as well as practical implications
for understanding strategic interactions in a network environment.

1. Introduction
We live in an increasingly connected society. First studied
by the American sociologist Stanley Milgram via his 1960s
experiments and later popularized by John Guare’s 1990
eponymous play, the theory of "six degrees of separation"
has been recently re-analyzed on the social networking site
1
McCombs School of Business, The University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX, USA 2 Department of Engineering Science,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 3 College of Control Science and
Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 4 Media Lab,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
Correspondence to: Yan Leng <yan.leng@mccombs.utexas.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Facebook, only to find out that any pair of Facebook users
can actually be connected via approximately three and a half
other ones (Backstrom et al., 2012). Individuals, unsurprisingly, are not merely connected; their decisions and actions
often influence the ones around them. Indeed, Christakis
and Fowler (Christakis & Fowler, 2009) have found in a
series of studies that, one’s emotion, health habit, and political opinion can affect individuals who are as far as three
degrees of separation in her social circle. Furthermore, such
influence on the decision-making process may take place
via either explicit (Aral et al., 2009; Leng et al., 2018) or
implicit interactions (Bandura & McClelland, 1977; Dong
et al., 2018).
To study the decision-making of a group of interacting
agents, recent literature in economics has increasingly focused on the modeling of such interactions as games played
on networks (Jackson & Zenou, 2014; Bramoullé & Kranton, 2016). The underlying assumption in this setting is
that, in a game played by a group of players who form a
social network, the payoff of a player depends on her action,
e.g., an effort made to achieve a specific task, as well as
that of her neighbors in the network. Two types of actions
have been studied in the literature, i.e., strategic complements and strategic substitutes. In the former case, one’s
action increases her neighbors’ incentives for action, e.g.,
students putting an effort together into a joint assignment
or firms working on a collaborative research project (Goyal
& Moraga-Gonzaléz, 2001). In the latter case, however,
the situation is the opposite, such as the scenarios of firms
competing on market prices or individuals on local public
goods (Bramoullé & Kranton, 2007).
In a network game, the underlying structure of the network
carries critical information and dictates the behavior and
actions of the players. Typically, graphs are used as mathematical tools to represent the structure of these networks,
and the current literature in this area has predominately focused on studying the characteristics of games on known or
predefined graphs (Ballester et al., 2006; Bramoullé et al.,
2014; Galeotti et al., 2017). However, it is increasingly
common that while ample observations on the actions of
the agents are available, the underlying complex relationships among them, which may be captured by an interaction
network, remain mostly hidden due to cost in observation
or privacy concern. In this case, the network needs to be

