Non-autoregressive Machine Translation with Disentangled Context
Transformer
Jungo Kasai 1 James Cross 2 Marjan Ghazvininejad 2 Jiatao Gu 2

Abstract
State-of-the-art neural machine translation models generate a translation from left to right and
every step is conditioned on the previously generated tokens. The sequential nature of this
generation process causes fundamental latency
in inference since we cannot generate multiple
tokens in each sentence in parallel. We propose an attention-masking based model, called
Disentangled Context (DisCo) transformer, that
simultaneously generates all tokens given different contexts. The DisCo transformer is trained
to predict every output token given an arbitrary
subset of the other reference tokens. We also develop the parallel easy-first inference algorithm,
which iteratively refines every token in parallel
and reduces the number of required iterations.
Our extensive experiments on 7 translation directions with varying data sizes demonstrate that
our model achieves competitive, if not better, performance compared to the state of the art in nonautoregressive machine translation while significantly reducing decoding time on average. Our
code is available at https://github.com/
facebookresearch/DisCo.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art neural machine translation systems use autoregressive decoding where words are predicted one-byone conditioned on all previous words (Bahdanau et al.,
2015; Vaswani et al., 2017). Non-autoregressive machine
translation (NAT, Gu et al., 2018), on the other hand, generates all words in one shot and speeds up decoding at the
expense of performance drop. Parallel decoding results in
1

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington. Work done at Facebook
AI. 2 Facebook AI. Correspondence to: Jungo Kasai <jkasai@cs.washington.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

conditional independence and prevents the model from properly capturing the highly multimodal distribution of target
translations (Gu et al., 2018). One way to remedy this fundamental problem is to refine model output iteratively (Lee
et al., 2018; Ghazvininejad et al., 2019). This work pursues
this iterative approach to non-autoregressive translation.1
In this work, we propose a transformer-based architecture
with attention masking, which we call Disentangled Context
(DisCo) transformer, and use it for non-autoregressive decoding. Specifically, our DisCo transformer predicts every
word in a sentence conditioned on an arbitrary subset of
the rest of the words. Unlike the masked language models
(Devlin et al., 2019; Ghazvininejad et al., 2019) where the
model only predicts the masked words, the DisCo transformer can predict all words simultaneously, leading to
faster inference as well as a substantial performance gain
when training data are relatively large.
We also introduce a new inference algorithm for iterative
parallel decoding, parallel easy-first, where each word is
predicted by attending to the words that the model is more
confident about. This decoding algorithm allows for predicting all tokens with different contexts in each iteration and
terminates when the output prediction converges, contrasting with the constant number of iterations (Ghazvininejad
et al., 2019). Indeed, we will show in a later section that
this method substantially reduces the number of required
iterations without loss in performance.
Our extensive empirical evaluations on 7 translation directions from standard WMT benchmarks show that our approach achieves competitive performance to state-of-the-art
non-autoregressive and autoregressive machine translation
while significantly reducing decoding time on average.

2. DisCo Transformer
We introduce our DisCo transformer for non-autoregressive
translation (Fig. 1). We propose a DisCo objective as an efficient alternative to masked language modeling and design
an architecture that computes the objective in a single pass.
1

Refinement requires several sequential steps, but we abuse
the term non-autoregressive generation to mean a broad family of
methods that generate the target in parallel for simplicity.

