Generalisation error in learning with random features
and the hidden manifold model
Federica Gerace * 1 Bruno Loureiro * 1 Florent Krzakala 2 Marc Mézard 2 Lenka Zdeborová 1

Abstract
We study generalised linear regression and classification for a synthetically generated dataset encompassing different problems of interest, such
as learning with random features, neural networks
in the lazy training regime, and the hidden manifold model. We consider the high-dimensional
regime and using the replica method from statistical physics, we provide a closed-form expression
for the asymptotic generalisation performance in
these problems, valid in both the under- and overparametrised regimes and for a broad choice of
generalised linear model loss functions. In particular, we show how to obtain analytically the
so-called double descent behaviour for logistic
regression with a peak at the interpolation threshold, we illustrate the superiority of orthogonal
against random Gaussian projections in learning
with random features, and discuss the role played
by correlations in the data generated by the hidden manifold model. Beyond the interest in these
particular problems, the theoretical formalism introduced in this manuscript provides a path to
further extensions to more complex tasks.

1. Introduction
One of the most important goals of learning theory is to provide generalisation bounds describing the quality of learning
a given task as a function of the number of samples. Existing results fall short of being directly relevant for the
state-of-the-art deep learning methods (Zhang et al., 2016;
Neyshabur et al., 2017). Consequently, providing tighter
results on the generalisation error is currently a very ac*
Equal contribution 1 Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, CEA,
Institut de physique théorique, 91191, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
2
Laboratoire de Physique de École normale supérieure, ENS, Université PSL, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, Université de Paris,
F-75005 Paris, France. Correspondence to: Bruno Loureiro <brloureiro@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tive research subject. The traditional learning theory approach to generalisation follows for instance the VapnikChervonenkis (Vapnik, 1998) or Rademacher (Bartlett &
Mendelson, 2002) worst-case type bounds, and many of
their more recent extensions (Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David,
2014). An alternative approach, followed also in this paper,
has been pursued for decades, notably in statistical physics,
where the generalisation ability of neural networks was analysed for a range of “typical-case” scenario for synthetic
data arising from a probabilistic model (Seung et al., 1992;
Watkin et al., 1993; Advani et al., 2013; Advani & Saxe,
2017; Aubin et al., 2018; Candès & Sur, 2020; Hastie et al.,
2019; Mei & Montanari, 2019; Goldt et al., 2019). While
at this point it is not clear which approach will lead to a
complete generalisation theory of deep learning, it is worth
pursuing both directions.
The majority of works following the statistical physics approach study the generalisation error in the so-called teacherstudent framework, where the input data are element-wise
i.i.d. vectors, and the labels are generated by a teacher neural
network. In contrast, in most of real scenarios the input data
do not span uniformly the input space, but rather live close
to a lower-dimensional manifold. The traditional focus onto
i.i.d. Gaussian input vectors is an important limitation that
has been recently stressed in (Mézard, 2017; Goldt et al.,
2019). In (Goldt et al., 2019), the authors proposed a model
of synthetic data to mimic the latent structure of real data,
named the hidden manifold model, and analysed the learning
curve of one-pass stochastic gradient descent algorithm in
a two-layer neural network with a small number of hidden
units also known as committee machine.
Another key limitation of the majority of existing works
stemming from statistical physics is that the learning curves
were only computed for neural networks with a few hidden units. In particular, the input dimension is considered
large, the number of samples is a constant times the input
dimension and the number of hidden units is of order one.
Tight learning curves were only very recently analysed for
two-layer neural networks with more hidden units. These
studies addressed in particular the case of networks that
have a fixed first layer with random i.i.d. Gaussian weights
(Hastie et al., 2019; Mei & Montanari, 2019), or the lazytraining regime where the individual weights change only

