TrajectoryNet: A Dynamic Optimal Transport Network for Modeling Cellular
Dynamics

Alexander Tong 1 Jessie Huang 1 Guy Wolf * 2 3 David van Dijk * 1 4 Smita Krishnaswamy * 1 5

Abstract
It is increasingly common to encounter data
from dynamic processes captured by static crosssectional measurements over time, particularly in
biomedical settings. Recent attempts to model
individual trajectories from this data use optimal transport to create pairwise matchings between time points. However, these methods cannot model continuous dynamics and non-linear
paths that entities can take in these systems. To
address this issue, we establish a link between
continuous normalizing ﬂows and dynamic optimal transport, that allows us to model the expected
paths of points over time. Continuous normalizing
ﬂows are generally under constrained, as they are
allowed to take an arbitrary path from the source
to the target distribution. We present TrajectoryNet, which controls the continuous paths taken
between distributions to produce dynamic optimal
transport. We show how this is particularly applicable for studying cellular dynamics in data from
single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) technologies, and that TrajectoryNet improves upon
recently proposed static optimal transport-based
models that can be used for interpolating cellular
distributions.

1. Introduction
In data science we are often confronted with cross-sectional
samples of time-varying phenomena, especially in biomedical data. Examples include health measurements of different
age cohorts (Oeppen & Vaupel, 2002), or disease measure*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Yale
University, New Haven, CT, USA 2 Department of Mathematics &
Statistics, Université de Montr´eal, Montr´eal, QC, Canada 3 Mila
– Quebec AI Institute, Montr´eal, QC, Canada 4 Internal Medicine,
Cardiology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA 5 Department of
Genetics, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. Correspondence
to: Smita Krishnaswamy <smita.krishnaswamy@yale.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

ments at different stages of disease progression (Waddington, 1942). In these measurements we consider data that is
sampled at multiple timepoints, but at each timepoint we
have access only to a distribution (cross-section) of the population at that time. Extracting the longitudinal dynamics of
development or disease from static snapshot measurements
can be challenging as there are few methods of interpolation
between distributions. Further exacerbating this problem
is the fact that the same entities are often not measured at
each time, resulting in a lack of point-to-point correspondences. Here, we propose to formulate this problem as one
of unbalanced dynamic transport, where the goal is to transport entities from one cross sectional measurement to the
next using efﬁcient and smooth paths. Our main contribution is to establish a link between continuous normalizing
ﬂows (CNF) (Grathwohl et al., 2019) and dynamic optimal
transport (Benamou & Brenier, 2000), allowing us to efﬁciently solve the transport problem using a Neural ODE
framework (Chen et al., 2018a). To our knowledge, TrajectoryNet1 is the ﬁrst method to consider the speciﬁc paths
taken by a CNF between distributions.
The continuous normalizing ﬂow formulation allows us to
generalize optimal transport to a series of distributions as
in recent work (Chen et al., 2018b; Benamou et al., 2019).
These works focus on the theoretical aspects of the problem,
here focus on the computational aspects. This link allows us
to smooth ﬂows over multiple and possibly unevenly spaced
distributions in high dimensions. This matches the setting
of time series data from single-cell RNA sequencing.
Single-cell RNA sequencing (Macosko et al., 2015) is a
relatively new technology that has made it possible for scientists to randomly sample the entire transcriptome, i.e.,
20-30 thousand species of mRNA molecules representing
transcribed genes of the cell. This technology can reveal
detailed information about the identity of individual cells
based on transcription factors, surface marker expression,
cell cycle and many other facets of cellular behavior. In
particular, this technology can be used to learn how cells differentiate from one state to another: for example, from embryonic stem cells to speciﬁed lineages such as neuronal or
1
Code is available here:
https://github.com/
KrishnaswamyLab/TrajectoryNet

