Differentiable Likelihoods for Fast Inversion
of ‘Likelihood-Free’ Dynamical Systems

Hans Kersting * 1 2 3 Nicholas Krämer * 1
Martin Schiegg Christian Daniel 3 Michael Tiemann 3 Philipp Hennig 1 2
3

Abstract
Likelihood-free (a.k.a. simulation-based) inference problems are inverse problems with expensive, or intractable, forward models. ODE inverse
problems are commonly treated as likelihood-free,
as their forward map has to be numerically approximated by an ODE solver. This, however, is not a
fundamental constraint but just a lack of functionality in classic ODE solvers, which do not return
a likelihood but a point estimate. To address this
shortcoming, we employ Gaussian ODE filtering
(a probabilistic numerical method for ODEs) to
construct a local Gaussian approximation to the
likelihood. This approximation yields tractable estimators for the gradient and Hessian of the (log-)
likelihood. Insertion of these estimators into existing gradient-based optimization and sampling
methods engenders new solvers for ODE inverse
problems. We demonstrate that these methods
outperform standard likelihood-free approaches
on three benchmark-systems.

1. Introduction
Inferring the parameters of dynamical systems that are defined by ordinary differential equations (ODEs) is of importance in almost all areas of science and engineering. Despite
the wide range of available ODE inverse problem solvers,
simple random-walk Metropolis methods remain the go-to
solution; see e.g. Tarantola (2005, Section 2.4). That is
to say that ODE inverse problems are routinely treated as
if their forward problems were black boxes. The reason
usually cited for this generic approach is that ODE forward
∗
Primary author 1 University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 3 Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Renningen, Germany. Correspondence to: Hans Kersting <hans.kersting@unituebingen.de>, Nicholas Krämer <nicholas.kraemer@unituebingen.de>.
2

Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Inference on the logistic ODE. First twelve sampled parameters of likelihood-free inference and our proposed method.
Details in text.

solutions are highly non-linear and numerically intractable
for all but the most trivial cases. Therefore, it is common
to consider ODE inverse problems as ‘likelihood-free’ inference (read: intractable likelihood)—a.k.a. simulation-based
inference or, in the Bayesian case, Approximate Bayesian
Computation (ABC); see Cranmer et al. (2020) for an up-todate examination of these closely-related areas.
We here argue that, at least for ODEs, this approach is
mistaken. If a dynamical system is accurately described
by an ODE, its explicit mathematical definition should be
exploited to design efficient algorithms—not ignored and
treated as a black-box, likelihood-free inference problem.
To this end, we construct a local Gaussian approximation
of the likelihood by Gaussian ODE Filtering, a probabilistic
numerical method (PNM) for ODE forward problems. (Supplement A provides a concise introduction to Gaussian ODE
filtering; Tronarp et al. (2019) offer a more detailed presentation. See Hennig et al. (2015) or Oates & Sullivan (2019)
for a broad introduction to PNMs.) The key insight of our
work is that there is a likelihood in simulations of ODEs,
and in fact it can be approximated cheaply, and analytically:
The mean estimate mθ of the forward solution computed
by Gaussian ODE filters can be linearized in the parameter
θ, so that gradient, Hessian, etc. of the approximated loglikelihood can—via a cheap estimator J of the Jacobian of
the map θ 7→ mθ —be computed in closed form (Section 5).
In this way, the probabilistic information from Gaussian
ODE filtering yields a tractable, twice-differentiable like-

