Discount Factor as a Regularizer
in Reinforcement Learning

Ron Amit 1 Ron Meir 1 Kamil Ciosek 2

Abstract
Specifying a Reinforcement Learning (RL) task
involves choosing a suitable planning horizon,
which is typically modeled by a discount factor.
It is known that applying RL algorithms with a
lower discount factor can act as a regularizer, improving performance in the limited data regime.
Yet the exact nature of this regularizer has not
been investigated. In this work, we fill in this
gap. For several Temporal-Difference (TD) learning methods, we show an explicit equivalence between using a reduced discount factor and adding
an explicit regularization term to the algorithm’s
loss. Motivated by the equivalence, we empirically study this technique compared to standard
L2 regularization by extensive experiments in discrete and continuous domains, using tabular and
functional representations. Our experiments suggest the regularization effectiveness is strongly
related to properties of the available data, such as
size, distribution, and mixing rate.

1. Introduction
The ability to perform well in new and unfamiliar situations
following a limited learning experience is a hallmark of
human intelligence. Similarly, the generalization ability of
Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms is often measured
by expected performance achieved by the agent in a Markov
Decision Process (MDP) after being exposed to a limited
amount of training data. Developing RL agents that generalize well is a longstanding challenge (Boyan & Moore,
1995; Sutton, 1996) that has recently been gaining more
attention (Cobbe et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018b;a; Wang
1
The Viterbi Faculty of Electrical Engineering,
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel 2 Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to:
Ron Amit <ronamit@campus.technion.ac.il>,
Ron Meir <rmeir@ee.technion.ac.il>,
Kamil Ciosek
<Kamil.Ciosek@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2019). In particular, generalization
is critical for successfully deploying RL agents that were
trained in a simulator in complex real-world scenarios that
contain elements not seen in the simulation.
There are several known approaches for improving generalization in RL. Selecting an appropriate function approximation model is one way to facilitate generalization across
states and actions (Boyan & Moore, 1995). Regularization
methods can further improve the generalization capacity.
For example, it is very common to perform regularization
in policy space by encouraging policies with high entropy
(Williams, 1992; Mnih et al., 2016; Ahmed et al., 2019;
Vieillard et al., 2020). Our focus is instead on policy evaluation. Traditionally, there have been two common approaches
to such regularization. First, one can use traditional regularization methods from supervised learning to estimate
the value function. Most commonly, this means adding an
L2 or L1 penalty on the parameters of the value function
(critic) (Kolter & Ng, 2009; Liu et al., 2012; Dann et al.,
2014; Lillicrap et al., 2015; Cobbe et al., 2018; Liu et al.,
2019). Second, one can apply indirect regularization by
running the learning algorithm with a discount factor lower
than specified by the task. We refer to this method as discount regularization. By focusing learning on short-term
gains, this approach may improve generalization by reducing variance (Petrik & Scherrer, 2009; Jiang et al., 2015b;a;
François-Lavet et al., 2019; van Seijen et al., 2019). This
leads to the question:
What are the factors that influence the effectiveness of
discount regularization?
This paper contributes to answering this question in three
ways. First, for a few variants of TD learning, we show
an equivalence between using a reduced discount and activation regularization, a technique used to train Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNNs) (Merity et al., 2017; 2018; Herold
et al., 2018).
Second, we empirically investigate the effectiveness of discount regularization in both tabular MDPs and large scale
continuous control benchmarks. We show the benefit of
discount regularization is strongly linked to the number of
samples, uniformity of the state visitation and mixing rate
of the data collection. Generally, discount regularization

