New Oracle-Efficient Algorithms for Private Synthetic Data Release

Giuseppe Vietri 1 Grace Tian 2 Mark Bun 3 Thomas Steinke 4 Zhiwei Steven Wu 1

Abstract
We present three new algorithms for constructing differentially private synthetic data—a sanitized version of a sensitive dataset that approximately preserves the answers to a large collection
of statistical queries. All three algorithms are
oracle-efficient in the sense that they are computationally efficient when given access to an optimization oracle. Such an oracle can be implemented using many existing (non-private) optimization tools such as sophisticated integer program solvers. While the accuracy of the synthetic
data is contingent on the oracle’s optimization
performance, the algorithms satisfy differential
privacy even in the worst case. For all three algorithms, we provide theoretical guarantees for both
accuracy and privacy. Through empirical evaluation, we demonstrate that our methods scale well
with both the dimensionality of the data and the
number of queries. Compared to the state-of-theart method High-Dimensional Matrix Mechanism
(McKenna et al., 2018), our algorithms provide
better accuracy in the large workload and high
privacy regime (corresponding to low privacy loss
ε).

1. Introduction
The wide range of personal data collected from individuals
has facilitated many studies and data analyses that inform
decisions related to science, commerce, and government
policy. Since many of these rich datasets contain highly
sensitive personal information, there is a tension between
releasing useful information about the population and compromising individuals’ privacy. In this work, we consider
*
Equal contribution 1 Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, University of Minnesota 2 Harvard University
3
Boston University 4 IBM Research – Almaden. Correspondence to: Giuseppe Vietri <vietr002@umn.edu>, Mark Bun
<mbun@bu.edu>, Thomas Steinke <web@thomas-steinke.net>,
Zhiwei Steven Wu <zsw@umn.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

the problem of answering a large collection of statistical
(or linear) queries subject to differential privacy constraints.
Formally, we consider a data domain X = {0, 1}d of dimension d and a dataset D ∈ X n consisting of the data
of n individuals. Our goal is to approximately answer a
large class of statistical queries Q about D. A predicate
φ : X → [0, 1] defines a statistical query,
Pnand the query
qφ : X n → [0, 1] is given by qφ (D) = n1 i=1 φ(Di ). An
approximate answer a ∈ [0, 1] must satisfy |a−qφ (D)| ≤ α
for some accuracy parameter α > 0. To preserve privacy,
we work under the constraint of differential privacy (Dwork
et al., 2006). Privately answering statistical queries is at the
heart of the 2020 US Census release (Abowd, 2018) and
provides the basis for a wide range of private data analysis
tasks. For example, many machine learning algorithms can
be simulated using statistical queries (Kearns, 1998).
An especially compelling way to perform private query release is to release private synthetic data – a sanitized version
of the dataset that approximates all of the queries in the class
Q. Notable examples of private synthetic data algorithms
are the SmallDB algorithm (Blum et al., 2008) and the private multiplicative weights (PMW) mechanism (Hardt &
Rothblum, 2010) (and its more practical variant the multiplicative weights exponential mechanism MWEM (Hardt
et al., 2012)), which can answer exponentially many queries
and achieves nearly optimal sample complexity (Bun et al.,
2018). Unfortunately, both algorithms involve maintaining
a probability distribution over the data domain X = {0, 1}d ,
and hence suffer exponential (in d) running time. Moreover,
under standard cryptographic assumptions, this running time
is necessary in the worst case (Ullman, 2016; Ullman & Vadhan, 2011). However, there is hope that these worst-case
intractability results do not apply to real-world datasets.
To build more efficient solutions for constructing private synthetic data, we consider oracle efficient algorithms that rely
on a black-box optimization subroutine. The optimization
problem is NP-hard in the worst case. However, we invoke
practical optimization heuristics for this subroutine (namely
integer program solvers such as CPLEX and Gurobi). These
heuristics work well on many real-world instances. Thus the
algorithms we present are more practical than the worst-case
hardness would suggest is possible. While our algorithms’
efficiency and accuracy are contingent on the solver’s performance, differential privacy is guaranteed even if the solver

