Bayesian Graph Neural Networks with Adaptive Connection Sampling

Arman Hasanzadeh * 1 Ehsan Hajiramezanali * 1 Shahin Boluki 1 Mingyuan Zhou 2 Nick Duffield 1
Krishna Narayanan 1 Xiaoning Qian 1

Abstract
We propose a unified framework for adaptive connection sampling in graph neural networks (GNNs) that generalizes existing stochastic regularization methods for training GNNs.
The proposed framework not only alleviates oversmoothing and over-fitting tendencies of deep
GNNs, but also enables learning with uncertainty
in graph analytic tasks with GNNs. Instead of
using fixed sampling rates or hand-tuning them
as model hyperparameters as in existing stochastic regularization methods, our adaptive connection sampling can be trained jointly with GNN
model parameters in both global and local fashions. GNN training with adaptive connection
sampling is shown to be mathematically equivalent to an efficient approximation of training
Bayesian GNNs. Experimental results with ablation studies on benchmark datasets validate that
adaptively learning the sampling rate given graph
training data is the key to boosting the performance of GNNs in semi-supervised node classification, making them less prone to over-smoothing
and over-fitting with more robust prediction.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs), and its numerous variants,
have shown to be successful in graph representation learning by extracting high-level features for nodes from their
topological neighborhoods. GNNs have boosted the state-ofthe-art performance in a variety of graph analytic tasks, such
as semi-supervised node classification and link prediction
(Kipf & Welling, 2017; 2016; Hasanzadeh et al., 2019; Hajiramezanali et al., 2019). Despite their successes, GNNs have
*

Equal contribution 1 Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA
2
McCombs School of Business, The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, Texas, USA. Correspondence to: Arman Hasanzadeh <armanihm@tamu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

two major limitations: 1) they cannot go very deep due to
over-smoothing and over-fitting phenomena (Li et al., 2018;
Kipf & Welling, 2017); 2) the current implementations of
GNNs do not provide uncertainty quantification (UQ) of
output predictions.
There exist a variety of methods to address these problems.
For example, DropOut (Srivastava et al., 2014) is a popular
regularisation technique with deep neural networks (DNNs)
to avoid over-fitting, where network units are randomly
masked during training. In GNNs, DropOut is realized by
randomly removing the node features during training (Rong
et al., 2019). Often, the procedure is independent of the
graph topology. However, empirical results have shown that,
due to the nature of Laplacian smoothing in GNNs, graph
convolutions have the over-smoothing tendency of mixing
representations of adjacent nodes so that, when increasing
the number of GNN layers, all nodes’ representations will
converge to a stationary point, making them unrelated to
node features (Li et al., 2018). While it has been shown
in Kipf & Welling (2017) that DropOut alone is ineffectual
in preventing over-fitting, partially due to over-smoothing,
the combination of DropEdge, in which a set of edges are
randomly removed from the graph, with DropOut has recently shown potential to alleviate these problems (Rong
et al., 2019).
On the other hand, with the development of efficient posterior computation algorithms, there have been successes in
learning with uncertainty by Bayesian extensions of traditional deep network architectures, including convolutional
neural networks (CNNs). However, for GNNs, deriving
their Bayesian extensions is more challenging due to their
irregular neighborhood connection structures. In order
to account for uncertainty in GNNs, Zhang et al. (2019)
present a Bayesian framework where the observed graph is
viewed as a realization from a parametric family of random
graphs. This allows joint inference of the graph and the
GNN weights, leading to resilience to noise or adversarial attacks. Besides its prohibitive computational cost, the
choice of the random graph model is important and can be
inconsistent for different problems and datasets. Furthermore, the posterior inference in the current implementation
only depends on the graph topology, but cannot consider
node features.

