Learning the Valuations of a k-demand Agent

Hanrui Zhang 1 Vincent Conitzer 1

Abstract
We study problems where a learner aims to learn
the valuations of an agent by observing which
goods he buys under varying price vectors. More
specifically, we consider the case of a k-demand
agent, whose valuation over the goods is additive
when receiving up to k goods, but who has no
interest in receiving more than k goods. We settle the query complexity for the active-learning
(preference elicitation) version, where the learner
chooses the prices to post, by giving a biased binary search algorithm, generalizing the classical
binary search procedure. We complement our
query complexity upper bounds by lower bounds
that match up to lower-order terms. We also study
the passive-learning version in which the learner
does not control the prices, and instead they are
sampled from some distribution. We show that in
the PAC model for passive learning, any empirical risk minimizer has a sample complexity that
e
is optimal up to a factor of O(k).

1. Introduction
The active learning of agents’ preferences is also known as
preference elicitation. Depending on the setting, we may
wish to model and represent preferences differently. For
example, if there is a set of alternatives to choose from, and
agents cannot make payments, then it is natural to represent
an agent’s preferences by a weak ordering . If agents
also express preferences over distributions over alternatives,
we may wish to model an agent’s preferences by a utility
function u(·) and assume the agent is maximizing expected
utility. We may learn agents’ preferences by asking them
queries, for example which of two (distributions over) alternatives is preferred.
1
Department of Computer Science, Duke University, Durham, USA. Correspondence to:
Hanrui
Zhang
<hrzhang@cs.duke.edu>,
Vincent
Conitzer
<conitzer@cs.duke.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

In other contexts, such as the allocation of goods (or bads,
e.g., tasks), agents are often able to make payments (or
receive them as compensation). In this context, it is natural
to model the agent’s preferences by a valuation function
v(·), and assume that utility is valuation minus payment
made. Depending on the setting, different types of query
may be possible. A value query would ask directly for the
valuation that the agent has for a specific bundle of goods.
But it is not always feasible to ask value queries, for example
because the agent finds the query hard to answer, is reluctant
to answer it out of fear of exploitation, or because there are
simply exogenous restrictions on the type of query we can
make. For example, if we are running a grocery store, the
only way in which we may learn about an agent’s valuation
is by setting prices and seeing what he buys. This is what is
known as a demand query—given these prices, what would
you buy? Such queries will be the focus of our paper.
The very simplest setting involves only a single good. In this
case, active learning of the agent’s valuation is equivalent
to the binary search problem: if we we quote a price p that
is above the valuation we get a “no” answer, and otherwise
a “yes” answer.1 If there are multiple goods but valuations
are additive, so that an agent’s
P valuation for a bundle S
of items is simply v(S) = j∈S v({j}), then the agent’s
decision on one good is independent of that on the other
goods, and we can simply parallelize the binary searches
for the individual goods. More interesting is the case of unit
demand, where there are multiple goods but the agent will
buy at most one good, namely the good j that maximizes
v(j) − p(j) if this value is nonnegative. Here, the active
learning problem can be thought of as the following simple
abstract problem. There is a vector of unknown numbers
~v ; a query consists of subtracting from it an arbitrary other
vector p~, and learning the index of the maximum element of
~v − p~, but not its value. (Note that it makes no difference
whether we add, subtract, and/or allow negative numbers.)
Given the simplicity of this problem, it is likely to have
applications outside of economics as well. For example,
imagine a physical system, each possible state of which has
1
Throughout the paper we assume consistent tie-breaking. I.e.,
whenever v(j) − p(j) = 0, the agent either always wants the item,
or always does not want the item. Similarly, whenever two items
i and j provide the same utility, i.e., v(i) − p(i) = v(j) − p(j),
one of the two is always preferred to the other.

