Reserve Pricing in Repeated Second-Price Auctions
with Strategic Bidders

Alexey Drutsa 1 2

Abstract
We study revenue optimization learning algorithms for repeated second-price auctions with reserve where a seller interacts with multiple strategic bidders each of which holds a fixed private
valuation for a good and seeks to maximize his expected future cumulative discounted surplus. We
propose a novel algorithm that has strategic regret
upper bound of O(log log T ) for worst-case valuations. This pricing is based on our novel transformation that upgrades an algorithm designed for
the setup with a single buyer to the multi-buyer
case. We provide theoretical guarantees on the
ability of a transformed algorithm to learn the valuation of a strategic buyer, which has uncertainty
about the future due to the presence of rivals.

1. Introduction
Revenue maximization is one of fundamental development
directions in major Internet companies that have their own
online advertising platforms (Gomes & Mirrokni, 2014;
Balseiro et al., 2015; Agarwal et al., 2014; Drutsa, 2017b;
Hummel, 2018). Most part of ad inventory is sold via widely
applicable second price auctions (He et al., 2013; Mohri &
Medina, 2014) and their generalizations like GSP (Varian,
2007; 2009; Varian & Harris, 2014; Sun et al., 2014). Adjustment of reserve prices plays a central role in revenue
optimization here: their proper setting is studied both by
game-theoretical methods (Myerson, 1981; Agrawal et al.,
2018) and by machine learning approaches (Nisan et al.,
2007; Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2013; Mohri & Medina, 2014;
Paes Leme et al., 2016).
In our work, we focus on a scenario where the seller repeatedly interacts through a second-price auction with M
strategic bidders (referred to as buyers as well). Each buyer
1

Yandex, Moscow, Russia 2 Faculty of Mechanics and Mathematics, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia.
Correspondence to: Alexey Drutsa <adrutsa@yandex.ru>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

participates in each round of this game, holds a fixed private
valuation for a good (e.g., an ad space), and seeks to maximize his expected future discounted surplus given his beliefs
about the behaviors of other bidders. The seller applies a
deterministic online learning algorithm, which is announced
to the buyers in advance and, in each round, selects individual reserve prices based on the previous bids of the buyers.
The seller’s goal is to maximize her revenue over a finite
horizon T through regret minimization for worst-case valuations of the bidders (Mohri & Munoz, 2014; Drutsa, 2018).
Thus, the seller seeks for a no-regret pricing algorithm.
To the best of our knowledge, no existing study investigated worst-case regret optimizing algorithms that set reserve prices in repeated second-price auctions with strategic bidders whose valuation is private, but fixed over all
rounds. However, our setting constitutes a natural generalization of the well-studied 1-buyer setup of repeated
posted-price auctions1 (RPPA) (Amin et al., 2013; Mohri
& Munoz, 2014) to the scenario of multiple buyers in a
second-price auction. In the RPPA setting, there are optimal
algorithms (Drutsa, 2017b; 2018) that have tight strategic
regret bound of Θ(log log T ). This bound follows from an
ability of the seller to upper bound the buyer valuation even
if he lies when rejecting a price (Drutsa, 2017b, Prop.2).
This ability strongly exploits that the buyer knows in advance the outcomes of a current and all future rounds since
he has complete information due to the absence of rivals. In
our multi-bidder scenario, this does not hold: a bidder has
incomplete information and is thus uncertain about the future. Hence, the theoretical guarantees could not be directly
ported to our scenario when trying straightforwardly apply
the optimal 1-buyer RPPA algorithms.
In our study, we propose a novel algorithm that can be applied against our strategic buyers with regret upper bound of
O(log log T ) (Th. 1) and constitutes the main contribution
of our work. We also introduce a novel transformation of a
RPPA algorithm that maps it to a multi-buyer pricing and is
based on a simple but crucial idea of cyclic elimination of all
bidders except one in each round (Sec.3). Construction and
1
In particular, when M = 1, our auction in a round reduces to
a posted-price one: the bidder has no rivals and his decision is thus
binary (to accept or to reject a currently offered price).

