Proving the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis: Pruning is All You Need

Eran Malach * 1 Gilad Yehudai * 2 Shai Shalev-shwartz 1 Ohad Shamir 2

Abstract
The lottery ticket hypothesis (Frankle and Carbin,
2018), states that a randomly-initialized network
contains a small subnetwork such that, when
trained in isolation, can compete with the performance of the original network. We prove
an even stronger hypothesis (as was also conjectured in Ramanujan et al., 2019), showing
that for every bounded distribution and every target network with bounded weights, a sufficiently
over-parameterized neural network with random
weights contains a subnetwork with roughly the
same accuracy as the target network, without any
further training.

1. Introduction
Neural network pruning is a popular method to reduce the
size of a trained model, allowing efficient computation during inference time, with minimal loss in accuracy. However,
such a method still requires the process of training an overparameterized network, as training a pruned network from
scratch seems to fail (see (Frankle and Carbin, 2018)). Recently, a work by Frankle and Carbin (2018) has presented
a surprising phenomenon: pruned neural networks can be
trained to achieve good performance, when resetting their
weights to their initial values. Hence, the authors state
the lottery ticket hypothesis: a randomly-initialized neural
network contains a subnetwork such that, when trained in
isolation, can match the performance of the original network.
This observation has attracted great interest, with various
follow-up works trying to understand this intriguing phenomenon. Specifically, very recent works by Zhou et al.
(2019); Ramanujan et al. (2019) presented algorithms to
find subnetworks that already achieve good performance,
*
Equal contribution 1 School of Computer Science, Hebrew
University 2 Weizmann Institute of Science. Correspondence to:
Eran Malach <eran.malach@mail.huji.ac.il>, Gilad Yehudai <gilad.yehudai@weizmann.ac.il>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

without any training. (Ramanujan et al., 2019) stated the following conjecture: a sufficiently over-parameterized neural
network with random initialization contains a subnetwork
that achieves competitive accuracy (with respect to the large
trained network), without any training. This conjecture can
be viewed as a stronger version of the lottery ticket hypothesis.
In this work, we prove this stronger conjecture, in the case
of over-parameterized neural networks. Moreover, we differentiate between two types of subnetworks: subnetworks
where specific weights are removed (weight-subnetworks)
and subnetworks where entire neurons are removed (neuronsubnetworks). First, we show that a ReLU network of arbitrary depth l can be approximated by finding a weightsubnetwork of a random network of depth 2l and sufficient
width. Second, we show that depth-two (one hidden-layer)
networks have neuron-subnetworks that are competitive
with the best random-features classifier (i.e. the best classifier achieved when training only the second layer of the
network). Hence, we imply that for shallow networks, training the second layer of the network is equivalent to pruning
entire neurons of a sufficiently large random network. In all
our results, the size of initial network is polynomial in the
problem parameters. In the case of the weight-subnetwork,
we show that the number of parameters in the pruned network is similar, up to a constant factor, to the number of
parameters in the target network.
As far as we are aware, this is the first work that gives
theoretical evidence to the existence of good subnetworks
within a randomly initialized neural network (i.e., proving
the strong lottery ticket hypothesis). Our results imply that
fundamentally, pruning a randomly initialized network is
as strong as optimizing the value of the weights. Hence,
while the common method for finding a good network is to
train its parameters, our work demonstrates that in fact, all
you need is a good pruning mechanism. This gives a strong
motivation to develop algorithms that focus on pruning the
weights rather than optimizing their values.
1.1. Related Work
Neural Network Pruning Pruning neural networks is a
popular method to compress large models, allowing them
to run on devices with limited resources. Over the years, a

