A Nearly-Linear Time Algorithm for Exact Community Recovery
in Stochastic Block Model
Peng Wang * 1 Zirui Zhou * 2 Anthony Man-Cho So 1

Abstract
Learning community structures in graphs that are
randomly generated by stochastic block models
(SBMs) has received much attention lately. In
this paper, we focus on the problem of exactly recovering the communities in a binary symmetric
SBM, where a graph of n vertices is partitioned
into two equal-sized communities and the vertices
are connected with probability p = α log(n)/n
within communities and q = β log(n)/n across
communities for some α > β > 0. We propose
a two-stage iterative algorithm for solving this
problem, which employs the power method with
a random starting point in the first stage and turns
to a generalized power method that can identify
the communities in a finite number of iterations in
the second stage.
shown√
that for any fixed α
√ It is √
and β such that α − β > 2, which is known
to be the information-theoretic limit for exact recovery, the proposed algorithm exactly identifies
the underlying communities in Õ(n) time with
probability tending to one as n → ∞. We also
present numerical results of the proposed algorithm to support and complement our theoretical
development.

1. Introduction
Learning community structures in graphs is a fundamental task in machine learning and computer science. It has
found broad applications in physics (Fortunato, 2010; Newman & Girvan, 2004), biology (Cline et al., 2007), and
social science (Girvan & Newman, 2002), to name a few.
In research on community estimation, the stochastic block
model (SBM), which is a generative model for random
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Systems Engineering
and Engineering Management, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong 2 Huawei Technologies Canada
Co., Ltd., Burnaby, Canada. Correspondence to: Zirui Zhou
<zirui.zhou@huawei.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

graphs that admits community structures, has become increasingly popular as a platform for validating theoretical
ideas and comparing numerical algorithms. In particular,
substantial advances have been made in the past decade on
understanding the statistical limits for detection and recovery of communities in graphs that are generated by SBMs,
and on developing computationally tractable methods that
can detect and recover the underlying communities at their
corresponding statistical limits; see, for example, Mossel
et al. (2014); Abbe & Sandon (2015); Abbe et al. (2016;
2017); Chen & Xu (2016); Gao et al. (2017).
In this paper, we focus on the problem of exactly recovering the communities in the binary symmetric SBM (also
known as the planted bisection model). Specifically, given
n nodes that are partitioned into two equal-sized clusters,
a graph on these n nodes is randomly generated such that
each pair of nodes are connected with probability p if they
are in the same cluster and with probability q if not, where
p > q > 0. Then, we aim to recover the underlying clusters using only the adjacency matrix of the generated graph.
For this problem, the regime where p = α log(n)/n and
q = β log(n)/n for some α > β > 0 is of particular interest as it possesses a sharp threshold for exact recovery.
Indeed, from an information-theoretic point of view, it has
been proved that recovering
the
√ with high proba√ clusters
√
bility
is
impossible
if
α
−
β
<
2 and is possible if
√
√
√
α − β > 2 (Abbe et al., 2016; Mossel et al., 2014).
Moreover, a number of computationally tractable algorithms
have been shown to achieve this threshold for exact recovery (Abbe et al., 2016; 2017; Hajek et al., 2016; Gao et al.,
2017). More precisely, these algorithms have running time
that
√ in n and for any fixed α and β such that
√
√ is polynomial
α − β > 2, they successfully identify the underlying clusters with probability tending to one as n → ∞.
However, these algorithms rely on solving a semidefinite
programming (SDP) or eigenvector computation, whose
time complexities are polynomial but generally not linear in
n. A major goal of this paper is to propose an algorithm that
runs in time nearly linear in n and achieves exact recovery
at the information-theoretic limit.

