Unique Properties of Flat Minima in Deep Networks

Rotem Mulayoff 1 Tomer Michaeli 1

Abstract
It is well known that (stochastic) gradient descent
has an implicit bias towards flat minima. In deep
neural network training, this mechanism serves
to screen out minima. However, the precise effect
that this has on the trained network is not yet fully
understood. In this paper, we characterize the flat
minima in linear neural networks trained with a
quadratic loss. First, we show that linear ResNets
with zero initialization necessarily converge to the
flattest of all minima. We then prove that these
minima correspond to nearly balanced networks
whereby the gain from the input to any intermediate representation does not change drastically
from one layer to the next. Finally, we show that
consecutive layers in flat minima solutions are
coupled. That is, one of the left singular vectors
of each weight matrix, equals one of the right
singular vectors of the next matrix. This forms
a distinct path from input to output, that, as we
show, is dedicated to the signal that experiences
the largest gain end-to-end. Experiments indicate
that these properties are characteristic of both linear and nonlinear models trained in practice.

1. Introduction
Optimization methods can have implicit biases towards certain solutions (Strand, 1974; Morgan & Bourlard, 1990;
Neyshabur et al., 2014). In the context of deep network
training, such biases have been shown to play key roles in
shaping the properties of the learned model. For example, in
binary classification of linearly separable data, among all linear separators that achieve the global minimum of the training loss, gradient descent (GD) converges to the maximum
margin separator. This is true for shallow networks (Soudry
et al., 2018), as well as for deep linear fully-connected
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Correspondence to: Rotem
Mulayoff <rotem.mulayof@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

models (Gunasekar et al., 2018b) and deep nonlinear networks with homogeneous activation functions (Lyu & Li,
2020). Implicit biases have been studied in many different
context, including for linear convolutional networks (Gunasekar et al., 2018b), matrix factorization (Gunasekar et al.,
2017), weight normalization (Wu et al., 2019), and with
different loss functions (Gunasekar et al., 2018a).
Perhaps the simplest mechanism through which GD and
stochastic GD (SGD) can screen out solutions, is their inability to stably converge to sharp minima (Jastrz˛ebski et al.,
2017; Wu et al., 2018; Simsekli et al., 2019). In fact, in some
cases, GD can only converge to the flattest of all minima
(see Section 2). However, interestingly, the effect that this
has on the resulting trained model, is not yet fully understood. Keskar et al. (2016) suggested that flat minima tend
to generalize better. This was somewhat supported by follow
up works, showing that in SGD, larger step sizes and smaller
batch sizes impose convergence to flatter minima, which
indeed generalize better empirically (Jastrz˛ebski et al., 2017;
Hoffer et al., 2017; Masters & Luschi, 2018; Smith & Le,
2017). However, Dinh et al. (2017) showed that for networks
with ReLU activations, a re-parametrization of the weights
can make any minimum arbitrarily sharper (without affecting generalization). This suggests that minimum sharpness
is not directly related to generalization, thus begging the
question: What does the sharpness of the minimum affect?
Our goal in this paper is to unveil the properties of flat minima in deep neural networks. We specifically focus on linear
models trained with a quadratic loss and define the sharpness of a minimum to be its maximal Hessian eigenvalue,
which is the factor affecting stable convergence of GD and
SGD. We start by showing that all minima become sharper
as the network gets deeper. We discuss and illustrate the
implications this has on the training process. We then move
on to study the flattest minimum solutions. We prove that
these networks possess a special structure, whereby the gain
from the input to any intermediate layer is well behaved.
Furthermore, consecutive layers in those solutions are coupled, forming a distinct path from input to output, which is
dedicated to the signal that experiences the largest gain endto-end. Interestingly, similar properties were recently shown
to arise in deep linear networks for binary classification (Ji
& Telgarsky, 2019). However, in our case of vector-valued
regression, the behaviors turn out to be more complex. We

