Provable Representation Learning for Imitation Learning
via Bi-level Optimization
Sanjeev Arora 1 2 Simon S. Du 2 Sham Kakade 3 Yuping Luo 1 Nikunj Saunshi 1

Abstract
A common strategy in modern learning systems
is to learn a representation that is useful for many
tasks, a.k.a. representation learning. We study
this strategy in the imitation learning setting for
Markov decision processes (MDPs) where multiple experts’ trajectories are available. We formulate representation learning as a bi-level optimization problem where the “outer” optimization tries
to learn the joint representation and the “inner”
optimization encodes the imitation learning setup
and tries to learn task-specific parameters. We
instantiate this framework for the imitation learning settings of behavior cloning and observationalone. Theoretically, we show using our framework that representation learning can provide sample complexity benefits for imitation learning in
both settings. We also provide proof-of-concept
experiments to verify our theory.

1. Introduction
Humans can often learn from experts quickly and with a
few demonstrations and we would like our artificial agents
to do the same. However, even for simple imitation learning
tasks, the current state-of-the-art methods require thousand
of demonstrations. Humans do not learn new skills from
scratch. We can summarize learned skills, distill them and
build a common ground, a.k.a, representation that is useful
for learning future skills. Can we build an agent to do the
same?
The current paper studies how to apply representation learning to imitation learning. Specifically, we want our agent
to be able to learn a representation from multiple experts’
demonstrations, where the experts aim to solve different
1
Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, USA 2 Institute
for Advanced Study, Princeton, New Jersey, USA 3 University
of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. Correspondence to:
Nikunj Saunshi <nsaunshi@cs.princeton.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Markov decision processes (MDPs) that share the same
state and action spaces but can differ in the transition and
reward functions. The agent can use this representation to
reduce the number of demonstrations required for a new
imitation learning task. While several methods have been
proposed (Duan et al., 2017; Finn et al., 2017b; James et al.,
2018) to build agents that can adapt quickly to new tasks,
none of them, to our knowledge, give provable guarantees
showing the benefit of using past experience. Furthermore,
they do not focus on learning a representation. See Section 2
for more discussions.
In this work, we propose a framework to formulate this
problem and analyze the statistical gains of representation
learning for imitation learning. The main idea is to use
bi-level optimization formulation where the “outer” optimization tries to learn the joint representation and the “inner”
optimization encodes the imitation learning setup and tries
to learn task-specific parameters. In particular, the inner
optimization is flexible enough to allow the agent to interact
with the environment. This framework allows us to do a
rigorous analysis to show provable benefits of representation learning for imitation learning. With this framework at
hand, we make the following concrete contributions:
• We first instantiate our framework in the setting where
the agent can observe experts’ actions and tries to find
a policy that matches the expert’s policy, a.k.a, behavior
cloning. This setting can be viewed as a straightforward
extension of multi-task representation learning for supervised learning (Maurer et al., 2016). We show in this
setting that with sufficient number of experts (possibly
optimizing for different reward functions), the agent can
learn a representation that provably reduces the sample
complexity for a new target imitation learning task.
• Next, we consider a more challenging setting where the
agent cannot observe experts’ actions but only their states,
a.k.a., the observation-alone setting. We set the inner
optimization as a min-max problem inspired by (Sun
et al., 2019). Notably, this min-max problem requires the
agent to interact with the environment to collect samples.
We again show that with sufficient number of experts, the
agent can learn a representation that provably reduces
the sample complexity for a target task where the agent

