Self-Modulating Nonparametric Event-Tensor Factorization

Zheng Wang 1 Xinqi Chu 2 Shandian Zhe 1

Abstract
Tensor factorization is a fundamental framework
to analyze high-order interactions in data. Despite the success of the existing methods, the valuable temporal information are severely underused.
The timestamps of the interactions are either ignored or discretized into crude steps. The recent
work although formulates event-tensors to keep
the timestamps in factorization and can capture
mutual excitation effects among the interaction
events, it overlooks another important type of temporal influence, inhibition. In addition, it uses a
local window to exclude all the long-term dependencies. To overcome these limitations, we propose a self-modulating nonparametric Bayesian
factorization model. We use the latent factors
to construct mutually-governed, general random
point processes, which can capture various shortterm/long-term, excitation/inhibition effects, so
as to encode the complex temporal dependencies
into factor representations. In addition, our model
couples with a latent Gaussian process to estimate
and fuse nonlinear yet static relationships between
the entities. For efficient inference, we derive a
fully decomposed model evidence lower bound to
dispense with the huge kernel matrix and costly
summations inside the rate and log rate functions.
We then develop an efficient stochastic optimization algorithm. We show the advantage of our
method in four real-world applications.

1. Introduction
Interactions between multiple entities (or nodes) are common in real-world applications. For example, consumers’
activities can be viewed as interactions between customers,
service items and providers. These (high-order) interactions
are naturally represented by tensors and analyzed by tensor
1
School of Computing, University of Utah 2 Xjera Labs, Pte.
Ltd. Correspondence to: Shandian Zhe <zhe@cs.utah.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

factorization, which learns a set of latent factors to represent
each participant. With the factor representations, we can discover the hidden structures within the entities, e.g., clusters
and outliers, and extract useful features to make predictions
(in downstream tasks).
While many excellent methods for tensor factorization
have been proposed (Tucker, 1966; Harshman, 1970; Chu
and Ghahramani, 2009; Kang et al., 2012; Choi and Vishwanathan, 2014), they mainly conduct a multilinear decomposition, and might be inadequate to capture more complex,
nonlinear relationships. More importantly, they severely
underuse the valuable temporal information along with the
data. Most methods either drop the time stamps of the interactions, summarizing the events as a count tensor (Chi
and Kolda, 2012; Hansen et al., 2015; Hu et al., 2015b),
or discretize the time stamps into crude steps (e.g., weeks
or months), ignoring the temporal dependencies within the
same step (Xiong et al., 2010; Schein et al., 2015; 2016). Recently, Zhe and Du (2018) formulated event-tensors (where
the tensor entries are sequences of interaction events) to preserve the accurate timestamps. They used Hawkes processes
to estimate the fine-grained, triggering effects between the
interactions. However, their approach overlooks inhibition,
another ubiquitous effect between the events, and can still
miss important temporal patterns. In addition, to compromise on the computational cost, they use a small time window to restrict the range of dependent events, and cannot
capture long-term temporal influences of the interactions.
To overcome these limitations, we propose a selfmodulating nonparametric Bayesian factorization model
for event tensors, which not only can capture static, nonlinear relationships of the entities, but also is flexible enough to
capture a variety of short-term and long-term, excitation and
inhibition effects among the interaction events, encoding
these complex temporal effects into the factor representations. Specifically, we use the latent factors to construct a
set of mutually-governed, general random point processes
to sample the observed interaction events. We first use a
latent Gaussian process (GP) to sample a function of the factor representations to determine the type of temporal effect
between each pair of interactions. The strength of the effect
is further modelled as a kernel (similarity) function of their
factors. In this way, both the type and strength of the effect
are absorbed into the factors, from which we can discover

