Hypernetwork Approach to Generating Point Clouds

Przemysław Spurek 1 Sebastian Winczowski 1 Jacek Tabor 1 Maciej Zamorski 2 3 Maciej Zieba 2 3
Tomasz Trzciński 4 3

Abstract
In this work, we propose a novel method for generating 3D point clouds that leverage properties of
hyper networks. Contrary to the existing methods
that learn only the representation of a 3D object,
our approach simultaneously finds a representation of the object and its 3D surface. The main
idea of our HyperCloud method is to build a hyper
network that returns weights of a particular neural
network (target network) trained to map points
from a uniform unit ball distribution into a 3D
shape. As a consequence, a particular 3D shape
can be generated using point-by-point sampling
from the assumed prior distribution and transforming sampled points with the target network. Since
the hyper network is based on an auto-encoder
architecture trained to reconstruct realistic 3D
shapes, the target network weights can be considered a parametrization of the surface of a 3D
shape, and not a standard representation of point
cloud usually returned by competitive approaches.
The proposed architecture allows finding meshbased representation of 3D objects in a generative
manner while providing point clouds en pair in
quality with the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Today many registration devices, such as LIDARs and depth
cameras, are able to capture not only RGB channels, but
also depth estimates. As a result, 3D objects registered by
those devices and geometric data structures representing
them, called point clouds, become increasingly important
in contemporary computer vision applications, including
1
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, Jagiellonian
University, Kraków, Poland 2 Wrocław University of Science
and Technology, Wrocław, Poland 3 Tooploox, Wrocław, Poland
4
Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland. Correspondence to: Przemysław Spurek <przemyslaw.spurek@uj.edu.pl>,
Tomasz Trzcinski <tomasz.trzcinski@pw.edu.pl>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Mesh representations generated by our HyperCloud
method. Contrary to the existing methods that return point cloud
representations sparsely distributed in 3D space, our approach allows to create a continuous 3D object representation in the form
of high quality meshes.

autonomous driving (Yang et al., 2018a) or robotic manipulation (Kehoe et al., 2015). To enable processing of point
clouds, researchers typically transform them into regular 3D
voxel grids or collections of images (Su et al., 2015; Wu
et al., 2015). This, however, increases memory footprint
of object representations and leads to significant information losses. On the other hand, representing 3D objects
with the parameters of their surfaces is not trivial due to
the complexity of mesh representations and combinatorial
irregularities. Last but not least, point clouds can contain
a variable number of data points corresponding to one object and registered at various angles, which requires for the
methods that process them to be permutation and rotation
invariant.
One way of addressing the above challenges related to point
cloud representations is to subsample the point clouds and
enforce permutation invariance within the model architecture, as it was done in DeepSets (Zaheer et al., 2017) or
PointNet (Qi et al., 2017a;b). Although it works perfectly
fine when point clouds are given as an input of the model,

