Streaming k-Submodular Maximization under Noise subject to Size Constraint

Lan N. Nguyen 1 My T. Thai 1

Abstract
Maximizing on k-submodular functions subject
to size constraint has received extensive attention
recently. In this paper, we investigate a more realistic scenario of this problem that (1) obtaining exact evaluation of an objective function is impractical, instead, its noisy version is acquired; and
(2) algorithms are required to take only one single
pass over dataset, producing solutions in a timely
manner. We propose two novel streaming algorithms, namely DS TREAM and RS TREAM, with
their theoretical performance guarantees. We further demonstrate the efficiency of our algorithms
in two applications in Influence Maximization and
Sensor Placement, showing that our algorithms
can return comparative results to state-of-the-art
non-streaming methods while using a much fewer
number of queries.

1. Introduction
Maximizing a k-submodular function subject to size constraint (MkSC) has been studied by Ohsaka & Yoshida
(2015); Zhou et al. (2019); Qian et al. (2017a); Sakaue
(2017). In this problem, a finite set V is given, let (k +
1)V = {(X1 , X2 , ...Xk ) | Xi ⊆ V ∀i ∈ [k], Xi ∩ Xj =
∅ ∀i 6= j} be a family of k disjoint sets. Given a ksubmodular function f : (k + 1)V → R and a positive
integer B, MkSC asks for s = {S1 , ..., Sk } ∈ (k + 1)V
subject to |S1 ∪ ... ∪ Sk | ≤ B that maximizes f (s).
Many applications of MkSC have been investigated in literature. For example, in Influence Maximization with k
topics (Ohsaka & Yoshida, 2015; Zhou et al., 2019; Qian
et al., 2017a), the problem asks for B social users, each
initially adopts a topic, that maximizes the expected number
of users, who are eventually activated by at least one topic.
1
Department of Computer and Information Science and Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United States.
Correspondence to: Lan N. Nguyen <lan.nguyen@ufl.edu>, My
T. Thai <mythai@cise.ufl.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Another readily application is Sensor Placement with k
types of measures (Ohsaka & Yoshida, 2015; Qian et al.,
2017a), which asks for B locations within n given locations
and each with what type of sensors that maximizes the information gain. Another applications of MkSC can also be
found in information coverage problem (Qian et al., 2017a)
and coupled feature selection (Singh et al., 2012).
However, existing literature has largely ignored the fact that
querying f may be expensive and could only be achieved
with some errors. For example, in the Influence Maximization or Information Coverage problem, exact computing
f (s) is #P-hard (Kempe et al., 2003), which requires at least
exponential number of computations.
Therefore, instead of exact querying, an approximate oracle of f , which approximates f within an amount of
error, should be considered. In this paper, we consider
a noisy version of f , denoted as F , which is accessible
with a multiplicative error (Qian et al., 2015) , guarantee
(1 − )f (s) ≤ F (s) ≤ (1 + )f (s) for all s ∈ (k + 1)V .
Moreover, in many applications, data volumes are increasing massive in scale, making it impractical to store a whole
dataset in computer memory. It is critical to process data one
by one in a streaming fashion, which not only reduces the
burden on memory storage but also be able to produce solutions in a timely manner. Motivated by these observation,
we aim to solve the noisy MkSC problem in the streaming fashion. Our algorithms require only one single scan
over V while providing performance guarantees in terms of
approximation ratios, memory, and query complexity.
Solving MkSC with noisy f in streaming fashion is quite
challenging, indeed. First, F may shadow f ’s properties,
i.e. F is not k-submodular and even decreasing when f is
increasing. Also, the noise  can mislead a process of constructing solution by magnifying the marginal gain of a selection whose contribution may be insignificant. On another
hand, even streaming algorithms for the monotone submodular function maximization (a special case of MkSC) has
been studied, directly applying them to noisy MkSC gives
unclear performance guarantees due to intrinsic differences
between submodularity and k-submodularity. That leaves a
task of solving noisy MkSC in the streaming fashion widely
open and to our knowledge, we are the first one studying
the problem.

