Confidence Sets and Hypothesis Testing in a Likelihood-Free Inference Setting

Niccolò Dalmasso 1 Rafael Izbicki 2 Ann B. Lee 1

Abstract
Parameter estimation, statistical tests and confidence sets are the cornerstones of classical statistics that allow scientists to make inferences about
the underlying process that generated the observed data. A key question is whether one can
still construct hypothesis tests and confidence sets
with proper coverage and high power in a socalled likelihood-free inference (LFI) setting; that
is, a setting where the likelihood is not explicitly known but one can forward-simulate observable data according to a stochastic model. In this
paper, we present ACORE (Approximate Computation via Odds Ratio Estimation), a frequentist
approach to LFI that first formulates the classical
likelihood ratio test (LRT) as a parametrized classification problem, and then uses the equivalence
of tests and confidence sets to build confidence
regions for parameters of interest. We also present
a goodness-of-fit procedure for checking whether
the constructed tests and confidence regions are
valid. ACORE is based on the key observation
that the LRT statistic, the rejection probability of
the test, and the coverage of the confidence set
are conditional distribution functions which often vary smoothly as a function of the parameters
of interest. Hence, instead of relying solely on
samples simulated at fixed parameter settings (as
is the convention in standard Monte Carlo solutions), one can leverage machine learning tools
and data simulated in the neighborhood of a parameter to improve estimates of quantities of interest. We demonstrate the efficacy of ACORE
with both theoretical and empirical results. Our
implementation is available on Github.

1
Department of Statistics & Data Science, Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, USA 2 Department of Statistics, Federal
University of São Carlos, São Paulo, Brazil. Correspondence to:
Niccolò Dalmasso <ndalmass@stat.cmu.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
Parameter estimation, statistical tests and confidence sets are
the cornerstones of classical statistics that relate observed
data to properties of the underlying statistical model. Most
frequentist procedures with good statistical performance
(e.g., high power) require explicit knowledge of a likelihood
function. However, in many science and engineering applications, complex phenomena are modeled by forward
simulators that implicitly define a likelihood function: For
example, given input parameters θ, a statistical model of our
environment, climate or universe may combine deterministic dynamics with random fluctuations to produce synthetic
data X. Simulation-based inference without an explicit
likelihood is called likelihood-free inference (LFI).
The literature on LFI is vast. Traditional LFI methods, such
as Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC; Beaumont
et al. 2002; Marin et al. 2012; Sisson et al. 2018), estimate posteriors by using simulations sufficiently close to
the observed data, hence bypassing the likelihood. More
recently, several approaches that leverage machine learning
algorithms have been proposed; these either directly estimate the posterior distribution (Marin et al., 2016; Chen &
Gutmann, 2019; Izbicki et al., 2019; Greenberg et al., 2019)
or the likelihood function (Izbicki et al., 2014; Thomas et al.,
2016; Price et al., 2018; Ong et al., 2018; Lueckmann et al.,
2019; Papamakarios et al., 2019). We refer the reader to
Cranmer et al. (2019) for a recent review of the field.
A question that has not received much attention so far is
whether one, in an LFI setting, can construct inference techniques with good frequentist properties. Frequentist procedures have nevertheless played an important role in many
fields. In high energy physics for instance, classical statistical techniques (e.g., hypothesis testing for outlier detection)
have resulted in discoveries of new physics and other successful applications (Feldman & Cousins, 1998; Cranmer,
2015; Cousins, 2018). Even though controlling type I error probabilities is important in these applications, most
LFI methods do not have guarantees on validity or power.
Ideally, a unified LFI approach should
• be computationally efficient in terms of the number of
required simulations,
• handle high-dimensional data from different sources
(without, e.g., predefined summary statistics),

