Fractional Underdamped Langevin Dynamics:
Retargeting SGD with Momentum under Heavy-Tailed Gradient Noise

Umut Şimşekli * 1 2 Lingjiong Zhu * 3 Yee Whye Teh 2 Mert Gürbüzbalaban 4

Abstract
Stochastic gradient descent with momentum
(SGDm) is one of the most popular optimization
algorithms in deep learning. While there is a rich
theory of SGDm for convex problems, the theory
is considerably less developed in the context of
deep learning where the problem is non-convex
and the gradient noise might exhibit a heavy-tailed
behavior, as empirically observed in recent studies. In this study, we consider a continuous-time
variant of SGDm, known as the underdamped
Langevin dynamics (ULD), and investigate its
asymptotic properties under heavy-tailed perturbations. Supported by recent studies from statistical physics, we argue both theoretically and
empirically that the heavy-tails of such perturbations can result in a bias even when the step-size
is small, in the sense that the optima of stationary
distribution of the dynamics might not match the
optima of the cost function to be optimized. As
a remedy, we develop a novel framework, which
we coin as fractional ULD (FULD), and prove
that FULD targets the so-called Gibbs distribution, whose optima exactly match the optima of
the original cost. We observe that the Euler discretization of FULD has noteworthy algorithmic
similarities with natural gradient methods and
gradient clipping, bringing a new perspective on
understanding their role in deep learning. We support our theory with experiments conducted on a
synthetic model and neural networks.

1. Introduction
Gradient-based optimization algorithms have been the de
facto choice in deep learning for solving the optimization
problems of the form:
n
o
Xn
x? = arg minx∈Rd f (x) , (1/n)
f (i) (x) , (1)
i=1

where f : Rd → R denotes the non-convex loss function,
f (i) denotes the loss contributed by an individual data point
i ∈ {1, . . . , n}, x ∈ Rd denotes the collection of all the
parameters of the neural network. Among others, stochastic
gradient descent with momentum (SGDm) is one of the
most popular algorithms for solving such optimization tasks
(see e.g., Sutskever et al. (2013); Smith et al. (2018)), and is
based on the following iterative scheme:
ṽk+1 = γ̃ ṽk − η̃∇f˜k+1 (xk ),

xk+1 = xk + ṽk+1 , (2)

where k denotes the iteration number, η̃ is the step-size, γ̃
is the friction, and ṽ denotes the velocity (also referred to
as momentum). Here, ∇f˜k denotes the stochastic gradients
defined as follows:
X
∇f˜k (x) , (1/b)
f (i) (x),
(3)
i∈Ωk

where Ωk ⊂ {1, . . . , n} denotes a random subset drawn
from the set of data points with |Ωk | = b  n for all k.
When the gradients are computed on all the data points (i.e.,
∇f˜k = ∇f ), SGDm becomes deterministic and can be
viewed as a discretization of the following continuous-time
system (Gao et al., 2018a; Maddison et al., 2018):
dvt = −(γvt + ∇f (xt ))dt,

*

Equal contribution 1 LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Paris, France 2 Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 3 Department of Mathematics,
Florida State University, Tallahassee, USA 4 Department of Management Science and Information Systems, Rutgers Business
School, Piscataway, USA. Correspondence to: Umut Şimşekli
<umut.simsekli@telecom-paris.fr>.

dxt = vt dt,

(4)

where vt is still called the velocity. The connection between
this system and (2) becomes clearer, if we discretize this
system by using the Euler scheme with step-size η:
vk+1 = vk − η(γvk+1 + ∇f (xk )) ,
xk+1 = xk + ηvk+1 ,

(5)

th

Proceedings of the 37 International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

and make the change of variables ṽk , ηvk , γ̃ , (1 −
ηγ), and η̃ , η 2 . However, due to the presence of the

