Scalable and Efficient Comparison-based Search without Features

Daniyar Chumbalov 1 Lucas Maystre 2 Matthias Grossglauser 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of finding a target object
t using pairwise comparisons, by asking an oracle
questions of the form “Which object from the pair
(i, j) is more similar to t?”. Objects live in a space
of latent features, from which the oracle generates
noisy answers. First, we consider the non-blind
setting where these features are accessible. We
propose a new Bayesian comparison-based search
algorithm with noisy answers; it has low computational complexity yet is efficient in the number
of queries. We provide theoretical guarantees, deriving the form of the optimal query and proving
almost sure convergence to the target t. Second,
we consider the blind setting, where the object
features are hidden from the search algorithm.
In this setting, we combine our search method
and a new distributional triplet embedding algorithm into one scalable learning framework called
L EARN 2S EARCH. We show that the query complexity of our approach on two real-world datasets
is on par with the non-blind setting, which is not
achievable using any of the current state-of-theart embedding methods. Finally, we demonstrate
the efficacy of our framework by conducting an
experiment with users searching for movie actors.

1. Introduction
Finding a target object among a large collection of n objects
is the central problem addressed in information retrieval
(IR). For example, in web search, one finds relevant web
pages through a query expressed as one or several keywords.
Of course, the form of the query depends on the object type;
other forms of search queries in the literature include finding
images similar to a query image (Datta et al., 2008), and
finding subgraphs of a large network isomorphic to a query
graph (Sun et al., 2012). A common feature of this classic
1

School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland. 2 Spotify. Correspondence to: Daniyar Chumbalov <daniyar.chumbalov@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

formulation of the search problem is the need to express
a meaningful query. However, this is often a non-trivial
task for a human user. For example, most people would
struggle to draw the face of a friend accurately enough that
it could be used as a query image. But they would be able
to confirm with near-total certainty whether a photograph
is of their friend—we have no real doppelgängers in the
world. In other words, comparing is cognitively much easier
than formulating a query. This is true for many complex or
unstructured types of data, such as music, abstract concepts,
images, videos, flavors, etc.
In this work, we develop models and algorithms for searching a large database by comparing a sequence of sample
objects relative to the target, thereby obviating the need
for any explicit query. The central problem concerns the
choice of the sequence of samples (e.g., pairs of faces that
the user compares with a target face she remembers). These
query objects have to be chosen in such a way that we learn
as much as possible about the target, i.e., shrink the set of
potential targets as quickly as possible. This is closely related to a classic problem in active learning (Settles, 2012;
MacKay, 1992), assuming we have a meaningful set of
features available for each object in the database.
It is natural to assume that the universe of objects lives in
some low-dimensional latent feature space, even though
the raw objects might be high-dimensional (images, videos,
sequences of musical notes, etc.). For example, a human
face, for the purposes of a similarity comparison, could
be quite accurately described by a few tens of features,
capturing head shape, eye color, fullness of lips, gender, age,
and the like (Chang & Tsao, 2017).
The key component of our framework is a noisy oracle
model that describes how a user responds to comparison
queries relative to a target, based on the objects’ embedding
in the latent feature space. The noise model implicitly determines which queries are likely to extract useful information
from the user; it is similar to pairwise comparison models such as those of Thurstone (1927) or Bradley & Terry
(1952), but here the comparison is always relative to a target.
The compared samples and the target are all represented as
points in the feature space. Our contributions in this context
are threefold. First, we develop an efficient search algorithm, which (a) generates query pairs and (b) navigates
towards the target. This algorithm is provably guaranteed

