Adaptive Sketching for Fast and Convergent Canonical Polyadic Decomposition

Kareem S. Aggour * 1 Alex Gittens * 2 Bülent Yener 2

Abstract
This work considers the canonical polyadic decomposition (CPD) of tensors using proximally
regularized sketched alternating least squares algorithms. First, it establishes a sublinear rate of
convergence for proximally regularized sketched
CPD algorithms under two natural conditions that
are known to be satisfied by many popular forms
of sketching. Second, it demonstrates that the iterative nature of CPD algorithms can be exploited
algorithmically to choose more performant sketching rates. This is accomplished by introducing
CPD-MWU, a proximally-regularized sketched
alternating least squares algorithm that adaptively
selects the sketching rate at each iteration. On
both synthetic and real data we observe that for
noisy tensors CPD-MWU produces decompositions of comparable accuracy to the standard CPD
decomposition in less time, often half the time; for
ill-conditioned tensors, given the same time budget, CPD-MWU produces decompositions with
an order-of-magnitude lower relative error. For
a representative real-world dataset CPD-MWU
produces residual errors on average 20% lower
than CPRAND-MIX and 44% lower than SPALS,
two recent sketched CPD algorithms.

1. Introduction
Tensors of ever larger sizes appear with growing frequency
in many applications including data mining (Papalexakis
et al., 2017), signal processing (Cichocki et al., 2015), video
analysis (Sobral et al., 2015), and more (Fanaee-T & Gama,
2016). Many of these applications use low-rank decompositions as a fundamental primitive in extracting latent factors
from these tensorial datasets. A recent body of work from
the machine learning, data mining, and applied mathematics
*

Equal contribution 1 GE Global Research, Niskayuna, New
York, USA 2 Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York,
USA. Correspondence to: Alex Gittens <gittea@rpi.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

communities has arisen that attempts to increase the scalability of tensor decomposition algorithms to match the scale
of modern datasets.
There are multiple, inequivalent forms of low-rank tensor decompositions. In this work, we focus on the CANDECOMP/PARAFAC/canonical polyadic decomposition
(CPD) (Bro, 1997), a generalization of the matrix singular value decomposition that uncovers a small set of latent
factors describing each mode, or independent dimension,
of the tensor. A CPD comprises a collection of latent factor matrices, one for each mode. Given the three-mode
tensor X ∈ RI×J×K , we denote its factor matrices by
A ∈ RI×R , B ∈ RJ×R , and C ∈ RK×R . The corresponding rank-R CPD decomposition is (Kolda & Bader, 2009)
X =

R
X
i=1

ai ◦ bi ◦ ci + E := JA, B, CK + E,

(1)

where ◦ denotes the vector outer product, ai , bi and ci are
columns of the factor matrices, and E denotes the residual
error. The factor matrices are obtained by minimizing the
reconstruction error
min kX − JA, B, CKk2F ,

A,B,C

(2)

qP
2
where kX kF =
ijk xijk is the Frobenius norm of X .
This is a difficult optimization problem both because X is
often large, and because the problem is non-convex. Attractive algorithms for CPD decomposition are computationally
efficient and converge to critical points of the CPD objective.
The alternating least squares algorithm (ALS) is the standard workhorse algorithm for computing CP decompositions (Kolda & Bader, 2009). CPD-ALS uses an alternating
minimization approach that updates one factor matrix to
minimize the objective while fixing all the others. Each
update requires the solution of a large least squares problem: if the tensor has size n × n × n, then the cost of each
iteration is O(n3 R). One popular and empirically effective
technique for accelerating CPD-ALS is the application of
randomization: by using a randomly selected subset of the
constraints of the linear systems at each iteration, i.e. by
sketching the linear systems, the computational cost of the
optimization can be greatly decreased. Both the choice of
the sampling distribution and the fraction of the constraints

