Countering Language Drift with Seeded Iterated Learning

Yuchen Lu 1 Soumye Singhal 1 Florian Strub 2 Olivier Pietquin 3 Aaron Courville 1 4

Abstract
Pretraining on human corpus and then finetuning
in a simulator has become a standard pipeline
for training a goal-oriented dialogue agent. Nevertheless, as soon as the agents are finetuned to
maximize task completion, they suffer from the
so-called language drift phenomenon: they slowly
lose syntactic and semantic properties of language
as they only focus on solving the task. In this paper, we propose a generic approach to counter language drift called Seeded iterated learning (SIL).
We periodically refine a pretrained student agent
by imitating data sampled from a newly generated
teacher agent. At each time step, the teacher is
created by copying the student agent, before being finetuned to maximize task completion. SIL
does not require external syntactic constraint nor
semantic knowledge, making it a valuable taskagnostic finetuning protocol. We evaluate SIL in
a toy-setting Lewis Game, and then scale it up
to the translation game with natural language. In
both settings, SIL helps counter language drift as
well as it improves the task completion compared
to baselines.

1. Introduction
Recently, neural language modeling methods have achieved
a high level of performance on standard natural language
processing tasks (Adiwardana et al., 2020; Radford et al.,
2019). Those agents are trained to capture the statistical
properties of language by applying supervised learning techniques over large datasets (Bengio et al., 2003; Collobert
et al., 2011). While such approaches correctly capture the
syntax and semantic components of language, they give
rise to inconsistent behaviors in goal-oriented language settings, such as question answering and other dialogue-based
1
Mila, University of Montreal 2 DeepMind 3 Google Research
- Brain Team 4 CIFAR Fellow. Correspondence to: Yuchen
Lu <luyuchen.paul@gmail.com>, Soumye Singhal <singhalsoumye@gmail.com>, Florian Strub <fstrub@google.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

tasks (Gao et al., 2019). Conversational agents trained via
traditional supervised methods tend to output uninformative
utterances such as, for example, recommend generic locations while booking for a restaurant (Bordes et al., 2017).
As models are optimized towards generating grammaticallyvalid sentences, they fail to correctly ground utterances to
task goals (Strub et al., 2017; Lewis et al., 2017).
A natural follow-up consists in rewarding the agent to solve
the actual language task, rather than solely training it to generate grammatically valid sentences. Ideally, such training
would incorporate human interaction (Skantze & Hjalmarsson, 2010; Li et al., 2016a), but doing so quickly faces
sample-complexity and reproducibility issues. As a consequence, agents are often trained by interacting with a second
model to simulate the goal-oriented scenarios (Levin et al.,
2000; Schatzmann et al., 2006; Lemon & Pietquin, 2012). In
the recent literature, a common setting is to pretrain two neural models with supervised learning to acquire the language
structure; then, at least one of the agents is finetuned to maximize task-completion with either reinforcement learning,
e.g., policy gradient (Williams, 1992), or Gumbel softmax
straight-through estimator (Jang et al., 2017; Maddison et al.,
2017). This finetuning step has shown consistent improvement in dialogue games (Li et al., 2016b; Strub et al., 2017;
Das et al., 2017), referential games (Havrylov & Titov, 2017;
Yu et al., 2017) or instruction following (Fried et al., 2018).
Unfortunately, interactive learning gives rise to the language
drift phenomenon. As the agents are solely optimizing for
task completion, they have no incentive to preserve the
initial language structure. They start drifting away from
the pretrained language output by shaping a task-specific
communication protocol. We thus observe a co-adaptation
and overspecialization of the agent toward the task, resulting in significant changes to the agent’s language distribution. In practice, there are different forms of language
drift (Lazaridou et al., 2020) including (i) structural drift: removing grammar redundancy (e.g. ”is it a cat?” becomes ”is
cat?” (Strub et al., 2017)), (ii) semantic drift: altering word
meaning (e.g. ”an old teaching” means ”an old man” (Lee
et al., 2019)) or (iii) functional drift: the language results in
unexpected actions (e.g. after agreeing on a deal, the agent
performs another trade (Li et al., 2016b)). Thus, these agents
perform poorly when paired with humans (Chattopadhyay
et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2017; Lazaridou et al., 2020).

