GradientDICE: Rethinking Generalized Offline Estimation
of Stationary Values

Shangtong Zhang 1 Bo Liu 2 Shimon Whiteson 1

Abstract
We present GradientDICE for estimating the density ratio between the state distribution of the target policy and the sampling distribution in offpolicy reinforcement learning. GradientDICE
fixes several problems of GenDICE (Zhang et al.,
2020a), the state-of-the-art for estimating such
density ratios. Namely, the optimization problem in GenDICE is not a convex-concave saddlepoint problem once nonlinearity in optimization
variable parameterization is introduced to ensure
positivity, so any primal-dual algorithm is not
guaranteed to converge or find the desired solution. However, such nonlinearity is essential to
ensure the consistency of GenDICE even with
a tabular representation. This is a fundamental
contradiction, resulting from GenDICE’s original
formulation of the optimization problem. In GradientDICE, we optimize a different objective from
GenDICE by using the Perron-Frobenius theorem
and eliminating GenDICE’s use of divergence,
such that nonlinearity in parameterization is not
necessary for GradientDICE, which is provably
convergent under linear function approximation.

1. Introduction
A key challenge in reinforcement learning (RL, Sutton &
Barto 2018) is off-policy evaluation (Precup et al., 2001;
Maei, 2011; Jiang & Li, 2015; Sutton & Barto, 2018; Liu
et al., 2018; Nachum et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020a),
where we want to estimate the performance of a target policy (average reward in the continuing setting or expected
total discounted reward in the episodic setting (Puterman,
2014)), from data generated by one or more behavior policies. Compared with on-policy evaluation (Sutton, 1988),
which requires data generated by the target policy, off-policy
1
University of Oxford 2 Auburn University. Correspondence to:
Shangtong Zhang <shangtong.zhang@cs.ox.ac.uk>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

evaluation is more flexible. We can evaluate a new policy
with existing data in a replay buffer (Lin, 1992) without interacting with the environment again. We can also evaluate
multiple target policies simultaneously when following a
single behavior policy (Sutton et al., 2011).
One major challenge in off-policy evaluation is dealing with
distribution mismatch: the state distribution of the target
policy is different from the sampling distribution. This
mismatch leads to divergence of the off-policy linear temporal difference learning algorithm (Baird, 1995; Tsitsiklis &
Van Roy, 1997). Precup et al. (2001) address this issue with
products of importance sampling ratios, which, however,
suffer from a large variance. To correct for distribution mismatch without incurring a large variance, Hallak & Mannor
(2017); Liu et al. (2018) propose to directly learn the density
ratio between the state distribution of the target policy and
the sampling distribution using function approximation.3
Intuitively, this learned density ratio is a “marginalization”
of the products of importance sampling ratios.
The density ratio learning algorithms from Hallak & Mannor
(2017); Liu et al. (2018) require data generated by a single
known behavior policy. Nachum et al. (2019) relax this
constraint in DualDICE, which is compatible with multiple
unknown behavior policies and offline training. DualDICE,
however, copes well with only the total discounted reward
criterion and cannot be used under the average reward criterion. In particular, DualDICE becomes unstable as the
discounting factor grows towards 1 (Zhang et al., 2020a).
To address the limitation of DualDICE, Zhang et al. (2020a)
propose GenDICE, which is compatible with multiple unknown behavior policies and offline training under both criteria. Zhang et al. (2020a) show empirically that GenDICE
achieves a new state-of-the-art in off-policy evaluation.
In this paper, we point out key problems with GenDICE.
In particular, the optimization problem in GenDICE is not
a convex-concave saddle-point problem (CCSP) once nonlinearity in optimization variable parameterization is introduced to ensure positivity, so any primal-dual algorithm
is not guaranteed to converge or find the desired solution
3

Such density ratios are referred to as stationary values in
Zhang et al. (2020a)

