Projection-free √
Distributed Online Convex Optimization
with O( T ) Communication Complexity

Yuanyu Wan 1 Wei-Wei Tu 2 Lijun Zhang 1

Abstract
To deal with complicated constraints via locally
light computations in distributed online learning,
a recent study has presented a projection-free
algorithm called distributed online conditional
gradient (D-OCG), and achieved an O(T 3/4 ) regret bound, where T is the number of prediction
rounds. However, in each round, the local learners
of D-OCG need to communicate with their neighbors to share the local gradients, which results in
a high communication complexity of O(T ). In
this paper, we first propose an improved variant
of D-OCG, namely D-BOCG, which
√ enjoys an
O(T 3/4 ) regret bound with only O( T ) communication complexity. The key √
idea is to divide
the total prediction rounds into T equally-sized
blocks, and only update the local learners at the
beginning of each block by performing iterative
linear optimization steps. Furthermore, to handle
the more challenging bandit setting, in which only
the loss value is available, we incorporate the classical one-point gradient estimator into D-BOCG,
and obtain similar theoretical guarantees.

1. Introduction
Conditional gradient (CG) (Frank & Wolfe, 1956) is a
simple yet efficient offline algorithm for solving highdimensional problems with complicated constraints. To
find a feasible solution, instead of performing the timeconsuming projection step, CG utilizes the linear optimization step, which can be carried out much more efficiently.
For example, in the matrix completion problem (Hazan &
Kale, 2012), where the feasible set consists of all matrices
with bounded trace norm, the projection step needs to compute the singular value decomposition (SVD) of a matrix.
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China 2 4Paradigm Inc., Beijing, China.
Correspondence to: Lijun Zhang <zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

In contrast, the linear optimization step in CG only requires
computing the top singular vector pair of a matrix, which is
at least an order of magnitude faster than the SVD. Due to
the emergence of large-scale problems, online conditional
gradient (OCG) (Hazan & Kale, 2012; Hazan, 2016) was
proposed for online convex optimization (OCO), which is
viewed as a multi-round game between a learner and an adversary (Zinkevich, 2003). Different from CG that requires
all data related to the objective function are given beforehand, this online variant can efficiently update the learner
based on only a single data point in each round.
Recently, Zhang et al. (2017) further proposed D-OCG by
extending OCG into a more practical scenario—distributed
setting. It is well motivated by many distributed applications
such as multi-agent coordination and distributed tracking in
sensor networks (Li et al., 2002; Xiao et al., 2007; Nedić
et al., 2009; Duchi et al., 2011). Specifically, the distributed
setting is formulated as a set of local learners connected by
an undirected graph, and each local learner can only communicate with its neighbors. The key idea of D-OCG is to
maintain OCG for each local learner, and update it according to the local gradient as well as that received from its
neighbors in each round. Compared with projection-based
distributed algorithms (Ram et al., 2010; Hosseini et al.,
2013), D-OCG significantly reduces the time cost for solving high-dimension problems with complicated constraints.
Moreover, D-OCG is more scalable than OCG, since it can
utilize many locally light computation resources to handle
large-scale problems. However, because the local learners
of D-OCG communicate with their neighbors to share the
local gradients in each round, it suffers a high communication complexity of O(T ), where T is the total number of
rounds.
In this paper, we first propose distributed block online conditional gradient (D-BOCG), an improved variant of D-OCG,
which
√ reduces the communication complexity from O(T ) to
O( T ). To this end, we borrow the delayed update mechanism and the iterative linear optimization steps which have
been employed to improve projection-free bandit convex
optimization (Garber & Kretzu, 2019), and apply them to
the distributed setting considered here. Specifically, according to the delayed update mechanism, we divide the total

