T-Basis: a Compact Representation for Neural Networks

Anton Obukhov 1 Maxim Rakhuba 1 Stamatios Georgoulis 1 Menelaos Kanakis 1 Dengxin Dai 1
Luc Van Gool 1 2

Abstract
We introduce T-Basis, a novel concept for a compact representation of a set of tensors, each of an
arbitrary shape, which is often seen in Neural Networks. Each of the tensors in the set is modeled
using Tensor Rings, though the concept applies
to other Tensor Networks. Owing its name to the
T-shape of nodes in diagram notation of Tensor
Rings, T-Basis is simply a list of equally shaped
three-dimensional tensors, used to represent Tensor Ring nodes. Such representation allows us to
parameterize the tensor set with a small number of
parameters (coefficients of the T-Basis tensors),
scaling logarithmically with each tensor’s size
in the set and linearly with the dimensionality
of T-Basis. We evaluate the proposed approach
on the task of neural network compression and
demonstrate that it reaches high compression rates
at acceptable performance drops. Finally, we analyze memory and operation requirements of the
compressed networks and conclude that T-Basis
networks are equally well suited for training and
inference in resource-constrained environments
and usage on the edge devices. Project website:
obukhov.ai/tbasis.

1. Introduction
Since the seminal work of Krizhevsky et al. (2012), neural networks have become the “go-to” approach for many
research fields, including computer vision (Redmon et al.,
2016; He et al., 2017a; Chen et al., 2018a), medical image
analysis (Ronneberger et al., 2015; Kamnitsas et al., 2017),
natural language processing (Graves et al., 2013; Devlin
et al., 2019), and so on. This tremendous success can largely
be attributed to a combination of deeper architectures, larger
datasets, and better processing units. It is safe to say that
neural networks have gradually turned into deep networks
1
ETH Zurich 2 KU Leuven. Correspondence to: Anton Obukhov
<anton.obukhov@vision.ee.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

that contain millions of trainable parameters and consume
lots of memory. For example, the ResNet-101 model (He
et al., 2016) has 44M parameters and requires 171MB of
storage, while the VGG-16 model (Simonyan & Zisserman,
2015) has 138M parameters and requires 528MB of storage. Most importantly, further advancements in network
performance seem to go hand-in-hand with a corresponding
increase in the network size.
On the other hand, over the last few years, we have been
witnessing a steady transition of this technology to industry. Thus, it is becoming a pressing problem to deploy
the best-performing deep networks to all kinds of resourceconstrained devices, such as mobile robots, smartphones,
wearables, and IoT devices. These systems come with restrictions in terms of runtimes, latency, energy, and memory
consumption, which contrasts with the considerations behind the state-of-the-art approaches. At the same time, the
lottery ticket hypothesis (Frankle & Carbin, 2019) and several other works (Denil et al., 2013; Ba & Caruana, 2014)
suggest strong evidence that modern neural networks are
highly redundant, and most of their performance can be
attributed to a small fraction of the learned parameters.
Motivated by these observations, network compression has
been proposed in the literature to arrive at smaller, faster, and
more energy-efficient neural networks. In general, network
compression techniques can be grouped into the following
categories: pruning, hashing, quantization, and filter/tensor
decomposition – we provide a detailed discussion of each
category in Sec. 2. In our work, we build upon the tensor
decomposition front, and in particular, the Tensor Ring
(TR) decomposition (Zhao et al., 2016), due to its high
generalization capabilities when compressing convolutional
(and fully-connected) layers (Wang et al., 2018). Formally,
TR decomposes a high-dimensional tensor as a sequence
of third-order tensors that are multiplied circularly. For
example, a 3 × 3 convolutional kernel with 16 input and 32
output channels, i.e., a 16 × 32 × 3 × 3 tensor with 4608
entries, may admit a parameterization using TR with rank
2, defined by 4 tensors of the sizes 2 × 16 × 2, 2 × 32 × 2,
2 × 3 × 2, 2 × 3 × 2 with only 4(16 + 32 + 3 + 3) = 216
total entries. However, a common drawback of existing
TR approaches on network compression, like TRN (Wang
et al., 2018), is that they have to estimate an individual TR

