Explore, Discover and Learn:
Unsupervised Discovery of State-Covering Skills

Vı́ctor Campos 1 Alex Trott 2 Caiming Xiong 2 Richard Socher 2 Xavier Giro-i-Nieto 3 Jordi Torres 1

Abstract
Acquiring abilities in the absence of a taskoriented reward function is at the frontier of reinforcement learning research. This problem has
been studied through the lens of empowerment,
which draws a connection between option discovery and information theory. Information-theoretic
skill discovery methods have garnered much interest from the community, but little research has
been conducted in understanding their limitations.
Through theoretical analysis and empirical evidence, we show that existing algorithms suffer
from a common limitation – they discover options that provide a poor coverage of the state
space. In light of this, we propose Explore, Discover and Learn (EDL), an alternative approach
to information-theoretic skill discovery. Crucially,
EDL optimizes the same information-theoretic objective derived from the empowerment literature,
but addresses the optimization problem using different machinery. We perform an extensive evaluation of skill discovery methods on controlled
environments and show that EDL offers significant advantages, such as overcoming the coverage problem, reducing the dependence of learned
skills on the initial state, and allowing the user
to define a prior over which behaviors should be
learned. Code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/victorcampos7/edl.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have recently
achieved outstanding goals thanks to advances in simulation (Todorov et al., 2012; Bellemare et al., 2013), efficient
and scalable learning algorithms (Mnih et al., 2015; Lillicrap
1

Barcelona Supercomputing Center 2 Salesforce Research
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya. Correspondence to: Vı́ctor
Campos <victor.campos@bsc.es>.
3

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Skills learned on a maze with bottleneck states. Each
colored line represents a trajectory initiated at the black dot by a
different skill. Multiple rollouts per skill are reported in order to
account for the stochasticity of the policy. The bottom left plot
depicts states visited by a policy with random weights, showing
which states are reachable by the agent at the beginning of training.
Existing methods fail at expanding this set of states, and end up
committing to behaviors discovered by the random policy. On the
other hand, EDL discovers skills that provide a better coverage of
the state space.

et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2015; 2017; Espeholt et al.,
2018), function approximation (LeCun et al., 2015; Goodfellow et al., 2016), and hardware accelerators (NVIDIA,
2017; Jouppi et al., 2017). These landmarks include outperforming humans in board (Silver et al., 2017) and computer
games (Mnih et al., 2015; Vinyals et al., 2019), and solving
complex robotic control tasks (Andrychowicz et al., 2017;
Akkaya et al., 2019). Typically, training aims to solve a
particular task, relying on task-specific reward functions to
measure progress and drive learning. This contrasts with
how intelligent creatures learn in the absence of external
supervisory signals, acquiring abilities in a task-agnostic

