An end-to-end approach for the verification problem: learning the right
distance
João Monteiro 1 2 Isabela Albuquerque 1 Jahangir Alam 1 2 R Devon Hjelm 3 4 Tiago Falk 1

Abstract
In this contribution, we augment the metric learning setting by introducing a parametric pseudodistance, trained jointly with the encoder. Several interpretations are thus drawn for the learned
distance-like model’s output. We first show it approximates a likelihood ratio which can be used
for hypothesis tests, and that it further induces
a large divergence across the joint distributions
of pairs of examples from the same and from
different classes. Evaluation is performed under
the verification setting consisting of determining
whether sets of examples belong to the same class,
even if such classes are novel and were never presented to the model during training. Empirical
evaluation shows such method defines an end-toend approach for the verification problem, able to
attain better performance than simple scorers such
as those based on cosine similarity and further outperforming widely used downstream classifiers.
We further observe training is much simplified
under the proposed approach compared to metric learning with actual distances, requiring no
complex scheme to harvest pairs of examples.

1. Introduction
Learning useful representations from high-dimensional data
is one of the main goals of modern machine learning. However, doing so is generally a side effect of the solution of
a pre-defined task, e.g., while learning the decision surface in a classification problem, inner layers of artificial
neural networks are shown to make salient cues of input
data which are discriminable. Moreover, in unsupervised
1

INRS-EMT, Université du Québec, Montreal, Canada. 2 Centre
de Recherche Informatique de Montréal, Montreal, Canada.
3
Microsoft Research. 4 Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute,
Université de Montréal, Montreal, Canada.. Correspondence to:
João Monteiro <joao.monteiro@emt.inrs.ca>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

settings, bottleneck layers of autoencoders as well as approximate posteriors from variational autoencoders have
all been shown to embed relevant properties of input data
which can be leveraged in downstream tasks. Rather than
employing a neural network to solve some task and hope
learned features are useful, approaches such as siamese networks (Bromley et al., 1994), which can be included in a
set of approaches commonly referred to as Metric Learning,
have been introduced with the goal of explicitly inducing
features holding desirable properties such as class separability. In this setting, an encoder is trained so as to minimize
or maximize a distance measured across pairs of encoded
examples, depending on whether the examples within each
pair belong to the same class or not, provided that class
labels are available. Follow-up work leveraged this idea for
several applications (Hadsell et al., 2006; Hoffer & Ailon,
2015), which include, for instance, the verification problem
in biometrics, as is the case of FaceNet (Schroff et al., 2015)
and Deep-Speaker (Li et al., 2017), which are used for face
and speaker recognition, respectively. However, as pointed
out in recent work (Schroff et al., 2015; Shi et al., 2016;
Wu et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2018), careful
selection of training pairs is crucial to ensure a reasonable
sample complexity during training given that most triplets
of examples quickly reach the condition such that distances
measured between pairs from the same class are smaller than
those of the pairs from different classes. As such, developing efficient strategies for harvesting negative pairs with
small distances throughout training becomes primordial.
In this contribution, we are concerned with the metric learning setting briefly described above, and more specifically,
we turn our attention to its application to the verification
problem, i.e., that of comparing data pairs and determining
whether they belong to the same class. The verification
problem arises in applications where comparisons of two
small samples is required such as face/finger-print/voice
verification (Reynolds, 2002), image retrieval (Zhu et al.,
2016; Wu et al., 2017), and so on. At test time, inference
is often performed to answer two types of questions: (i)
Do two given examples belong to the same class? and (ii)
Does a test example belong to a specific claimed class? And
in both cases test examples might belong to classes never
presented to the model during training. Current verification

