From Importance Sampling to Doubly Robust Policy Gradient

Jiawei Huang 1 Nan Jiang 1

Abstract
We show that on-policy policy gradient (PG) and
its variance reduction variants can be derived by
taking finite difference of function evaluations
supplied by estimators from the importance sampling (IS) family for off-policy evaluation (OPE).
Starting from the doubly robust (DR) estimator
(Jiang & Li, 2016), we provide a simple derivation
of a very general and flexible form of PG, which
subsumes the state-of-the-art variance reduction
technique (Cheng et al., 2019) as its special case
and immediately hints at further variance reduction opportunities overlooked by existing literature. We analyze the variance of the new DR-PG
estimator, compare it to existing methods as well
as the Cramer-Rao lower bound of policy gradient,
and empirically show its effectiveness.

1. Introduction
In reinforcement learning, policy gradient (PG) refers to
the family of algorithms that estimate the gradient of the
expected return w.r.t. the policy parameters, often from
on-policy Monte-Carlo trajectories. Off-policy evaluation
(OPE) refers to the problem of evaluating a policy that is different from the data generating policy, often by importance
sampling (IS) techniques.
Despite the superficial difference that standard PG is onpolicy while IS for OPE is off-policy by definition, they
share many similarities: both PG and IS are arguably based
on the Monte-Carlo principle (as opposed to the dynamic
programming principle); both of them often suffer from
high variance, and variance reduction techniques have been
studied extensively for PG and IS separately in the literature.
Given these similarities, one may naturally wonder: is there
a deeper connection between the two topics?
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign. Correspondence to: Nan Jiang <nanjiang@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Summary of the Paper We provide a simple and positive
answer to the above question in the episodic RL setting. In
particular, one can write down the policy gradient as (we
informally illustrate the idea with scalar θ for now)
lim

∆θ→0

J(πθ+∆θ ) − J(πθ )
,
∆θ

(1)

where θ is the current policy parameter, and J(·) is the
expected return of a policy w.r.t. some initial state distribution. The connection between IS and PG is extremely
simple: using any method in the IS family to estimate J(·)
in Eq.(1) will lead to a version of PG, and most unbiased PG
estimators—with different variance reduction techniques—
can be recovered in this way. Furthermore, by deriving PG
from the doubly robust (DR) estimator for OPE (Jiang &
Li, 2016), we obtain a very general and flexible form of PG
with variance reduction, which immediately subsumes the
state-of-the-art technique by Cheng et al. (2019) as its special case. In fact, the resulting estimator can achieve more
variance reduction than Cheng et al. (2019) given additional
side information. See Table 1 for some highlighted results.

2. Related Work
To the best of our knowledge, Tang & Abbeel (2010) was
the first to explicitly mention the connection between (pertrajectory) IS and PG, which corresponds to the first row of
our Table 1. The connection between DR and PG was lightly
touched by Tucker et al. (2018), although the authors’ main
goal was to challenge the success of state-action-dependent
baseline methods in benchmarks, and did not give a more
detailed analysis on this connection.
More recently, Cheng et al. (2019) noticed that the previous
variance reduction methods in PG overlooked the correlation
across the times steps and ignored the randomness in the
future steps (e.g., Grathwohl et al., 2018; Gu et al., 2017;
Liu et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2018). They used the law of
the total variance to derive a trajectory-wise control variate
estimator, which is subsumed by our general form of PG
derived from DR in Section 5 as a special case.

