Spectrum Dependent Learning Curves in Kernel Regression and Wide Neural
Networks
Blake Bordelon 1 Abdulkadir Canatar 2 Cengiz Pehlevan 1 3

Abstract
We derive analytical expressions for the generalization performance of kernel regression as a
function of the number of training samples using theoretical methods from Gaussian processes
and statistical physics. Our expressions apply to
wide neural networks due to an equivalence between training them and kernel regression with
the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK). By computing
the decomposition of the total generalization error
due to different spectral components of the kernel,
we identify a new spectral principle: as the size of
the training set grows, kernel machines and neural
networks fit successively higher spectral modes of
the target function. When data are sampled from
a uniform distribution on a high-dimensional hypersphere, dot product kernels, including NTK,
exhibit learning stages where different frequency
modes of the target function are learned. We verify our theory with simulations on synthetic data
and MNIST dataset.

1. Introduction
Finding statistical patterns in data that generalize beyond a
training set is a main goal of machine learning. Generalization performance depends on factors such as the number of
training examples, the complexity of the learning task, and
the nature of the learning machine. Identifying precisely
how these factors impact the performance poses a theoretical challenge. Here, we present a theory of generalization
in kernel machines (Schölkopf & Smola, 2001) and neural
1

John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA 2 Department of
Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA 3 Center for
Brain Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. Correspondence to: Cengiz Pehlevan <cpehlevan@seas.harvard.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
Code:
https://github.com/Pehlevan-Group/
NTK_Learning_Curves

networks (LeCun et al., 2015) with wide hidden layers that
addresses these questions.
The goal of our theory is not to provide worst case bounds
on generalization performance in the sense of statistical
learning theory (Vapnik, 1999), but to provide analytical expressions that explain the average or a typical performance
in the spirit of statistical physics. The techniques we use are
a continuous approximation to learning curves previously
used in Gaussian processes (Sollich, 1999; 2002; Sollich &
Halees, 2002) and the replica method of statistical physics
(Sherrington & Kirkpatrick, 1975; Mézard et al., 1987).
We first develop an approximate theory of generalization in
kernel regression that is applicable to any kernel. We then
use our theory to gain insight into neural networks by using a correspondence between kernel regression and neural
network training. When the hidden layers of a neural network are taken to infinite width with a certain initialization
scheme, recent influential work (Jacot et al., 2018; Arora
et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2019) showed that training a feedforward neural network with gradient descent to zero training
loss is equivalent to kernel interpolation (or ridgeless kernel
regression) with a kernel called the Neural Tangent Kernel
(NTK) (Jacot et al., 2018). Our kernel regression theory contains kernel interpolation as a special limit (ridge parameter
going to zero).
Our contributions and results are summarized below:
• Using a continuous approximation to learning curves
adapted from Gaussian process literature (Sollich, 1999;
2002), we derive analytical expressions for learning
curves for each spectral component of a target function
learned through kernel regression.
• We present another way to arrive at the same analytical
expressions using the replica method of statistical physics
and a saddle-point approximation (Sherrington & Kirkpatrick, 1975; Mézard et al., 1987).
• Analysis of our theoretical expressions show that different spectral modes of a target function are learned with
different rates. Modes corresponding to higher kernel
eigenvalues are learned faster, in the sense that a marginal
training data point causes a greater percent reduction in
generalization error for higher eigenvalue modes than for
lower eigenvalue modes.

