Training Linear Neural Networks:
Non-Local Convergence and Complexity Results

Armin Eftekhari 1

Abstract

by the linear map
Rdx → Rdy

Linear networks provide valuable insights into
the workings of neural networks in general. This
paper identifies conditions under which the gradient flow provably trains a linear network, in spite
of the non-strict saddle points present in the optimization landscape. This paper also provides
the computational complexity of training linear
networks with gradient flow. To achieve these results, this work develops a machinery to provably
identify the stable set of gradient flow, which then
enables us to improve over the state of the art in
the literature of linear networks (Bah et al., 2019;
Arora et al., 2018a). Crucially, our results appear
to be the first to break away from the lazy training regime which has dominated the literature of
neural networks. This work requires the network
to have a layer with one neuron, which subsumes
the networks with a scalar output, but extending
the results of this theoretical work to all linear
networks remains a challenging open problem.

x → W x,

and the matrix W ∈ Rdy ×dx in (2) is itself specified with
the nonlinear (and often over-parametrized) map
Rd1 ×d0 × · · · × RdN ×dN −1 −→ Rdy ×dx
(W1 , · · · , WN ) −→ W := WN · · · W1 ,

In foregoing the full generality of nonlinear neural networks,
linear networks afford us a level of insight and technical
rigor that is out of the reach for nonlinear networks, at least
with our current technical tools (Arora et al., 2018b; Yan
et al., 1994; Kawaguchi, 2016; Chitour et al., 2018; Trager
et al., 2019; Saxe et al., 2013; Lu & Kawaguchi, 2017; Yun
et al., 2017).
Indeed, despite the absence of activation functions, matrix
W in the linear network (2,3) is a nonlinear function of
{Wi }i , and training this linear network thus involves solving
a nonconvex optimization problem in {Wi }i , which shares
many interesting features of the nonlinear neural networks.
Simply put, we cannot claim to understand neural networks
in general without understanding linear networks.

Consider the training samples and their labels {xi , yi }m
i=1 ⊂
Rdx × Rdy , respectively. By concatenating {xi }i and {yi }i ,
we form the data matrices
Y ∈ Rdy ×m .

(3)

where we set d0 = dx and dN = dy for consistency.

1. Introduction and Overview

X ∈ Rdx ×m ,

(2)

(1)

Consider also a linear network, i.e., a neural network where
the nonlinear activation functions are replaced with the identity map. To be specific, with N layers and the corresponding weight matrices {Wi }N
i=1 , this network is characterized
1

Department of Mathematics and Mathematical Statistics,
Umea University, Sweden. AE is indebted to Holger Rauhut,
Ulrich Terstiege and Gongguo Tang for insightful discussions.
Correspondence to: Armin Eftekhari <armin.eftekhari@umu.se>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Training the linear network (2,3) with the data (X, Y ) in (1)
can be cast as the optimization problem
(
1
min
kY − WN WN −1 · · · W1 Xk2F
W1 ,··· ,WN 2
(4)
subject to Wj ∈ Rdj ×dj−1
∀j ∈ [N ],
which is nonconvex when N ≥ 2. Above, [N ] =
{1, · · · , N }. Let us introduce the shorthand
WN := (W1 , · · · , WN )
∈ Rd1 ×d0 × · · · × RdN ×dN −1 =: RdN ,

(5)

which allows us to rewrite problem (4) more compactly as
min LN (WN ) subject to WN ∈ RdN ,
WN

(6)

where LN (WN ) := 12 kY − WN · · · W1 Xk2F . With this
setup and before turning to the details, let us highlight the
contributions of this paper, in the order of appearance.

