Causal Effect Estimation and Optimal Dose Suggestions in Mobile Health
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2020)

Liangyu Zhu 1 Wenbin Lu 1 Rui Song 1

Abstract
In this article, we propose novel structural nested
models to estimate causal effects of continuous
treatments based on mobile health data. To find
the treatment regime that optimizes the expected
short-term outcomes for patients, we define a
weighted lag-K advantage as the value function.
The optimal treatment regime is then defined to
be the one that maximizes the value function. Our
method imposes minimal assumptions on the data
generating process. Statistical inference is provided for the estimated parameters. Simulation
studies and an application to the Ohio type 1 diabetes dataset show that our method could provide
meaningful insights for dose suggestions with mobile health data.

1. Introduction
There is a rapid-increasing interest in healthcare interventions using mobile apps. Mobile technologies allow physical
conditions of patients to be collected in real time, measured by sensors or self-reported by patients. Studies have
shown that mobile health interventions could be beneficial
for the healthcare delivery process by improving disease
management, enhancing communication with the healthcare provider and providing more precise and individualized
medication (Free et al., 2013). However, analyzing mobile
health data can be challenging because they typically have
a large number of time points, time-varying treatments, and
non-definite time horizon (Luckett et al., 2019).
One focus in analyzing mobile health data is to evaluate
causal effects of mobile health interventions. Generalized
estimating equations (GEE) are commonly used for studying dependence of an outcome variable on a set of covariates
observed over time (Liang & Zeger, 1986; Zhao & Prentice,
*

Equal contribution 1 Department of Statistics, North Carolina
State University, Raleigh, NC, USA. Correspondence to: Liangyu
Zhu <lzhu12@ncsu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1990; Liang et al., 1992; Schafer, 2006). GEE enhance the
efficiency of the generalized linear models by including into
the estimation equations the correlations among repeated
observations of a subject over time. Such approaches typically require a full working correlation model and will be
computationally expensive as the time points get larger. Application of GEE in mobile health data has been limited to
time-invariant treatments (Evans et al., 2012; Carrà et al.,
2016). Liao et al. (2015) proposed the micro-randomized
trial design for estimating the causal effect of just-in-time
treatments under the mobile health setting (Klasnja et al.,
2015; Liao et al., 2016; Dempsey et al., 2015). Liao et al.
(2016) and Boruvka et al. (2018) defined the proximal and
lagged treatment effects for time-varying treatments with
data from micro-randomized trials. A centered and weighted
estimation method based on inverse probability of treatmentestimators (Robins et al., 2000; Murphy et al., 2001) is then
proposed for estimating these causal effects.
Providing personalized treatment suggestions based on mobile health data is also of great interest. Dynamic treatment regimes (DTR) have been proposed for providing sequential treatment suggestions based on longitudinal data
from randomized trials or observational data (Murphy, 2003;
Moodie et al., 2007; Kosorok & Moodie, 2015; Chakraborty
& Moodie, 2013). A dynamic treatment regime is a set of
decision rules that decide treatments to be assigned to patients according to their time-varying measurements during
the ongoing treatment process. An optimal DTR is the one
that yields the most favorable expected mean outcome over
a fixed period of time. Optimal dynamic treatment regimes
are typically estimated by backward induction based on
parametric models for the expected outcome (Q-learning)
(Watkins & Dayan, 1992; Sutton et al., 1998; Murphy, 2005;
Schulte et al., 2014). Robustness of these methods can be
further enhanced by using semi-parametric models (Murphy,
2003; Robins, 2004; Moodie et al., 2007; Tang & Kosorok,
2012; Schulte et al., 2014) or non-parametric models (Zhao
et al., 2009). Zhao et al. (2015) avoid the risk of model
misspecification by directly maximizing a nonparametric
estimation of the cumulative reward among a predefined
class of treatment regimes.
However, mobile health data usually have infinite time hori-

