Approximation Guarantees of Local Search Algorithms
via Localizability of Set Functions
Kaito Fujii 1

Abstract
This paper proposes a new framework for providing approximation guarantees of local search algorithms. Local search is a basic algorithm design
technique and is widely used for various combinatorial optimization problems. To analyze local
search algorithms for set function maximization,
we propose a new notion called localizability of
set functions, which measures how effective local
improvement is. Moreover, we provide approximation guarantees of standard local search algorithms under various combinatorial constraints in
terms of localizability. The main application of
our framework is sparse optimization, for which
we show that restricted strong concavity and restricted smoothness of the objective function imply localizability, and further develop accelerated
versions of local search algorithms. We conduct
experiments in sparse regression and structure
learning of graphical models to conﬁrm the practical efﬁciency of the proposed local search algorithms.

1. Introduction
Local search is a widely used technique to design efﬁcient
algorithms for optimization problems. Roughly speaking,
local search algorithms start with an initial solution and
gradually increase the objective value by repeatedly moving
the solution to a nearby point. While this approach leads
to effective heuristics for many optimization problems in
practice, it is not always easy to provide approximation
guarantees on their performance.
In this paper, we propose a generic framework for providing approximation guarantees of local search algorithms
for set function optimization. Set function optimization is a
1
National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan. Correspondence to: Kaito Fujii <fujiik@nii.ac.jp>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

problem of ﬁnding an (approximately) optimal set from all
feasible sets. Various machine learning tasks have been
formulated as set function optimization problems, such
as feature selection (Das & Kempe, 2011; Elenberg et al.,
2018), summarization (Lin & Bilmes, 2011; Badanidiyuru
et al., 2014), or active learning (Hoi et al., 2006; Golovin &
Krause, 2011).
A promising approach to analyze local search algorithms for
set function optimization is to utilize submodularity. Submodularity (Fujishige, 2005) is a property of set functions
useful for designing efﬁcient algorithms and has been extensively studied. Existing studies showed that for maximizing
a submodular function subject to a certain constraint, local
search procedures yield a constant-factor approximate solution to an optimal solution (Nemhauser et al., 1978; Fisher
et al., 1978; Lee et al., 2010; Feldman et al., 2011). Local search algorithms have been applied to several machine
learning tasks that have submodularity (Iyer et al., 2013;
Balkanski et al., 2016), but there are many other practical
set functions that deviate from submodularity.
To analyze local search algorithms for these problems, we
propose a novel analysis framework that can be applied to
local search algorithms for non-submodular functions. The
key notion of our framework is a property of set functions,
which we call localizability. Intuitively, localizability is
a property that implies any local optimum is a good approximation to a global optimal solution. By utilizing this
property, we show that for maximizing a set function with
localizability under a certain constraint, simple local search
algorithms achieve a good approximation.
The main application of our framework is sparse optimization. Sparse optimization is the problem of ﬁnding a sparse
vector that optimizes a continuous objective function. It
has various applications such as feature selection for sparse
regression and structure learning of graphical models. An
approach to sparse optimization is a reduction to a set function optimization problem, which is adopted by Jain et al.
(2016) and Elenberg et al. (2017). We show that localizability of this set function is derived from restricted strong
concavity and restricted smoothness of the original objective function, which implies approximation guarantees of
local search algorithms. Furthermore, we devise accelerated

