Consistent Structured Prediction with Max-Min Margin Markov Networks

Alex Nowak-Vila 1 Francis Bach 1 Alessandro Rudi 1

Abstract
Max-margin methods for binary classification
such as the support vector machine (SVM) have
been extended to the structured prediction setting
under the name of max-margin Markov networks
(M3 N), or more generally structural SVMs. Unfortunately, these methods are statistically inconsistent when the relationship between inputs and
labels is far from deterministic. We overcome
such limitations by defining the learning problem in terms of a “max-min” margin formulation, naming the resulting method max-min margin Markov networks (M4 N). We prove consistency and finite sample generalization bounds
for M4 N and provide an explicit algorithm to
compute the estimator. The algorithm
achieves
√
a generalization error of O(1/ n) for a total
cost of O(n) projection-oracle calls (which have
at most the same cost as the max-oracle from
M3 N). Experiments on multi-class classification,
ordinal regression, sequence prediction and ranking demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
method.

1. Introduction
Many classification tasks in machine learning lie beyond
the classical binary and multi-class classification settings.
In those tasks, the output elements are structured objects
made of interdependent parts, such as sequences in natural
language processing (Smith, 2011), images in computer vision (Nowozin & Lampert, 2011), permutations in ranking
or matching problems (Caetano et al., 2009) to name just
a few (BakIr et al., 2007). The structured prediction setting has two key properties that makes it radically different from multi-class classification, namely, the exponential
growth of the size of the output space with the number of its
parts, and the cost-sensitive nature of the learning task, as
1

INRIA - Département d’Informatique de l’Ecole Normale
Supérieure, PSL Research University. Correspondence to: Alex
Nowak-Vila <alex.nowak-vila@inria.fr>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

prediction mistakes are not equally costly. In sequence prediction, for instance, the number of possible outputs grows
exponentially with the length of the sequences, and predicting a sequence with one incorrect character is better than
predicting the whole sequence wrong.
Classical approaches in binary classification such as the
non-smooth support vector machine (SVM), and the
smooth logistic and quadratic plug-in classifiers have been
extended to the structured setting under the name of maxmargin Markov networks (M3 N) (Taskar et al., 2004) (or
more generally structural SVM (SSVM) (Tsochantaridis
et al., 2005)), conditional random fields (CRFs) (Lafferty
et al., 2001) and quadratic surrogate (QS) (Ciliberto et al.,
2016; 2019), respectively. Theoretical properties of CRF
and QS are well-understood. In particular, it is possible to
obtain finite-sample generalization bounds of the resulting
estimator on the cost-sensitive structured loss (Nowak-Vila
et al., 2019a). Unfortunately, these guarantees are not satisfied by M3 Ns even though the method is based on an upper
bound of the loss. More precisely, it is known that the upper
bound can be not tight (and lead to inconsistent estimation)
when the relationship between input and output labels is
far from deterministic (Liu, 2007), which it is essentially
always the case in structured prediction due to the exponentially large output space. This means that the estimator
does not converge to the minimizer of the problem leading
to inconsistency.
Recently, a line of work (Fathony et al., 2016; 2018a;b;c)
proposed a consistent method based on an adversarial game
formulation on the structured problem. However, their
analysis does not allow to get generalization bounds and
their proposed algorithm is specific for every setting with at
least a complexity of O(n2 ) to obtain optimal statistical error when learning from n samples. In this paper, we derive
this method in the generic structured output setting from
first principles coming from the binary SVM. We name this
method max-min margin Markov networks (M4 N), as it is
based on a correction of the max-margin of M3 N to a ‘maxmin’ margin. The proposed algorithm has essentially the
same complexity as state-of-the-art methods for M3 N on
the regularized empirical risk minimization problem, but it
comes with consistency guarantees and finite sample generalization bounds on the discrete structured prediction loss,
with constants that are polynomial in the number of parts

