Semi-Supervised StyleGAN for Disentanglement Learning

Weili Nie∗ 1 Tero Karras 2 Animesh Garg 2 3 Shoubhik Debnath 2 Anjul Patney 2
Ankit B. Patel 1 Anima Anandkumar 2 4

Abstract
Disentanglement learning is crucial for obtaining disentangled representations and controllable
generation. Current disentanglement methods
face several inherent limitations: difficulty with
high-resolution images, primarily focusing on
learning disentangled representations, and nonidentifiability due to the unsupervised setting. To
alleviate these limitations, we design new architectures and loss functions based on StyleGAN
(Karras et al., 2019), for semi-supervised highresolution disentanglement learning. We create
two complex high-resolution synthetic datasets
for systematic testing. We investigate the impact of limited supervision and find that using
only 0.25%∼2.5% of labeled data is sufficient for
good disentanglement on both synthetic and real
datasets. We propose new metrics to quantify generator controllability, and observe there may exist
a crucial trade-off between disentangled representation learning and controllable generation. We
also consider semantic fine-grained image editing
to achieve better generalization to unseen images.

1. Introduction
Disentanglement learning with deep generative models has
attracted much attention recently (Chen et al., 2016; Higgins et al., 2017; Locatello et al., 2019). This is crucial for
controllable generation, where the style codes specified to
the generator need to separately control various factors of
variation for faithful generation. Another goal is learning
disentangled representations where the input samples can
be encoded to latent factors that are disentangled. This has
been argued as a key to success of deep learning (Achille
& Soatto, 2018). Previous works have primarily focused
on only one of the above two objectives. Ideally, the ultiRice University (∗ Work done as a part of internship at Nvidia)
Nvidia 3 University of Toronto 4 California Institute of Technology.
Correspondence to: Weili Nie <wn8@rice.edu>.
1

2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

mate goal of disentanglement learning is to achieve both
the objectives at the same time, especially on more complex
high-resolution images, and we pursue this goal in this paper. We first list the three main limitations of the current
disentanglement methods.
First, much effort has focused on unsupervised disentanglement methods (Chen et al., 2016; Higgins et al., 2017;
Nguyen-Phuoc et al., 2019). This is because a large number
of fully annotated samples is expensive to obtain. These
methods suffer from non-identifiability, which means multiple repeated runs will not reliably observe the same latent representations (Hyvärinen & Pajunen, 1999; Locatello
et al., 2019). In addition, human feedback is needed to discern (i) what factors of variation the model has learnt (e.g.,
object shape and color), and (ii) what semantic meaning
different values of the discovered factor code represent (e.g.,
red and blue in a color factor code). To reliably control generation for practical use, adding a small amount of labeled
data may resolve the non-identifiability issue and lead to
interpretable factors. Hence, we investigate the impact of
limited supervision on disentanglement learning.
Second, current disentanglement methods (Locatello et al.,
2019; 2020) are mainly developed and evaluated on relatively simple low-resolution images, such as dSprites
(Matthey et al., 2017) and 3DShapes (Kim & Mnih, 2018),
which raises concerns about their ability to scale up to more
diverse, higher-resolution images. For example, the use of
3D representations to disentangle the 3D pose may not easily apply to high-resolution images due to the computational
cost. The difficulty of some deep generative models at generating realistic images also limits their application in more
complex domains. Furthermore, although there exist many
real image datasets of high resolution, the latent factors
are typically only partially observed or unbalanced, which
makes it hard to scientifically study disentanglement. To
gain practically useful insights, it is critical to first test disentanglement methods on complex, high-resolution, synthetic
images wherein ground-truth factors are easy to obtain.
Third, most previous works (Kim & Mnih, 2018; Chen et al.,
2018) have primarily focused on learning disentangled representations by quantifying encoder disentanglement quality,
in the hopes that a better disentangled encoder might also

