Layered Sampling for Robust Optimization Problems

Hu Ding 1 Zixiu Wang 1

Abstract

2011; Huang et al., 2018), logistic regression (Huggins et al.,
2016; Munteanu et al., 2018), linear regression (Dasgupta
et al., 2009; Drineas et al., 2006), and Gaussian mixture
model (Lucic et al., 2017; Karnin & Liberty, 2019).

In real world, our datasets often contain outliers.
Most existing algorithms for handling outliers
take high time complexities (e.g. quadratic or cubic complexity). Coreset is a popular approach
for compressing data so as to speed up the optimization algorithms. However, the current coreset
methods cannot be easily extended to handle the
case with outliers. In this paper, we propose a new
variant of coreset technique, layered sampling, to
deal with two fundamental robust optimization
problems: k-median/means clustering with outliers and linear regression with outliers. This new
coreset method is in particular suitable to speed
up the iterative algorithms (which often improve
the solution within a local range) for those robust
optimization problems.

A large part of existing coreset construction methods are
based on the theory of sensitivity which was proposed by
(Langberg & Schulman, 2010). Informally, each data point
p ∈ P has the sensitivity φ(p) (in fact, we just need to
compute an appropriate upper bound of φ(p)) to measure
its importance to the whole
P instance P over all possible
solutions, and Φ(P ) = p∈P φ(p) is called the total sensitivity. The coreset construction is a simple sampling procedure where each point p is drawn i.i.d. from P proporφ(p)
tional to Φ(P
) ; each sampled point p is assigned a weight
Φ(P )
w(p) = mφ(p)
where m is the sample size depending on the
“pseudo-dimension” of the objective function ∆ ((Feldman
& Langberg, 2011; Li et al., 2001)); eventually, the set of
weighted sampled points form the desired coreset S.

1. Introduction
Coreset is a widely studied technique for solving many
optimization problems (Phillips, 2016; Bachem et al., 2017;
Munteanu et al., 2018; Feldman, 2020). The (informal)
definition is as follows. Given an optimization problem with
the objective function ∆, denote by ∆(P, C) the objective
value determined by a dataset P and a solution C; a small
set S is called a coreset if
∆(P, C) ≈ ∆(S, C)

(1)

for any feasible solution C. Roughly speaking, the coreset
is a small set of data approximately representing a much
larger dataset, and therefore existing algorithm can run on
the coreset (instead of the original dataset) so as to reduce
the complexity measures like running time, space, and communication. In the past years, the coreset techniques have
been successfully applied to solve many optimization problems, such as clustering (Chen, 2009; Feldman & Langberg,
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, University
of Science and Technology of China. Correspondence to:
Hu Ding <huding@ustc.edu.cn, http://staff.ustc.edu.
cn/˜huding/ >.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

In real world, datasets are noisy and contain outliers. Moreover, outliers could seriously affect the final results in data
analysis (Chandola et al., 2009; Goodfellow et al., 2018).
However, the sensitivity based coreset approach is not appropriate to handle robust optimization problems involving
outliers (e.g., k-means clustering with outliers). For example, it is not easy to compute the sensitivity φ(p) because
the point p could be inlier or outlier for different solutions;
moreover, it is challenging to build the relation, such as (1),
between the original instance P and the coreset S (e.g., how
to determine the number of outliers for the instance S?).
1.1. Our Contributions
In this paper, we consider two important robust optimization
problems: k-median/means clustering with outliers and linear regression with outliers. Their quality guaranteed algorithms exist but often have high complexities that seriously
limit their applications in real scenarios (see Section 1.2 for
more details). We observe that these problems can be often
efficiently solved by some heuristic algorithms in practice,
though they only guarantee local optimums in theory. For
example, (Chawla & Gionis, 2013) proposed the algorithm
k-means- - to solve the problem of k-means clustering with
outliers, where the main idea is an alternating minimization
strategy. The algorithm is an iterative procedure, where it

