Scalable Gaussian Process Separation for Kernels with a Non-Stationary Phase

Jan Graßhoff 1 Alexandra Jankowski 1 Philipp Rostalski 1

Abstract
The application of Gaussian processes (GPs) to
large data sets is limited due to heavy memory
and computational requirements. A variety of
methods has been proposed to enable scalability,
one of which is to exploit structure in the kernel matrix. Previous methods, however, cannot
easily deal with mixtures of non-stationary processes. This paper investigates an efficient GP
framework, that extends structured kernel interpolation methods to GPs with a non-stationary
phase. We particularly treat the separation of nonstationary sources, which is a problem that commonly arises e.g. in spatio-temporal biomedical
datasets. Our approach employs multiple sets of
non-equidistant inducing points to account for the
non-stationarity and retrieve Toeplitz and Kronecker structure in the kernel matrix allowing for
efficient inference and kernel learning. Our approach is demonstrated on numerical examples
and large spatio-temporal biomedical problems.

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) provide interpretable models for
solving regression, classification and prediction problems
in a huge number of scientific domains. GP regression
originates from early work in geostatistics, where the technique was known under the name of kriging (Rasmussen &
Williams, 2005). Since then, its great potential of discovering intricate structure in data has been shown empirically
in numerous problems. Still, due to O(n3 ) computational
and O(n2 ) storage cost in the number of training points n,
scalability to large datasets remains as the main limiting
factor in many practical applications and restricts GPs to
datasets containing at most a few thousand observations.
Different approaches to scalable GP regression have been
1

Institute for Electrical Engineering in Medicine, Universität zu Lübeck, Germany. Correspondence to: Jan Graßhoff
<j.grasshoff@uni-luebeck.de>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

proposed (Liu et al., 2018), one of which is based on computing low-rank approximations of the kernel matrix by
using sparse inducing point sets (Snelson & Ghahramani,
2006; Quinonero Candela & Rasmussen, 2005). Inducing
point methods are particularly useful when the data are
densely sampled compared to the characteristic length-scale
of the underlying process. However, short-scale variability
requires a large amount of inducing points, which in such
cases diminishes the performance. Also, these methods
scale poorly on long time-series data (and spatio-temporal
data) as the extending domain has to be filled up with inducing points (Solin et al., 2018).
Another orthogonal line of research deals with the exploitation of structure in the kernel matrix: among the most
promising approaches are (1) state-space representation
methods (Hartikainen & Särkkä, 2010; Solin & Särkkä,
2014; Särkkä & Hartikainen, 2012) and (2) methods exploiting Toeplitz and Kronecker matrix structure (Cunningham
et al., 2008; Saatci, 2011). The state-space approach enables
highly scalable O(n) inference and marginal likelihood evaluation for spatio-temporal data – though, it might become
slow if the gaps between data points are very uneven. We
focus on the second structure exploiting approach, namely
Toeplitz/Kronecker matrix structure for fast matrix-vector
multiplications (MVMs) which requires that samples are
distributed on a multidimensional lattice and that the kernel
is stationary/separable. The restriction to lattice structures
was later lifted through an approach called structured kernel interpolation (SKI), introduced by Wilson & Nickisch
(2015). It employs a structured set of inducing points and
a sparse interpolation matrix enabling fast MVMs with the
kernel matrix without requiring any special data structure.
In this paper we are concerned with solving the source
separation and model learning problem for additive mixtures of non-stationary processes. We show, that SKI can
be naturally extended for mixtures of non-stationary kernels, more specifically kernels with a non-stationary phase
in an approach we call warpSKI. We propose to use multiple non-equispaced sets of inducing points to recover
structure in the kernel matrix. This permits us to solve
new classes of important problems via GPs, in particular
temporal/spatio-temporal source separation and regression
problems on large biomedical datasets, which is the main
contribution of this work. We focus on the case that the

