Implicit Regularization of Random Feature Models

Arthur Jacot * 1 Berfin Şimşek * 1 2 Francesco Spadaro 1 Clément Hongler 1 Franck Gabriel 1

Abstract
Random Feature (RF) models are used as efficient
parametric approximations of kernel methods. We
investigate, by means of random matrix theory,
the connection between Gaussian RF models and
Kernel Ridge Regression (KRR). For a Gaussian
RF model with P features, N data points, and a
ridge λ, we show that the average (i.e. expected)
RF predictor is close to a KRR predictor with an
effective ridge λ̃. We show that λ̃ > λ and λ̃ &
λ monotonically as P grows, thus revealing the
implicit regularization effect of finite RF sampling.
We then compare the risk (i.e. test error) of the λ̃KRR predictor with the average risk of the λ-RF
predictor and obtain a precise and explicit bound
on their difference. Finally, we empirically find
an extremely good agreement between the test
errors of the average λ-RF predictor and λ̃-KRR
predictor.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we consider the Random Feature (RF) model
which is an approximation of Kernel Methods (Rahimi &
Recht, 2008) which has seen many recent theoretical developements.
The conventional wisdom suggests that to ensure good generalization performance, one should choose a model class
that is complex enough to learn the signal from the training
data, yet simple enough to avoid fitting spurious patterns
therein (Bishop, 2006). This view has been questioned
by recent developments in machine learning. First, Zhang
et al. (2016) observed that modern neural network models
can perfectly fit randomly labeled training data, while still
generalizing well. Second, the test error as a function of
*

Equal contribution 1 Chair of Statistical Field Theory, École
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
2
Laboratory of Computational Neuroscience, École Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to:
Arthur Jacot <arthur.jacot@epfl.ch>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

parameters exhibits a so-called ‘double-descent’ curve for
many models including neural networks, random forests,
and random feature models (Advani & Saxe, 2017; Spigler
et al., 2018; Belkin et al., 2018; Mei & Montanari, 2019;
Belkin et al., 2019; Nakkiran et al., 2019).
The above models share the feature that for fixed input, the
learned predictor fˆ is random: for neural networks, this is
due to the random initialization of the parameters and/or
to the stochasticity of the training algorithm; for random
forests, to the random branching; for random feature models,
to the sampling of random features. The somehow surprising generalization behavior of these models has recently
been the subject of increasing attention. In general, the risk
(i.e. test error) is a random variable with two sources of randomness: the usual one due to the sampling of the training
set, and the second one due to the randomness of the model
itself.
We consider the Random Feature (RF) model (Rahimi &
Recht, 2008) with features sampled from a Gaussian Process
(GP) and study the RF predictor fˆ minimizing the regularized least squares error, isolating the randomness of the
model by considering fixed training data points. RF models have been the subject of intense research activity: they
are (randomized) approximations of Kernel Methods aimed
at easing the computational challenges of Kernel Methods
while being asymptotically equivalent to them (Rahimi &
Recht, 2008; Yang et al., 2012; Sriperumbudur & Szabó,
2015; Yu et al., 2016). Unlike the asymptotic behavior,
which is well studied, RF models with a finite number of
features are much less understood.
1.1. Contributions
We consider a model of Random Features (RF) approximating a kernel method with kernel K. This model consists
of P Gaussian features, sampled i.i.d. from a (centered)
Gaussian process with covariance kernel K. For a given
training set of size N , we study the distribution of the RF
(RF )
predictor fˆλ
with ridge parameter λ > 0 (L2 penalty
on the parameters) and denote it by λ-RF. We show the
following:
(RF )

• The distribution of fˆλ
sian processes.

is that of a mixture of Gaus-

