On Learning Sets of Symmetric Elements

Haggai Maron 1 Or Litany 2 Gal Chechik 3 1 Ethan Fetaya 3

Abstract
Learning from unordered sets is a fundamental
learning setup, recently attracting increasing attention. Research in this area has focused on the
case where elements of the set are represented by
feature vectors, and far less emphasis has been
given to the common case where set elements
themselves adhere to their own symmetries. That
case is relevant to numerous applications, from
deblurring image bursts to multi-view 3D shape
recognition and reconstruction. In this paper, we
present a principled approach to learning sets of
general symmetric elements. We first characterize
the space of linear layers that are equivariant both
to element reordering and to the inherent symmetries of elements, like translation in the case of
images. We further show that networks that are
composed of these layers, called Deep Sets for
Symmetric elements layers (DSS), are universal
approximators of both invariant and equivariant
functions. DSS layers are also straightforward to
implement. Finally, we show that they improve
over existing set-learning architectures in a series
of experiments with images, graphs and pointclouds.

1. Introduction
Learning with data that consists of unordered sets of elements is an important problem with numerous applications,
from classification and segmentation of 3D data (Zaheer
et al., 2017; Qi et al., 2017; Su et al., 2015; Kalogerakis
et al., 2017) to image deblurring (Aittala & Durand, 2018).
In this setting, each data point consists of a set of elements,
and the task is independent of element order. This independence induces a symmetry structure, which can be used
to design deep models with improved efficiency and generalization. Indeed, models that respect set symmetries,
1
NVIDIA Research 2 Stanford University 3 Bar Ilan University.
Correspondence to: Haggai Maron <hmaron@nvidia.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

e.g. (Zaheer et al., 2017; Qi et al., 2017), have become the
leading approach for solving such tasks. However, in many
cases, the elements of the set themselves adhere to certain
symmetries, as happens when learning with sets of images,
sets of point-clouds and sets of graphs. It is still unknown
what is the best way to utilize these additional symmetries.
A common approach to handle per-element symmetries, is
based on processing elements individually. First, one processes each set-element independently into a feature vector
using a Siamese architecture (Bromley et al., 1994), and
only then fuses information across all feature vectors. When
following this process, the interaction between the elements
of the set only occurs after each element has already been
processed, possibly omitting low-level details. Indeed, it
has been recently shown that for learning sets of images
(Aittala & Durand, 2018; Sridhar et al., 2019; Liu et al.,
2019), significant gain can be achieved with intermediate
information-sharing layers.
In this paper, we present a principled approach to learning
sets of symmetric elements. First, we describe the symmetry group of these sets, and then fully characterize the
space of linear layers that are equivariant to this group. Notably, this characterization implies that information between
set elements should be shared in all layers. For example,
Figure 1 illustrates a DSS layer for sets of images. DSS
layers provide a unified framework that generalizes several
previously-described architectures for a variety of data types.
In particular, it directly generalizes DeepSets (Zaheer et al.,
2017). Moreover, other recent works can also be viewed as
special cases of our approach (Hartford et al., 2018; Aittala
& Durand, 2018; Sridhar et al., 2019).
A potential concern with equivariant architectures is that
restricting layers to be equivariant to some group of symmetries may reduce the expressive power of the model (Maron
et al., 2019c; Morris et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2019). We
eliminate this potential limitation by proving two universalapproximation theorems for invariant and equivariant DSS
networks. Simply put, these theorems state that if invariant
(equivariant) networks for the elements of interest are universal, then the corresponding invariant (equivariant) DSS
networks on sets of such elements are also universal.
To summarize, this paper has three main contributions: (1)
We characterize the space of linear equivariant layers for sets

