Convex Calibrated Surrogates for the Multi-Label F-Measure

Mingyuan Zhang 1 Harish G. Ramaswamy 2 Shivani Agarwal 1

Abstract
The F -measure is a widely used performance
measure for multi-label classiﬁcation, where multiple labels can be active in an instance simultaneously (e.g. in image tagging, multiple tags can be
active in any image). In particular, the F -measure
explicitly balances recall (fraction of active labels predicted to be active) and precision (fraction
of labels predicted to be active that are actually
so), both of which are important in evaluating the
overall performance of a multi-label classiﬁer. As
with most discrete prediction problems, however,
directly optimizing the F -measure is computationally hard. In this paper, we explore the question of designing convex surrogate losses that are
calibrated for the F -measure – speciﬁcally, that
have the property that minimizing the surrogate
loss yields (in the limit of sufﬁcient data) a Bayes
optimal multi-label classiﬁer for the F -measure.
We show that the F -measure for an s-label problem, when viewed as a 2s × 2s loss matrix, has
rank at most s2 + 1, and apply a result of Ramaswamy et al. (2014) to design a family of convex calibrated surrogates for the F -measure. The
resulting surrogate risk minimization algorithms
can be viewed as decomposing the multi-label
F -measure learning problem into s2 + 1 binary
class probability estimation problems. We also
provide a quantitative regret transfer bound for
our surrogates, which allows any regret guarantees for the binary problems to be transferred to
regret guarantees for the overall F -measure problem, and discuss a connection with the algorithm
of Dembczynski et al. (2013). Our experiments
conﬁrm our theoretical ﬁndings.
1

Department of Computer and Information Science, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA 2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology
Madras, Chennai, India. Correspondence to: Shivani Agarwal
<ashivani@seas.upenn.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

1. Introduction
The Fβ -measure is a widely used performance measure for
multi-label classiﬁcation (MLC) problems. In particular,
in an MLC problem, multiple labels can be active in an
instance simultaneously; a good example is that of image
tagging, where several tags (such as sky, sand, water)
can be active in the same image. In such problems, when
evaluating the performance of a classiﬁer on a particular
instance, it is important to balance the recall of the classiﬁer
on the given instance, i.e. the fraction of active labels for
that instance that are correctly predicted as such, and the
precision of the classiﬁer on the instance, i.e. the fraction
of labels predicted to be active for that instance that are
actually so. The Fβ -measure accomplishes this by taking the
(possibly weighted) harmonic mean of these two quantities.
Unfortunately, as with most discrete prediction problems,
optimizing the Fβ -measure directly during training is computationally hard. Consequently, one generally settles for
some form of approximation. One approach is to simply
treat the labels as independent, and train a separate binary
classiﬁer for each label; this is sometimes referred to as the
binary relevance (BR) approach. Of course, this ignores the
fact that labels can have correlations among them (e.g. sky
and cloud may be more likely to co-occur than sky and
computer). Several other approaches have been proposed
in recent years (Dembczynski et al., 2013; Koyejo et al.,
2015; Wu & Zhou, 2017; Pillai et al., 2017).
In this paper, we turn to the theory of convex calibrated surrogate losses – which has yielded convex risk minimization
algorithms for several other discrete prediction problems in
recent years (Bartlett et al., 2006; Zhang, 2004b; Tewari &
Bartlett, 2007; Steinwart, 2007; Duchi et al., 2010; Gao &
Zhou, 2013; Ramaswamy et al., 2014; 2015) – to design
principled surrogate risk minimization algorithms for the
multi-label Fβ -measure. In particular, for an MLC problem
with s tags, the total number of possible labelings of an
instance is 2s (each tag can be active or inactive). Viewing
the Fβ -measure as (one minus) a 2s × 2s loss matrix, we
show that this matrix has rank at most s2 + 1, and apply the
results of Ramaswamy et al. (2014) to design an output coding scheme that reduces the Fβ learning problem to a set of
s2 + 1 binary class probability estimation (CPE) problems.
By using a suitable binary surrogate risk minimization algorithm (such as binary logistic regression) for these binary

