Abstraction Mechanisms Predict Generalization in Deep Neural Networks

Alex Gain 1 Hava Siegelmann 2

Abstract
A longstanding problem for Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) is understanding their puzzling
ability to generalize well. We approach this problem through the unconventional angle of cognitive abstraction mechanisms, drawing inspiration
from recent neuroscience work, allowing us to
deﬁne the Cognitive Neural Activation metric
(CNA) for DNNs, which is the correlation between information complexity (entropy) of given
input and the concentration of higher activation
values in deeper layers of the network. The CNA
is highly predictive of generalization ability, outperforming norm-and-sharpness-based generalization metrics on an extensive evaluation of close
to 200 network instances comprising a breadth
of dataset-architecture combinations, especially
in cases where additive noise is present and/or
training labels are corrupted. These strong empirical results show the usefulness of the CNA
as a generalization metric and encourage further
research on the connection between information
complexity and representations in the deeper layers of networks in order to better understand the
generalization capabilities of DNNs. 1

more puzzling is their ability to memorize random datasets
(Zhang et al., 2016; Yun et al., 2019). In part due to this,
there has been a surge of work aimed at understanding the
crucial factors to high-performing DNNs. Some studies
have approached explaining generalization in DNNs via optimization arguments characterizing critical points (Dauphin
et al., 2014; Kawaguchi, 2016; Haeffele and Vidal, 2017),
the smoothness of loss surfaces (Nguyen and Hein, 2017;
Choromanska et al., 2015; Li et al., 2017), and implicit
priors and regularization brought on by DNNs’ learning
methods (Mianjy et al., 2018), including that overparameterization itself leads to better learned optima and easier
optimization (Arpit and Bengio, 2019; Allen-Zhu et al.,
2019; Oymak and Soltanolkotabi, 2019; Allen-Zhu et al.,
2018). The work from (Morcos et al., 2018) provides insight
by relating DNN generalization capability to reliance on single directions. Others have used information theory as a
means of explaining the perfomance and inner-mechanisms
of DNNs (Tishby and Zaslavsky, 2015; Shwartz-Ziv and
Tishby, 2017). In (Lampinen and Ganguli, 2018), task structure of DNNs w.r.t. transfer learning is incorporated for
tighter bounds on generalization error.

Department of Computer Science, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA 2 School of Computer and
Information Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst,
Amherst, MA 01003, USA. Correspondence to: Alex Gain
<again1@jhu.edu>.

Complementary to these works, we approach the problem
of understanding generalization of DNNs via the unconventional angle of applying the cognitive neuroscience concept
of abstraction mechanisms (Calvo and Gomila, 2008; Peters
et al., 2017; Taylor et al., 2015; Shivhare and Kumar, 2016;
Gilead et al., 2014) – i.e. how representations are formed
that compress information content while retaining only information which is relevant for generalization to unseen
examples. Speciﬁcally, we seek to analyze DNNs’ representational patterns with comparison to abstraction mechanisms employed by the brain. Arguably, if we can quantify
representational similarity (and dissimilarity) of these mechanisms in DNNs in comparison to the brain then it may aid
in understanding their inner-mechanisms and could allow us
to leverage current and ongoing neuroscience research. Additionally, it could bring new perspectives or understanding
to the optimization, regularization, and information theory
works cited in the previous paragraph.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
An implementation of this paper can be found on GitHub:
https://github.com/alexgain/cna-icml2020

While we don’t fully realize these aims in this paper, we
instead provide practical metrics merely inspired by these
neuroscience works that could shed light on the generalization mechanisms of DNNs, and provide a potential starting

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have made big strides in
recent years, improving substantially on state-of-the-art results across many benchmarks and showing great generalization abilities (LeCun et al., 2015). This is perhaps
surprising given the large number of parameters, ﬂexibility,
and relative lack of explicit priors enforced in DNNs. Even
1

