Strategic Classification is Causal Modeling in Disguise

John Miller 1 Smitha Milli 1 Moritz Hardt 1

Abstract
Consequential decision-making incentivizes individuals to strategically adapt their behavior to
the specifics of the decision rule. While a long
line of work has viewed strategic adaptation as
gaming and attempted to mitigate its effects, recent work has instead sought to design classifiers
that incentivize individuals to improve a desired
quality. Key to both accounts is a cost function
that dictates which adaptations are rational to undertake. In this work, we develop a causal framework for strategic adaptation. Our causal perspective clearly distinguishes between gaming and
improvement and reveals an important obstacle
to incentive design. We prove any procedure for
designing classifiers that incentivize improvement
must inevitably solve a non-trivial causal inference problem. We show a similar result holds
for designing cost functions that satisfy the requirements of previous work. With the benefit
of hindsight, our results show much of the prior
work on strategic classification is causal modeling
in disguise.

1. Introduction
Individuals faced with consequential decisions about them
often use knowledge of the decision rule to strategically
adapt towards achieving a desirable outcome. Much work
in computer science views such strategic adaptation as
adversarial behavior (Dalvi et al., 2004; Brückner et al.,
2012), manipulation, or gaming (Hardt et al., 2016; Dong
et al., 2018). More recent work rightfully recognizes
that adaptation can also correspond to attempts at selfimprovement (Bambauer & Zarsky, 2018; Kleinberg &
Raghavan, 2019). Rather than seek classifiers that are robust to gaming, these works suggest to design classifiers
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Berkeley, Berkeley, California, USA. Correspondence to: John
Miller <miller john@berkeley.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

that explicitly incentive improvement on some target measure (Kleinberg & Raghavan, 2019; Alon et al., 2020; Khajehnejad et al., 2019; Haghtalab et al., 2020).
Incentivizing improvement requires a clear distinction between gaming and improvement. While this distinction
may be intuitive in some cases, in others, it is subtle. Do
employer rewards for punctuality improve productivity? It
sounds plausible, but empirical evidence suggests otherwise (Gubler et al., 2016). Indeed, the literature is replete
with examples of failed incentive schemes (Oates & Schwab,
2015; Rich & Larson, 1984; Belot & Schröder, 2016).
Our contributions in this work are two-fold. First, we provide the missing formal distinction between gaming and
improvement. This distinction is a corollary of a comprehensive causal framework for strategic adaptation that we
develop. Second, we give a formal reason why incentive
design is so difficult. Specifically, we prove any successful attempt to incentivize improvement must have solved a
non-trivial causal inference problem along the way.
1.1. Causal Framework
We conceptualize individual adaptation as performing an
intervention in a causal model that includes all relevant features X, a predictor Ŷ , as well as the target variable Y . We
then characterize gaming and improvement by reasoning
about how the corresponding intervention affects the predictor Ŷ and the target variable Y . This is illustrated in
Figure 1.
We combine the causal model with an agent-model that
describes how individuals with a given setting of features
respond to a classification rule. For example, it is common
in strategic classification to model agents as being rational
with respect to a cost function that quantifies the cost of
feature changes.
Combining the causal model and agent model, we can separate improvement from gaming. Informally speaking, improvement corresponds to the case where the agent response
to the predictor causes a positive change in the target variable Y . Gaming corresponds to the case where the agent
response causes a change in the prediction Ŷ but not the
underlying target variable Y . Making this intuition precise,
however, requires the language of counterfactuals of the

