Robust One-Bit Recovery via ReLU Generative Networks: Near-Optimal
Statistical Rate and Global Landscape Analysis

Shuang Qiu * 1 Xiaohan Wei * 2 Zhuoran Yang 3

Abstract
We study the robust one-bit compressed sensing problem whose goal is to design an algorithm that faithfully recovers any sparse target
vector θ0 ∈ Rd uniformly via m quantized noisy
measurements. Specifically, we consider a new
framework for this problem where the sparsity
is implicitly enforced via mapping a low dimensional representation x0 ∈ Rk through a known
n-layer ReLU generative network G : Rk → Rd
such that θ0 = G(x0 ). Such a framework poses
low-dimensional priors on θ0 without a known
sparsity basis. We propose to recover the target G(x0 ) solving an unconstrained empirical
risk minimization (ERM). Under a weak subexponential measurement assumption, we establish a joint statistical and computational analysis.
In particular, we prove that the ERM estimator
in this new framework achieves a statistical rate
e
of m = O(kn
log d/ε2 ) recovering any G(x0 )
uniformly up to an error ε. When the network
is shallow (i.e., n is small), we show this rate
matches the information-theoretic lower bound
up to logarithm factors on ε−1 . From the lens of
computation, we prove that under proper conditions on the network weights, our proposed empirical risk, despite non-convexity, has no stationary
point outside of small neighborhoods around the
true representation x0 and its negative multiple;
furthermore, we show that the global minimizer
of the empirical risk stays within the neighborhood around x0 rather than its negative multiple
under further assumptions on weights.
Equal contribution 1 University of Michigan, MI, USA.
University of Southern California, CA, USA. 3 Princeton
University, NJ, USA. Correspondence to: Shuang Qiu
<qiush@umich.edu>, Xiaohan Wei <xiaohanw@usc.edu>,
Zhuoran Yang <zy6@princeton.edu>.

1. Introduction
Quantized compressed sensing investigates how to design
the sensing procedure, quantizer, and reconstruction algorithm so as to recover a high dimensional vector from a
limited number of quantized measurements. The problem of one-bit compressed sensing, which aims at recovering a target vector θ0 ∈ Rd from single-bit observations
yi = sign(hai , θ0 i), i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , m}, m  d and random sensing vectors ai ∈ Rd , is particularly challenging.
Previous theoretical successes on this problem (e.g. Jacques
et al. (2013); Plan & Vershynin (2013); Zhu & Gu (2015))
mainly rely on two key assumptions: (1) The Gaussianity
of the sensing vector ai . (2) The sparsity of the vector θ0 on
a given basis. However, the practical significance of these
assumptions are rather limited in the sense that it is difficult
to generate Gaussian vectors and high dimensional targets in
practice are often distributed near a low-dimensional manifold rather than sparse on some given basis. The goal of this
work is to make steps towards addressing these limitations.
1.1. Sub-Gaussian One-Bit Compressed Sensing
As investigated in Ai et al. (2014), sub-Gaussian one-bit
compressed sensing can easily fail regardless of the recovery
algorithms. More specifically, consider two sparse vectors:
θ1 = [1, 0, 0, · · · , 0], θ2 = [1, − 1/2, 0, · · · , 0],
and i.i.d. Bernoulli sensing vectors ai , where each entry
takes +1 and −1 with equal probabilities. Such sensing
vectors are known to perform optimally in the ordinary
linear compressed sensing scenario, but cannot distinguish
between θ1 and θ2 in the current one-bit scenario regardless
of algorithms. Moreover, Ai et al. (2014); Goldstein &
Wei (2018) further propose non-consistent estimators whose
discrepancies are measured in terms of certain distances
between the Gaussian distribution and the distribution of
the sensing vectors.

*

2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

A major step towards consistent non-Gaussian one-bit compressed sensing is called dithering, which has been considered in several recent works (Xu & Jacques, 2018;
Dirksen & Mendelson, 2018a). The key idea is that instead of yi = sign(hai , θ0 i), one considers a new procedure by adding artificial random noise τi before quantization: yi = sign(hai , θ0 i + τi ), i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , m}. In

