On the Relation between Quality-Diversity Evaluation and Distribution-Fitting
Goal in Text Generation
Jianing Li 1 2 Yanyan Lan 1 2 Jiafeng Guo 1 2 Xueqi Cheng 1 2

Abstract
The goal of text generation models is to ft the
underlying real probability distribution of text.
For performance evaluation, quality and diversity
metrics are usually applied. However, it is still
not clear to what extend can the quality-diversity
evaluation refect the distribution-ftting goal. In
this paper, we try to reveal such relation in a theoretical approach. We prove that under certain
conditions, a linear combination of quality and
diversity constitutes a divergence metric between
the generated distribution and the real distribution.
We also show that the commonly used BLEU/SelfBLEU metric pair fails to match any divergence
metric, thus propose CR/NRR as a substitute for
quality/diversity metric pair.

1. Introduction
Text generation is an essential task for many NLP applications, such as machine writing (Zhang et al., 2017a), machine translation (Bahdanau et al., 2014), image captioning
(Rennie et al., 2017) and dialogue system (Li et al., 2017).
Text generation models work by either explicitly modeling
the probability distribution of text (Mikolov et al., 2010;
Yu et al., 2017), or implicitly learning a generator which
maps noise data to text (Zhang et al., 2017b; Chen et al.,
2018). Both approaches aim at generating text with the
same distribution of given text data.
To achieve the distribution-ftting goal, divergence metrics
are usually applied as the training objective for text generation models, which take minimal value 0 if and only if the
model distribution exactly recover the real text distribution.
Typical choices include the Kullback-Leibler divergence
1

CAS Key Laboratory of Network Data Science and Technology, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China 2 University of Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Yanyan Lan
<lanyanyan@ict.ac.cn>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

by maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) (Mikolov et al.,
2010), and Jensen-Shannon divergence or Wasserstein distance by adversarial training (Yu et al., 2017; Gulrajani et al.,
2017). However during evaluation, divergence-based metrics fails to distinguish two under-ftting cases from each
other: the low-quality case that generate unrealistic text,
and the low-diversity case that generates dull and repeated
text. As such, quality and diversity metrics are introduces
to help the model diagnosis, such as BLEU (Papineni et al.,
2002) and Self-BLEU (Zhu et al., 2018). High generation
quality requires the model to generate realistic samples, i.e.
generated samples are free of grammatical or logical errors.
High generation diversity requires the model to generate
diverse samples, i.e. generated samples are less likely to be
duplicate and contain diverse unique patterns.
Despite popular application of quality-diversity metrics in
evaluation of text generation models (Chen et al., 2018; Lu
et al., 2018b; Fedus et al., 2018; Alihosseini et al., 2019), the
relationship between such evaluation and the distributionftting goal is still not clear. It seems to be a tacit consensus
in recent works that a model with both higher quality and
higher diversity also better ft the real text distribution (Caccia et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019; d’Autume et al., 2019).
However, such assumption is yet to be verifed. This is critical since a potential inequivalence may result in misleading
evaluation conclusions. In this paper, we try to answer this
question under the unconditional text generation setting by
a theoretical approach.
To bridge the gap between distribution-ftting goal and
quality-diversity evaluation, we require the optimal solutions from divergence minimization to be consistent with
that of quality-diversity maximization. As such, we frst
give a general defnition of quality and diversity. Then, we study a Multi-Objective Programming (MOP) problem which
maximizes quality and diversity simultaneously. We prove
there exists a family of Pareto-optimal solutions for this
MOP problem, i.e. solutions which cannot be outperformed
in terms of both quality and diversity. Then we prove the
real distribution belongs to this Pareto-optimal family if
and only if quality-diversity metrics are used in pairs with
strong restrictions. Under such condition, a linear combination of quality and diversity constitutes a divergence metric
between the generated distribution and the real distribution.

