Responsive Safety in Reinforcement Learning by PID Lagrangian Methods

Adam Stooke 1 2 Joshua Achiam 1 2 Pieter Abbeel 1

Abstract
Lagrangian methods are widely used algorithms
for constrained optimization problems, but their
learning dynamics exhibit oscillations and overshoot which, when applied to safe reinforcement
learning, leads to constraint-violating behavior
during agent training. We address this shortcoming by proposing a novel Lagrange multiplier update method that utilizes derivatives of the constraint function. We take a controls perspective,
wherein the traditional Lagrange multiplier update behaves as integral control; our terms introduce proportional and derivative control, achieving favorable learning dynamics through damping and predictive measures. We apply our PID
Lagrangian methods in deep RL, setting a new
state of the art in Safety Gym, a safe RL benchmark. Lastly, we introduce a new method to ease
controller tuning by providing invariance to the
relative numerical scales of reward and cost. Our
extensive experiments demonstrate improved performance and hyperparameter robustness, while
our algorithms remain nearly as simple to derive
and implement as the traditional Lagrangian approach.

on a robot’s components or its surroundings. It may not be
possible to impose such limits by prescribing constraints in
the action or state space directly; instead, hazard-avoiding
behavior must be learned. For this purpose, we use the
well-known framework of the constrained Markov decision
process (CMDP) (Altman, 1999), which limits the accumulation of a “cost” signal which is analogous to the reward.
The optimal policy is one which maximizes the usual return while satisfying the cost constraint. In safe RL the
agent must avoid hazards not only at convergence, but also
throughout exploration and learning.
Lagrangian methods are a classic approach to solving constrained optimization problems. For example, the equalityconstrained problem over the real vector x:
min f (x)

s.t. g(x) = 0

is transformed into an unconstrained one by introduction
of a dual variable–the Lagrange multiplier, λ–to form the
Lagrangian: L(x, λ) = f (x) + λg(x), which is used to find
the solution as:
(x∗ , λ∗ ) = arg max min L(x, λ)
λ

Reinforcement learning has solved sequential decision tasks
of impressive difficulty by maximizing reward functions
through trial and error. Recent examples using deep learning range from robotic locomotion (Schulman et al., 2015;
Gu et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2017; Levine et al., 2016)
to sophisticated video games (Mnih et al., 2013; Schulman
et al., 2017; OpenAI, 2018; Jaderberg et al., 2019). While
errors during training in these domains come without cost,
in some learning scenarios it is important to limit the rates of
hazardous outcomes. One example would be wear and tear
1
University of California, Berkeley 2 OpenAI. Correspondence
to: Adam Stooke <adam.stooke@berkeley.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

(2)

x

Gradient-based algorithms iteratively update the primal and
dual variables:
−∇x L(x, λ) = − ∇x f (x) − λ∇x g(x)

1. Introduction

(1)

x

∇λ L(x, λ) = g(x)

(3)
(4)

so that λ acts as a learned penalty coefficient in the objective,
leading eventually to a constraint-satisfying solution (see
e.g. Bertsekas (2014)). The Lagrangian multiplier method
is readily adapted to the constrained RL setting (Altman,
1998; Geibel & Wysotzki, 2011) and has become a popular
baseline in deep RL (Achiam et al., 2017; Chow et al., 2019)
for its simplicity and effectiveness.
Although they have been shown to converge to optimal,
constraint-satisfying policies (Tessler et al., 2018; Paternain
et al., 2019), a shortcoming of gradient Lagrangian methods
for safe RL is that intermediate iterates often violate constraints. Cost overshoot and oscillations are in fact inherent
to the learning dynamics (Platt & Barr, 1988; Wah et al.,
2000), and we witnessed numerous problematic cases in our
own experiments. Figure 1 (left) shows an example from a

