Stochastic Optimization for Regularized Wasserstein Estimators

Marin Ballu 1 Quentin Berthet 2 Francis Bach 3

Abstract
Optimal transport is a foundational problem in
optimization, that allows to compare probability
distributions while taking into account geometric
aspects. Its optimal objective value, the Wasserstein distance, provides an important loss between
distributions that has been used in many applications throughout machine learning and statistics.
Recent algorithmic progress on this problem and
its regularized versions have made these tools increasingly popular. However, existing techniques
require solving an optimization problem to obtain a single gradient of the loss, thus slowing
down first-order methods to minimize the sum of
losses, that require many such gradient computations. In this work, we introduce an algorithm
to solve a regularized version of this problem
of Wasserstein estimators, with a time per step
which is sublinear in the natural dimensions of
the problem. We introduce a dual formulation,
and optimize it with stochastic gradient steps that
can be computed directly from samples, without
solving additional optimization problems at each
step. Doing so, the estimation and computation
tasks are performed jointly. We show that this
algorithm can be extended to other tasks, including estimation of Wasserstein barycenters. We
provide theoretical guarantees and illustrate the
performance of our algorithm with experiments
on synthetic data.

1. Introduction

can transport mass with distribution measure µ to another
distribution measure ν, with minimal global transport cost.
It can also be written with a probabilistic interpretation,
known as the Monge-Kantorovich formulation, of finding a
joint distribution π in the set Π(µ, ν) of those with marginals
µ and ν, minimizing an expected cost between variables X
and Y . The minimum value gives rise to a natural statistical
tool to compare distributions, known as the Wasserstein (or
earth-mover’s) distance,
Wc (µ, ν) = OT(µ, ν) =

min
π∈Π(µ,ν)

E(X,Y )∼π [c(X, Y )] .

In the case of finitely supported measures, taken with same
support size n for ease of notation, such as two empirical
measures from samples, it is written as a linear program
(on the right). It can be solved by the Hungarian algorithm
(Kuhn, 1955), which runs in time O(n3 ). While tractable,
this is still relatively expensive for extremely large-scale
applications in modern machine learning, where one hopes
for running times that are linear in the size of the input (here
n2 ).
Attention to this problem has been recently renewed in machine learning, in particular due to recent advances to efficiently solve an entropic-regularized version (Cuturi, 2013),
and its uses in many applications (see e.g. Peyré et al., 2019,
for a survey), as it allows to capture the geometric aspects
of the data. This problem has a strongly convex objective,
and its solution converges to that of the optimal transport
problem when the regularization parameter goes to 0. It
can be easily solved with the Sinkhorn algorithm (Sinkhorn,
1964; Altschuler et al., 2017), or by other methods in time
O(n2 log n) (Dvurechensky et al., 2018).

Department of Pure Mathematics and Mathematical Statistics, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom 2 Google Research, Brain Team, Paris, France 3 Inria, ENS, PSL Research
University, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Marin Ballu
<mb2193@cam.ac.uk>.

These tools have been applied in a wide variety of fields,
from machine learning (Alvarez-Melis et al., 2018; Arjovsky
et al., 2017; Gordaliza et al., 2019; Flamary et al., 2018),
natural language processing (Grave et al., 2019; Alaux et al.,
2018; Alvarez-Melis et al., 2018), computer graphics (Feydy
et al., 2017; Lavenant et al., 2018; Solomon et al., 2015),
the natural sciences (del Barrio et al., 2019; Schiebinger
et al., 2019), and learning under privacy (Boursier & Perchet,
2019).

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Of particular interests to statistics and machine learning are
analyses of this problem with only sample access to the
distributions. There have been growing efforts to estimate

Optimal transport is one of the foundational problems of
optimization (Monge, 1781; Kantorovich, 2006), and an
important topic in analysis (Villani, 2008). It asks how one
1

