Boosting Deep Neural Network Efficiency with Dual-Module Inference

Liu Liu 1 2 Lei Deng 2 Zhaodong Chen 2 Yuke Wang 1 Shuangchen Li 3 Jingwei Zhang 3 Yihua Yang 3
Zhenyu Gu 3 Yufei Ding 1 Yuan Xie 2

Abstract
Using deep neural networks (DNNs) in machine
learning tasks is promising in delivering highquality results but challenging to meet stringent
latency requirements and energy constraints because of the memory-bound and the computebound execution pattern of DNNs. We propose
a big-little dual-module inference to dynamically
skip unnecessary memory accesses and computations to accelerate DNN inference. Leveraging
the noise-resilient feature of nonlinear activation
functions, we propose to use a lightweight little module that approximates the original DNN
layer, termed as the big module, to compute activations of the insensitive region that are more
noise-resilient. Hence, the expensive memory accesses and computations of the big module can
be reduced as the results are only calculated in
the sensitive region. For memory-bound models
such as recurrent neural networks (RNNs), our
method can reduce the overall memory accesses
by 40% on average and achieve 1.54x to 1.75x
speedup on a commodity CPU-based server platform with a negligible impact on model quality. In
addition, our method can reduce the operations of
the compute-bound models such as convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) by 3.02x, with only a
0.5% accuracy drop.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) play a critical role in many
areas like image classification (He et al., 2015; Giacinto &
Roli, 2001; Zheng et al., 2019), natural language processing
(NLP) (Bahdanau et al., 2014; Wu et al., 2016; Graves et al.,
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California,
Santa Barbara 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Santa Barbara 3 Alibaba Group. Correspondence to: Liu Liu <liu liu@ucsb.edu>, Lei Deng <leideng@ucsb.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

2013; He et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2017), and graph processing (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Duvenaud et al., 2015; Klicpera
et al., 2018; Yan et al., 2020). While the DNN models
are usually trained in data-centers, the pre-trained models
can be deployed in both data-centers for cloud-based service and edge devices. During inference, there are primary
concerns including latency and energy consumption: low
latency is critical for real-time interaction, and low energy
can help companies reduce cost in data-centers and increase
the endurance of edge devices.
In recent years, extensive studies have shown that quantization and pruning are two effective ways to reduce latency
and energy consumption of DNNs (Han et al., 2015b;a;
Narang et al., 2017; Zhu & Gupta, 2017; Dai et al., 2018;
McKinstry et al., 2018). However, most existing studies
apply pruned and quantized models to compute all the output activations; the overall pruning or quantization ratio is
limited by the accuracy loss.
In this paper, we observe that most popular activation functions like ReLU in convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
and sigmoid, tanh in recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
demonstrate noise resilience in particular regions, i.e., the
negative region of ReLU and the saturation regions of
sigmoid, tanh. We theoretically and experimentally provide evidence that the noise caused by pruning and quantization in these regions is less influential. This observation
motivates us that more aggressive pruning and quantization
can be applied to these insensitive regions.
Leveraging the noise resilience of DNNs, we propose a biglittle dual-module inference (DMI) algorithm that regards
the original pre-trained module as a big module, and use a
little module that has fewer parameters and lower bit-width
to approximate the results of the big module in the insensitive regions. Executing one DNN layer at inference time
takes the following steps: (1) quantize the input activations
and forward them through the little module; (2) predict
which output neurons belong to the sensitive region based
on results from the little module; (3) compute the output
activations of the big module in the predicted sensitive region; (4) combine the outputs of the little module in the
insensitive region and the outputs of the big module with in
the sensitive region.

