Landscape Connectivity and Dropout Stability of SGD Solutions for
Over-parameterized Neural Networks

Alexander Shevchenko 1 Marco Mondelli 1

Abstract
The optimization of multilayer neural networks
typically leads to a solution with zero training error, yet the landscape can exhibit spurious local
minima and the minima can be disconnected. In
this paper, we shed light on this phenomenon: we
show that the combination of stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) and over-parameterization makes
the landscape of multilayer neural networks approximately connected and thus more favorable
to optimization. More specifically, we prove that
SGD solutions are connected via a piecewise linear path, and the increase in loss along this path
vanishes as the number of neurons grows large.
This result is a consequence of the fact that the parameters found by SGD are increasingly dropout
stable as the network becomes wider. We show
that, if we remove part of the neurons (and suitably rescale the remaining ones), the change in
loss is independent of the total number of neurons, and it depends only on how many neurons
are left. Our results exhibit a mild dependence
on the input dimension: they are dimension-free
for two-layer networks and require the number of
neurons to scale linearly with the dimension for
multilayer networks. We validate our theoretical
findings with numerical experiments for different
architectures and classification tasks.

1. Introduction
The recent successes of deep learning have two elements
in common: (i) a local search algorithm, e.g., stochastic
gradient descent (SGD), and (ii) an over-parameterized neural network. Even though the training problem can have
several local minima (Auer et al., 1996) and is NP-hard in
the worst case (Blum & Rivest, 1989), the optimization of
1
Institute of Science and Technology, Austria. Correspondence
to: Alexander Shevchenko <ashevche@ist.ac.at>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

an over-parameterized network via SGD typically leads to a
solution that has small training error and generalizes well.
This fact has led to a focus on the theoretical understanding
of neural networks’ optimization landscape (see, e.g., (Livni
et al., 2014; Dauphin et al., 2014; Safran & Shamir, 2016;
Pennington & Bahri, 2017) and the discussion in Section
2). However, most of the existing results either make strong
assumptions on the model or do not provide a satisfactory
scaling with respect to the parameters of the problem.
From the empirical viewpoint, it has been observed that, if
we connect two minima of SGD with a line segment, the
loss is large along this path (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Keskar
et al., 2017). However, if the path is chosen in a more sophisticated way, one can connect the minima found by SGD
via a piecewise linear path where the loss is approximately
constant (Garipov et al., 2018; Draxler et al., 2018). These
findings suggest that the minima of SGD are not isolated
points in parameter space, but rather they are approximately
connected. In the recent paper (Kuditipudi et al., 2019),
mode connectivity of multilayer ReLU networks is proved
by assuming generic properties of well-trained networks,
i.e., dropout stability and noise stability.
In this work, we consider multilayer neural networks trained
by one-pass (or online) SGD with the square loss. We show
that, as the number of neurons increases, (i) the neural
network becomes increasingly dropout stable, and (ii) the
optimization landscape becomes increasingly connected between SGD solutions. We establish quantitative bounds
on how much the loss changes after the dropout procedure
and along the path connecting two SGD solutions, and we
relate this change in loss to the total number of neurons, the
size of the dropout pattern, and the input dimension. By
doing so, we give a theoretical justification to the empirical
observation that the barriers between local minima tend to
disappear as the neural network becomes larger (Draxler
et al., 2018). More specifically, our main contributions can
be summarized as follows:
Two-layer networks. We consider the training of a twolayer neural network ŷ(x) = N1 aT σ(W x) with N neurons. First, we study the dropout stability of SGD solutions,
namely, we bound the change in loss when N − M neurons
are removed from the trained network and M remaining

