GNN-FiLM: Graph Neural Networks with Feature-wise Linear Modulation

Marc Brockschmidt 1

Abstract
This paper presents a new Graph Neural Network
(GNN) type using feature-wise linear modulation
(FiLM). Many standard GNN variants propagate
information along the edges of a graph by computing messages based only on the representation
of the source of each edge. In GNN-FiLM, the
representation of the target node of an edge is
used to compute a transformation that can be applied to all incoming messages, allowing featurewise modulation of the passed information. Different GNN architectures are compared in extensive experiments on three tasks from the literature, using re-implementations of many baseline
methods. Hyperparameters for all methods were
found using extensive search, yielding somewhat
surprising results: differences between state of
the art models are much smaller than reported
in the literature and well-known simple baselines
that are often not compared to perform better
than recently proposed GNN variants. Nonetheless, GNN-FiLM outperforms these methods on
a regression task on molecular graphs and performs competitively on other tasks.

1. Introduction
Learning from graph-structured data has seen explosive
growth over the last few years, as graphs are a convenient
formalism to model the broad class of data that has objects
(treated as vertices) with some known relationships (treated
as edges). This capability has been used in physical and
biological systems, knowledge bases, computer programs,
and relational reasoning in computer vision tasks. This
graph construction is a highly complex form of feature engineering, mapping the knowledge of a domain expert into
a graph structure which can be consumed and exploited by
high-capacity neural network models.
1
Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK. Correspondence to:
Marc Brockschmidt <mabrocks@microsoft.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

Most neural graph learning methods can be summarised as
neural message passing (Gilmer et al., 2017): nodes are
initialised with some representation and then exchange information by transforming their current state (in practice
with a single linear layer) and sending it as a message to
all neighbours in the graph. At each node, messages are
aggregated in some way and then used to update the associated node representation. In this setting, the message
is entirely determined by the source node (and potentially
the edge type) and the target node is not taken into consideration. A (partial) exception to this is the family of
Graph Attention Networks (Veličković et al., 2018), where
the agreement between source and target representation of
an edge is used to determine the weight of the message in
an attention architecture. However, this weight is applied
to all dimensions of the message at the same time.
A simple consequence of this observation may be to simply
compute messages from the pair of source and target node
state. However, the linear layer commonly used to compute messages would only allow additive interactions between the representations of source and target nodes. More
complex transformation functions are often impractical, as
computation in GNN implementations is dominated by the
message transformation function.
However, this need for non-trivial interaction between different information sources is a common problem in neural
network design. A recent trend has been the use of hypernetworks (Ha et al., 2017), neural networks that compute
the weights of other networks. In this setting, interaction
between two signal sources is achieved by using one of
them as the input to a hypernetwork and the other as input
to the computed network. While an intellectually pleasing
approach, it is often impractical because the prediction of
weights of non-trivial neural networks is computationally
expensive. Approaches to mitigate this exist (e.g., Wu et al.
(2019) handle this in natural language processing), but are
often domain-specific.
A more general mitigation method is to restrict the structure
of the computed network. Recently, “feature-wise linear
modulations” (FiLM) were introduced in the visual question answering domain (Perez et al., 2017). Here, the hypernetwork is fed with an encoding of a question and produces an element-wise affine function that is applied to the

