Go Wide, Then Narrow: Efficient Training of Deep Thin Networks

Denny Zhou 1 Mao Ye 2 Chen Chen* 1 Tianjian Meng* 1 Mingxing Tan* 1 Xiaodan Song 1 Quoc Le 1
Qiang Liu 2 Dale Schuurmans 1

Abstract
For deploying a deep learning model into production, it needs to be both accurate and compact to
meet the latency and memory constraints. This
usually results in a network that is deep (to ensure
performance) and yet thin (to improve computational efficiency). In this paper, we propose
an efficient method to train a deep thin network
with a theoretic guarantee. Our method is motivated by model compression. It consists of three
stages. First, we sufficiently widen the deep thin
network and train it until convergence. Then, we
use this well-trained deep wide network to warm
up (or initialize) the original deep thin network.
This is achieved by layerwise imitation, that is,
forcing the thin network to mimic the intermediate outputs of the wide network from layer to
layer. Finally, we further fine tune this already
well-initialized deep thin network. The theoretical guarantee is established by using the neural
mean field analysis. It demonstrates the advantage
of our layerwise imitation approach over backpropagation. We also conduct large-scale empirical experiments to validate the proposed method.
By training with our method, ResNet50 can outperform ResNet101, and BERTBASE can be comparable with BERTLARGE , when ResNet101 and
BERTLARGE are trained under the standard training procedures as in the literature.

1. Introduction
In many machine learning applications, in particular, language modeling and image classification, it is becoming
common to dramatically increase the model size to achieve
significant performance improvement (e.g., He et al., 2016;
*

Equal contribution 1 Google Brain, USA 2 Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Austin, USA. Correspondence to: Denny Zhou <dennyzhou@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Wu et al., 2016; Devlin et al., 2019; Brock et al., 2019; Raffel et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020). To enlarge a model,
we can make it either much deeper or wider. A big deep
learning model may involve millions or even billions of
parameters, and be trained over a big computation cluster
containing hundreds or thousands of computational nodes.
Despite their impressive performance, however, it is almost
impossible to directly deploy these big deep learning models
into production because of the low latency and memory constraints. To remedy this issue, there has been an increasing
interest in developing compact versions of good performing
big models to meet the practical constraints while without
much drop of accuracy (e.g., Iandola et al., 2016; Sandler
et al., 2018; Howard et al., 2019; Tan & V. Le, 2019; Wortsman et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2020).
In general, compact modeling results in networks which
are both deep and thin. This is because a compact model
must be sufficiently deep in order to extract hierarchical
high-level representations that are impossible for shallow
models to accomplish (e.g., Lee et al., 2009; Le et al., 2012;
Allen-Zhu & Li, 2020), but each layer of the model does not
have to be very wide since many neurons are redundant and
can be pruned without hurting the performance (e.g., Han
et al., 2015; Li et al., 2017; Frankle & Carbin, 2019; Liu
et al., 2019; Ye et al., 2020).
Nevertheless, training deep thin networks are much more
difficult than training deep wide networks. The loss surface of a deep thin network tends to be highly irregular
and nonconvex (e.g., Li et al., 2018). Moreover, during
the backpropagation through a deep thin network, gradients
may vanish or explode (e.g., Bengio et al., 1994; Pascanu
et al., 2013). On the other hand, it has been observed that increasing the width of, or “overparameterizing” the network
makes it much easier to train since its loss surface becomes
smoother and nearly convex (e.g., Li et al., 2018; Du et al.,
2019; Allen-Zhu et al., 2019).
In this paper, we propose a generic algorithm to train deep
thin networks with a theoretical guarantee. Our method
is motivated by model compression. It consists of three
stages (Figure 1 and Algorithm 1). In the first stage, we
significantly widen the deep thin network to obtain a deep
wide network, for example, twice wider, and then train it

