Deep Gaussian Markov Random Fields

Per Sidén 1 Fredrik Lindsten 1

Abstract
Gaussian Markov random fields (GMRFs) are
probabilistic graphical models widely used in spatial statistics and related fields to model dependencies over spatial structures. We establish a formal
connection between GMRFs and convolutional
neural networks (CNNs). Common GMRFs are
special cases of a generative model where the
inverse mapping from data to latent variables is
given by a 1-layer linear CNN. This connection allows us to generalize GMRFs to multi-layer CNN
architectures, effectively increasing the order of
the corresponding GMRF in a way which has favorable computational scaling. We describe how
well-established tools, such as autodiff and variational inference, can be used for simple and efficient inference and learning of the deep GMRF.
We demonstrate the flexibility of the proposed
model and show that it outperforms the state-ofthe-art on a dataset of satellite temperatures, in
terms of prediction and predictive uncertainty.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are the de facto standard model in computer vision when training on a large
set of images. Images are lattice-based data with local dependencies and thus have clear connections with spatial
statistics. However, many spatial problems lack the abundance of data common to computer vision applications, and
often we need to build a model based on a single “image”,
i.e., data recorded over some spatial field. Models such as
deep image prior (Ulyanov et al., 2018) have shown that
CNN architectures can encode useful spatial priors even in
such situations, but the dominant approach is still to model
the spatial dependencies explicitly using, e.g., Gaussian processes (GPs) (Williams & Rasmussen, 2006) or Gaussian
1
Division of Statistics and Machine Learning, Department of Computer and Information Science, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden. Correspondence to: Per Sidén
<per.siden@liu.se>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Markov random fields (GMRFs) (Rue & Held, 2005).
In this paper we show a formal connection between GMRFs
applied to lattice data and CNNs. Common GMRFs based
on nearest neighbour interactions can be viewed as special
cases of a generative model where the inverse mapping from
the spatial field x to a latent variable z is given by a 1-layer
linear CNN. Since common GP models have previously
been shown to be tightly linked with GMRFs (Lindgren
et al., 2011), this connection applies to certain GPs as well.
Modeling the inverse mapping (x → z) using a CNN results
in an auto-regressive (AR) spatial model, whereas using a
CNN for the forward mapping (z → x) would correspond
to a moving average (MA) model (see, e.g., (Ljung, 1999)
for a discussion on AR and MA models in a time series
context). This has the important implication that we obtain
an infinite receptive field (i.e., infinite range on the spatial
dependencies in x) even with a 1-layer model. Indeed, this
is a well known property of GMRFs.
The interpretation of a GMRF as a 1-layer CNN opens up
for a straightforward generalization to multi-layer architectures, resulting in deep GMRFs (DGMRFs). Even when all
layers are linear this has important practical implications:
adding layers corresponds to increasing the auto-regressive
order of the GMRF, i.e., edges are added to the GMRF graph
which improves its expressivity. For conventional GMRF
algorithms, simply adding more edges can have have a significant impact on the computational complexity due to a
reduced degree of sparsity of the resulting precision matrix.
For a DGMRF, on the other hand, the structure imposed by
a multi-layer CNN architecture results in a favorable computational scaling. Indeed, using variational inference for the
latent variables, we obtain a learning algorithm that scales
linearly both with the number of dimensions in the spatial
field (“pixels”) and the number of layers (AR order). Furthermore, viewing GMRFs through the lens of deep learning
allows us to use well-established toolboxes for, e.g., automatic differentiation and GPU training, to facilitate simple
learning of DGMRFs.
After a review of GMRFs in Section 2, we introduce the
DGMRF model in Section 3. Section 4 describes how to
efficiently train the model, and how to compute the posterior
predictive distribution, including uncertainty. We discuss
related work in Section 5. The results in Section 6 illus-

