Linear Bandits with Stochastic Delayed Feedback

Claire Vernade 1 Alexandra Carpentier 2 Tor Lattimore 1 Giovanni Zappella 3 Beyza Ermis 3
Michael Brueckner 3

Abstract
Stochastic linear bandits are a natural and
well-studied model for structured exploration/exploitation problems and are widely used
in applications such as online marketing and
recommendation. One of the main challenges
faced by practitioners hoping to apply existing
algorithms is that usually the feedback is
randomly delayed and delays are only partially
observable. For example, while a purchase is
usually observable some time after the display,
the decision of not buying is never explicitly sent
to the system. In other words, the learner only
observes delayed positive events. We formalize
this problem as a novel stochastic delayed linear
bandit and propose OTFLinUCB and OTFLinTS,
two computationally efficient algorithms able to
integrate new information as it becomes available
and to deal with the permanently
√ censored
feedback. We prove optimal Õ(d T ) bounds
on the regret of the first algorithm and study the
dependency on delay-dependent parameters. Our
model, assumptions and results are validated by
experiments on simulated and real data.

1. Introduction
Content optimization for websites and online advertising are
among the main industrial applications of bandit algorithms
(Chapelle & Li, 2011; Chapelle, 2014). The dedicated services sequentially choose an option among several possibilities and display it on a web page to a particular customer.
In most real world architectures, for each recommendation
request, the features of the products are joined and hashed
with those of the current user and provide a (finite) action
set included in Rd . For that purpose, linear bandits (Chu
et al., 2011; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011) are among the
1

DeepMind, London, UK 2 Otto-Von-Guericke Universität,
Magdeburg, Germany 3 Amazon, Berlin, Germany. Correspondence to: Claire Vernade <vernade@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

most adopted as they allow to take into account the structure
of the space where the action vectors lie.
A key aspect of these interactions through displays on webpages is the time needed by a customer to make a decision
and provide feedback to the learning algorithm, also known
as the conversion indicator (Chapelle, 2014; Diemert et al.,
2017). For example, a mid-size e-commerce website can
serve hundreds of recommendations per second, but customers need minutes, or even hours, to make a purchase. In
(Chapelle, 2014), the authors ran multiple tests on proprietary industrial datasets, providing a good example of how
delays affect the performance of click-through rate estimation. They extract 30 days of display advertising data and
find that delays are on average of the order of several hours
and up to several days.
On the other extreme of the time scale, some companies
optimize long-term metrics for customer engagement (e.g.,
accounting for returned products in the sales results) which
by definition can be computed only several weeks after the
bandit has played the action. Moreover, after a piece of
content is displayed on a page, the user may or may not
decide to react (e.g., click, buy a product). In the negative
case, no signal is sent to the system and the learner cannot
distinguish between actions for which the user did not click
and those where they did, but the conversion is delayed.
Note that in the use cases we consider, when a feedback is
received, the learner is able to attribute it to the past action
that triggered it.
Two major requirements for bandit algorithms in order to be
ready to run in a real online service are the ability to leverage
contextual information and handle delayed feedback. Many
approaches are available to deal with contextual information
(Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011; Agarwal et al., 2014; Auer
et al., 2002; Neu, 2015; Beygelzimer et al., 2011; Chu et al.,
2011; Zhou, 2015). Delays have been identified as a major
problem in online applications (Chapelle, 2014). We give an
overview of the existing literature in Section 2. However, to
the best of our knowledge, no algorithm was able to address
this problem given the requirements defined above.

Contributions Our main contribution is a novel bandit
algorithm called On-The-Fly-LinUCB (OTFLinUCB).

