Stochastically Dominant Distributional Reinforcement Learning

John D. Martin 1 Michal Lyskawinski 1 Xiaohu Li 1 Brendan Englot 1

Abstract
We describe a new approach for managing
aleatoric uncertainty in the Reinforcement Learning (RL) paradigm. Instead of selecting actions according to a single statistic, we propose a distributional method based on the second-order stochastic dominance (SSD) relation. This compares the
inherent dispersion of random returns induced
by actions, producing a comprehensive evaluation of the environment’s uncertainty. The necessary conditions for SSD require estimators to
predict accurate second moments. To accommodate this, we map the distributional RL problem
to a Wasserstein gradient flow, treating the distributional Bellman residual as a potential energy
functional. We propose a particle-based algorithm
for which we prove optimality and convergence.
Our experiments characterize the algorithm’s performance and demonstrate how uncertainty and
performance are better balanced using an SSD
policy than with other risk measures.

1. Introduction
Often in Reinforcement Learning (RL), agents select actions to maximize their expected sum of future (discounted)
rewards. Many have pointed out how this strategy will sometimes lead to undesirable outcomes, particularly when the
environment is stochastic (Heger, 1994; Tamar et al., 2013;
Keramati et al., 2020). In these domains, an interesting subclass of problems require the agent to decide between several competing alternatives with the same expected outcome.
These scenarios frequently arise in finance (Dentcheva &
Ruszczyński, 2006a), where mutliple portfolios can lead
to the same return but with different variability. In such
settings, the expected value does not capture the full state
of uncertainty, and it becomes prudent to employ the full
distribution of outcomes.
1
Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey, USA.
Correspondence to: John D. Martin <jmarti3@stevens.edu>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

The Conditional Value at Risk (CVaRα ) is a popular statistic
that measures uncertainty with the expected outcome under
an α-fraction of possibilities (Artzner et al., 1999). A great
deal of recent RL research focuses on learning good CVaR
policies (Chow & Ghavamzadeh, 2014; Tamar et al., 2015b;
Dabney et al., 2018; Keramati et al., 2020). One point that
remains unresolved is how to choose the right fraction of
outcomes, i.e. the risk level α. It seems plausible that
the best α-subset could vary across the environment. To
our knowledge no one has considered this problem in RL,
when uncertainty is used to evaluate competing actions. To
address these issues, we introduce a distributional policy
that simultaneously captures many risk levels, therefore
removing the need to select one. Our policy is based on the
Second Order Stochastic Dominance (SSD) relation.
The SSD relation is defined using distribution functions and
compared over the continuum of their realizable values. We
say that X stochastically dominates Y in the
R α second order when their cumulative CDFs, F (2) (α) = −∞ F (x)dx,
satisfy (1), and we denote the relation X (2) Y :
(2)

(2)

X (2) Y ⇐⇒ FX (α) ≤ FY (α) ∀α ∈ R.

(1)

The function F (2) defines the frontier of what is known as
the dispersion space (Figure 1). The volume reflects the
degree to which a random variable differs from its expected
value, or its deterministic behavior. Outcomes that are disperse have more uncertainty and are considered risky in
decision making settings. Indeed, a fundamental result from
expected utility theory states that rational risk-averse agents
prefer X to Y when X (2) Y (Dentcheva & Ruszczyński,
2006b). Drawing inspiration from this strategy, we apply
SSD as an action selection method to reduce dispersion in
the data distribution with which a policy is learned. Our
paper offers the following contributions:
A distributional policy: Metrics such as variance (Sato
et al., 2001; Tamar et al., 2013) and quantile statistics, like
CVaR, (Chow & Ghavamzadeh, 2014; Dabney et al., 2018;
Keramati et al., 2020) are prevalent in RL. A novel contribution of our work is the introduction of SSD for distributional
action selection. As we will show, this relation eliminates
the need to tune risk parameters. We apply the relation
in settings where there are many solutions, and the agent
wishes to select the least disperse (i.e. most certain) option.

