Set Functions for Time Series
Max Horn 1 2 Michael Moor 1 2 Christian Bock 1 2 Bastian Rieck 1 2 Karsten Borgwardt 1 2

Abstract
Despite the eminent successes of deep neural
networks, many architectures are often hard to
transfer to irregularly-sampled and asynchronous
time series that commonly occur in real-world
datasets, especially in healthcare applications.
This paper proposes a novel approach for classifying irregularly-sampled time series with unaligned measurements, focusing on high scalability and data efficiency. Our method SeFT (Set
Functions for Time Series) is based on recent advances in differentiable set function learning, extremely parallelizable with a beneficial memory
footprint, thus scaling well to large datasets of
long time series and online monitoring scenarios.
Furthermore, our approach permits quantifying
per-observation contributions to the classification
outcome. We extensively compare our method
with existing algorithms on multiple healthcare
time series datasets and demonstrate that it performs competitively whilst significantly reducing
runtime.

1. Introduction
With the increasing digitalization, measurements over extensive time periods are becoming ubiquitous. Nevertheless, in many application domains, such as healthcare (Yadav et al., 2018), measurements might not necessarily be
observed at a regular rate or could be misaligned. Moreover, the presence or absence of a measurement and its observation frequency may carry information of its own (Little & Rubin, 2014), such that imputing the missing values
is not always desired.
While some algorithms can be readily applied to datasets
with varying lengths, these methods usually assume regular sampling of the data and/or require the measurements
1
Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, ETH
Zurich, 4058 Basel, Switzerland 2 SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Karsten Borgwardt
<karsten.borgwardt@bsse.ethz.ch>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

across modalities to be aligned/synchronized, preventing
their application to the aforementioned settings. By contrast, existing approaches, in particular in clinical applications, for unaligned measurements, typically rely on imputation to obtain a regularly-sampled version of a dataset
for classification (Desautels et al., 2016, Moor et al., 2019).
Learning a suitable imputation scheme, however, requires
understanding the underlying dynamics of a system; this
task is significantly more complicated and not necessarily required when classification or pattern detection is the
main goal. Furthermore, even though a decoupled imputation scheme followed by classification is generally more
scalable, it may lose information (in terms of “missingness
patterns”) that could be crucial for prediction tasks. The
fact that decoupled schemes perform worse than methods
that are trained end-to-end was empirically demonstrated
by Li & Marlin (2016). Approaches that jointly optimize
both tasks add a large computational overhead, thus suffering from poor scalability or high memory requirements.
Our method is motivated by the understanding that, while
RNNs and similar architectures are well suited for capturing and modelling the dynamics of a time series and thus
excel at tasks such as forecasting, retaining the order of an
input sequence can even be a disadvantage in some scenarios (Vinyals et al., 2016). We show that by relaxing the
condition that a sequence must be processed in order, we
can naturally derive an architecture that directly accounts
for (i) irregular sampling, and (ii) unsynchronized measurements. Our method S E FT: Set Functions for Time
Series, extends recent advances in set function learning
to irregular sampled time series classification tasks, yields
favourable classification performance, is highly scalable,
and improves over current approaches by almost an order
of magnitude in terms of runtime. With S E FT, we propose to rephrase the problem of classifying time series as
classifying a set of observations. We show how set functions can be used to create classifiers that are applicable to
unaligned and irregularly-sampled time series, leading to
favourable performance in classification tasks. Next to being highly parallelizable, thus permitting ready extensions
to online monitoring setups with thousands of patients, our
method also yields importance values for each observation
and each modality. This makes it possible to interpret predictions, providing much-needed insights into the decision
made by the model.

