On Relativistic f -Divergences

Alexia Jolicoeur-Martineau 1

Abstract
We take a more rigorous look at Relativistic
Generative Adversarial Networks (RGANs) and
prove that the objective function of the discriminator is a statistical divergence for any concave
function f with minimal properties (f (0) = 0,
f 0 (0) 6= 0, supx f (x) > 0). We devise additional variants of relativistic f -divergences. We
show that the Wasserstein distance is weaker than
f -divergences which are weaker than relativistic f -divergences. Given the good performance
of RGANs, this suggests that Wasserstein GAN
does not performs well primarily because of the
weak metric, but rather because of regularization
and the use of a relativistic discriminator. We introduce the minimum-variance unbiased estimator (MVUE) for Relativistic GANs and show that
it does not perform better. We show that the estimator of Relativistic average GANs (RaGANs)
is asymptotically unbiased and that the finitesample bias is small; removing this bias does not
improve performance.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al., 2014) are a very popular approach to approximately
generate data from a complex probability distribution using
only samples of data (without any information on the true
data distribution). Most notably, it has been very successful at generating photo-realistic images (Karras et al., 2017;
2018). It consists in a game between two neural networks,
the generator G and the discriminator D. The goal of D is
to classify real from fake (generated) data. The goal of G is
to generate fake data that appears to be real, thus ”fooling”
D into thinking that fake data is actually real.
There are many GAN variants and most of them con1

Mila, Université de Montréal .
to:
Alexia
Jolicoeur-Martineau
martineau@mail.mcgill.ca>.

Correspondence
<alexia.jolicoeur-

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

sist of changing the loss function of D. To name a few:
Standard GAN (SGAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), LeastSquares GAN (LSGAN) (Mao et al., 2017), Hinge-loss
GAN (HingeGAN) (Miyato et al., 2018), Wasserstein GAN
(WGAN) (Arjovsky et al., 2017).
For most GAN variants, training D is equivalent to estimating a divergence: SGAN estimates the Jensen–Shannon
divergence (JSD), LSGAN estimates the Pearson χ2 divergence, HingeGAN estimates the Reverse-KL divergence,
and WGAN estimates the Wasserstein distance. Even more
generally, f -GANs (Nowozin et al., 2016) estimate any
f -divergence (which includes most of the popular divergences), while IPM-based GANs (Mroueh & Sercu, 2017)
estimate any Integral probability metric (IPM) (Müller,
1997). Thus, intuitively, GANs can be thought of as estimating a diverge and then minimizing it (this is not technically correct; see Jolicoeur-Martineau (2018b)).
Recently, Jolicoeur-Martineau (2018a) showed that IPMbased GANs possess a unique type of discriminator which
they call a Relativistic Discriminator (RD). They explained
that one can construct f -GANs while using a RD and that
doing so improves the stability of the training and quality
of generated data. They called this approach Relativistic
GANs (RGANs). They proposed two variants: Relativistic
paired GANs (RpGANs)1 and Relativistic Average GANs
(RaGANs).
Jolicoeur-Martineau (2018a) provided mathematical and
intuitive arguments as to why using a Relativistic Discriminator (RD) may be helpful. However, they did not
prove that the loss functions are mathematically sensible. Furthermore, the estimators that they used are not the
minimum-variance unbiased estimators (MVUE).
The contributions of this paper are the following:
1. We prove that the objective functions of the discriminator in RGANs are divergences (relativistic f divergences).
2. We devise additional variants of Relativistic f divergences.
1

We added the word ”paired” to better distinguish the variant
with paired real/fake data (originally called RGANs) and the general approach called Relativistic GANs (RGANs).

