Fast and Consistent Learning of Hidden Markov Models
by Incorporating Non-Consecutive Correlations

Robert Mattila 1 Cristian R. Rojas 1 Eric Moulines 2 3 Vikram Krishnamurthy 4 Bo Wahlberg 1

Abstract
Can the parameters of a hidden Markov model
(HMM) be estimated from a single sweep through
the observations – and additionally, without being trapped at a local optimum in the likelihood
surface? That is the premise of recent method of
moments algorithms devised for HMMs. In these,
correlations between consecutive pair- or tripletwise observations are empirically estimated and
used to compute estimates of the HMM parameters. Albeit computationally very attractive, the
main drawback is that by restricting to only loworder correlations in the data, information is being
neglected which results in a loss of accuracy (compared to standard maximum likelihood schemes).
In this paper, we propose extending these methods (both pair- and triplet-based) by also including non-consecutive correlations in a way which
does not significantly increase the computational
cost (which scales linearly with the number of
additional lags included). We prove strong consistency of the new methods, and demonstrate an
improved performance in numerical experiments
on both synthetic and real-world financial timeseries datasets.

1. Introduction
The hidden Markov model (HMM) is a standard tool in statistical modeling of stochastic time-series (Cappé et al., 2005;
Krishnamurthy, 2016). Despite its structural simplicity – a
Markov chain observed via a noisy sensor –, the HMM has
been successfully applied in a vast range of fields: from
1

Division of Decision and Control Systems, School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, KTH Royal Institute
of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden. 2 Centre de Mathématiques
Appliquées de Polytechnique, Ecole Polytechnique, Paris, France.
3
HSE University, Moscow, Russia. 4 School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA.
Correspondence to: Robert Mattila <rmattila@kth.se>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

computational biology (Durbin, 1998; Vidyasagar, 2014)
and speech recognition (Rabiner, 1989; Gales & Young,
2007) to finance (Mamon & Elliott, 2007; 2014) and human
intent modeling (Yang et al., 1997; Xia et al., 2012), etc.
Mathematically, an HMM is described by a latent finitedimensional Markov chain xk ∈ {1, . . . , X} that evolves
according to an X × X transition matrix P :
[P ]ij = Pr[xk+1 = j|xk = i],

(1)

where k denotes discrete time. The state xk is observed, in
the case of a finite observation alphabet yk ∈ {1, . . . , Y },
via an X × Y observation matrix B:
[B]ij = Pr[yk = j|xk = i].

(2)

In order to employ an HMM in any application that requires
filtering or prediction, the parameters (1) and (2) have first
to be determined – usually, via either domain-expertise or
data-driven modeling. In this paper, we consider the latter.
Even though data-driven parameter estimation for HMMs
has been studied for more than fifty years (Baum & Petrie,
1966), it remains a challenging problem in practice. The de
facto standard methods employ iterative (“hill-climbing”)
local-search procedures that aim to maximize the likelihood of observed data (e.g., the expectation-maximization
(EM), or Baum-Welch, algorithm) (Cappé et al., 2005; Krishnamurthy, 2016). In practice, these methods suffer from
drawbacks related to convergence to bad local maxima (see
Section 6.1 for an explicit numerical example) as well as
slow convergence with an associated high computational
cost.
In order to address such drawbacks, methods of moments
have been introduced for HMMs (e.g., Chang, 1996; Mossel
& Roch, 2005; Vanluyten et al., 2008; Lakshminarayanan
& Raich, 2010; Hsu et al., 2012; Anandkumar et al., 2012;
2014; Kontorovich et al., 2013; Subakan et al., 2015; Tran
et al., 2016; Mattila et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2018).
These methods begin by estimating low-order correlations
in the data, such as those of pairs Pr[yk , yk+1 ] or triplets
Pr[yk , yk+1 , yk+2 ]. The analytical relations between these
correlations and the HMM parameters are then used “in
reverse” to obtain empirical parameter estimates.

