Evolutionary Reinforcement Learning for Sample-Efficient Multiagent
Coordination
Shauharda Khadka * 1 Somdeb Majumdar * 1 Santiago Miret 1 Stephen McAleer 2 Kagan Tumer 3

Abstract
Many cooperative multiagent reinforcement learning environments provide agents with a sparse
team-based reward, as well as a dense agentspecific reward that incentivizes learning basic
skills. Training policies solely on the team-based
reward is often difficult due to its sparsity. Furthermore, relying solely on the agent-specific reward is sub-optimal because it usually does not
capture the team coordination objective. A common approach is to use reward shaping to construct a proxy reward by combining the individual
rewards. However, this requires manual tuning
for each environment. We introduce Multiagent
Evolutionary Reinforcement Learning (MERL), a
split-level training platform that handles the two
objectives separately through two optimization
processes. An evolutionary algorithm maximizes
the sparse team-based objective through neuroevolution on a population of teams. Concurrently, a
gradient-based optimizer trains policies to only
maximize the dense agent-specific rewards. The
gradient-based policies are periodically added to
the evolutionary population as a way of information transfer between the two optimization processes. This enables the evolutionary algorithm to
use skills learned via the agent-specific rewards
toward optimizing the global objective. Results
demonstrate that MERL significantly outperforms
state-of-the-art methods, such as MADDPG, on a
number of difficult coordination benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Cooperative multiagent reinforcement learning (MARL)
studies how multiple agents can learn to coordinate as a team
*
Equal contribution 1 Intel Labs 2 University of California,
Irvine 3 Oregon State University. Correspondence to: Shauharda
Khadka <shauharda.khadka@intel.com>, Somdeb Majumdar
<somdeb.majumdar@intel.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

toward maximizing a global objective. Cooperative MARL
has been applied to many real world applications such as air
traffic control (Tumer and Agogino, 2007), multi-robot coordination (Sheng et al., 2006; Yliniemi et al., 2014; Khadka
et al., 2017a), communication and language (Lazaridou
et al., 2016; Mordatch and Abbeel, 2018), and autonomous
driving (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2016).
Many such environments endow agents with a team reward
that reflects the team’s coordination objective, as well as
an agent-specific local reward that rewards basic skills. For
instance, in soccer, dense local rewards could capture agentspecific skills such as passing, dribbling and running. The
agents must then coordinate when and where to use these
skills in order to optimize the team objective, which is winning the game. Usually, the agent-specific reward is dense
and easy to learn from, while the team reward is sparse and
requires the cooperation of all or most agents.
Having each agent directly optimize the team reward and
ignore the agent-specific reward usually fails or leads to
sample-inefficiency for complex tasks due to the sparsity
of the team reward. Conversely, having each agent directly
optimize the agent-specific reward also fails because it does
not capture the team’s objective, even with state-of-the-art
methods such as MADDPG (Lowe et al., 2017).
One approach to this problem is to use reward shaping,
where extensive domain knowledge about the task is used to
create a proxy reward function (Rahmattalabi et al., 2016).
Constructing this proxy reward function is challenging in
complex environments, and is usually domain-dependent. In
addition to requiring domain knowledge and manual tuning,
this approach also poses risks of changing the underlying
problem itself (Ng et al., 1999). Common approaches to
creating proxy rewards via linear combinations of the two
objectives also fail to solve or generalize to complex coordination tasks (Devlin et al., 2011; Williamson et al., 2009).
In this paper, we introduce Multiagent Evolutionary Reinforcement Learning (MERL), a state-of-the-art algorithm
for cooperative MARL that does not require reward shaping. MERL is a split-level training platform that combines
gradient-based and gradient-free optimization. The gradientfree optimizer is an evolutionary algorithm that maximizes
the team objective through neuroevolution. The gradient-

