Normalized Loss Functions for Deep Learning with Noisy Labels

Xingjun Ma * 1 Hanxun Huang * 1 Yisen Wang 2 Simone Romano Sarah Erfani 1 James Bailey 1

Abstract
Robust loss functions are essential for training accurate deep neural networks (DNNs) in the presence of noisy (incorrect) labels. It has been shown
that the commonly used Cross Entropy (CE) loss
is not robust to noisy labels. Whilst new loss functions have been designed, they are only partially
robust. In this paper, we theoretically show by
applying a simple normalization that: any loss
can be made robust to noisy labels. However, in
practice, simply being robust is not sufficient for
a loss function to train accurate DNNs. By investigating several robust loss functions, we find
that they suffer from a problem of underfitting.
To address this, we propose a framework to build
robust loss functions called Active Passive Loss
(APL). APL combines two robust loss functions
that mutually boost each other. Experiments on
benchmark datasets demonstrate that the family
of new loss functions created by our APL framework can consistently outperform state-of-the-art
methods by large margins, especially under large
noise rates such as 60% or 80% incorrect labels.

2018; Han et al., 2018b); and 4) robust loss functions that
are inherently tolerant to noisy labels (Ghosh et al., 2017;
Zhang & Sabuncu, 2018; Wang et al., 2019c). Compared to
the first three approaches that may suffer from inaccurate
noise estimation or involve sophisticated training procedure
modifications, robust loss functions provide a simpler solution, which is also the main focus of this paper.
It has been theoretically shown that some loss functions
such as Mean Absolute Error (MAE) are robust to label
noise, while others are not, which unfortunately includes
the commonly used Cross Entropy (CE) loss. This has motivated a body of work to design new loss functions that
are inherently robust to noisy labels. For example, Generalized Cross Entropy (GCE) (Zhang & Sabuncu, 2018)
was proposed to improve the robustness of CE against noisy
labels. GCE can be seen as a generalized mixture of CE and
MAE, and is only robust when reduced to the MAE loss.
Recently, a Symmetric Cross Entropy (SCE) (Wang et al.,
2019c) loss was suggested as a robustly boosted version of
CE. SCE combines the CE loss with a Reverse Cross Entropy (RCE) loss, and only the RCE term is robust. Whilst
these loss functions have demonstrated improved robustness,
theoretically, they are only partially robust to noisy labels.

2

Different from previous works, in this paper, we theoretically show that any loss can be made robust to noisy labels,
and all is needed is a simple normalization. However, in
practice, simply being robust is not enough for a loss function to train accurate DNNs. By investigating several robust
loss functions, we find that they all suffer from an underfitting problem. Inspired by recent developments in this field,
we propose to characterize existing loss functions into two
types: 1) “Active” loss, which only explicitly maximizes the
probability of being in the labeled class, and 2) “Passive”
loss, which also explicitly minimizes the probabilities of
being in other classes. Based on this characterization, we
further propose a novel framework to build a new set of
robust loss functions called Active Passive Losses (APLs).
We show that under this framework, existing loss functions
can be reworked to achieve the state-of-the-art for training
DNNs with noisy labels. Our key contributions are:

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

• We provide new theoretical insights into robust loss functions demonstrating that a simple normalization can make
any loss function robust to noisy labels.

1. Introduction
Training accurate deep neural networks (DNNs) in the presence of noisy (incorrect) labels is of great practical importance. Different approaches have been proposed for robust
learning with noisy labels. This includes 1) label correction
methods that aim to identify and correct wrong labels (Xiao
et al., 2015; Vahdat, 2017; Veit et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017b);
2) loss correction methods that correct the loss function
based on an estimated noise transition matrix (Sukhbaatar
et al., 2014; Reed et al., 2014; Patrini et al., 2017; Han et al.,
2018a); 3) refined training strategies that modify the training procedure to be more adaptive to incorrect labels (Jiang
et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018; Tanaka et al., 2018; Ma et al.,
*

Equal contribution 1 The University of Melbourne, Australia
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. Correspondence to: Yisen
Wang <eewangyisen@gmail.com>.

