Refined Bounds for Algorithm Configuration:
The Knife-edge of Dual Class Approximability

Maria-Florina Balcan 1 Tuomas Sandholm 1 2 3 4 Ellen Vitercik 1

Abstract
Automating algorithm configuration is growing
increasingly necessary as algorithms come with
more and more tunable parameters. It is common to tune parameters using machine learning,
optimizing algorithmic performance (runtime or
solution quality, for example) using a training set
of problem instances from the specific domain
at hand. We investigate a fundamental question
about these techniques: how large should the training set be to ensure that a parameter’s average
empirical performance over the training set is
close to its expected, future performance? We
answer this question for algorithm configuration
problems that exhibit a widely-applicable structure: the algorithm’s performance as a function
of its parameters can be approximated by a “simple” function. We show that if this approximation
holds under the L∞ -norm, we can provide strong
sample complexity bounds, but if the approximation holds only under the Lp -norm for p < ∞,
it is not possible to provide meaningful sample
complexity bounds in the worst case. We empirically evaluate our bounds in the context of
integer programming, obtaining sample complexity bounds that are up to 700 times smaller than
the previously best-known bounds (Balcan et al.,
2018a).

1. Introduction
Algorithms typically have tunable parameters that significantly impact their performance, measured in terms of runtime, solution quality, and so on. Machine learning is often
used to automate parameter tuning (Horvitz et al., 2001;
1

Computer Science Department, Carnegie Mellon Uni3
versity 2 Strategy Robot, Inc.
Optimized Markets, Inc.
4
Strategic Machine, Inc.. Correspondence to: Maria-Florina
Balcan <ninamf@cs.cmu.edu>, Tuomas Sandholm <sandholm@cs.cmu.edu>, Ellen Vitercik <vitercik@cs.cmu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Hutter et al., 2009; Kadioglu et al., 2010; Sandholm, 2013):
given a training set of problem instances from the application domain at hand, this automated procedure returns a
parameter setting that will ideally perform well on future,
unseen instances.
It is important to be careful when using this automated approach: if the training set is too small, a parameter setting
with strong average empirical performance over the training
set may have poor future performance on unseen instances.
Generalization bounds provide guidance when it comes to
selecting the training set size. They bound the difference
between an algorithm’s performance on average over the
training set (drawn from an unknown, application-specific
distribution) and its expected performance on unseen instances. These bounds can be used to evaluate a parameter
setting returned by any black-box procedure: they bound the
difference between that parameter’s average performance
on the training set and its expected performance.
At a high level, we provide generalization bounds that hold
when an algorithm’s performance as a function of its parameters exhibits a widely-applicable structure: it can be
approximated by a “simple” function. We prove that it is
possible to provide strong generalization bounds when the
approximation holds under the L∞ -norm. Meanwhile, it
is not possible to provide strong guarantees in the worstcase if the approximation only holds under the Lp -norm for
p < ∞. Therefore, this connection between learnability and
approximability is balanced on a knife-edge.
Our analysis is based on structure exhibited by primal and
dual functions (Assouad, 1983), which we now describe at
a high level. To provide generalization bounds, a common
strategy is to bound the intrinsic complexity of the following
function class F : for every parameter vector r (such as
a CPLEX parameter setting) there is a function fr ∈ F
that takes as input a problem instance x (such as an integer
program) and returns fr (x), the algorithm’s performance on
input x when parameterized by r. Performance is measured
by runtime, solution quality, or some other metric. The
functions fr are called primal functions.
The class F is gnarly: in the case of integer programming
algorithm configuration, the domain of every function in F

