Sub-Goal Trees – a Framework for Goal-Based Reinforcement Learning

Tom Jurgenson 1 Or Avner 1 Edward Groshev 2 Aviv Tamar 1

Abstract
Many AI problems, in robotics and other domains, are goal-based, essentially seeking trajectories leading to various goal states. Reinforcement learning (RL), building on Bellman’s optimality equation, naturally optimizes for a single
goal, yet can be made multi-goal by augmenting
the state with the goal. Instead, we propose a
new RL framework, derived from a dynamic programming equation for the all pairs shortest path
(APSP) problem, which naturally solves multigoal queries. We show that this approach has
computational benefits for both standard and approximate dynamic programming. Interestingly,
our formulation prescribes a novel protocol for
computing a trajectory: instead of predicting the
next state given its predecessor, as in standard
RL, a goal-conditioned trajectory is constructed
by first predicting an intermediate state between
start and goal, partitioning the trajectory into two.
Then, recursively, predicting intermediate points
on each sub-segment, until a complete trajectory
is obtained. We call this trajectory structure a subgoal tree. Building on it, we additionally extend
the policy gradient methodology to recursively
predict sub-goals, resulting in novel goal-based algorithms. Finally, we apply our method to neural
motion planning, where we demonstrate significant improvements compared to standard RL on
navigating a 7-DoF robot arm between obstacles.

1. Introduction
Many AI problems can be characterized as learning or optimizing goal-based trajectories of a dynamical system, for
example, robot skill learning and motion planning (Mülling
et al., 2013; Gu et al., 2017; LaValle, 2006; Qureshi et al.,
2018). The reinforcement learning (RL) formulation, a
1

EE Department, Technion 2 Osaro Inc.. Correspondence
to: Tom Jurgenson <tomj@campus.technion.ac.il>, Aviv Tamar
<avivt@technion.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

popular framework for trajectory optimization based on
Bellman’s dynamic programming (DP) equation (Bertsekas
& Tsitsiklis, 1996), naturally addresses the case of a single
goal, as specified by a single reward function. RL formulations for multiple goals have been proposed (Schaul et al.,
2015; Andrychowicz et al., 2017), typically by augmenting
the state space to include the goal as part of the state, but
without changing the underlying DP structure.
On the other hand, in deterministic shortest path problems,
multi-goal trajectory optimization is most naturally represented by the all-pairs shortest path (APSP) problem (Russell & Norvig, 2010). In this formulation, augmenting the
state and using Bellman’s equation is known to be suboptimal1 , and dedicated APSP algorithms such as FloydWarshall (Floyd, 1962) build on different DP principles.
Motivated by this, we propose a goal-based RL framework
that builds on an efficient APSP solution, and is also applicable to large or continuous state spaces using function
approximation.
Our key idea is that a goal-based trajectory can be constructed in a divide-and-conquer fashion. First, predict a
sub-goal between start and goal, partitioning the trajectory
into two. Then, recursively, predict intermediate sub-goals
on each sub-segment, until a complete trajectory is obtained.
We call this trajectory structure a sub-goal tree (Figure 1),
and we develop a DP equation for APSP that builds on it
and is compatible with function approximation. We further
bound the error of following the sub-goal tree trajectory in
the presence of approximation errors, and show favorable
results compared to the conventional RL method, intuitively,
due to the sub-goal tree’s lower sensitivity to drift.
The sub-goal tree can also be seen as a general parametric
structure for a trajectory, where a parametric model, e.g.,
a neural network, is used to predict each sub-goal given
its predecessors. Based on this view, we develop a policy
gradient framework for sub-goal trees, and show that conventional policy-gradient techniques such as control variates
and trust regions (Greensmith et al., 2004; Schulman et al.,
2015) naturally apply here as well.
Finally, we present an application of our approach to neu1

This is equivalent to running the Bellman-Ford single-goal
algorithm for each possible goal state (Russell & Norvig, 2010).

