PolyGen: An Autoregressive Generative Model of 3D Meshes

Charlie Nash 1 Yaroslav Ganin 1 S. M. Ali Eslami 1 Peter W. Battaglia 1

Abstract
Polygon meshes are an efficient representation
of 3D geometry, and are of central importance
in computer graphics, robotics and games development. Existing learning-based approaches
for object synthesis have avoided the challenges
of working with 3D meshes, instead using alternative object representations that are more
compatible with neural architectures and training approaches. We present PolyGen, a generative model of 3D objects which models the
mesh directly, predicting vertices and faces sequentially using a Transformer-based architecture.
Our model can condition on a range of inputs,
including object classes, voxels, and images, and
because the model is probabilistic it can produce
samples that capture uncertainty in ambiguous
scenarios. We show that the model is capable
of producing high-quality, usable meshes, and
establish log-likelihood benchmarks for the meshmodelling task. We also evaluate the conditional
models on surface reconstruction metrics against
alternative methods, and demonstrate competitive
performance despite not training directly on this
task.

1. Introduction
Polygon meshes are an efficient representation of 3D geometry, and are widely used in computer graphics to represent
virtual objects and scenes. Automatic mesh generation enables more rapid creation of the 3D objects that populate
virtual worlds in games, film, and virtual reality. In addition,
meshes are a useful output in computer vision and robotics,
enabling planning and interaction in 3D space.
Existing approaches to 3D object synthesis rely on the recombination and deformation of template models (Kalogerakis et al., 2012; Chaudhuri et al., 2011), or a paramet1

DeepMind, London, United Kingdom. Correspondence to:
Charlie Nash <charlienash@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Figure 1. Class conditional n-gon meshes generated by PolyGen.

ric shape family (Smelik et al., 2014). Meshes are challenging for deep learning architectures to work with because of their unordered elements and discrete face structures. Instead, recent deep-learning approaches have generated 3D objects using alternative representations of object
shape—voxels (Choy et al., 2016), point clouds, occupancy
functions (Mescheder et al., 2019), and surfaces (Groueix
et al., 2018)—however mesh reconstruction is left as a postprocessing step and can yield results of varying quality. This
contrasts with the human approach to mesh creation, where
the mesh itself is the central object, and is created directly
with 3D modelling software. Human created meshes are
compact, and reuse geometric primitives to efficiently represent real-world objects. Neural autoregressive models
have demonstrated a remarkable capacity to model complex,
high-dimensional data including images (van den Oord et al.,
2016c), text (Radford et al., 2019) and raw audio waveforms
(van den Oord et al., 2016a). Inspired by these methods we
present PolyGen, a neural generative model of meshes, that
autoregressively estimates a joint distribution over mesh
vertices and faces.
PolyGen consists of two parts: A vertex model, that unconditionally models mesh vertices, and a face model, that models
the mesh faces conditioned on input vertices. Both components make use of the Transformer architecture (Vaswani
et al., 2017), which is effective at capturing the long-range
dependencies present in mesh data. The vertex model uses

