Efficient nonparametric statistical inference on population feature importance
using Shapley values

Brian D. Williamson * 1 Jean Feng * 2

Abstract
The true population-level importance of a variable
in a prediction task provides useful knowledge
about the underlying data-generating mechanism
and can help in deciding which measurements to
collect in subsequent experiments. Valid statistical inference on this importance is a key component in understanding the population of interest. We present a computationally efficient procedure for estimating and obtaining valid statistical inference on the Shapley Population Variable
Importance Measure (SPVIM). Although the
computational complexity of the true SPVIM
scales exponentially with the number of variables,
we propose an estimator based on randomly sampling only Θ(n) feature subsets given n observations. We prove that our estimator converges
at an asymptotically optimal rate. Moreover, by
deriving the asymptotic distribution of our estimator, we construct valid confidence intervals and
hypothesis tests. Our procedure has good finitesample performance in simulations, and for an
in-hospital mortality prediction task produces similar variable importance estimates when different
machine learning algorithms are applied.

1. Introduction
In many scientific applications, understanding the intrinsic
predictive value of a variable can shed light on the internal
mechanisms relating the variable to the outcome of interest,
help build future models, and guide experimental design.
For example, hospital administrators may want to know the
important features to collect for predicting patient outcomes.
*

Equal contribution 1 Vaccine and Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA 2 Department of Biostatistics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Correspondence to: Brian D. Williamson
<bwillia2@fredhutch.org>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

Likewise, vaccine researchers may want to know the most
important molecular phenotypes to measure that are most
predictive of binding or vaccine efficacy (see, e.g., Dunning, 2006). Variable importance measures (VIMs) provide
necessary information towards answering these questions.
Our interest here is in statistical inference on the population
VIM. This VIM quantifies the predictive value of a variable
within the oracle prediction model f0 defined relative to
an arbitrary predictiveness measure V . For many choices
of V , f0 is either the conditional mean outcome given covariates (e.g., if V = R2 ) or a simple functional of this
conditional mean (e.g., if V = classification accuracy). We
note that population VIMs are distinct from algorithmic
VIMs, which describe the importance of a variable within a
fitted model fˆ (see, e.g., Breiman, 2001; Garson, 1991; Murdoch et al., 2019). Although algorithmic VIMs have been
used as a proxy for population VIMs out of convenience,
differences between fˆ and f0 can often lead to substantially
different interpretations of the resulting VIMs. Whereas an
algorithmic VIM necessarily varies across fitted models, a
population VIM is independent of the specific procedure
used to estimate f0 .
Existing population VIMs suffer from a number of issues.
Traditionally, population VIMs have relied on restrictive
parametric assumptions (e.g., R2 in linear models; see, e.g.,
Grömping, 2007; Nathans et al., 2012), which can lead to
misleading results if the parametric model does not hold.
Recent work has focused on extending these definitions by
removing the parametric assumptions (Feng et al., 2018;
Williamson et al., 2020b); however, these definitions define
importance of a variable with respect to the others and assign
near-zero importance when features are highly correlated.
Other VIMs require strong assumptions on the design to be
valid (e.g., ANOVA), but again fail in simple cases with correlated variables. To address this, Owen and Prieur (2017)
proposed using Shapley values to quantify the population
VIM, where the value function is the variance explained;
these VIMs inherit many desirable theoretical properties
from the Shapley value. In fact, contemporary work has
also defined the ideal estimand of algorithmic VIM estimation procedures to be the Shapley population VIM (SPVIM)
(Covert et al., 2020).

