Learning and Sampling of Atomic Interventions from Observations

Arnab Bhattacharyya * 1 Sutanu Gayen * 1 Saravanan Kandasamy * 2 Ashwin Maran * 3 N. V. Vinodchandran * 4

Abstract
We study the problem of efficiently estimating
the effect of an intervention on a single variable
(atomic interventions) using observational samples in a causal Bayesian network. Our goal
is to give algorithms that are efficient in both
time and sample complexity in a non-parametric
setting. Tian and Pearl (AAAI ‘02) have exactly characterized the class of causal graphs for
which causal effects of atomic interventions can
be identified from observational data. We make
their result quantitative. Suppose P is a causal
model on a set V of n observable variables with
respect to a given causal graph G with observable
distribution P . Let Px denote the interventional
distribution over the observables with respect to
an intervention of a designated variable X with
x.1 We show that assuming that G has bounded
in-degree, bounded c-components (k), and that
the observational distribution is identifiable and
satisfies certain strong positivity condition:
(i) [Evaluation] There is an algorithm that outputs with probability 2/3 an evaluator for a
distribution P 0 that satisfies dTV (Px , P 0 ) ⩽
ε using m = Õ(nε−2 ) samples from P and
O(mn) time. The evaluator can return in
O(n) time the probability P 0 (v) for any assignment v to V.
(ii) [Generation] There is an algorithm that outputs with probability 2/3 a sampler for a
distribution P̂ that satisfies dTV (Px , P̂ ) ⩽
ε using m = Õ(nε−2 ) samples from P and
O(mn) time. The sampler returns an iid
sample from P̂ with probability 1 in O(n)
*

1
Equal contribution
National University of Singapore
3
Cornell University
University of Wisconsin-Madison
4
University of Nebraska-Lincoln. Correspondence to: Arnab
Bhattacharyya <arnabb@nus.edu.sg>.

2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
P (V | do(x)) is another notation for Px that is widely used
in the literature, with do(x) denoting an intervention on a variable
X with value x.

time.
We extend our techniques to estimate marginals
Px |Y over a given subset Y ⊆ V of variables of
interest. We also show lower bounds for the sample complexity showing that our sample complexity has optimal dependence on the parameters n and ε, as well as if k = 1 on the strong
positivity parameter.

1. Introduction
A causal model for a system of variables describes not only
how the variables are associated with each other but also
how they would change if they were to be acted on by an
external force. For example, in order to have a proper discussion about global warming, we need more than just an
associational model which would give the correlation between human CO2 emissions and Arctic temperature levels. We instead need a causal model which would predict
the climatological effects of humans reducing CO2 emissions by (say) 20% over the next five years. Notice how the
two can give starkly different pictures: if global warming
is being propelled by natural weather cycles, then changing
human emissions won’t make any difference to temperature
levels, even though human emissions and temperature may
be correlated in our dataset (just because both are increasing over the timespan of our data).
Causality has been a topic of inquiry since ancient times,
but a modern, rigorous formulation of causality came about
in the twentieth century through the works of Pearl, Robins,
Rubin, and others (Imbens & Rubin, 2015; Pearl, 2009;
Rubin et al., 2011; Hernan & Robins, 2020). In particular, (Pearl, 2009) recasted causality in the language of
causal Bayesian networks (or causal Bayes nets for short).
A causal Bayes net is a standard Bayes net that is reinterpreted causally. Specifically, it makes the assumption of
modularity: for any variable X, the dependence of X on its
parents is an autonomous mechanism that does not change
even if other parts of the network are changed. This allows
assessment of external interventions, such as those encountered in policy analysis, treatment management, and planning. The idea is that by virtue of the modularity assumption, an intervention simply amounts to a modified Bayes

