Frequency Bias in Neural Networks for Input of Non-Uniform Density

Ronen Basri 1 Meirav Galun 1 Amnon Geifman 1 David Jacobs 2 Yoni Kasten 1 Shira Kritchman 1
Epoch = 3

Abstract
Recent works have partly attributed the generalization ability of over-parameterized neural networks
to frequency bias – networks trained with gradient
descent on data drawn from a uniform distribution find a low frequency fit before high frequency
ones. As realistic training sets are not drawn from
a uniform distribution, we here use the Neural
Tangent Kernel (NTK) model to explore the effect of variable density on training dynamics. Our
results, which combine analytic and empirical
observations, show that when learning a pure harmonic function of frequency κ, convergence at
a point x ∈ Sd−1 occurs in time O(κd /p(x))
where p(x) denotes the local density at x. Specifically, for data in S1 we analytically derive the
eigenfunctions of the kernel associated with the
NTK for two-layer networks. We further prove
convergence results for deep, fully connected networks with respect to the spectral decomposition
of the NTK. Our empirical study highlights similarities and differences between deep and shallow
networks in this model.

-

0

Epoch = 100

-

Epoch = 3

-

0

0

Epoch = 40

-

0

Figure 1. Frequency bias under uniform (top) and non-uniform
(bottom) distributions. The light cyan line represents the target
function which is composed of the sum of low and high frequency
functions. The thin black line represents the network output. Top:
when training data is distributed uniformly, low frequency (left) is
learned before high frequency (right). Bottom: with non-uniform
distribution (positive region is dense, negative is sparse), a good
low frequency fit for the low density region is obtained only after
40 epochs, but by then the network fits most of the high frequency
component of the target function at the dense region.

1. Introduction
A key question in understanding the success of neural networks is: what makes over-parameterized networks generalize so well, avoiding solutions that overfit the training data?
In search of an explanation, a number of recent papers (Farnia et al., 2018; Rahaman et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2019) have
suggested that training with gradient descent (GD) (as well
as SGD) yields a frequency bias – in early epochs training a
neural net yields a low frequency fit to the target function,
while high frequencies are learned only in later epochs, if
they are needed to fit the data (see Figure 1(top)).
1

Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel
2
Department of Computer Science, Univeristy of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA. Correspondence to: Ronen Basri <ronen.basri@weizmann.ac.il>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

This frequency bias has been carefully analyzed in the case
of over-parameterized, two-layer networks with rectified
linear unit (ReLU) activation, when only the first layer is
trained. The dynamics of GD in this case was shown to
match the dynamics of GD for the corresponding Neural
Tangent Kernel (NTK) (Arora et al., 2019b; Du et al., 2019;
Jacot et al., 2018). Assuming the training data is distributed
uniformly on a hypersphere, the NTK matrix forms a convolution on the sphere. Its eigenvectors consist of the spherical
harmonic functions (Basri et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2017),
and its eigenvalues shrink monotonically with frequency,
yielding longer convergence times for high frequency components. Specifically, for training data on the circle, high
frequencies are learned quadratically slower than low frequencies, and this frequency-dependent gap increases exponentially with dimension (Basri et al., 2019; Bietti & Mairal,
2019; Cao et al., 2019).
All this previous work assumed that training data is dis-

