Topological Autoencoders
Michael Moor † 1 2 Max Horn † 1 2 Bastian Rieck ‡ 1 2 Karsten Borgwardt ‡ 1 2

Abstract
We propose a novel approach for preserving topological structures of the input space in latent representations of autoencoders. Using persistent homology, a technique from topological data analysis, we calculate topological signatures of both the
input and latent space to derive a topological loss
term. Under weak theoretical assumptions, we
construct this loss in a differentiable manner, such
that the encoding learns to retain multi-scale connectivity information. We show that our approach
is theoretically well-founded and that it exhibits
favourable latent representations on a synthetic
manifold as well as on real-world image data sets,
while preserving low reconstruction errors.

1. Introduction
While topological features, in particular multi-scale features
derived from persistent homology, have seen increasing use
in the machine learning community (Carrière et al., 2019,
Guss & Salakhutdinov, 2018, Hofer et al., 2017, 2019a,b,
Ramamurthy et al., 2019, Reininghaus et al., 2015, Rieck
et al., 2019a,b), employing topology directly as a constraint
for modern deep learning methods remains a challenge. This
is due to the inherently discrete nature of these computations, making backpropagation through the computation of
topological signatures immensely difficult or only possible
in certain special circumstances (Chen et al., 2019, Hofer
et al., 2019a, Poulenard et al., 2018).
This work presents a novel approach that permits obtaining
gradients during the computation of topological signatures.
This makes it possible to employ topological constraints
while training deep neural networks, as well as building
topology-preserving autoencoders. Specifically, we make
†

Equal contribution. ‡ These authors jointly directed this
work. 1 Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, ETH
Zurich, 4058 Basel, Switzerland 2 SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Karsten Borgwardt
<karsten.borgwardt@bsse.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

the following contributions:
1. We develop a new topological loss term for autoencoders that helps harmonise the topology of the data
space with the topology of the latent space.
2. We prove that our approach is stable on the level of
mini-batches, resulting in suitable approximations of
the persistent homology of a data set.
3. We empirically demonstrate that our loss term aids
in dimensionality reduction by preserving topological
structures in data sets; in particular, the learned latent
representations are useful in that the preservation of
topological structures can improve interpretability.

2. Background: Persistent Homology
Persistent homology (Barannikov, 1994, Edelsbrunner &
Harer, 2008) is a method from the field of computational
topology, which develops tools for analysing topological features (connectivity-based features such as connected components) of data sets. We first introduce the underlying
concept of simplicial homology. For a simplicial complex
K, i.e. a generalised graph with higher-order connectivity
information such as cliques, simplicial homology employs
matrix reduction algorithms to assign K a family of groups,
the homology groups. The dth homology group Hd (K) of
K contains d-dimensional topological features, such as connected components (d = 0), cycles/tunnels (d = 1), and
voids (d = 2). Homology groups are typically summarised
by their ranks, thereby obtaining a simple invariant “signature” of a manifold. For example, a circle in R2 has one
feature with d = 1 (a cycle), and one feature with d = 0 (a
connected component).
In practice, the underlying manifold M is unknown and we
are working with a point cloud X := {x1 , . . . , xn } ✓ Rd
and a metric dist : X ⇥ X ! R such as the Euclidean
distance. Persistent homology extends simplicial homology to this setting: instead of approximating M by means
of a single simplicial complex, which would be an unstable procedure due to the discrete nature of X, persistent
homology tracks changes in the homology groups over multiple scales of the metric. This is achieved by constructing a special simplicial complex, the Vietoris–Rips complex (Vietoris, 1927). For 0  ✏ < 1, the Vietoris–Rips
complex of X at scale ✏, denoted by R✏ (X), contains all

