Curse of Dimensionality on Randomized Smoothing for Certifiable Robustness

Aounon Kumar 1 Alexander Levine 1 Tom Goldstein 1 Soheil Feizi 1

Abstract
Randomized smoothing, using just a simple
isotropic Gaussian distribution, has been shown
to produce good robustness guarantees against `2 norm bounded adversaries. In this work, we show
that extending the smoothing technique to defend
against other attack models can be challenging,
especially in the high-dimensional regime. In
particular, for a vast class of i.i.d. smoothing distributions, we prove that the largest `p -radius that
1
1
can be certified decreases as O(1/d 2 − p ) with dimension d for p > 2. Notably, for p ≥ 2, this
dependence on d is no better than that of the `p radius that can be certified using isotropic Gaussian smoothing, essentially putting a matching
lower bound on the robustness radius. When restricted to generalized Gaussian smoothing, these
two bounds can be shown to be within a constant
factor of each other in an asymptotic sense, establishing that Gaussian smoothing provides the
best possible results, up to a constant factor, when
p ≥ 2. We present experimental results on CIFAR
to validate our theory. For other smoothing distributions, such as, a uniform distribution within
an `1 or an `∞ -norm ball, we show upper bounds
1
of the form O(1/d) and O(1/d1− p ) respectively,
which have an even worse dependence on d.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks, especially in image classification
tasks, have been shown to be vulnerable to adversarial perturbations of the input that are unnoticeable to a human
observer but can alter the prediction of the model (Szegedy
et al., 2014). These examples are generated by optimizing a
loss function for a trained network over the input features
within a small neighborhood of an example input. Gradient
1

University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, USA. Correspondence to: Aounon Kumar <aounon@umd.edu>, Soheil Feizi
<sfeizi@cs.umd.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

based methods such as FGSM (Goodfellow et al., 2015) and
projected gradient descent (Madry et al., 2018) have been
shown to be very effective for this purpose. In the last couple of years, several heuristic methods have been proposed
to detect and/or defend against attacks from specific types of
adversaries (Buckman et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2018; Dhillon
et al., 2018; Li & Li, 2017; Grosse et al., 2017; Gong et al.,
2017). Such defenses, however, have been shown to break
down against more powerful attacks (Carlini & Wagner,
2017; Athalye et al., 2018; Uesato et al., 2018; Laidlaw
& Feizi, 2019). For certain types of problems, adversarial
examples might even be unavoidable (Shafahi et al., 2019).
This necessitates developing classifiers with robustness guarantees. Several convex relaxation-based techniques have
been proposed to design certifiably robust classifiers (Wong
& Kolter, 2018; Raghunathan et al., 2018; Singla & Feizi,
2019; Chiang et al., 2020; Singla & Feizi, 2020) whose predictions are guaranteed to remain constant within a certified
neighborhood around the input point, thereby eliminating
the presence of any adversarial example in that region. However, the ever-increasing complexity of deep neural networks
has made it difficult to scale these methods meaningfully to
high-dimensional datasets like ImageNet.
To deal with the scalability issue in certifiable robustness,
a line of work has been introduced based on randomized
robustness (Lécuyer et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019; Cohen et al.,
2019; Salman et al., 2019; Levine & Feizi, 2020a;b;c; Lee
et al., 2019; Teng et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020) wherein
an arbitrary base classifier is made more robust by averaging
its prediction over random perturbations of the input point
within its neighborhood. Cohen et al. (2019) proved the first
tight robustness guarantee for Gaussian smoothing for an
`2 -norm bounded adversary.
In this work, however, we show that extending the smoothing technique to defend against higher-norm attacks, especially in the high-dimensional regime, can be challenging.
In particular, for a general class of i.i.d. smoothing distributions, we show that, for p > 2, the largest `p -radius that
can be certified (denoted by rp∗ ) decreases with the number
1

1

of dimensions d as O(1/d 2 − p ). Note that the special case
of p = 2 does not suffer from such dependency on d. This
makes smoothing-based robustness bounds weak against `p
adversarial attacks for large p, especially, for `∞ because as

