Structured Prediction with Partial Labelling through the Infimum Loss

Vivien Cabannes 1 Alessandro Rudi 1 Francis Bach 1

Abstract
Annotating datasets is one of the main costs in
nowadays supervised learning. The goal of weak
supervision is to enable models to learn using only
forms of labelling which are cheaper to collect,
as partial labelling. This is a type of incomplete
annotation where, for each datapoint, supervision
is cast as a set of labels containing the real one.
The problem of supervised learning with partial
labelling has been studied for specific instances
such as classification, multi-label, ranking or segmentation, but a general framework is still missing. This paper provides a unified framework
based on structured prediction and on the concept
of infimum loss to deal with partial labelling over
a wide family of learning problems and loss functions. The framework leads naturally to explicit
algorithms that can be easily implemented and
for which proved statistical consistency and learning rates. Experiments confirm the superiority
of the proposed approach over commonly used
baselines.

1. Introduction
Fully supervised learning demands tight supervision of large
amounts of data, a supervision that can be quite costly to
acquire and constrains the scope of applications. To overcome this bottleneck, the machine learning community is
seeking to incorporate weaker sources of information in
the learning framework. In this paper, we address those
limitations through partial labelling: e.g., giving only partial ordering when learning user preferences over items, or
providing the label “flower" for a picture of Arum Lilies1 ,
instead of spending a consequent amount of time to find the
exact taxonomy.
1
INRIA - Département d’Informatique de l’École Normale
Supérieure - PSL Research University, Paris, France. Correspondence to: Vivien Cabannes <vivien.cabannes@gmail.com>.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).
1
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arum

Partial labelling has been studied in the context of classification (Cour et al., 2011; Nguyen & Caruana, 2008), multilabelling (Yu et al., 2014), ranking (Hüllermeier et al., 2008;
Korba et al., 2018), as well as segmentation (Verbeek &
Triggs, 2008; Papandreou et al., 2015), or natural language
processing tasks (Fernandes & Brefeld, 2011; Mayhew et al.,
2019), however a generic framework is still missing. Such
a framework is a crucial step towards understanding how
to learn from weaker sources of information, and widening
the spectrum of machine learning beyond rigid applications
of supervised learning. Some interesting directions are provided by Cid-Sueiro et al. (2014); van Rooyen & Williamson
(2017), to recover the information lost in a corrupt acquisition of labels. Yet, they assume that the corruption process
is known, which is a strong requirement that we want to
relax.
In this paper, we make the following contributions:
– We provide a principled framework to solve the problem of learning with partial labelling, via structured
prediction. This approach naturally leads to a variational framework built on the infimum loss.
– We prove that the proposed framework is able to recover the original solution of the supervised learning
problem under identifiability assumptions on the labelling process.
– We derive an explicit algorithm which is easy to train
and with strong theoretical guarantees. In particular,
we prove that it is consistent and we provide generalization error rates.
– Finally, we test our method against some simple baselines, on synthetic and real examples. We show that for
certain partial labelling scenarios with symmetries, our
infimum loss performs similarly to a simple baseline.
However in scenarios where the acquisition process of
the labels is more adversarial in nature, the proposed
algorithm performs consistently better.

2. Partial labelling with infimum loss
In this section, we introduce a statistical framework for partial labelling, and we show that it is characterized naturally
in terms of risk minimization with the infimum loss. First,
let’s recall some elements of fully supervised and weakly
supervised learning.

