Sparse Gaussian Processes with Spherical Harmonic Features
Vincent Dutordoir 1 2 Nicolas Durrande 1 James Hensman 3

Abstract
We introduce a new class of inter-domain variational Gaussian processes (GP) where data is
mapped onto the unit hypersphere in order to use
spherical harmonic representations. Our inference scheme is comparable to variational Fourier
features, but it does not suffer from the curse of
dimensionality, and leads to diagonal covariance
matrices between inducing variables. This enables a speed-up in inference, because it bypasses
the need to invert large covariance matrices. Our
experiments show that our model is able to fit a
regression model for a dataset with 6 million entries two orders of magnitude faster compared to
standard sparse GPs, while retaining state of the
art accuracy. We also demonstrate competitive
performance on classification with non-conjugate
likelihoods.

1. Introduction
Gaussian processes (GPs) (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006)
provide a flexible framework for modelling unknown functions: they are robust to overfitting, offer good predictive
uncertainty estimates and allow us to incorporate prior assumptions into the model. Given a dataset with some inputs
X 2 RN ⇥d and outputs y 2 RN , a GP regression model
assumes yi = f (xi ) + "i where f is a GP over Rd and
where the "i are normal random variables accounting for observation noise. The model predictions at x 2 Rd are then
given by the posterior distribution f | y. However, computing the posterior distribution usually scales O(N 3 ), because
it requires solving a system involving an N ⇥ N matrix.
A range of sparse GP methods (see Quiñonero-Candela &
Rasmussen (2005) for an overview) have been developed
1

PROWLER.io, Cambridge, United Kingdom 2 Department of
Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom 3 Amazon Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom (work done
while JH was affiliated to PROWLER.io). Correspondence to:
Vincent Dutordoir <vincent@prowler.io>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

y

bias

x

Figure 1. Illustration of the mapping between a 2D dataset (grey
dots) embedded into a 3D space and its projection (orange dots)
onto the unit half-circle using a linear mapping.

to improve on this O(N 3 ) scaling. Among them, variational inference is a practical approach allowing regression
(Titsias, 2009), classification (Hensman et al., 2015), minibatching (Hensman et al., 2013) and structured models including latent variables, time-series and depth (Titsias &
Lawrence, 2010; Frigola et al., 2014; Hensman & Lawrence,
2014; Salimbeni & Deisenroth, 2017). Variational inference
in GPs works by approximating the exact (but intractable)
posterior f | y. This approximate posterior process is constructed from a conditional distribution based on M pseudo
observations of ui = f (zi ) at locations Z = {zi }M
i=1 . The
approximation is optimised by minimising the KullbackLeibler divergence between the approximate posterior and
the exact one. The resulting complexity is O(M 3 + M 2 N ),
so choosing M ⌧ N enables significant speedups compared to vanilla GP models. However, when using common
stationary kernels such as Matérn, Squared Exponential (SE)
or rational quadratic, the influence of pseudo-observations
are only local and limited to the neighbourhoods of the inducing points Z, so a large number of inducing points M
may be required to cover the input space. This is especially
problematic for higher dimensional data as a result of the
curse of dimensionality.
Variational Fourier Features (Hensman et al., 2017, VFF)
inducing variables have been proposed to overcome this
limitation. In VFF the inducing variables based on pseudo
observations are replaced with inducing variables obtained
by projecting the GP onto the Fourier basis. This results in
inducing variables that have global influence on the predictions. For one-dimensional inputs, this construction leads
to covariances matrices between inducing variables that are

