Explicit Gradient Learning for Black-Box Optimization

Elad Sarafian* 1 Mor Sinay* 1 Yoram Louzoun 1 Noa Agmon 1 Sarit Kraus 1

Abstract
Black-Box Optimization (BBO) methods can find
optimal policies for systems that interact with
complex environments with no analytical representation. As such, they are of interest in many
Artificial Intelligence (AI) domains. Yet classical BBO methods fall short in high-dimensional
non-convex problems. They are thus often overlooked in real-world AI tasks. Here we present a
BBO method, termed Explicit Gradient Learning (EGL), that is designed to optimize highdimensional ill-behaved functions. We derive
EGL by finding weak spots in methods that fit
the objective function with a parametric Neural
Network (NN) model and obtain the gradient signal by calculating the parametric gradient. Instead
of fitting the function, EGL trains a NN to estimate the objective gradient directly. We prove
the convergence of EGL to a stationary point and
its robustness in the optimization of integrable
functions. We evaluate EGL and achieve state-ofthe-art results in two challenging problems: (1)
the COCO test suite against an assortment of standard BBO methods; and (2) in a high-dimensional
non-convex image generation task.

1. Introduction
Optimization problems are prevalent in many artificial intelligence applications, from search-and-rescue optimal deployment (Zhen et al., 2014) to triage policy in emergency
rooms (Rosemarin et al., 2019) to hyperparameter tuning
in machine learning (Bardenet et al., 2013). In these tasks,
the objective is to find a policy that minimizes a cost or
maximizes a reward. Evaluating the cost of a single policy
is a complicated and often costly process that usually has
no analytical representation, e.g., due to interaction with
*

Equal contribution. 1 Department of Computer Science, BarIlan University, Israel. Correspondence to: Elad Sarafian, Mor
Sinay <elad.sarafian@gmail.com, mor.sinay@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).

real-world physics or numerical simulation. Black-Box Optimization (BBO) algorithms (Audet & Hare, 2017; Golovin
et al., 2017) are designed to solve such problems, when
the analytical formulation is missing, by repeatedly querying the Black-Box function and searching for an optimal
solution while minimizing the number of queries (budget).
Related Work BBO problems have been studied in multiple fields with diverse approaches. Many works investigated
derivative–free methods (Rios & Sahinidis, 2013), from the
classic Nelder–Mead algorithm (Nelder & Mead, 1965) and
Powell’s method (Powell, 1964) to more recent evolutionary
algorithms such as CMA-ES (Hansen, 2006). Another line
of research is derivative-based algorithms, which first approximate the gradient and then apply line-search methods
such as the Conjugate Gradient (CG) Method (Shewchuk
et al., 1994) and Quasi-Newton Methods, e.g. BFGS (Nocedal & Wright, 2006). Other model-based methods such
as SLSQP (Bonnans et al., 2006) and COBYLA (Powell,
2007) iteratively solve quadratic or linear approximations
of the objective function. Some variants apply trust-region
methods and iteratively find an optimum within a trusted
subset of the domain (Conn et al., 2009; Chen et al., 2018).
Another line of research is more focused on stochastic discrete problems, e.g. Bayesian methods (Snoek et al., 2015),
and multi-armed bandit problems (Flaxman et al., 2004).
More recent works have studied the applications of NNs in
BBO algorithms. (Mania et al., 2018; Vemula et al., 2019)
showed that Markov Decision Processes could be solved by
applying random search optimization over the weights of
a parameterized policy. (Sener & Koltun, 2020) suggested
learning an intermediate low dimensional manifold with a
NN to reduce the complexity of the random search. (Maheswaranathan et al., 2018) suggested learning the objective
and using the parametric gradient with respect to the inputs
(Lillicrap et al., 2015) to guide a random search. (Saremi,
2019) studied NN architectures for learning gradients.
Our contribution In this paper, we suggest a new
derivative-based algorithm, Explicit Gradient Learning
(EGL), that learns a surrogate function for the gradient by
averaging the numerical directional derivatives over small
volumes bounded by ε radius. We control the accuracy of
our model by controlling the ε radius parameter. We then use
trust-regions and dynamic scaling of the objective function

