Efficient and Scalable Bayesian Neural Nets with Rank-1 Factors
Michael W. Dusenberry * † 1 Ghassen Jerfel * 1 2 Yeming Wen 1 3 Yi-An Ma 1 4 Jasper Snoek 1
Katherine Heller 1 2 Balaji Lakshminarayanan 1 Dustin Tran 1

Abstract
Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) demonstrate
promising success in improving the robustness
and uncertainty quantification of modern deep
learning. However, they generally struggle with
underfitting at scale and parameter efficiency. On
the other hand, deep ensembles have emerged
as alternatives for uncertainty quantification that,
while outperforming BNNs on certain problems,
also suffer from efficiency issues. It remains unclear how to combine the strengths of these two
approaches and remediate their common issues.
To tackle this challenge, we propose a rank-1
parameterization of BNNs, where each weight
matrix involves only a distribution on a rank-1
subspace. We also revisit the use of mixture approximate posteriors to capture multiple modes,
where unlike typical mixtures, this approach admits a significantly smaller memory increase (e.g.,
only a 0.4% increase for a ResNet-50 mixture of
size 10). We perform a systematic empirical study
on the choices of prior, variational posterior, and
methods to improve training. For ResNet-50 on
ImageNet, Wide ResNet 28-10 on CIFAR-10/100,
and an RNN on MIMIC-III, rank-1 BNNs achieve
state-of-the-art performance across log-likelihood,
accuracy, and calibration on the test sets and outof-distribution variants.1

1. Introduction
Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) marginalize over a distribution of neural network models for prediction, allowing
for uncertainty quantification and improved robustness in
*

Equal contribution † Work completed as a Google AI Resident. 1 Google Brain, Mountain View, USA 2 Duke University,
Durham, USA 3 University of Toronto, Toronto, CA 4 University
of California, San Diego, USA. Correspondence to: Michael
W. Dusenberry <dusenberrymw@google.com>, Ghassen Jerfel
<ghassen@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).
1
Code: https://github.com/google/edward2.

deep learning. In principle, BNNs can permit graceful failure, signalling when a model does not know what to predict
(Kendall & Gal, 2017; Dusenberry et al., 2019), and can also
generalize better to out-of-distribution examples (Louizos &
Welling, 2017; Malinin & Gales, 2018). However, there are
two important challenges prohibiting their use in practice.
First, Bayesian neural networks often underperform on metrics such as accuracy and do not scale as well as simpler
baselines (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016; Lakshminarayanan
et al., 2017; Maddox et al., 2019). A possible reason is that
the best configurations for BNNs remain unknown. What
is the best parameterization, weight prior, approximate posterior, or optimization strategy? The flexibility that accompanies these choices makes BNNs broadly applicable, but
adds a high degree of complexity.
Second, maintaining a distribution over weights incurs a
significant cost both in additional parameters and runtime
complexity. Mean-field variational inference (Blundell et al.,
2015), for example, requires doubling the existing millions
or billions of network weights (i.e., mean and variance for
each weight). Using an ensemble of size 5, or 5 MCMC
samples, requires 5x the number of weights. In contrast,
simply scaling up a deterministic model to match this parameter count can lead to much better predictive performance
on both in- and out-of-distribution data (Recht et al., 2019).
In this paper, we develop a flexible distribution over neural network weights that achieves state-of-the-art accuracy
and uncertainty while being highly parameter-efficient. We
address the first challenge by building on ideas from deep
ensembles (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017), which work by
aggregating predictions from multiple randomly initialized,
stochastic gradient descent (SGD)-trained models. Fort et al.
(2019) identified that deep ensembles’ multimodal solutions
provide uncertainty benefits that are distinct and complementary to distributions centered around a single mode.
We address the second challenge by leveraging recent work
that has identified neural network weights as having low
effective dimensionality for sufficiently diverse and accurate predictions. For example, Li et al. (2018) find that
the “intrinsic” dimensionality of popular architectures can
be on the order of hundreds to a few thousand. Izmailov
et al. (2019) perform Bayesian inference on a learned 5-

