Online Continual Learning from Imbalanced Data

Aristotelis Chrysakis 1 Marie-Francine Moens 1

Abstract
A well-documented weakness of neural networks
is the fact that they suffer from catastrophic for­
getting when trained on data provided by a nonstationary distribution. Recent work in the ﬁeld
of continual learning attempts to understand and
overcome this issue. Unfortunately, the majority
of relevant work embraces the implicit assump­
tion that the distribution of observed data is per­
fectly balanced, despite the fact that, in the real
world, humans and animals learn from observa­
tions that are temporally correlated and severely
imbalanced. Motivated by this remark, we aim
to evaluate memory population methods that are
used in online continual learning, when dealing
with highly imbalanced and temporally correlated
streams of data. More importantly, we introduce a
new memory population approach, which we call
class-balancing reservoir sampling (CBRS). We
demonstrate that CBRS outperforms the state-of­
the-art memory population algorithms in a consid­
erably challenging learning setting, over a range
of different datasets, and for multiple architec­
tures.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, deep neural networks have been used
to tackle an impressive range of problems. Such problems
vary from classifying (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) or gener­
ating images (Radford et al., 2015) to translating natural
language (Bahdanau et al., 2015) and outperforming hu­
mans at playing several board games (Silver et al., 2018).
The models utilized to solve the aforementioned tasks are
typically trained ofﬂine by performing multiple passes over
large amounts of previously collected (mostly labeled) data.
The accumulation of knowledge and experience by humans
1

Department of Computer Science, KU Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium. Correspondence to: Aristotelis Chrysakis <aris­
totelis.chrysakis@kuleuven.be>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the au­
thor(s).

is a vastly different story. Over our lives we perceive a
stream of temporally correlated, unlabeled observations, and
rarely revisit the same observation multiple times (Parisi
et al., 2019). Moreover, the learning and application of
new knowledge takes place concurrently, rather than in two
distinct stages, by interacting with our surrounding environ­
ment (Tani, 2016). Finally, humans learn to address a large
number of problems (i.e., visual understanding of our sur­
roundings, communication, use of our limbs etc.), instead
of only just one (Cangelosi & Schlesinger, 2015).
In general, neural networks perform poorly when trained on
a non-stationary distribution of data. Assuming a network
is being trained on a sequence of distinct tasks, sometimes
called a continuum, it learns the currently presented task
but fails to remember previously learned ones (Goodfellow
et al., 2014). This phenomenon is deﬁned as catastrophic
forgetting (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989; French, 1999).
The ﬁeld researching how to overcome catastrophic for­
getting is called continual learning (CL). Two distinct CL
settings have primarily been investigated (De Lange et al.,
2019). The ﬁrst one, termed task-incremental CL, assumes
that each task of the continuum can be learned ofﬂine.
Speciﬁcally, the learner is given access to all the data from
the current task and can perform numerous passes over it.
Under the second CL setting, which is being referred to as
online CL, the learner is presented with a stream of tiny
batches of observations and cannot revisit previously seen
batches from the current or the previous tasks.
A majority of recent work has centered on the taskincremental setting. In this work, however, we focus on
online CL, as it more closely resembles the way humans
and animals learn (Cangelosi & Schlesinger, 2015). In par­
ticular, we focus on replay-based online CL, under which a
small part of the incoming stream of observations are mem­
orized, so that they can be used to retrain the learner in the
future. Research in the ﬁeld of neuroscience has shown that
replay is also present in living beings and is connected to the
process of memory consolidation (Girardeau et al., 2009;
Ego-Stengel & Wilson, 2010).
Our main motivation has been to emphasize a gap that exists
in CL research. Speciﬁcally, most of the benchmarks used
to evaluate CL approaches are perfectly balanced, both in
terms of the sizes of the different tasks, and in terms of the

