Efficient Identification in Linear Structural Causal Models
with Auxiliary Cutsets

Daniel Kumor 1 Carlos Cinelli 2 Elias Bareinboim 3

Abstract
We develop a polynomial-time algorithm for identification of structural coefficients in linear causal
models that subsumes previous efficient state-ofthe-art methods, unifying several disparate approaches to identification in this setting. Building
on these results, we develop a procedure for identifying total causal effects in linear systems.

1. Introduction
Regression analysis is one of the most popular methods
used to understand the relationships across multiple variables throughout the empirical sciences. The most common
type of regression is linear, where one attempts to explain
the observed data by fitting a line (or hyperplane), minimizing the sum of the corresponding deviations. This method
can be traced back at least to the pioneering work of Legendre and Gauss (Legendre, 1805; Gauss, 1809), in the
context of astronomical observations (Stigler, 1986). Linear
regression and its generalizations have been the go-to tool
of a generation of data analysts, and the workhorse behind
many recent breakthroughs in the sciences, in businesses,
and throughout engineering. Based on modern statistics and
machine learning techniques, it’s feasible to handle regression instances up to thousands, sometimes even millions of
variables at the same time (Hastie et al., 2009).
Despite the power entailed by this family of methods, one of
its main drawbacks is that it only explains the association (or
correlation) between purported variables, while remaining
silent with respect to any possible cause and effect relationship. In practice, however, learning about causation is often
the main goal of the exercise, sometimes, the very reason
one engaged in the data collection and the subsequent anal1

Dept. of Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette,
IN, USA 2 Dept. of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA 3 Dept. of Computer Science, Columbia University,
New York, NY, USA. Correspondence to: Daniel Kumor <dkumor@purdue.edu>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

ysis in the first place. For instance, a health scientist may
be interested in knowing the effect of a new treatment on
the survival of its patients, while an economist may attempt
to understand the unintended consequences of a new policy
on a nation’s gross domestic product. If regression analysis
doesn’t allow scientists to answer their more precious questions, which framework could legitimize such inferences?
The discipline of causal inference is interested in formalizing precisely these conditions, and, more broadly, providing a principled approach to combining data and partial
understanding about the underlying generating processes
to support causal claims (Pearl, 2000; Spirtes et al., 2000;
Bareinboim & Pearl, 2016). One popular framework used to
study this family of problems is known as structural causal
models (SCMs, for short). Given the pervasiveness of linear
regression in data-driven disciplines, we’ll focus on the class
of linear structural models, following the treatment provided
in Wright (1921) and as discussed more contemporaneously
in Pearl (2000, Ch. 5).
In this class of SCMs, the set of observed variables is determined by a linear combination of their direct causes and
latent confounders (or errors terms). Formally, this is represented as a system of linear equations X = ΛT X + ,
where X is a vector of observed variables,  is a vector
of latent variables, and Λ is an upper triangular matrix of
direct effects, otherwise known as path coefficients, whose
ijth element, λij gives the magnitude of the direct causal
effect of xi on xj . The error terms are commonly assumed to be normally distributed, which means that the
covariance matrix Σ characterizes the observational distribution. This matrix can be linked to the underlying structural parameters through the system of polynomial equations
Σ = XX T = (I − Λ)−T Ω(I − Λ)−1 . Identification then
is reduced to finding the elements of Λ that are uniquely
determined by the above system. If a structural parameter
can be expressed in terms of the elements of Σ alone, it is
said to be generically identifiable (Foygel et al., 2012; Drton
& Weihs, 2015).
Generic identification can be fully solved using computer
algebra as shown in García-Puente et al. (2010). In practice, however, this method has a doubly-exponential computational complexity (Bardet & Chyzak, 2005), becoming

