Adaptive Sampling for Estimating Probability Distributions

Shubhanshu Shekhar 1 Tara Javidi 1 Mohammad Ghavamzadeh 2

Abstract
We consider the problem of allocating a fixed
budget of samples to a finite set of discrete distributions to learn them uniformly well (minimizing
the maximum error) in terms of four common
distance measures: `22 , `1 , f -divergence, and separation distance. To present a unified treatment
of these distances, we first propose a general optimistic tracking algorithm and analyze its sample allocation performance w.r.t. an oracle. We
then instantiate this algorithm for the four distance measures and derive bounds on their regret.
We also show that the allocation performance of
the proposed algorithm cannot, in general, be improved, by deriving lower-bounds on the expected
deviation from the oracle allocation for any adaptive scheme. We verify our theoretical findings
through some experiments. Finally, we show that
the techniques developed in the paper can be easily extended to learn some classes of continuous
distributions as well as to the related setting of
minimizing the average error (rather than the maximum error) in learning a set of distributions.

1. Introduction
Consider the problem in which a learner must allocate n
samples among K discrete distributions to construct uniformly good (minimizing the maximum error) estimates of
these distributions in terms of a distance measure D. Depending on D, certain distributions may require much fewer
samples than the others to be estimated with the same precision. The optimal sampling strategy for a given n requires
knowledge of the true distributions. The goal of this paper
is to design adaptive allocation strategies that converge to
the optimal strategy, oblivious to the true distributions.
The problem described above models several applications
which are not captured by existing works. Here, we describe
1

ECE Department, University of California, San Diego
Google Research. Correspondence to: Shubhanshu Shekhar
<shshekha@eng.uscd.edu>.
2

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Online, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

some such applications. (1) Opinion Polling: Suppose
there are K groups of voters who have different preference distributions over l candidates in an election. While
some groups might heavily favour a single candidate, others
might be indifferent, resulting in a more uniform distribution over the set of candidates. In this setting, how should
the polling agency allocate its sampling budget? Intuitively,
more samples should be allocated to the indifferent voter
groups to construct uniformly good estimates of their preference distributions. (2) Compression of text files: Given
a sampling budget of n bytes, consider the problem of designing codes with minimum average length for text files
in K different languages. Since different languages may
have different symbol frequencies, this can be formulated
as learning K distributions uniformly well in terms of certain f -divergences. (3) Learning MDP model: In many
sequential decision-making problems, the agent’s interaction with the environment is modeled as a Markov decision
process (MDP). In these problems, it is often important to accurately estimate the dynamics (i.e., the transition structure
of the MDP), given a finite exploration budget. Learning the
MDP model is equivalent to estimating S × A distributions,
where S and A are the number of states and actions of the
(finite) MDP. Therefore, assuming the existence of a known
policy that can efficiently transition the MDP between any
two states, the problem reduces to finding the optimal allocation of samples to these S × A distributions. Thus, the
framework studied in this paper provides the first step towards solving the general problem of constructing accurate
models for MDPs. The requirement of a known policy to
transition between states can be relaxed by employing the
techniques recently developed for efficient exploration in
MDPs (e.g., Tarbouriech & Lazaric 2019; Hazan et al. 2019;
Cheung 2019), which we leave for future work.
Antos et al. (2008) were the first to study the problem of
learning the mean of K distributions uniformly well, and
proposed and analyzed an algorithm based on forced exploration strategy. Carpentier et al. (2011) proposed and
analyzed an alternative approach for the same problem,
based on the UCB algorithm (Auer et al., 2002). Carpentier
& Munos (2011) analyzed an optimistic policy for the related problem of stratified-sampling, where the goal is to
learn K distributions in terms of a weighted average distance (instead of max). Soare et al. (2013) extended the
optimistic strategy to the case of uniformly estimating K

