Causal Deciphering and Inpainting in
Spatio-Temporal Dynamics via Diffusion Model

Yifan Duan1∗, Jian Zhao2∗†, pengcheng5 , Junyuan Mao1∗ , Hao Wu1 , Jingyu Xu3 ,
Shilong Wang1 , Caoyuan Ma3 , Kai Wang4 , Kun Wang6† , Xuelong Li2†
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 TeleAI, China Telecom, 3 Wuhan University,
4
National University of Singapore, 5 Beijing Forestry University, 6 Nanyang Technological University
{duanyifan28,wslong1259,maojunyuan,wuhao2022}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
{kevinxu,macaoyuan}@whu.edu.cn,pengcheng2022@bjfu.edu.cn,li@nwpu.edu.cn,
wk520529wjh@gmail.com,{E0823044,zhaojian90}@u.nus.edu

Abstract
Spatio-temporal (ST) prediction has garnered a De facto attention in earth sciences, such as meteorological prediction, human mobility perception. However, the scarcity of data coupled with the high expenses involved in sensor
deployment results in notable data imbalances. Furthermore, models that are
excessively customized and devoid of causal connections further undermine the
generalizability and interpretability. To this end, we establish a framework for ST predictions from a causal perspective, termed CaPaint, which targets
to identify causal regions in data and endow model with causal reasoning ability
in a two-stage process. Going beyond this process, we build on the front door
adjustment as the theoretical foundation to specifically address the sub-regions
identified as non-causal in the upstream phase. By using a fine-tuned unconditional
Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM) as the generative prior, we in-fill the masks
defined as environmental parts, offering the possibility of reliable extrapolation
for potential data distributions. CaPaint overcomes the high complexity dilemma
of optimal ST causal discovery models by reducing the data generation complexity from exponential to quasi-linear levels. Extensive experiments conducted on
five real-world ST benchmarks demonstrate that integrating the CaPaint concept
allows models to achieve improvements ranging from 3.7%∼77.3%. Moreover,
compared to traditional mainstream ST augmenters, CaPaint underscores the potential of diffusion models in ST data augmentation, offering a novel paradigm for
this field. Our project is available at CaPaint.

1

Introduction

Deep learning methodologies have achieved groundbreaking success across a wide array of spatiotemporal (ST) dynamics systems [28, 84, 44], which include meteorological forecasting [3, 50, 59, 92],
wildfire spread modeling [71, 20], intelligent transportation [29, 27, 87], and human mobility systems
[27, 90], to name just a few. Traditional ST dynamics approaches, based on first-principles [4, 53],
often come with high computational costs. In contrast, ST dynamic analysis methods based on
deep learning are not directly reliant on the explicit expression of physical laws but are data-driven
[28, 84, 3, 27], relying on training models with large-scale observable datasets [86, 65, 92].
In a parallel vein, numerous efforts aim to incorporate physical laws into deep networks [35, 8,
54, 31, 81], termed Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs), which blend deep learning
principles with physics to address challenges in scientific computing, particularly in fluid dynamics.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

