The Intelligible and Effective Graph Neural Additive
Networks
Maya Bechler-Speicher
Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel-Aviv University

Amir Globerson
Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel-Aviv University∗

Ran Gilad-Bachrach
Department of Bio-Medical Engineering
Edmond J. Safra Center for Bioinformatics
Tel-Aviv University

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have emerged as the predominant approach for
learning over graph-structured data. However, most GNNs operate as black-box
models and require post-hoc explanations, which may not suffice in high-stakes
scenarios where transparency is crucial. In this paper, we present a GNN that is
interpretable by design. Our model, Graph Neural Additive Network (GNAN),
is a novel extension of the interpretable class of Generalized Additive Models,
and can be visualized and fully understood by humans. GNAN is designed to
be fully interpretable, offering both global and local explanations at the feature
and graph levels through direct visualization of the model. These visualizations
describe exactly how the model uses the relationships between the target variable,
the features, and the graph. We demonstrate the intelligibility of GNANs in a
series of examples on different tasks and datasets. In addition, we show that the
accuracy of GNAN is on par with black-box GNNs, making it suitable for critical
applications where transparency is essential, alongside high accuracy.

1

Introduction

In many domains, ranging from biology to fraud detection, Artificial Intelligence (AI) is applied
to data with graph structure. Neural Networks, and specifically Graph Neural Networks (GNNs),
have emerged as the predominant approach in these applications (see, for example, Zhou et al. [1]).
While GNNs demonstrate high accuracy, in terms of the correctness of their predictions, they often
function as black-box models; thus, their decision-making processes are opaque. Transparency is
vital for assessing potential biases or safety risks, and is particularly critical in high-stakes areas
such as criminal justice, healthcare, and finance, where decisions significantly impact individuals’
lives. In such contexts, interpretable models, despite sometimes being less accurate, may be preferred
over complex black-box models [2]. Furthermore, the transparency of automated decision making
processes is increasingly becoming a legal mandate. While there is ongoing debate over whether the
European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) implies a “right to explanation” [3, 4],
the proposed European AI Act explicitly addresses this issue, stating that “To address concerns
related to opacity and complexity of certain AI systems and help deployers to fulfill their obligations
under this regulation, transparency should be required for high-risk AI systems before they are placed
on the market or put into service” [5].
∗

Now also at Google Research

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

