Data-Faithful Feature Attribution: Mitigating
Unobservable Confounders via Instrumental Variables
Qiheng Sun1,2 , Haocheng Xia3 , Jinfei Liu1,2∗
1
Zhejiang University
2
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
3
Siebel School of Computing and Data Science
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{qiheng_sun,jinfeiliu}@zju.edu.cn, hxia7@illinois.edu

Abstract
The state-of-the-art feature attribution methods often neglect the influence of
unobservable confounders, posing a risk of misinterpretation, especially when
it is crucial for the interpretation to remain faithful to the data. To counteract
this, we propose a new approach, data-faithful feature attribution, which trains
a confounder-free model using instrumental variables. The cluttered effects of
unobservable confounders in a model trained as such are decoupled from input
features, thereby aligning the output of the model with the contribution of input
features to the target feature in the data generation. Furthermore, feature attribution
results produced by our method are more robust when focusing on attributions
from the perspective of data generation. Our experiments on both synthetic and
real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our approaches.

1

Introduction

The increasing complexity and opacity of machine learning (ML) models in real-world applications
boost the demand for feature attribution [8]. The feature attribution methods have been developed to
help users understand why a model produces certain outputs from specific inputs. For instance, a
loan applicant rejected by a bank’s decision-making model might seek reasons behind the denial and
what changes could potentially reverse the model’s decision. Some recent studies [19, 9] have shifted
the focus of feature attribution from a traditional model-centric perspective to a new perspective that
is data-centric. Specifically, users may wish to assign importance values to features according to the
data generation process, referring to the causal relationships through which features influence the
target feature. For example, consider a medical application setting where a patient seeks to understand
which personal features aggravated the illness and the cooperative impact of all features on the illness.
What the patient really wants to know is how all features collaboratively contribute to the illness,
rather than one diagnostic model’s prediction output. These two aspects of feature attribution align
with the concepts of model fidelity and data fidelity, respectively. Here, model fidelity refers to the
attribution being consistent with the output of the explained model, while data fidelity pertains to the
attribution being consistent with the data generation process.
SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) [27] and Integrated Gradients (IG) [38] are prevalent representatives of two distinct series of feature attribution methods, each uniquely satisfying critical
axioms including sensitivity, implementation invariance, completeness, and symmetry [28]. These
properties are essential for ensuring reasonability and fairness in feature attribution. The SHAP-based
methods, grounded in game theory and particularly the Shapley value [32], offer interpretations by
evaluating all possible combinations of feature contributions in a discrete feature space. In contrast,
∗

Jinfei Liu is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

