CultureLLM: Incorporating Cultural Differences into
Large Language Models

Cheng Li∗
Institute of Software, CAS
chenglicat0228@gmail.com

Mengzhuo Chen
Institute of Software, CAS
mengzhuo.happy@gmail.com

Jindong Wang†
Microsoft Research
jindong.wang@microsoft.com

Sunayana Sitaram
Microsoft Research
Sunayana.Sitaram@microsoft.com

Xing Xie
Microsoft Research
xing.xie@microsoft.com

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have been observed to exhibit bias towards certain cultures due to the predominance of training data obtained from English
corpora. Considering that multilingual cultural data is often expensive to procure, existing methodologies address this challenge through prompt engineering
or culture-specific pre-training. However, these strategies may neglect the knowledge deficiency of low-resource cultures and necessitate substantial computing
resources. In this paper, we propose CultureLLM, a cost-effective solution to
integrate cultural differences into LLMs. CultureLLM employs the World Value
Survey (WVS) as seed data and generates semantically equivalent training data
through the proposed semantic data augmentation. Utilizing only 50 seed samples from WVS with augmented data, we fine-tune culture-specific LLMs as
well as a unified model (CultureLLM-One) for 9 cultures, encompassing both
rich and low-resource languages. Extensive experiments conducted on 60 culturerelated datasets reveal that CultureLLM significantly surpasses various counterparts
such as GPT-3.5 (by 8.1%) and Gemini Pro (by 9.5%), demonstrating performance comparable to or exceeding that of GPT-4. Our human study indicates
that the generated samples maintain semantic equivalence to the original samples, offering an effective solution for LLMs augmentation. Code is released at
https://github.com/Scarelette/CultureLLM.

1

Introduction

Culture is a complex construct that encapsulates various identities, including, but not limited to,
language, nationality, region, religion, and gender identity. Cultural bias is prevalent worldwide and
refers to the tendency to favor specific cultural perspectives, values, and norms, which results in
subjective opinions and may offend individuals from other cultures. For instance, according to the
World Value Survey [Survey, 2022], Arabic culture believes that men are better political leaders than
∗
†

Work done during Cheng’s internship at MSRA.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

