Energy-based Epistemic Uncertainty
for Graph Neural Networks

Dominik Fuchsgruber, Tom Wollschläger, and Stephan Günnemann
School of Computation, Information and Technology & Munich Data Science Institute
Technical University of Munich, Germany
{d.fuchsgruber, tom.wollschlaeger, s.guennemann}@tum.de

Abstract
In domains with interdependent data, such as graphs, quantifying the epistemic
uncertainty of a Graph Neural Network (GNN) is challenging as uncertainty can
arise at different structural scales. Existing techniques neglect this issue or only
distinguish between structure-aware and structure-agnostic uncertainty without
combining them into a single measure. We propose GEBM, an energy-based model
(EBM) that provides high-quality uncertainty estimates by aggregating energy at
different structural levels that naturally arise from graph diffusion. In contrast
to logit-based EBMs, we provably induce an integrable density in the data space
by regularizing the energy function. We introduce an evidential interpretation of
our EBM that significantly improves the predictive robustness of the GNN. Our
framework is a simple and effective post hoc method applicable to any pre-trained
GNN that is sensitive to various distribution shifts. It consistently achieves the best
separation of in-distribution and out-of-distribution data on 6 out of 7 anomaly
types while having the best average rank over shifts on all datasets.

1

Introduction

Quantifying and understanding uncertainty is crucial to developing safe and reliable machine learning
systems. Many applications such as Reinforcement Learning [42], Active Learning [5, 31] or Outof-Distribution detection [60] benefit from disentangling different facets of uncertainty [54, 17, 46].
Typically, one distinguishes between an irreducible aleatoric component and reducible epistemic
factors [29]. The former is inherent to the data, while the latter is rooted in a lack of knowledge. One
way to quantify epistemic uncertainty is to define a classifier-dependent density over the data domain
[55]. High values indicate similarity to the training data and thus imply low epistemic uncertainty.
Energy-based models (EBMs) induce this density by defining an energy function that assumes low
values near the training data [38]. A common choice is the logits of the classifier as their magnitude
is supposed to correlate with the model confidence [40]. However, many architectures have been
shown to produce arbitrarily overconfident predictions far from the training data [28]. The negative
implications for logit-based EBMs are only scarcely discussed in the literature [35, 36].
While substantial effort has been directed toward uncertainty estimation for independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) problems [1, 24, 49, 37, 6, 22], graphs have only recently received attention
within the community [71, 64, 67, 21]. There, uncertainty can arise at different structural scales, e.g.,
from only a single node, clusters, or global properties. Previous work only accounts for this implicitly
by applying techniques from i.i.d. domains to Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [67, 49]. A recent approach distinguishes only between structure-aware and structure-agnostic uncertainty [64] while not
combining them into a single measure, which is often required in downstream applications [42, 54].
Consequently, estimates are often only sensitive to shifts that match their structural resolution. They
may overfit certain anomaly types and not be reliable in general.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

