Zero-Shot Tokenizer Transfer
Benjamin Minixhofer [SEP] Edoardo M. Ponti [CLS] Ivan Vulić [SEP]
[SEP]
[CLS]
University of Cambridge
University of Edinburgh

Abstract
Language models (LMs) are bound to their tokenizer, which maps raw text to a
sequence of vocabulary items (tokens). This restricts their flexibility: for example,
LMs trained primarily on English may still perform well in other natural and
programming languages, but have vastly decreased efficiency due to their Englishcentric tokenizer. To mitigate this, we should be able to swap the original LM
tokenizer with an arbitrary one, on the fly, without degrading performance. Hence,
in this work we define a new problem: Zero-Shot Tokenizer Transfer (ZeTT).
The challenge at the core of ZeTT is finding embeddings for the tokens in the
vocabulary of the new tokenizer. Since prior heuristics for initializing embeddings
often perform at chance level in a ZeTT setting, we propose a new solution: we
train a hypernetwork taking a tokenizer as input and predicting the corresponding
embeddings. We empirically demonstrate that the hypernetwork generalizes to new
tokenizers both with encoder (e.g., XLM-R) and decoder LLMs (e.g., Mistral-7B).
Our method comes close to the original models’ performance in cross-lingual and
coding tasks while markedly reducing the length of the tokenized sequence. We
also find that the remaining gap can be quickly closed by continued training on
less than 1B tokens. Finally, we show that a ZeTT hypernetwork trained for a base
(L)LM can also be applied to fine-tuned variants without extra training. Overall,
our results make substantial strides toward detaching LMs from their tokenizer.

1

Introduction

Language Models1 typically operate on discrete tokens, so they need a means to map text into a
sequence of tokens, namely a tokenizer. The vast majority of contemporary LMs use subword
tokenizers (Devlin et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023; Parmar et al., 2024, among
others), whereas others use byte-level (Xue et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024) or
character-level tokenizers (Clark et al., 2022; Tay et al., 2022). Regardless of the chosen tokenization
‘granularity’, these models share a fundamental limitation: once they are trained with a particular
tokenizer, inference with a different tokenizer is impossible. In other terms, a pre-trained LM is
“bound” to the tokenizer it was trained with. This has wide-ranging implications: since the focus during
pretraining is typically primarily on the English language, the tokenizer often encodes languages
besides English (Rust et al., 2021) or other domains, such as code, less efficiently. This leads to
large disparities in the inference cost between English and non-English text (Ahia et al., 2023; Petrov
et al., 2023). Tokenizers may also be sub-optimal for domains which they were not designed to be
used with, e.g. fine-tunings of the Llama models performing subpar on coding tasks (Dagan et al.,
2024). Efficiency and performance are only some of the reasons to transfer models across tokenizers:
methods of interaction between models, such as ensembling (Sagi & Rokach, 2018) and model
merging (Wortsman et al., 2022; Ainsworth et al., 2023; Yadav et al., 2023), typically assume the
same unit of representation (i.e., equivalent tokenization) across models; if two models adopt different
1

We adopt a broad definition of LMs that also includes models that do not define a probability distribution
over finite-length sequences, such as text encoders.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

