Measuring Déjà vu Memorization Efficiently

Narine Kokhlikyan
FAIR at Meta

Bargav Jayaraman
FAIR at Meta

Chuan Guo
FAIR at Meta

Florian Bordes
FAIR at Meta

Kamalika Chaudhuri
FAIR at Meta

Abstract
Recent research has shown that representation learning models may accidentally
memorize their training data. For example, the déjà vu method shows that for
certain representation learning models and training images, it is sometimes possible to correctly predict the foreground label given only the representation of
the background – better than through dataset-level correlations. However, their
measurement method requires training two models – one to estimate dataset-level
correlations and the other to estimate memorization. This multiple model setup
becomes infeasible for large open-source models. In this work, we propose alternative simple methods to estimate dataset-level correlations, and show that these
can be used to approximate an off-the-shelf model’s memorization ability without
any retraining. This enables, for the first time, the measurement of memorization
in pre-trained open-source image representation and vision-language models. Our
results show that different ways of measuring memorization yield very similar
aggregate results. We also find that open-source models typically have lower aggregate memorization than similar models trained on a subset of the data. The code is
available both for vision and vision language models.

1

Introduction

Representation learning has emerged as one of the major tasks in computer vision. The goal in
representation learning is to learn a model that produces semantically meaningful representations,
where images or image-text pairs that are close in meaning occur close together in representation
space. These learned representations can then be used in numerous downstream applications such
as semantic segmentation [Kirillov et al., 2023], image generation [Rombach et al., 2022] and
multi-modal LLMs [Liu et al., 2024]. A natural question that arises is whether these representation
learning models memorize their training data and to what extent. Excessive memorization may call
the generalization abilities of the models into question. Thus, there is a need to develop a way to
measure if and to what extent memorization is taking place.
Since learned representations are usually abstract and hard to interpret, memorization measurement
for representation learning models requires careful design. Currently, a standard way of doing
this is the déjà vu method, which designs a causal task of predicting parts of the training sample
given another disjoint part, and uses performance on this task to determine if the model memorizes.
For example, Meehan et al. [2023] designed the task of predicting the foreground object given
the background crop of a training image, as shown in Figure 1 (orange block). Achieving a high
performance on this task indicates two possibilities: (i) if the model has memorized the association of
the background crop with the foreground object for a specific training sample, or (ii) if the model
has learned the dataset-level correlation between the background crop and a given foreground object.
To rule out the second possibility, Meehan et al. [2023] opted for a two-model approach, training
two separate models on disjoint parts of the training set and using the gap in performance between
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

