Expected Probabilistic Hierarchies

Marcel Kollovieh1,2,3
1

Bertrand Charpentier4

Daniel Zügner5

Stephan Günnemann1,2,3,4

School of Computation, Information and Technology, Technical University of Munich
2
Munich Data Science Institute 3 Munich Center for Machine Learning
4
Pruna AI 5 Microsoft Research AI for Science
Correspondence to: m.kollovieh@tum.de

Abstract
Hierarchical clustering has usually been addressed by discrete optimization using
heuristics or continuous optimization of relaxed scores for hierarchies. In this work,
we propose to optimize expected scores under a probabilistic model over hierarchies. (1) We show theoretically that the global optimal values of the expected
Dasgupta cost and Tree-Sampling divergence (TSD), two unsupervised metrics for
hierarchical clustering, are equal to the optimal values of their discrete counterparts
contrary to some relaxed scores. (2) We propose Expected Probabilistic Hierarchies
(EPH), a probabilistic model to learn hierarchies in data by optimizing expected
scores. EPH uses differentiable hierarchy sampling enabling end-to-end gradient
descent based optimization, and an unbiased subgraph sampling approach to scale
to large datasets. (3) We evaluate EPH on synthetic and real-world datasets including vector and graph datasets. EPH outperforms all other approaches quantitatively
and provides meaningful hierarchies in qualitative evaluations.

1

Introduction

A fundamental problem in unsupervised learning is clustering. Given a dataset, the task is to partition
the instances into similar groups. While flat clustering algorithms such as k-means group data points
into disjoint groups, a hierarchical clustering divides the data recursively into smaller clusters, which
yields several advantages over a flat one. Instead of only providing cluster assignments of the data
points, it captures the clustering at multiple granularities, allowing the user to choose the desired level
of fine and coarseness depending on the task. The hierarchical structure can be easily visualized in a
dendrogram (e.g., see Fig. 4), making it easy to interpret and analyze. Hierarchical clustering finds
applications in many areas, from personalized recommendation [39] and document clustering [35] to
gene-expression [16] and phylogenetics [17]. Furthermore, the presence of hierarchical structures
can be observed in various real-world graphs in nature and society [33].
A first family of methods for hierarchical clustering are discrete approaches. They aim at optimizing
some hierarchical clustering quality scores on a discrete search space, i.e.:
max score(X, T̂ ) s.t.T̂ ∈ discrete hierarchies,

(1)

T̂

where X denotes a given (vector or graph) dataset. Examples of score optimization could be the
minimization of the discrete Dasgupta score [12], the minimization of the error sum of squares [37],
the maximization of the discrete TSD [8], or the maximization of the modularity score [4]. Discrete
approaches have two main limitations: the optimization search space of discrete hierarchies is large
and constrained, which often makes the problem intractable without using heuristics, and the learning
procedure is not differentiable and thus not amenable to gradient-based optimization, as done by
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

