DiffuBox: Refining 3D Object Detection with Point
Diffusion
Xiangyu Chen∗,1,† Zhenzhen Liu∗,1 Katie Z Luo∗,1 Siddhartha Datta2
Adhitya Polavaram1 Yan Wang3 Yurong You3 Boyi Li3 Marco Pavone3
Wei-Lun Chao4 Mark Campbell1 Bharath Hariharan1 Kilian Q. Weinberger1
1
Cornell University 2 University of Oxford 3 NVIDIA Research 4 The Ohio State University

Abstract
Ensuring robust 3D object detection and localization is crucial for many applications in robotics and autonomous driving. Recent models, however, face difficulties
in maintaining high performance when applied to domains with differing sensor
setups or geographic locations, often resulting in poor localization accuracy due to
domain shift. To overcome this challenge, we introduce a novel diffusion-based
box refinement approach. This method employs a domain-agnostic diffusion model,
conditioned on the LiDAR points surrounding a coarse bounding box, to simultaneously refine the box’s location, size, and orientation. We evaluate this approach
under various domain adaptation settings, and our results reveal significant improvements across different datasets, object classes and detectors. Our PyTorch
implementation is available at https://github.com/cxy1997/DiffuBox.

1

Introduction

3D object detection is a fundamental task for embodied agents to safely navigate in complex environments. For autonomous vehicles to navigate complicated traffic conditions, this amounts to
identifying and localizing other road agents. Detection models under this setting need to make sense
of LiDAR point clouds to identify accurate bounding boxes for pre-specified objects. Given the
diverse driving environments that occur in practice it is common, however, for the train- and test-time
distributions to differ significantly. Domain distributional differences mainly arise from differences
in object size, point cloud density, and LiDAR beam angles. Consequently, models trained in one
region or particular dataset (e.g. Germany) may not perform well in another region or dataset (e.g.
USA) [48]. As a result, the domain adaptation problem raises concerns over the reliability and safety
of 3D object detection in self-driving, that are often trained in a particular setting, then deployed into
a diverse set of regions and locations.
Wang et al. [48] have obtained reductions in the domain adaptation gap by resizing boxes with a
simple scaling heuristic after the fact. Consequently, we share the belief that the performance gap
associated with domain adaptation is dominated by incorrect box sizes, shapes, and orientations,
rather than false positives and negatives in detections — e.g. a model trained in Germany can detect
US cars, but struggles to capture their larger dimensions.
In this paper we observe that, although the relationship of bounding boxes to the surrounding
environment varies across domains, the relative position of LiDAR points with respect to their
bounding boxes is surprisingly consistent [23]. Bounding boxes of these detections are, by definition,
supposed to tightly fit the corresponding objects. Furthermore, the objects within the same object
class (e.g., cars) have a similar shape with minor variance across different domains. What mostly
∗
†

Denotes equal contribution.
Correspondences could be directed to xc429@cornell.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

