A Huber Loss Minimization Approach to Mean
Estimation under User-level Differential Privacy

Puning Zhao
Zhejiang Lab
pnzhao@zhejianglab.com
Qingming Li
Zhejiang University
liqm@zju.edu.cn

Lifeng Lai
University of California, Davis
lflai@ucdavis.edu

Jiafei Wu
Zhejiang Lab
wujiafei@zhejianglab.com

Li Shen
Sun Yat-Sen University
mathshenli@gmail.com

Zhe Liu∗
Zhejiang Lab
zhe.liu@zhejianglab.com

Abstract
Privacy protection of users’ entire contribution of samples is important in distributed
systems. The most effective approach is the two-stage scheme, which finds a small
interval first and then gets a refined estimate by clipping samples into the interval.
However, the clipping operation induces bias, which is serious if the sample
distribution is heavy-tailed. Besides, users with large local sample sizes can make
the sensitivity much larger, thus the method is not suitable for imbalanced users.
Motivated by these challenges, we propose a Huber loss minimization approach
to mean estimation under user-level differential privacy. The connecting points of
Huber loss can be adaptively adjusted to deal with imbalanced users. Moreover, it
avoids the clipping operation, thus significantly reducing the bias compared with
the two-stage approach. We provide a theoretical analysis of our approach, which
gives the noise strength needed for privacy protection, as well as the bound of mean
squared error. The result shows that the new method is much less sensitive to the
imbalance of user-wise sample sizes and the tail of sample distributions. Finally,
we perform numerical experiments to validate our theoretical analysis.

1

Introduction

Privacy is one of the major concerns in modern data analysis. Correspondingly, differential privacy
(DP) [1] has emerged as a standard framework of privacy protection. Various statistical problems
have been analyzed with additional DP requirements [2–5]. Among all these problems, mean
estimation is a fundamental one [6–9], which is not only useful in its own right [10], but also serves
as a building block of many other tasks relying on estimating gradients, such as private stochastic
optimization [11–16] and machine learning [17–23]. Existing research on DP mean estimation
focuses primarily on item-level cases, i.e. each user contributes only one sample. However, in many
practical scenarios, especially in recommendation systems [24–26] and federated learning [27–32], a
user has multiple samples. We hope to regard them as a whole for privacy protection.
In recent years, a flurry of works focus on user-level DP [33–36]. The most popular one is the
Winsorized Mean Estimator (WME) proposed in [34], which takes a two-stage approach. In the first
stage, WME identifies an interval, which is small but contains the ground truth µ with high probability.
In the second stage, WME clips user-wise averages to control the sensitivity and then calculates
the final average with appropriate noise. This method can be extended to high dimensionality
by Hadamard transform [37]. The convergence rate has been established in [34] under some ideal
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

