Fine-Tuning is Fine, if Calibrated

Zheda Mai1∗, Arpita Chowdhury1∗, Ping Zhang1∗, Cheng-Hao Tu1 , Hong-You Chen1 ,
Vardaan Pahuja1 , Tanya Berger-Wolf1 , Song Gao2 , Charles Stewart3 , Yu Su1 , Wei-Lun Chao1
1
The Ohio State University, 2 University of Wisconsin Madison, 3 Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.

Abstract
Fine-tuning is arguably the most straightforward way to tailor a pre-trained model
(e.g., a foundation model) to downstream applications, but it also comes with
the risk of losing valuable knowledge the model had learned in pre-training. For
example, fine-tuning a pre-trained classifier capable of recognizing a large number
of classes to master a subset of classes at hand is shown to drastically degrade
the model’s accuracy in the other classes it had previously learned. As such, it is
hard to further use the fine-tuned model when it encounters classes beyond the
fine-tuning data. In this paper, we systematically dissect the issue, aiming to answer
the fundamental question, “What has been damaged in the fine-tuned model?” To
our surprise, we find that the fine-tuned model neither forgets the relationship
among the other classes nor degrades the features to recognize these classes.
Instead, the fine-tuned model often produces more discriminative features for these
other classes, even if they were missing during fine-tuning! What really hurts the
accuracy is the discrepant logit scales between the fine-tuning classes and the other
classes, implying that a simple post-processing calibration would bring back the
pre-trained model’s capability and at the same time unveil the feature improvement
over all classes. We conduct an extensive empirical study to demonstrate the
robustness of our findings and provide preliminary explanations underlying them,
suggesting new directions for future theoretical analysis. Our code is available at
https://github.com/OSU-MLB/Fine-Tuning-Is-Fine-If-Calibrated.

1

Introduction

Pre-trained models (e.g., foundation models) have become an indispensable component in modern
AI development [2]. Building upon neural networks with millions if not billions of parameters and
trained with gigantic amounts of data, these models have led to groundbreaking results in various
domains [30, 32, 39] and shown several emerging capabilities not observed priorly [21, 27, 2].
Yet, to obtain superior downstream performance, fine-tuning is still often needed. Typically, finetuning optimizes the model’s performance on the available downstream data. Taking image classification as an example, end-users typically fine-tune the pre-trained classifier to maximize the accuracy
of a certain set of classes at hand, no matter whether they know up front that it is the complete set
of classes or not. As a result, it is hard to further apply the model to some other classes, even if the
model had learned about those classes in pre-training. (Please see Figure 1 for an illustration.)
A recent work by Tu et al. [49] systematically evidenced such a problem. They fine-tuned a pretrained classifier with a subset of classes it had learned (i.e., fine-tuning classes) and found this led to a
drastic accuracy drop in the other classes (i.e., absent classes). Tu et al. [49] viewed this as an instance
of catastrophic forgetting [12, 24, 7] and suggested two ways to address it: (1) identifying the model
updating direction that can improve both the fine-tuning and absent classes; (2) preserving class
relationships. They presented a strong baseline, combining a new stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
∗

Equal contributions.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

