Efficient LLM Scheduling by Learning to Rank

Yichao Fu1
1

Siqi Zhu2 Runlong Su1 Aurick Qiao3
UCSD 2 Tsinghua University 3 Snowflake

Ion Stoica4 Hao Zhang1∗
UC Berkeley

4

Abstract
In Large Language Model (LLM) inference, the output length of an LLM request is
typically regarded as not known a priori. Consequently, most LLM serving systems
employ a simple First-come-first-serve (FCFS) scheduling strategy, leading to
Head-Of-Line (HOL) blocking and reduced throughput and service quality. In
this paper, we reexamine this assumption – we show that, although predicting the
exact generation length of each request is infeasible, it is possible to predict the
relative ranks of output lengths in a batch of requests, using learning to rank. The
ranking information offers valuable guidance for scheduling requests. Building
on this insight, we develop a novel scheduler for LLM inference and serving that can
approximate the shortest-job-first (SJF) schedule better than existing approaches.
We integrate this scheduler with the state-of-the-art LLM serving system and show
significant performance improvement in several important applications: 2.8x lower
latency in chatbot serving and 6.5x higher throughput in synthetic data generation.
Our code is available at https://github.com/hao-ai-lab/vllm-ltr.git.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly becoming the backbone of many today’s Internet
services and applications that serve millions of users [1]. Due to the surge in demand, efficient
scheduling for LLM serving is crucial to ensure high-quality service amidst numerous concurrent users
competing for computing resources. For popular interactive applications such as chatbots, this means
minimizing the latency that each user perceives while maximizing the overall system throughput to
accommodate as many users as possible.
Under high load, LLM services that implement a first-come-first-serve (FCFS) scheduling strategy
inevitably face significant Head-Of-Line (HOL) blocking, as many requests must wait for others to
execute. Figure 1 illustrates a typical example of how a long request can block shorter ones in FCFS
scheduling, leading to significant HOL blocking. In such scenarios, it is well-established that the
shortest-job-first (SJF) and shortest-remaining-time-first (SRTF) scheduling algorithms minimize
the average latency experienced across all requests. However, SJF/SRTF are seldom implemented in
LLM services because they require requests to be ordered by their remaining generation lengths, which
is traditionally assumed to be difficult or impossible to know ahead of time in existing systems [2, 3].
In this paper, we contend that, although accurately knowing the generation length of requests may
be difficult, it is actually not needed. Rather, just knowing the relative ordering between request
lengths is sufficient for SJF/SRTF scheduling. To this end, we propose to use the Kendall rank
correlation coefficient (Kendall’s Tau) [4] to measure the similarity between a predicted schedule and
the SJF/SRTF schedule based on groundtruth generation lengths (i.e. oracle). We demonstrate that
schedules with higher similarities (measured by Kendal’s Tau) to the oracle generally translate to lower
latencies in real-world performance (Figure. 2).
Based on this insight, we propose to optimize the request scheduling in LLM serving via learning
to rank. We show that a small auxiliary model (e.g., OPT-125M [5]) can be trained to accurately rank
∗

Hao Zhang is the corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

