OmniTokenizer: A Joint Image-Video Tokenizer for
Visual Generation
Junke Wang1,2 , Yi Jiang3♠ , Zehuan Yuan3 , Binyue Peng3 , Zuxuan Wu1,2†,♠ , Yu-Gang Jiang1,2
2

1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center on Intelligent Visual Computing, 3 Bytedance Inc.

Code available at https://github.com/FoundationVision/OmniTokenizer.

Abstract
Tokenizer, serving as a translator to map the intricate visual data into a compact
latent space, lies at the core of visual generative models. Based on the finding
that existing tokenizers are tailored to image or video inputs, this paper presents
OmniTokenizer, a transformer-based tokenizer for joint image and video tokenization. OmniTokenizer is designed with a spatial-temporal decoupled architecture,
which integrates window and causal attention for spatial and temporal modeling.
To exploit the complementary nature of image and video data, we further propose
a progressive training strategy, where OmniTokenizer is first trained on image
data on a fixed resolution to develop the spatial encoding capacity and then jointly
trained on image and video data on multiple resolutions to learn the temporal
dynamics. OmniTokenizer, for the first time, handles both image and video inputs
within a unified framework and proves the possibility of realizing their synergy.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that OmniTokenizer achieves state-of-the-art
(SOTA) reconstruction performance on various image and video datasets, e.g., 1.11
reconstruction FID on ImageNet and 42 reconstruction FVD on UCF-101, beating
the previous SOTA methods by 13% and 26%, respectively. Additionally, we also
show that when integrated with OmniTokenizer, both language model-based approaches and diffusion models can realize advanced visual synthesis performance,
underscoring the superiority and versatility of our method.

1

Introduction

The development of generative models [25, 54, 14, 17, 10, 41] has been one of the most exhilarating
developments in artificial intelligence, offering the potential to revolutionize the way we generate visual content. In recent years, visual generation approaches have emerged as two dominant
paradigms: language model-based methods [54, 12, 66, 48] and diffusion models [17, 45]. The
former exploits the superior sequence modeling capability of language models (LMs) [36, 37, 52]
for visual generation by formulating it as a next-token prediction process, while the latter gradually
transforms noise into coherent visual structures through a carefully crafted reverse diffusion process.
Core to both approaches is the tokenizer, which translates visual signals into latent representations,
with LM tokenizers, also known as VQVAE, discretizing inputs into sequences of latent codes [12,
64, 66, 27], and diffusion tokenizers, i.e., VAE, modeling their probability distributions within a
latent space [25, 41]. Analogous to the role of the lexicon in a written language, tokenizers for visual
synthesis dictate the upper bound of the generative models, thus attracting increasing attention in the
community [12, 63, 19].
♠: project leaders, †: corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

