Localized Zeroth-Order Prompt Optimization

Wenyang Hu*†§ , Yao Shu*⋄ , Zongmin Yu† , Zhaoxuan Wu§¶ , Xiaoqiang Lin† ,
Zhongxiang Dai‡ , See-Kiong Ng†§ , Bryan Kian Hsiang Low†
Dept. of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore†
Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore§
Guangdong Lab of AI and Digital Economy (SZ)⋄
Singapore-MIT Alliance for Research and Technology, Republic of Singapore¶
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen‡
wenyang.hu@u.nus.edu, shuyao@gml.ac.cn
{yuzongmin, wu.zhaoxuan, xiaoqiang.lin}@u.nus.edu
daizhongxiang@cuhk.edu.cn, seekiong@nus.edu.sg, lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
The efficacy of large language models (LLMs) in understanding and generating
natural language has aroused a wide interest in developing prompt-based methods
to harness the power of black-box LLMs. Existing methodologies usually prioritize
a global optimization for finding the global optimum, which however will perform
poorly in certain tasks under budget constraints. This thus motivates us to re-think
the necessity of finding a global optimum in prompt optimization. To answer
this, we conduct a thorough empirical study on prompt optimization and draw two
major insights. Contrasting with the rarity of global optimum, local optima are
usually prevalent and well-performed, which can be more worthwhile for efficient
prompt optimization (Insight I). The choice of the input domain, including both
the generation and the representation of prompts, affects the identification of
well-performing local optima (Insight II). Inspired by these insights, we propose
a novel algorithm, namely localized zeroth-order prompt optimization (ZOPO),
which incorporates a Neural Tangent Kernel-based derived Gaussian process into
standard zeroth-order optimization for an efficient search of well-performing local
optima in prompt optimization. Remarkably, ZOPO outperforms existing baselines
in terms of both the optimization performance and the query efficiency, which we
demonstrate through extensive experiments. Our implementation is available at
https://github.com/allen4747/ZOPO.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities for understanding and
generating natural languages [27, 41, 45]. Thanks to the instruction-following abilities of LLMs [28],
prompting—adding crafted, discrete prompts, or namely natural language text, to the input emerges
as an effective and lightweight approach to direct LLMs to generate specific, desired responses [20,
21]. Such an approach is of particular interest when users interact with state-of-the-art LLMs like
ChatGPT [25] and GPT-4 [24], which can only be accessed through black-box APIs (i.e., the interface
of black-box LLMs only accepts discrete texts as input). So, prompt optimization becomes a critical
effort in pursuing the optimal performance of black-box LLMs on downstream tasks.
Although human knowledge may subjectively guide prompt designs [21, 32], this process is commonly
time-intensive and its results are not always desirable in practice. To mitigate such human efforts
* Equal contribution.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

