DARG: Dynamic Evaluation of Large Language
Models via Adaptive Reasoning Graph

Zhehao Zhang
Dartmouth College
zhehao.zhang.gr@dartmouth.edu

Jiaao Chen
Georgia Institute of Technology
jiaaochen@gatech.edu

Diyi Yang
Stanford University
diyiy@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
The current paradigm of evaluating Large Language Models (LLMs) through static
benchmarks comes with significant limitations, such as vulnerability to data contamination and a lack of adaptability to the evolving capabilities of LLMs. Therefore,
evaluation methods that can adapt and generate evaluation data with controlled
complexity are urgently needed. In this work, we introduce Dynamic Evaluation
of LLMs via Adaptive Reasoning Graph Evolvement (DARG) to dynamically
extend current benchmarks with controlled complexity and diversity. Specifically,
we first extract the reasoning graphs of data points in current benchmarks and then
perturb the reasoning graphs to generate novel testing data. Such newly generated
test samples can have different levels of complexity while maintaining linguistic
diversity similar to the original benchmarks. We further use a code-augmented
LLM to ensure the label correctness of newly generated data. We apply our DARG
framework to diverse reasoning tasks in four domains with 15 state-of-the-art
LLMs. Experimental results show that almost all LLMs experience a performance
decrease with increased complexity and certain LLMs exhibit significant drops.
Additionally, we find that LLMs exhibit more biases when being evaluated via
the data generated by DARG with higher complexity levels. These observations
provide useful insights into how to dynamically and adaptively evaluate LLMs.
The code is available at https://github.com/SALT-NLP/DARG.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have recently attained exceptional performance across a wide
range of tasks [10, 2, 11] by showing substantial evaluation results on static benchmark datasets
[35, 16, 14] where their test data points are open-sourced and unchanged. Although these widely used
benchmarks are generally of high-quality, they may suffer from the following issues [119]: (1) Data
contamination [8, 66, 104, 29], which refers to the potential overlap between LLMs’ training corpus
and benchmarks’ data points. This raises concerns about whether LLMs are merely memorizing and
overfitting these benchmarks instead of learning how to solve the tasks [112], which may lead to poor
generalization[67, 13, 9]. (2) Static datasets only have fixed complexity and lack the flexibility to
evolve. As LLMs are developing and scaling up rapidly, existing static benchmarks may fail to align
with their increasing capabilities, as the complexity of current benchmarks remains unchanged [25].
To address these issues, prior work has introduced template-based methods [119] to generate evaluation samples with different complexities for mathematical and logical reasoning tasks. However, these
rule-based generated samples are synthetic and limited to a specific set of tasks, lacking linguistic
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

