Revisiting Few-Shot Object Detection with
Vision-Language Models

1

Anish Madan1,→, Neehar Peri1,→ , Shu Kong2,3,†, Deva Ramanan1,†
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 University of Macau, 3 Institute of Collaborative Innovation

Abstract
The era of vision-language models (VLMs) trained on web-scale datasets challenges conventional formulations of “open-world" perception. In this work, we
revisit the task of few-shot object detection (FSOD) in the context of recent foundational VLMs. First, we point out that zero-shot predictions from VLMs such as
GroundingDINO significantly outperform state-of-the-art few-shot detectors (48
vs. 33 AP) on COCO. Despite their strong zero-shot performance, such foundation
models may still be sub-optimal. For example, trucks on the web may be defined
differently from trucks for a target application such as autonomous vehicle perception. We argue that the task of few-shot recognition can be reformulated as
aligning foundation models to target concepts using a few examples. Interestingly,
such examples can be multi-modal, using both text and visual cues, mimicking
instructions that are often given to human annotators when defining a target concept of interest. Concretely, we propose Foundational FSOD, a new benchmark
protocol that evaluates detectors pre-trained on any external data and fine-tuned
on multi-modal (text and visual) K-shot examples per target class. We repurpose
nuImages for Foundational FSOD, benchmark several popular open-source VLMs,
and provide an empirical analysis of state-of-the-art methods. Lastly, we discuss
our recent CVPR 2024 Foundational FSOD competition and share insights from the
community. Notably, the winning team significantly outperforms our baseline by
23.3 mAP! Our code and dataset splits are available on GitHub and HuggingFace.

1

Introduction

Vision-language models (VLMs) trained on (often proprietary) web-scale datasets have disrupted
traditional notions of the “open-world”, particularly for few-shot recognition. In this paper, we
revisit few-shot object detection (FSOD) in the context of these foundation models, propose a new
benchmark protocol that allows foundation models to “enter the conversation”, and present several
simple baselines.
First, we highlight that zero-shot predictions from VLMs like GroundingDINO [33] demonstrate a
remarkable improvement over state-of-the-art few-shot detectors (48.3 vs. 33.1 AP) on COCO [31],
as shown in Table 1. In hindsight, this is not surprising, as the former is pre-trained on far more data
(that may include visual examples of the target concept), while the later is pre-trained on data that
is explicitly curated to avoid target concepts of interest. From this perspective, VLMs violate the
current training protocol of few-shot benchmarks, suggesting that such protocols need to be rethought
in the foundational era.
Concept Alignment. Despite their impressive performance, foundation models used in a zero-shot
fashion can still be sub-optimal. For example, trucks as defined for a particular target application
→
†

Equal Contribution
Equal Senior Authorship

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

