einspace: Searching for Neural Architectures
from Fundamental Operations

Linus Ericsson1∗ Miguel Espinosa1
Amos Storkey2 Shay B. Cohen2
1

Chenhongyi Yang1 Antreas Antoniou2
Steven McDonagh1 Elliot J. Crowley1

School of Engineering 2 School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh

Project page: https://linusericsson.github.io/einspace
Code: https://github.com/linusericsson/einspace

Abstract
Neural architecture search (NAS) finds high performing networks for a given task.
Yet the results of NAS are fairly prosaic; they did not e.g. create a shift from convolutional structures to transformers. This is not least because the search spaces in NAS
often aren’t diverse enough to include such transformations a priori. Instead, for NAS
to provide greater potential for fundamental design shifts, we need a novel expressive
search space design which is built from more fundamental operations. To this end, we
introduce einspace, a search space based on a parameterised probabilistic contextfree grammar. Our space is versatile, supporting architectures of various sizes and
complexities, while also containing diverse network operations which allow it to
model convolutions, attention components and more. It contains many existing competitive architectures, and provides flexibility for discovering new ones. Using this
search space, we perform experiments to find novel architectures as well as improvements on existing ones on the diverse Unseen NAS datasets. We show that competitive architectures can be obtained by searching from scratch, and we consistently find
large improvements when initialising the search with strong baselines. We believe
that this work is an important advancement towards a transformative NAS paradigm
where search space expressivity and strategic search initialisation play key roles.

1

Introduction

The goal of neural architecture search (NAS) [14, 42] is to automatically find a network architecture for a
given task, removing the need for expensive human expertise. NAS uses (i) a defined search space of all
possible architectures that can be chosen, and (ii) a search algorithm e.g. [68, 58, 40] to navigate through
the space, selecting the most suitable architecture with respect to search objectives. Despite significant
research investment in NAS, with over 1000 papers released since 2020 [59], manually designed
architectures still dominate the landscape. If someone looks through recent deep learning papers, they
will most likely come across a (manually designed) transformer [56], or perhaps a (manually designed)
MLP-Mixer [53], or even a (manually designed) ResNet [19]. Why isn’t NAS being used instead?
∗

linus.ericsson@ed.ac.uk

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

