ProgressGym: Alignment with a Millennium of
Moral Progress
Tianyi Qiu1∗ †

Yang Zhang1∗

Xuchuan Huang1

Jasmine Xinze Li2

Jiaming Ji13

Yaodong Yang13‡
1

Peking University
3

2

Cornell University

Institute for AI, Peking University

Abstract
Frontier AI systems, including large language models (LLMs), hold increasing
inﬂuence over the epistemology of human users. Such inﬂuence can reinforce prevailing societal values, potentially contributing to the lock-in of misguided moral
beliefs and, consequently, the perpetuation of problematic moral practices on a
broad scale. We introduce progress alignment as a technical solution to mitigate
this imminent risk. Progress alignment algorithms learn to emulate the mechanics of human moral progress, thereby addressing the susceptibility of existing
alignment methods to contemporary moral blindspots. To empower research in
progress alignment, we introduce ProgressGym,4 an experimental framework allowing the learning of moral progress mechanics from history, in order to facilitate
future progress in real-world moral decisions. Leveraging 9 centuries of historical text and 18 historical LLMs,5 ProgressGym enables codiﬁcation of real-world
progress alignment challenges into concrete benchmarks. Speciﬁcally, we introduce three core challenges: tracking evolving values (PG-Follow), preemptively
anticipating moral progress (PG-Predict), and regulating the feedback loop between human and AI value shifts (PG-Coevolve). Alignment methods without a
temporal dimension are inapplicable to these tasks. In response, we present lifelong and extrapolative algorithms as baseline methods of progress alignment, and
build an open leaderboard6 soliciting novel algorithms and challenges.

1

Introduction

Due to their increasingly widespread deployment, frontier AI systems are exerting profound inﬂuences over human beliefs and values. For instance, large language models (LLMs) have recently
assumed roles as personal assistants [1], romantic partners [2], Internet authors [3], and K-12 educators [4] — roles of signiﬁcant inﬂuence over human epistemology. Given studies demonstrating
that interactions with opinionated LLMs markedly alter user’s beliefs [5], it follows that the values
represented in AI systems could be reinforced in human users on a societal scale [6].
∗

Equal technical contribution.
Project lead.
‡
B Corresponding author. Email: yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn
4
ProgressGym is open-source and available at https://github.com/PKU-Alignment/ProgressGym.
5
Datasets and models are available as a Huggingface collection.
6
Accessible at https://huggingface.co/spaces/PKU-Alignment/ProgressGym-LeaderBoard.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

