Adam on Local Time: Addressing Nonstationarity
in RL with Relative Adam Timesteps

Benjamin Ellis∗
University of Oxford

Matthew T. Jackson∗
University of Oxford

Mattie Fellows
University of Oxford

Andrei Lupu
University of Oxford

Shimon Whiteson
University of Oxford

Alexander D. Goldie
University of Oxford

Jakob N. Foerster
University of Oxford

Abstract
In reinforcement learning (RL), it is common to apply techniques used broadly in
machine learning such as neural network function approximators and momentumbased optimizers [1, 2]. However, such tools were largely developed for supervised learning rather than nonstationary RL, leading practitioners to adopt target
networks [3], clipped policy updates [4], and other RL-specific implementation
tricks [5, 6] to combat this mismatch, rather than directly adapting this toolchain
for use in RL. In this paper, we take a different approach and instead address the
effect of nonstationarity by adapting the widely used Adam optimiser [7]. We first
analyse the impact of nonstationary gradient magnitude—such as that caused by
a change in target network—on Adam’s update size, demonstrating that such a
change can lead to large updates and hence sub-optimal performance. To address
this, we introduce Adam with Relative Timesteps, or Adam-Rel. Rather than using
the global timestep in the Adam update, Adam-Rel uses the local timestep within
an epoch, essentially resetting Adam’s timestep to 0 after target changes. We
demonstrate that this avoids large updates and reduces to learning rate annealing in
the absence of such increases in gradient magnitude. Evaluating Adam-Rel in both
on-policy and off-policy RL, we demonstrate improved performance in both Atari
and Craftax. We then show that increases in gradient norm occur in RL in practice,
and examine the differences between our theoretical model and the observed data.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) aims to learn robust policies from an agent’s experience. This has
the potential for large scale real-world impact in areas such as autonomous driving or improving
logistic chains. Over the last decade, a number of breakthroughs in supervised learning—such as
convolutional neural networks and the Adam optimizer—have expanded the deep learning toolchain
and been transferred to RL, enabling it to begin fulfilling this potential.
However, since RL agents are continuously learning from new data they collect under their changing
policy, the optimisation objective is fundamentally nonstationary. Furthermore, temporal difference
(TD) approaches bootstrap the agent’s update from its own value predictions, exacerbating the
nonstationarity in the objective function. This is in stark contrast to the stationary supervised learning
setting for which the deep learning toolchain was originally developed. Therefore, to apply these
tools successfully, researchers have developed a variety of implementation tricks on top of this base
to stabilise training [8, 6, 5]. This has resulted in a proliferation of little-documented design choices
that are vital for performance, contributing to the reproducibility crisis in RL [9].
∗

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

