SubgDiff: A Subgraph Diffusion Model to Improve
Molecular Representation Learning

Jiying Zhang, Zijing Liu∗, Yu Wang, Bin Feng, Yu Li∗
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)
{zhangjiying,liuzijing,fengbin,liyu}@idea.edu.cn
https://github.com/IDEA-XL/SubgDiff

Abstract
Molecular representation learning has shown great success in advancing AI-based
drug discovery. A key insight of many recent works is that the 3D geometric
structure of molecules provides essential information about their physicochemical
properties. Recently, denoising diffusion probabilistic models have achieved impressive performance in molecular 3D conformation generation. However, most
existing molecular diffusion models treat each atom as an independent entity,
overlooking the dependency among atoms within the substructures. This paper
introduces a novel approach that enhances molecular representation learning by
incorporating substructural information in the diffusion model framework. We
propose a novel diffusion model termed SubgDiff for involving the molecular
subgraph information in diffusion. Specifically, SubgDiff adopts three vital techniques: i) subgraph prediction, ii) expectation state, and iii) k-step same subgraph
diffusion, to enhance the perception of molecular substructure in the denoising
network. Experiments on extensive downstream tasks, especially the molecular
force predictions, demonstrate the superior performance of our approach.

1

Introduction

Molecular representation learning (MRL) has attracted tremendous attention due to its significant role
in learning from limited labeled data for applications
like AI-based drug discovery [37, 3, 4, 25] and material science [33]. From the perspective of physical
chemistry, the 3D molecular conformation can largely
determine the properties of molecules and the activities of drugs [6, 7]. Thus, numerous geometric neural
network architectures and self-supervised learning
strategies have been proposed to explore 3D molecular structures to improve performance on downstream
molecular property prediction tasks [35, 56, 23, 58].
Meanwhile, diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs)
have shown remarkable power to generate realistic
samples, especially in synthesizing high-quality im- Figure 1: Equilibrium probability of the six difages and videos [40, 10]. By modeling the generation ferent 3D structures (c1–c6) of the same molecule
ibuprofen (C13H18O2) in four different conditions.
as a reverse diffusion process, DPMs transform a ran- (Adapted with permission from [27]. Copyright 2018 American
dom noise into a sample in the target distribution. Chemical Society.)
Recently, diffusion models/flow models have also
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

