Keeping LLMs Aligned After Fine-tuning:
The Crucial Role of Prompt Templates

Kaifeng Lyu1∗, Haoyu Zhao1∗, Xinran Gu2∗†, Dingli Yu1 , Anirudh Goyal, Sanjeev Arora1
Computer Science Department & Princeton Language and Intelligence, Princeton Univeristy
2
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
{klyu,arora}@cs.princeton.edu
Content warning: This paper contains examples of harmful language.

1

Abstract
Public LLMs such as the Llama 2-Chat underwent alignment training and were
considered safe. Recently Qi et al. [2024] reported that even benign fine-tuning
on seemingly safe datasets can give rise to unsafe behaviors in the models. The
current paper is about methods and best practices to mitigate such loss of alignment.
We focus on the setting where a public model is fine-tuned before serving users
for specific usage, where the model should improve on the downstream task while
maintaining alignment. Through extensive experiments on several chat models
(Meta’s Llama 2-Chat, Mistral AI’s Mistral 7B Instruct v0.2, and OpenAI’s GPT3.5 Turbo), this paper uncovers that the prompt templates used during fine-tuning
and inference play a crucial role in preserving safety alignment, and proposes
the “Pure Tuning, Safe Testing” (PTST) strategy — fine-tune models without a
safety prompt, but include it at test time. This seemingly counterintuitive strategy
incorporates an intended distribution shift to encourage alignment preservation.
Fine-tuning experiments on GSM8K, ChatDoctor, and OpenOrca show that PTST
significantly reduces the rise of unsafe behaviors.1

1

Introduction

Fine-tuning existing Large Language Models (LLMs) for new applications is crucial in today’s
research and business. Available options include fine-tuning open-source language models (e.g.,
Llama 2, Touvron et al. 2023) with local resources or calling fine-tuning APIs for proprietary language
models (e.g., GPT-3.5 Turbo, Peng et al. 2023a).
Many of these models underwent alignment training (usually RLHF, Ouyang et al. 2022) so that they
can follow users’ instructions and provide helpful responses—while ensuring “safety,” meaning that
given problematic user queries (e.g., seeking help with criminal behavior), they either refuse to help
or respond with a safe and constructive answer. However, there is no guarantee that the model will
remain aligned after fine-tuning. Of course, a malicious model creator may fine-tune the model on a
dataset full of inappropriate behaviors to break the model’s alignment and elicit unsafe behaviors.
Such methods have been shown to be effective on many popular language models, including Llama 2
and GPT-3.5 Turbo [Yang et al., 2023, Zhan et al., 2023, Lermen et al., 2023b]. But recently, Qi et al.
[2024] raised a trickier question: If the model creator is benign and the model is fine-tuned on clearly
benign datasets, will the model be safe for public deployment? Interestingly, they showed that even
fine-tuning on datasets that do not contain harmful data (such as Alpaca, Taori et al. 2023) can result
in a noticeable rise in unsafe behaviors.
∗

Equal contribution
Work done while visiting Princeton.
1
Code: https://github.com/vfleaking/PTST
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

