Tight Rates for Bandit Control Beyond Quadratics

Y. Jennifer Sun
Princeton University
ys7849@princeton.edu

Zhou Lu
Princeton University
zhoul@princeton.edu

Abstract
Unlike classical control theory, such as Linear Quadratic Control (LQC), real-world
control problems are highly complex. These problems often involve adversarial
perturbations, bandit feedback models, and non-quadratic, adversarially chosen
cost functions. A fundamental yet unresolved question is whether optimal regret
can be achieved for these general control problems. The standard approach to
addressing this problem involves a reduction to bandit convex optimization with
memory. In the bandit setting, constructing a gradient estimator with low variance
is challenging due to the memory structure and non-quadratic loss functions.
In this paper, we provide an affirmative answer
√ to this question. Our main contribution is an algorithm that achieves an Õ( T ) optimal regret for bandit nonstochastic control with strongly-convex and smooth cost functions in the presence of
adversarial perturbations, improving the previously known Õ(T 2/3 ) regret bound
from (Cassel and Koren, 2020). Our algorithm overcomes the memory issue by
reducing the problem to Bandit Convex Optimization (BCO) without memory and
addresses general strongly-convex costs using recent advancements in BCO from
(Suggala et al., 2024). Along the way, we develop an improved algorithm for BCO
with memory, which may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Optimal control lies at the heart of engineering and operations research, with applications ranging
from launching spacecraft to stabilizing economies. The theory of optimal control is a well-established
field with a rich history, dating back to 1868 when James Clerk Maxwell analyzed governors, and
flourishing in the mid-20th century with the development of dynamic programming by (Bellman,
1954) and the Kalman filter by (Kalman, 1960).
Classic optimal control theory studies the problem where a controller interacts with an environment,
according to a (partially observable) linear time-invariant (LTI) dynamical system:
xt+1 = Axt + But + wt , yt = Cxt + et ,

(1)

where A, B, C are the dynamics governing the system, xt , ut , yt , wt , et represent the system state,
control input, observation, perturbation, and observation noise at time t, respectively. At each time t,
the controller observes yt and chooses a control ut , incurring a cost ct (yt , ut ) based on the current
observation and control. The system then evolves according to Eq. (1) to reach the next state xt+1 .
The theory of optimal control (e.g., LQC) typically relies on three key assumptions on the setting:
the perturbation wt is stochastic, the cost function ct is quadratic and known in advance, and the
function ct is observable to the controller. The linear-quadratic regulator (LQR) (Kalman et al., 1960)
provides a closed-form optimal solution under these conditions, representing a pinnacle of classical
control theory.
However, these assumptions are often too idealistic for practical scenarios. In real-world control
problems, the perturbations can be adversarial, the feedback model can be bandit, and the cost
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

