Don’t Compress Gradients in Random Reshuffling:
Compress Gradient Differences

Abdurakhmon Sadiev1,2∗, Grigory Malinovsky1 , Eduard Gorbunov1,2,3,4†‡,
Igor Sokolov1 , Ahmed Khaled5 , Konstantin Burlachenko1 , Peter Richtárik1
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Saudi Arabia
2
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Russian Federation
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
4
Mila, Université de Montréal, Canada
5
Princeton University, USA

Abstract
Gradient compression is a popular technique for improving communication complexity of stochastic first-order methods in distributed training of machine learning
models. However, the existing works consider only with-replacement sampling of
stochastic gradients. In contrast, it is well-known in practice and recently confirmed
in theory that stochastic methods based on without-replacement sampling, e.g.,
Random Reshuffling (RR) method, perform better than ones that sample the gradients with-replacement. In this work, we close this gap in the literature and provide
the first analysis of methods with gradient compression and without-replacement
sampling. We first develop a distributed variant of random reshuffling with gradient
compression (Q-RR), and show how to reduce the variance coming from gradient
quantization through the use of control iterates. Next, to have a better fit to Federated Learning applications, we incorporate local computation and propose a variant
of Q-RR called Q-NASTYA. Q-NASTYA uses local gradient steps and different local
and global stepsizes. Next, we show how to reduce compression variance in this
setting as well. Finally, we prove the convergence results for the proposed methods
and outline several settings in which they improve upon existing algorithms.

1

Introduction

Distributed learning plays a crucial role in the training of modern Deep Learning (DL) models since
distributed approaches are able to significantly reduce training time [Goyal et al., 2017, You et al.,
2019]. Moreover, distributed methods are mandatory for such applications as Federated learning
(FL) [Konečný et al., 2016, McMahan et al., 2017], where multiple nodes connected over a network
collaborate on a learning task. Each node possesses its own dataset and cannot share this data with
other nodes or a central server. As a result, algorithms for federated learning often rely on local
computation and lack access to the entire dataset of training examples. Federated learning finds
applications in diverse fields, including language modeling for mobile keyboards [Liu et al., 2021],
∗

Part of the work was done while A. Sadiev was a research intern at KAUST, working in the Optimization
and Machine Learning Lab of P. Richtárik.
†
Part of the work was done when E. Gorbunov was a researcher at MIPT and Mila & UdeM and also a
visiting researcher at KAUST, in the Optimization and Machine Learning Lab of P. Richtárik.
‡
Corresponding author, eduard.gorbunov@mbzuai.ac.ae

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

