Schur Nets: effectively exploiting local structure for
equivariance in higher order graph neural networks

Qingqi Zhang1∗ , Ruize Xu2∗ and Risi Kondor1,2,3
1
Computational and Applied Mathematics
Departments of 2 Computer Science and 3 Statistics
University of Chicago
{qingqi,richard1xur,risi}@uchicago.edu

Abstract
Recent works have shown that extending the message passing paradigm to subgraphs communicating with other subgraphs, especially via higher order messages,
can boost the expressivity of graph neural networks. In such architectures, to
faithfully account for local structure such as cycles, the local operations must be
equivariant to the automorphism group of the local environment. However, enumerating the automorphism groups of all subgraphs of interest and finding appropriate
equivariant operations for each one of them separately is generally not feasible. In
this paper we propose a solution to this problem based on spectral graph theory
that bypasses having to determine the automorphism group entirely and constructs
a basis for equivariant operations directly from the graph Laplacian. We show that
this approach can boost the performance of GNNs on some standard benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Message pasing neural networks (MPNNs) are the most popular paradigm for building neural
networks on graphs [18]. While MPNNs have proved to be remarkably effective in a range of
domains from program analysis [1] to drug discovery [20], a series of both empirical [3] and
theoretical [40, 10] results have shown that the fact that MPNNs are based on just vertices sending
messages to their neighbors limits their expressive power. This problem is especially acute in domains
such as chemistry, where the presence or absence of specific small structural units (functional groups)
directly influences the behavior and properties of molecules.
Recent papers proposed to address this issue by extending the message paradigm to also allow for
message passing between vertices and edges [24] or between subgraphs [2, 15, 4, 46]. However, if the
actual messages remain scalars, the added expressive power of these networks is relatively limited.
A newer development is the appearance of higher order MPNNs, where the messages are not just
scalars, but more complex objects indexed by the vertices of the sending and receiving subgraphs
[31, 34, 14]. For example, in an organic molecule, the internal state of a benzene ring (six carbon
atoms arranged in a cycle) can be represented as a matrix T ∈ R6×c , where the rows correspond
to the individual carbons. When this benzene ring passes a message to a neighboring benzene ring
that it shares an edge with, information relating to the two shared carbons can be sent directly to
the corresponding atoms in the second ring. Information relating to the other vertices has to be
treated differently. Hypergraph neural networks [15, 45, 41] and neural networks on more abstract
mathematical structures such as simplicial complexes [7, 6] are closely related, since these also
* denotes equal contribution.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

