Addressing Bias in Online Selection with Limited
Budget of Comparisons

Ziyad Benomar
ENSAE, Ecole Polytechnique,
FairPlay joint team
ziyad.benomar@ensae.fr

Evgenii Chzhen
CNRS, LMO, Université Paris-Saclay
evgenii.chzhen@universite-paris-saclay.fr

Nicolas Schreuder
CNRS, Laboratoire d’informatique
Gaspard Monge (LIGM/UMR 8049)
nicolas.schreuder@cnrs.fr

Vianney Perchet
CREST, ENSAE, Criteo AI LAB
Fairplay joint team
vianney.perchet@normalesup.org

Abstract
Consider a hiring process with candidates coming from different universities. It is
easy to order candidates with the same background, yet it can be challenging to
compare them otherwise. The latter case requires additional costly assessments,
leading to a potentially high total cost for the hiring organization. Given an assigned
budget, what would be an optimal strategy to select the most qualified candidate?
We model the above problem as a multicolor secretary problem, allowing comparisons between candidates from distinct groups at a fixed cost. Our study explores
how the allocated budget enhances the success probability in such settings.

1

Introduction

Online selection is among the most fundamental problems in decision-making under uncertainty,
Multiple problems within this framework can be modeled as variants of the secretary problem
[Dynkin, 1963, Chow et al., 1971], where the decision-maker has to identify the best candidate among
a pool of totally ordered candidates, observed sequentially in a uniformly random order. When a
new candidate is observed, the decision maker can either select them and halt the process or reject
them irrevocably. The optimal strategy is well known and consists of skipping the first 1/e fraction
of the candidates and then selecting the first candidate that is better than all previously observed ones.
This strategy yields a probability 1/e of selecting the best candidate. A large body of literature is
dedicated to the secretary problem and its variants, we refer the interested reader to [Chow et al.,
1971, Lindley, 1961] for a historical overview of this theoretical problem.
In practice, as pointed out by several social studies, the selection processes often do not reflect the
actual relative ranks of the candidates and might be biased with respect to some socioeconomic
attributes [Salem et al., 2022, Raghavan et al., 2020]. To tackle this issue, several works have explored
variants of the secretary problem with noisy or biased observations [Salem and Gupta, 2019, Freij and
Wästlund, 2010]. In particular, Correa et al. [2021a] studied the multi-color secretary problem, where
each candidate belongs to one of K distinct groups, and only candidates of the same group can be
compared. This corresponds for example to the case of graduate candidates from different universities,
where the within-group orders are freely observable and can be trusted using a metric such as GPA,
but inter-group order cannot be obtained by the same metric. This model, however, is too pessimistic,
as it overlooks the possibility of obtaining inter-group orders at some cost, through testing and
examination. Taking this into account, we study the multicolor secretary problem with a budget for
comparisons, where comparing candidates from the same group is free, and comparing candidates
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

