CONTRAST: Continual Multi-source Adaptation to
Dynamic Distributions

Sk Miraj Ahmed2,∗† , Fahim Faisal Niloy1,∗ , Xiangyu Chang1 , Dripta S. Raychaudhuri3,‡ ,
Samet Oymak4 , Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury1
1
University of California, Riverside, 2 Brookhaven National Laboratory, 3 AWS AI Labs,
4
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
{sahme047@, fnilo001@, cxian008@, drayc001@, amitrc@ece.}ucr.edu, oymak@umich.edu

Abstract
Adapting to dynamic data distributions is a practical yet challenging task. One
effective strategy is to use a model ensemble, which leverages the diverse expertise
of different models to transfer knowledge to evolving data distributions. However,
this approach faces difficulties when the dynamic test distribution is available only
in small batches and without access to the original source data. To address the
challenge of adapting to dynamic distributions in such practical settings, we propose
CONtinual mulTi-souRce Adaptation to dynamic diStribuTions (CONTRAST),
a novel method that optimally combines multiple source models to adapt to the
dynamic test data. CONTRAST has two distinguishing features. First, it efficiently
computes the optimal combination weights to combine the source models to adapt
to the test data distribution continuously as a function of time. Second, it identifies
which of the source model parameters to update so that only the model which
is most correlated to the target data is adapted, leaving the less correlated ones
untouched; this mitigates the issue of “forgetting" the source model parameters
by focusing only on the source model that exhibits the strongest correlation with
the test batch distribution. Through theoretical analysis we show that the proposed
method is able to optimally combine the source models and prioritize updates to
the model least prone to forgetting. Experimental analysis on diverse datasets
demonstrates that the combination of multiple source models does at least as well
as the best source (with hindsight knowledge), and performance does not degrade
as the test data distribution changes over time (robust to forgetting).

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have shown impressive performance on test inputs that closely resemble the
training distribution. However, their performance degrades significantly when they encounter test
inputs from a different data distribution. Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) techniques [1, 2]
aim to mitigate this performance drop. Addressing the distribution shift in case of dynamic data
distributions is even more challenging and practically relevant - in many real-world applications like
autonomous navigation, models often encounter dynamically evolving distributions. Furthermore,
test data is often accessed in streaming batches rather than all at once, and source data may not always
be available due to privacy and storage concerns.
For domain adaptation to dynamically evolving environments, employing a model ensemble can
be beneficial, as it allows leveraging the learned knowledge of different models to more effectively
∗

Equal contribution; Co-first authors listed alphabetically by last name.
Currently at Brookhaven National Laboratory. Work done while the author was at UCR.
‡
Currently at AWS AI Labs. Work done while the author was at UCR.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

