Learning De-Biased Representations for
Remote-Sensing Imagery

Zichen Tian Zhaozheng Chen Qianru Sun
School of Computing and Information Systems
Singapore Management University
{zichen.tian.2023,zzchen.2019}@phdcs.smu.edu.sg,qianrusun@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
Remote sensing (RS) imagery, which requires specialized satellites to collect and
is difficult to annotate, suffers from data scarcity and class imbalance in certain
spectrums. Due to their data scarcity, training large-scale RS models from scratch
is unrealistic, and the alternative is to transfer pre-trained models by fine-tuning or a
more data-efficient method LoRA [22]. Due to class imbalance, transferred models
exhibit strong bias, where features of the major class dominate over those of the
minor class. In this paper, we propose debLoRA—a generic training approach that
works with any LoRA variants to yield debiased features. It is an unsupervised
learning approach that can diversify minor class features based on the shared
attributes with major classes, where the attributes are obtained by a simple step
of clustering. To evaluate it, we conduct extensive experiments in two transfer
learning scenarios in the RS domain: from natural to optical RS images, and from
optical RS to multi-spectrum RS images. We perform object classification and
oriented object detection tasks on the optical RS dataset DOTA and the SAR dataset
FUSRS. Results show that our debLoRA consistently surpasses prior arts across
these RS adaptation settings, yielding up to 3.3 and 4.7 percentage points gains
on the tail classes for natural → optical RS and optical RS → multi-spectrum
RS adaptations, respectively, while preserving the performance on head classes,
substantiating its efficacy and adaptability 1 .

1

Introduction

Remote sensing (RS) is crucial in various applications such as environmental monitoring, resource
management, and disaster response [71, 36]. RS data is collected by various sensors and has multiple
spectrums, including optical RS imagery (dubbed as ORS, 400–700nm) [32], multi-spectral RS
imagery (MSRS, 400–2500nm) [8], and synthetic aperture radar imagery (SAR, 1mm-1m) [48, 13].
These spectrums differ significantly in imaging mechanisms, leading to distinct data characteristics
and processing pipelines [70]. Given this diversity, learning robust and generic representation models
for such data is desirable to reduce processing costs and complexities.
Recently, in natural image domains, large-scale pre-trained visual foundation models (e.g., CLIP [45],
Stable Diffusion [47], and DINO [4]) have shown great advances in robustness and generalization
ability. The zero-shot features extracted from the models show impressive performance in downstream
tasks such as object classification, detection and semantic segmentation [66], even outperforming
the supervised models trained on the specific datasets of those tasks. However, in the RS domain,
training such foundation models from scratch remains challenging. Even though some trials have
been made in past years [8, 16], their works have clear limitations. First, they require large-scale RS
data for effective training, which are available for only ORS but not other spectrums such as SAR
1

Code: https://github.com/doem97/deblora

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024)

