Toward Efficient Inference for Mixture of Experts

Haiyang Huang1∗ Newsha Ardalani2 Anna Sun2 Liu Ke3∗
Hsien-Hsin S. Lee4∗ Shruti Bhosale2 Carole-Jean Wu2 Benjamin Lee5∗
1
Duke University 2 FAIR at Meta 3 Washington University in St. Louis
4
Intel Corporation 5 University of Pennsylvania
hyhuang@cs.duke.edu
{new, annaysun, shru, carolejeanwu}@meta.com
ke.l@wustl.edu
lee.sean@gmail.com
leebcc@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) models have recently gained steam in achieving the
state-of-the-art performance in a wide range of tasks in computer vision and natural
language processing. They effectively expand the model capacity while incurring
a minimal increase in computation cost during training. However, deploying
such models for inference is difficult due to their large model size and complex
communication pattern. In this work, we provide a characterization of two MoE
workloads, namely Language Modeling (LM) and Machine Translation (MT)
and identify their sources of inefficiencies at deployment. We propose three
optimization techniques to mitigate sources of inefficiencies, namely (1) Dynamic
gating, (2) Expert Buffering, and (3) Expert load balancing. We show that dynamic
gating improves maximum throughput by 6.21-11.55× for LM, 5.75-10.98× for
MT Encoder and 2.58-5.71× for MT Decoder. It also reduces memory usage by
up to 1.36× for LM and up to 1.1× for MT. We further propose Expert Buffering,
a new caching mechanism that only keeps hot, active experts in GPU memory
while buffering the rest in CPU memory. This reduces static memory allocation by
1.47×. Finally, we propose a load balancing methodology that provides additional
robustness to the workload. Our code is available at https://github.com/
hyhuang00/moe_inference.

1

Introduction

A machine learning model’s predictive ability increases with the number of parameters. Model
capacity has grown at an exponential rate of 10× per year [1], which in turn has driven demand for
computation. Mixture of Experts (MoEs) decouple model capacity from computational demands by
using conditionally, sparsely activated neural networks. They can reduce training costs yet improve
accuracy [2–4] for language modeling [5–8], machine translation [9], and image recognition [10, 11].
But training is only half the story. MoE inference is important yet challenging as large language
models are deployed for production services. Our experiments show MoE inference is relatively
inefficient, requiring much more time to perform the same number of calculations. In Section 3, we
show that MoEs are 15× slower for language models and 3× slower for machine translation compared
to their FLOP-equivalent dense counterparts. Distillation could shrink models and reduce latency but
harm model quality [6, 8, 2]. Optimizations could increase parallelism and GPU utilization, but they
narrowly target specific kernels for communication collectives and GPU computation [12, 13]. They
∗

Work done while interning/working/visiting FAIR at Meta.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

