Transformers Represent Belief State Geometry in their
Residual Stream
Adam S. Shai
Simplex
PIBBSS∗

Sarah E. Marzen
Department of Natural Sciences
Pitzer and Scripps College

Alexander Gietelink Oldenziel
University College London
Timaeus

Lucas Teixeira
PIBBSS

Paul M. Riechers
Simplex
BITS

Abstract
What computational structure are we building into large language models when we
train them on next-token prediction? Here, we present evidence that this structure
is given by the meta-dynamics of belief updating over hidden states of the datagenerating process. Leveraging the theory of optimal prediction, we anticipate
and then find that belief states are linearly represented in the residual stream of
transformers, even in cases where the predicted belief state geometry has highly
nontrivial fractal structure. We investigate cases where the belief state geometry is
represented in the final residual stream or distributed across the residual streams of
multiple layers, providing a framework to explain these observations. Furthermore
we demonstrate that the inferred belief states contain information about the entire
future, beyond the local next-token prediction that the transformers are explicitly
trained on. Our work provides a general framework connecting the structure of
training data to the geometric structure of activations inside transformers.

1

Introduction

In this work, we present a rigorous and concrete theoretical framework that connects the structure of
training data to the geometry of activations in trained transformer neural networks. Our framework is
grounded in the theory of optimal prediction. It suggests that transformers pretrained on next-token
prediction will develop internal structures characterized by the meta-dynamics of belief updating over
hidden states of the data-generating process. In other words, pretrained models should learn more
than the hidden structure of the data generating process—they must also learn how to update their
beliefs about the hidden state of the world as they synchronize to it in context.
To test this framework, we conduct well-controlled experiments where we train transformers on
data generated from processes with hidden ground truth structure, and then use our theory to make
predictions about the geometry of internal activations. Even in cases where the framework predicts
highly nontrivial fractal structure, our empirical results confirm these predictions (Figure 1). This
provides a comprehensive explanation of how transformers encode information beyond the local
next-token predictions they are explicitly trained on.
In Section 2, we review the relevant theory from computational mechanics which motivates our
prediction of the geometry of activations in the residual stream. Core to our work is the mixed-state
presentation, which describes the metadynamic of beliefs in the probability simplex over states of the
∗

Principles of Intelligent Behaviour in Biological and Social Systems

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

