Identify Then Recommend:
Towards Unsupervised Group Recommendation

Yue Liu
Ant Group
National University of Singapore
yueliu1990731@163.com
Tianyuan Yang
Ant Group
Hangzhou, China

Shihao Zhu
Ant Group
Hangzhou, China

Jian Ma
Ant Group
Hangzhou, China

Wenliang Zhong ∗
Ant Group
Hangzhou, China

Abstract
Group Recommendation (GR), which aims to recommend items to groups of
users, has become a promising and practical direction for recommendation systems.
This paper points out two issues of the state-of-the-art GR models. (1) The predefined and fixed number of user groups is inadequate for real-time industrial
recommendation systems, where the group distribution can shift dynamically. (2)
The training schema of existing GR methods is supervised, necessitating expensive
user-group and group-item labels, leading to significant annotation costs. To this
end, we present a novel unsupervised group recommendation framework named
Identify Then Recommend (ITR), where it first identifies the user groups in an
unsupervised manner even without the pre-defined number of groups, and then
two pre-text tasks are designed to conduct self-supervised group recommendation.
Concretely, at the group identification stage, we first estimate the adaptive density of
each user point, where areas with higher densities are more likely to be recognized
as group centers. Then, a heuristic merge-and-split strategy is designed to discover
the user groups and decision boundaries. Subsequently, at the self-supervised
learning stage, the pull-and-repulsion pre-text task is proposed to optimize the
user-group distribution. Besides, the pseudo group recommendation pre-text task
is designed to assist the recommendations. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
superiority and effectiveness of ITR on both user recommendation (e.g., 22.22%
NDCG@5 ↑) and group recommendation (e.g., 22.95% NDCG@5 ↑). Furthermore,
we deploy ITR on the industrial recommender and achieve promising results. The
codes are available on GitHub2 . A collection (papers, codes, datasets) of deep
group recommendation/intent learning methods is available on GitHub3 .

1

Introduction

Online platforms’ expansion and information overload make finding pertinent content difficult.
Recommendations help by supplying users with items that match their tastes and activities. This
paper categorizes recommendations into User Recommendation (UR) and Group Recommendation
(GR). UR, the conventional method, delivers personalized content for single users. Differently, GR
targets user collectives, striving for a consensus to please most group members.
∗

Corresponding Author
https://github.com/yueliu1999/ITR
3
https://github.com/yueliu1999/Awesome-Deep-Group-Recommendation
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

