PTQ4DiT: Post-training Quantization for
Diffusion Transformers

1

Junyi Wu1,3,∗ Haoxuan Wang1,∗ Yuzhang Shang2 Mubarak Shah3 Yan Yan1,†
University of Illinois Chicago 2 Illinois Institute of Technology 3 University of Central Florida
https://github.com/adreamwu/PTQ4DiT

Abstract
The recent introduction of Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) has demonstrated exceptional capabilities in image generation by using a different backbone architecture,
departing from traditional U-Nets and embracing the scalable nature of transformers. Despite their advanced capabilities, the wide deployment of DiTs, particularly
for real-time applications, is currently hampered by considerable computational
demands at the inference stage. Post-training Quantization (PTQ) has emerged as a
fast and data-efficient solution that can significantly reduce computation and memory footprint by using low-bit weights and activations. However, its applicability to
DiTs has not yet been explored and faces non-trivial difficulties due to the unique
design of DiTs. In this paper, we propose PTQ4DiT, a specifically designed PTQ
method for DiTs. We discover two primary quantization challenges inherent in
DiTs, notably the presence of salient channels with extreme magnitudes and the
temporal variability in distributions of salient activation over multiple timesteps.
To tackle these challenges, we propose Channel-wise Salience Balancing (CSB)
and Spearman’s ρ-guided Salience Calibration (SSC). CSB leverages the complementarity property of channel magnitudes to redistribute the extremes, alleviating
quantization errors for both activations and weights. SSC extends this approach
by dynamically adjusting the balanced salience to capture the temporal variations in activation. Additionally, to eliminate extra computational costs caused by
PTQ4DiT during inference, we design an offline re-parameterization strategy for
DiTs. Experiments demonstrate that our PTQ4DiT successfully quantizes DiTs to
8-bit precision (W8A8) while preserving comparable generation ability and further
enables effective quantization to 4-bit weight precision (W4A8) for the first time.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have spearheaded recent breakthroughs in generation tasks [59, 7]. In the past, these
models were based on convolutional U-Nets [40] as their backbone architectures [46, 17, 9, 39]. However, recent work [2, 60, 30] has revealed that the U-Net inductive bias is not essential for the success
of diffusion models and even limits their scalability. Among this trend, Diffusion Transformers (DiTs)
[37] have demonstrated exceptional capabilities in image generation by using a different backbone
architecture. Different from U-Nets that carefully design downsampling and upsampling blocks with
skip-connections, DiTs are constructed by repeatedly and sequentially stacking transformer blocks
[49]. This architectural choice inherits the scaling property of transformers [5, 48, 58, 31], facilitating
more flexible parameter expansion for enhanced performance. With their versatility and scalability,
DiTs have been successfully integrated into advanced frameworks like Sora [4], demonstrating their
potential as a leading architecture for future generative models [14, 6, 30, 65].
∗

Equal Contribution. † Corresponding Author. Work done during Junyi Wu’s visit to CRCV, UCF.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

