Towards a Scalable Reference-Free Evaluation of
Generative Models
Azim Ospanov∗
aospanov9@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Mohammad Jalali∗
mjalali24@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Jingwei Zhang∗
jwzhang22@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Xuenan Cao †
xuenancao@cuhk.edu.hk

Andrej Bogdanov ‡
abogdano@uottawa.ca

Farzan Farnia∗
farnia@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
While standard evaluation scores for generative models are mostly reference-based,
a reference-dependent assessment of generative models could be generally difficult
due to the unavailability of applicable reference datasets. Recently, the referencefree entropy scores, VENDI [1] and RKE [2], have been proposed to evaluate the
diversity of generated data. However, estimating these scores from data leads to
significant computational costs for large-scale generative models. In this work, we
leverage the random Fourier features framework to reduce the computational price
and propose the Fourier-based Kernel Entropy Approximation (FKEA) method.
We utilize FKEA’s approximated eigenspectrum of the kernel matrix to efficiently
estimate the mentioned entropy scores. Furthermore, we show the application of
FKEA’s proxy eigenvectors to reveal the method’s identified modes in evaluating
the diversity of produced samples. We provide a stochastic implementation of the
FKEA assessment algorithm with a complexity O(n) linearly growing with sample
size n. We extensively evaluate FKEA’s numerical performance in application
to standard image, text, and video datasets. Our empirical results indicate the
method’s scalability and interpretability applied to large-scale generative models.
The codebase is available at https://github.com/aziksh-ospanov/FKEA.

1

Introduction

A quantitative comparison of generative models requires evaluation metrics to measure the quality
and diversity of the models’ produced data. Since the introduction of variational autoencoders (VAEs)
[3], generative adversarial networks (GANs) [4], and diffusion models [5] that led to impressive
empirical results in the last decade, several evaluation scores have been proposed to assess generative
models learned by different training methods and architectures. Due to the key role of evaluation
criteria in comparing generative models, they have been extensively studied in the literature.
While various statistical methods have been applied to measure the fidelity and variety of a generative
model’s produced data, the standard scores commonly perform a reference-based evaluation of
generative models, i.e., they quantify the characteristics of generated samples in comparison to a
reference distribution. The reference distribution is usually chosen to be either the distribution of
∗

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Department of Cultural and Religious Studies, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
‡
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Ottawa, Canada
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

