Is Programming by Example Solved by LLMs?

Wen-Ding Li
Cornell University
wl678@cornell.edu

Kevin Ellis
Cornell University
kellis@cornell.edu

Abstract
Programming-by-Examples (PBE) aims to generate an algorithm from input-output
examples. Such systems are practically and theoretically important: from an
end-user perspective, they are deployed to millions of people, and from an AI perspective, PBE corresponds to a very general form of few-shot inductive inference.
Given the success of Large Language Models (LLMs) in code-generation tasks, we
investigate here the extent to which LLMs can be said to have ‘solved’ PBE. We
experiment on classic domains such as lists and strings, and an uncommon graphics
programming domain not well represented in typical pretraining data. We find that
pretrained models are not effective at PBE, but that they can be fine-tuned for much
higher performance, provided the test problems are in-distribution. We analyze
empirically what causes these models to succeed and fail, and take steps toward
understanding how to achieve better out-of-distribution generalization. Collectively
these results suggest that LLMs make strong progress toward solving the typical
suite of PBE tasks, potentially increasing the flexibility and applicability of PBE
systems, while also identifying ways in which LLMs still fall short.

1

Introduction

Programming-by-Example (PBE) systems solve a challenging task: Given input-output examples of
a hidden algorithm, they seek to construct the source code of the underlying function [1, 2]. PBE is
deployed to millions of users [3, 4, 5, 6], lies near the heart of core AI challenges [7, 8, 9, 10], and is a
qualitatively different problem from the bulk of recent work on LLM code generation, because rather
than generate source code from natural language [11], PBE is instead fundamentally about few-shot
inductive inference: Given a handful of examples, inferring the program that will generalize to new
inputs, or which captures the true latent regularity, without relying on natural-language guidance.
We investigate here the extent to which large language models pretrained on source code can
solve PBE. If they can, this unlocks the ability to do PBE in general-purpose Turing complete
languages like Python, unlike the restricted domain-specific languages which have so far dominated
PBE [4, 12, 13, 14, i.a.], thereby increasing the scope and power of this paradigm. If LLMs cannot
perform PBE, then this highlights a deficit of inductive reasoning and problem solving, and suggests
LLMs lean too heavily on natural language cues to generate code.
We find that pretrained and instruction-tuned models serve as poor PBE systems, a finding also
supported by recent work [15, 16, 12, 17]. But our investigation further finds that LLMs can be
fine-tuned for significantly higher performance, provided they are not asked to generalize far beyond
the fine-tuning data. To address this failure of generalization we give an algorithm for taking a small
unlabeled dataset of problems and adapting the LLM to it, which we find narrows this domain gap.
The resulting recipe allows PBE over Turing-complete languages across three qualitatively different
domains (Fig. 1): algorithms on vectors of numbers, string manipulation macros, and graphics
programs in LOGO/Turtle. In every case, our final model is at least as effective as custom symbolic
search algorithms operating over domain-specific languages, and surpasses powerful closed-source
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

