LAM3D: Large Image-Point-Cloud Alignment Model
for 3D Reconstruction from Single Image

Ruikai Cui1 ∗ Xibin Song2 † Weixuan Sun2 Senbo Wang2 Weizhe Liu2
Shenzhou Chen2 Taizhang Shang2 Yang Li2 Nick Barnes1 Hongdong Li1 Pan Ji2
1
Australian National University 2 Tencent XR Vision Labs

Abstract
Large Reconstruction Models have made significant strides in the realm of automated 3D content generation from single or multiple input images. Despite their
success, these models often produce 3D meshes with geometric inaccuracies, stemming from the inherent challenges of deducing 3D shapes solely from image data.
In this work, we introduce a novel framework, the Large Image and Point Cloud
Alignment Model (LAM3D), which utilizes 3D point cloud data to enhance the fidelity of generated 3D meshes. Our methodology begins with the development of a
point-cloud-based network that effectively generates precise and meaningful latent
tri-planes, laying the groundwork for accurate 3D mesh reconstruction. Building
upon this, our Image-Point-Cloud Feature Alignment technique processes a single
input image, aligning to the latent tri-planes to imbue image features with robust 3D
information. This process not only enriches the image features but also facilitates
the production of high-fidelity 3D meshes without the need for multi-view input,
significantly reducing geometric distortions. Our approach achieves state-of-the-art
high-fidelity 3D mesh reconstruction from a single image in just 6 seconds, and
experiments on various datasets demonstrate its effectiveness.

1

Introduction

High-quality 3D mesh creation has drawn increasing attentions for its great potential in numerous
fields, such as video games, virtual reality, and films. Traditionally, 3D assets are usually created
manually by expert artists or alternatively reconstructed from multi-view 2D images, which are
time-consuming. Recent proposed Large Reconstruction Models (LRMs) [15, 62, 48, 52] from a
single view or few-shot images bring significant advancements for high-fidelity 3D content creation.
Single view based LRMs [15, 13] take a single-view image as input and use transformers to directly
regress tri-plane-based [3] neural radiance fields (NeRF) [31] for 3D content creation. However,
as shown in Fig. 1 (b), due to ambiguity of 3D geometry from a single image, single-view-based
LRMs commonly suffer from geometric distortions, especially for the unseen areas of the input view.
Inspired by Hong et al. [15], LRMs with multi-view inputs [62, 48, 52, 20] are proposed, where
they typically first feed the single-view image into multi-view image diffusion models [51, 43, 28]
for few-shot multi-view images generation. Then multi-view tri-plane features are generated and
converted into 3D representations (NeRF [31], SDFs [34], etc.) for 3D mesh creation. However, as
shown in Fig.1 (c), the generated multi-view images lack guaranteed multi-view consistency, which
can lead to geometric distortions.
To relieve these problems, we propose to introduce a 3D point cloud prior for single image based 3D
mesh reconstruction with Large Image-Point-Cloud Alignment Model (LAM3D). LAM3D aims to
∗
†

The contribution of Ruikai Cui was made during an internship at Tencent XR Vision Labs.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

