Sample-Efficient Agnostic Boosting

Udaya Ghai
Amazon
ughai@amazon.com

Karan Singh
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
karansingh@cmu.edu

Abstract
The theory of boosting provides a computational framework for aggregating approximate weak learning algorithms, which perform marginally better than a random
predictor, into an accurate strong learner. In the realizable case, the success of
the boosting approach is underscored by a remarkable fact that the resultant sample complexity matches that of a computationally demanding alternative, namely
Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM). This in particular implies that the realizable boosting methodology has the potential to offer computational relief without
compromising on sample efficiency.
Despite recent progress, in agnostic boosting, where assumptions on the conditional
distribution of labels given feature descriptions are absent, ERM outstrips the
agnostic boosting methodology in being quadratically more sample efficient than all
known agnostic boosting algorithms. In this paper, we make progress on closing this
gap, and give a substantially more sample efficient agnostic boosting algorithm than
those known, without compromising on the computational (or oracle) complexity.
A key feature of our algorithm is that it leverages the ability to reuse samples across
multiple rounds of boosting, while guaranteeing a generalization error strictly better
than those obtained by blackbox applications of uniform convergence arguments.
We also apply our approach to other previously studied learning problems, including
boosting for reinforcement learning, and demonstrate improved results.

1

Introduction

A striking observation in statistical learning is that given a small number of samples it is possible to
learn the best classifier from an almost exponentially large class of predictors. In fact, it is possible to
do using a conceptually straightforward procedure – Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) – that finds
a classifier that is maximally consistent with the collected samples. Substantiating this observation,
the fundamental theorem of statistical learning (e.g., [SSBD14]) states that with high probability ERM
can guarantee ε−excess population error with respect to the best classifier from a finite, but large
hypothesis class H given merely magnostic ≈ (log |H|)/ε2 identically distributed and independent
(IID) samples of pairs of features and labels from the population distribution. Under an additional
assumption – that of realizability – guaranteeing that there exists a perfect classifier in the hypothesis
class achieving zero error, a yet quadratically smaller number mrealizable ≈ (log |H|)/ε of samples
suffice. In the absence of such assumption, the learning problem is said to take place in the agnostic
setting, i.e., under of a lack of belief in the ability of any hypothesis to perfectly fit the observed data.
This ability to generalize to the population distribution and successfully (PAC) learn from an almost
exponentially large, and hence expressive, hypothesis class given limited number of examples suggests
that the primary bottleneck for efficient learning is computational. Indeed, even with modest sample
requirements, finding a maximally consistent hypothesis within an almost exponentially large class
via, say, enumeration or global search, is generally computationally intractable.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

