P2C2Net: PDE-Preserved Coarse Correction Network
for Efficient Prediction of Spatiotemporal Dynamics

Qi Wang1 , Pu Ren2 , Hao Zhou1 , Xin-Yang Liu3 , Zhiwen Deng4 , Yi Zhang4 , Ruizhi Chengze4 ,
Hongsheng Liu4 , Zidong Wang4 , Jian-Xun Wang3 , Ji-Rong Wen1 , Hao Sun1,∗ , Yang Liu5,∗
1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA
3
Department of Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA
4
Huawei Technologies, Shenzhen, China
5
School of Engineering Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2

Emails: qi_wang@ruc.edu.cn (Q.W.); haosun@ruc.edu.cn (H.S.); liuyang22@ucas.ac.cn (Y.L.)

Abstract
When solving partial differential equations (PDEs), classical numerical methods
often require fine mesh grids and small time stepping to meet stability, consistency, and convergence conditions, leading to high computational cost. Recently,
machine learning has been increasingly utilized to solve PDE problems, but they
often encounter challenges related to interpretability, generalizability, and strong
dependency on rich labeled data. Hence, we introduce a new PDE-Preserved Coarse
Correction Network (P2 C2 Net) to efficiently solve spatiotemporal PDE problems
on coarse mesh grids in small data regimes. The model consists of two synergistic
modules: (1) a trainable PDE block that learns to update the coarse solution (i.e.,
the system state), based on a high-order numerical scheme with boundary condition
encoding, and (2) a neural network block that consistently corrects the solution on
the fly. In particular, we propose a learnable symmetric Conv filter, with weights
shared over the entire model, to accurately estimate the spatial derivatives of PDE
based on the neural-corrected system state. The resulting physics-encoded model
is capable of handling limited training data (e.g., 3–5 trajectories) and accelerates
the prediction of PDE solutions on coarse spatiotemporal grids while maintaining a
high accuracy. P2 C2 Net achieves consistent state-of-the-art performance with over
50% gain (e.g., in terms of relative prediction error) across four datasets covering
complex reaction-diffusion processes and turbulent flows.

1

Introduction

Complex spatiotemporal dynamical systems are pivotal and commonly seen in numerous fields such
biology, meteorology, fluid mechanics, etc. The behaviors of these systems are primarily governed by
partial differential equations (PDEs), conventionally solved by numerical methods [1–4]. However,
direct numerical simulation (DNS) demands in-depth knowledge of the underlying physics, and
the efficacy of numerical solutions is intricately linked to the resolution of mesh grids and time
steps. High-resolution spatiotemporal grids are essential for accurate and convergent calculations,
yet leading to substantial computational costs. For instance, simulating the flow field around a large
aircraft [5, 6] involves creating over millions of mesh nodes and may consume vast simulation time
even on high performance computing. Additionally, any changes in initial and boundary conditions
(I/BCs) or design parameters necessitate recalculations, further compounding the complexity.
∗

Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

