Generalized Tensor Decomposition for Understanding
Multi-Output Regression under Combinatorial Shifts

Andong Wang
RIKEN AIP
andong.wang@riken.jp

Yuning Qiu
RIKEN AIP
yuning.qiu@riken.jp

Zhong Jin
China University of Petroleum-Beijing at Karamay
zhongjin@cupk.edu.cn

Mingyuan Bai
RIKEN AIP
mingyuan.bai@riken.jp

Guoxu Zhou∗
Guangdong University of Technology
gx.zhou@gdut.edu.cn

Qibin Zhao∗
RIKEN AIP
qibin.zhao@riken.jp

Abstract
In multi-output regression, we identify a previously neglected challenge that arises
from the inability of training distribution to cover all combinations of input features,
leading to combinatorial distribution shift (CDS). To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first work to formally define and address this problem. We tackle it through
a novel tensor decomposition perspective, proposing the Functional t-Singular
Value Decomposition (Ft-SVD) theorem which extends the classical tensor SVD to
infinite and continuous feature domains, providing a natural tool for representing
and analyzing multi-output functions. Within the Ft-SVD framework, we formulate
the multi-output regression problem under CDS as a low-rank tensor estimation
problem under the missing not at random (MNAR) setting, and introduce a series of
assumptions about the true functions, training and testing distributions, and spectral
properties of the ground-truth embeddings, making the problem more tractable.
To address the challenges posed by CDS in multi-output regression, we develop
a tailored Double-Stage Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM-DS) algorithm that
leverages the spectral properties of the embeddings and uses specific hypothesis
classes in each frequency component to better capture the varying spectral decay
patterns. We provide rigorous theoretical analyses that establish performance
guarantees for the ERM-DS algorithm. This work lays a preliminary theoretical
foundation for multi-output regression under CDS.

1

Introduction

In the realm of Multi-Output Regressions (MOR), systems are designed to predict multiple related
outputs from a set of input features, unlike single-output regressions which neglect the relationship
between targets. MOR is effective for various scientific problems [55] such as river quality prediction
[17], natural gas demand forecasting [5] and drug efficacy prediction [30]. In many MOR applications,
it is interactions among multiple features that the predictions are typically derived from. For example,
to predict multiple outcomes such as risk scores and health outcomes of patients, the input features
usually include healthcare costs and demographic variables (e.g., race) [40]. Similarly, predictions
∗

Qibin Zhao and Guoxu Zhou are the corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

