Overfitting Behaviour of Gaussian Kernel Ridgeless
Regression: Varying Bandwidth or Dimensionality

Marko Medvedev
The University of Chicago
medvedev@uchicago.edu

Gal Vardi
Weizmann Institute of Science
gal.vardi@weizmann.ac.il

Nathan Srebro
TTI-Chicago
nati@ttic.edu

Abstract
We consider the overfitting behavior of minimum norm interpolating solutions
of Gaussian kernel ridge regression (i.e. kernel ridgeless regression), when the
bandwidth or input dimension varies with the sample size. For fixed dimensions,
we show that even with varying or tuned bandwidth, the ridgeless solution is
never consistent and, at least with large enough noise, always worse than the null
predictor. For increasing dimension, we give a generic characterization of the
overfitting behavior for any scaling of the dimension with sample size. We use
this to provide the first example of benign overfitting using the Gaussian kernel
with sub-polynomial scaling dimension. All our results are under the Gaussian
universality ansatz and the (non-rigorous) risk predictions in terms of the kernel
eigenstructure.

1

Introduction

A central question in learning theory is how learning algorithms can generalize well even when
returning models that perfectly fit (i.e. interpolate) noisy training data. This phenomenon was
observed empirically by Zhang et al. [63], and does not align with the traditional belief from
statistical learning theory that overfitting to noise leads to poor generalization. Consequently, it
attracted significant interest in recent years, and there has been much effort to understand the
overfitting behavior of linear models, kernel methods, and neural networks.
In this paper, we study the overfitting behavior of Kernel Ridge Regression (KRR) with Gaussian
kernel, namely, the behavior of the limiting test error when training on noisy data as the number
of samples tends to infinity by insisting on interpolation (achieving zero training error). When the
input dimension and bandwidth are fixed, the overfitting behavior is known to be “catastrophic” [37],
i.e. for any nonzero noise, the test risk tends to infinity as the sample size increases. However,
this is not how Gaussian Kernel Ridge Regression is typically used in practice. In fixed dimension,
the bandwidth is tuned, that is decreased, when the sample size increases [51, 19]. Additionally, it
makes sense to study the behaviour when the input dimension increases with sample size (as in, e.g.
linear models with proportional scaling [42]). This could be because when more data is available,
more input features are used, even with a kernel; because as more resources are available we scale
up both the input dimension and amount of data used; or to capture the fact that very large scale
problems typically involve both more samples and higher input dimension. But unlike with linear
models, where the dimension must scale linearly with the number of samples in order to allow for
interpolation, when a kernel is used we can study the behaviour even when the input dimensionality
increases much slower, and ask how slowly it could increase without catastrophic overfitting. Previous
studies on kernel ridgeless regression considered polynomial increasing dimension (i.e. dimension
∝ sample-sizea , for 0 < a ≤ 1) [4, 64, 24, 38, 40], but not subpolynomial scaling.
We aim to provide a more comprehensive picture of overfitting with Gaussian KRR by studying
the overfitting behavior with varying bandwidth or with arbitrarily varying dimension, including
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

