Stronger Than You Think:
Benchmarking Weak Supervision on Realistic Tasks

Tianyi Zhang1∗ Linrong Cai2∗ Jeffrey Li1 Nicholas Roberts2 Neel Guha3 Frederic Sala2
1
University of Washington 2 University of Wisconsin-Madison 3 Stanford University
tzhang26@uw.edu, lcai54@wisc.edu

Abstract
Weak supervision (WS) is a popular approach for label-efficient learning, leveraging
diverse sources of noisy but inexpensive weak labels to automatically annotate
training data. Despite its wide usage, WS and its practical value are challenging to
benchmark due to the many knobs in its setup, including: data sources, labeling
functions (LFs), aggregation techniques (called label models), and end model
pipelines. Existing evaluation suites tend to be limited, focusing on particular
components or specialized use cases. Moreover, they often involve simplistic
benchmark tasks or de-facto LF sets that are suboptimally written, producing
insights that may not generalize to real-world settings. We address these limitations
by introducing a new benchmark, B OX WRENCH,2 designed to more accurately
reflect real-world usages of WS. This benchmark features tasks with (1) higher
class cardinality and imbalance, (2) notable domain expertise requirements, and (3)
opportunities to re-use LFs across parallel multilingual corpora. For all tasks, LFs
are written using a careful procedure aimed at mimicking real-world settings. In
contrast to existing WS benchmarks, we show that supervised learning requires
substantial amounts (1000+) of labeled examples to match WS in many settings.

1

Introduction

Weak supervision (WS) aims to address the labeled data bottleneck for supervised machine learning. It uses multiple weak but inexpensive sources of signal and combines them into high-quality
pseudolabels that can be used for training downstream models [34, 35, 39]. These weak sources
can be diverse, including but not limited to: heuristic rules encoded into small programs, queries to
knowledge bases, and pretrained models. Frameworks implementing WS are hugely popular and are
widely applied in industry [3, 36] and academic settings [12, 42].
WS frameworks typically have a simple three-stage approach. First, they formalize weak sources
into labeling functions (LFs). In contrast to manual labeling, these can be automatically applied
to an entire unlabeled dataset. Next, since LFs are inherently noisy and may conflict with one
another, a label model (LM) is used to estimate the quality of each source (typically without accessing
ground truth labels) and then to aggregate their outputs into high-quality pseudolabels. Finally, these
pseudolabels can be used to train a downstream model. A vast literature studies variations on this
basic recipe, with diverse approaches to crafting LFs, creating LMs, and noise-aware training of
end-models [47].
For practitioners, a key question is when is WS useful? While it is natural to produce benchmarks
that answer this, surprisingly, there has been relatively little work doing so. One reason for this may
be the overall complexity of WS pipelines. The performance of a WS system varies with (1) the
∗
2

Equal contribution.
The box wrench is the most ubiquitous and practical wrench.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

