Overcoming the Sim-to-Real Gap: Leveraging
Simulation to Learn to Explore for Real-World RL

Andrew Wagenmaker∗
University of California, Berkeley

Kevin Huang
University of Washington

Kevin Jamieson
University of Washington

Liyiming Ke
University of Washington

Abhishek Gupta
University of Washington

Abstract
In order to mitigate the sample complexity of real-world reinforcement learning,
common practice is to first train a policy in a simulator where samples are cheap,
and then deploy this policy in the real world, with the hope that it generalizes
effectively. Such direct sim2real transfer is not guaranteed to succeed, however,
and in cases where it fails, it is unclear how to best utilize the simulator. In
this work, we show that in many regimes, while direct sim2real transfer may
fail, we can utilize the simulator to learn a set of exploratory policies which
enable efficient exploration in the real world. In particular, in the setting of
low-rank MDPs, we show that coupling these exploratory policies with simple,
practical approaches—least-squares regression oracles and naive randomized
exploration—yields a polynomial sample complexity in the real world, an
exponential improvement over direct sim2real transfer, or learning without access
to a simulator. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first evidence that
simulation transfer yields a provable gain in reinforcement learning in settings
where direct sim2real transfer fails. We validate our theoretical results on several
realistic robotic simulators and a real-world robotic sim2real task, demonstrating
that transferring exploratory policies can yield substantial gains in practice as well.

1

Introduction

Over the last decade, reinforcement learning (RL) techniques have been deployed to solve a variety of
real-world problems, with applications in robotics, the natural sciences, and beyond [27, 54, 52, 26,
46, 23]. While promising, the broad application of RL methods has been severely limited by its large
sample complexity—the number of interactions with the environment required for the algorithm to
learn to solve the desired task. In applications of interest, it is often the case that collecting samples
is very costly, and the number of samples required by RL algorithms is prohibitively expensive.
In many domains, while collecting samples in the desired deployment environment may be very
costly, we have access to a simulator where the cost of samples is virtually nonexistent. As a concrete
example, in robotic applications where the goal is real-world deployment, directly training in the
real world typically requires an infeasibly large number of samples. However, it is often possible
to obtain a simulator—derived from first principles or knowledge of the robot’s actuation—which
provides an approximate model of the real-world deployment environment. Given such a simulator,
common practice is to first train a policy to accomplish the desired task in the simulator, and then
deploy it in the real world, with the hope that the policy generalizes effectively from the simulator
to the goal deployment environment. Indeed, such “sim2real” transfer has become a key piece in the
∗

Correspondance to: ajwagen@berkeley.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

