Iterative Reasoning Preference Optimization

Richard Yuanzhe Pang1,2
Weizhe Yuan1,2
Kyunghyun Cho2
2
1∗
He He
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar
Jason Weston1,2∗
1

Meta FAIR

2

New York University

Abstract
Iterative preference optimization methods have recently been shown to perform
well for general instruction tuning tasks, but typically make little improvement on
reasoning tasks [Yuan et al., 2024, Chen et al., 2024]. In this work we develop
an iterative approach that optimizes the preference between competing generated
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) candidates by optimizing for winning vs. losing reasoning
steps. We train using a modified DPO loss [Rafailov et al., 2023] with an additional
negative log-likelihood term, which we find to be crucial. We show reasoning
improves across repeated iterations of this scheme. While only relying on examples
in the training set, our approach results in increasing accuracy on GSM8K, MATH,
and ARC-Challenge for Llama-2-70B-Chat, outperforming other Llama-2-based
models not relying on additionally sourced datasets. For example, we see a large
improvement from 55.6% to 81.6% on GSM8K and an accuracy of 88.7% with
majority voting out of 32 samples.

1

Introduction

Preference optimization has proven to give large gains when aligning pre-trained language models
to human requirements compared to supervised fine-tuning alone [Ziegler et al., 2019, Stiennon
et al., 2020]. Offline methods such as DPO [Rafailov et al., 2023] are becoming more popular for
their simplicity and efficiency. Recent results have shown that iterative application of such an offline
procedure is beneficial, whereby the updated model is used to construct new preference relations
that are more informative, and hence improve results further. These methods include Iterative DPO
[Xu et al., 2023, Xiong et al., 2023], Self-Rewarding LLMs [Yuan et al., 2024], SPIN [Chen et al.,
2024], and other methods [Rosset et al., 2024]. Common to these approaches is that they have
been shown to perform well on general instruction tuning tasks, but they either make only moderate
gains or even decrease the performance on standard reasoning tasks. While other kinds of iterative
training methods have been applied successfully to reasoning, particularly involving the iteration
of supervised fine-tuning (SFT) such as STaR [Zelikman et al., 2022], RestEM [Singh et al., 2024],
and V-STaR [Hosseini et al., 2024]1 , using preference optimization to train the generative reasoning
model is not applied in these methods.
In this work, we develop an approach to apply iterative preference optimization to reasoning tasks,
with a particular focus on Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning [Wu et al., 2023]. On each iteration we
sample multiple chain-of-thought reasoning steps and final answers over training prompts, and then
construct preference pairs such that pair winners have correct answers and pair losers have wrong
answers. We then train a variant of DPO that includes a negative log-likelihood (NLL) loss term for
the pair winners, which also proves crucial for performance. Given the newly trained model, we then
iterate the procedure by generating new pairs, and training again, starting from the previously trained
∗
1

Equal contribution.
V-STaR does use preference optimization, but for training a separate verifier model.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

