Reproducibility of predictive networks
for mouse visual cortex
Polina Turishcheva,1,† Max F. Burg,1-3 Fabian H. Sinz,1-2 Alexander S. Ecker1,4,*
1

Institute of Computer Science and Campus Institute Data Science, University Göttingen, Germany
2
International Max Planck Research School for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
3
Tübingen AI Center, University of Tübingen, Germany
4
Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization, Göttingen, Germany
†

turishcheva@cs.uni-goettingen.de, ∗ ecker@cs.uni-goettingen.de

Abstract
Deep predictive models of neuronal activity have recently enabled several new
discoveries about the selectivity and invariance of neurons in the visual cortex.
These models learn a shared set of nonlinear basis functions, which are linearly
combined via a learned weight vector to represent a neuron’s function. Such weight
vectors, which can be thought as embeddings of neuronal function, have been
proposed to define functional cell types via unsupervised clustering. However, as
deep models are usually highly overparameterized, the learning problem is unlikely
to have a unique solution, which raises the question if such embeddings can be
used in a meaningful way for downstream analysis. In this paper, we investigate
how stable neuronal embeddings are with respect to changes in model architecture
and initialization. We find that L1 regularization to be an important ingredient
for structured embeddings and develop an adaptive regularization that adjusts the
strength of regularization per neuron. This regularization improves both predictive
performance and how consistently neuronal embeddings cluster across model
fits compared to uniform regularization. To overcome overparametrization, we
propose an iterative feature pruning strategy which reduces the dimensionality of
performance-optimized models by half without loss of performance and improves
the consistency of neuronal embeddings with respect to clustering neurons. Our
results suggest that to achieve an objective taxonomy of cell types or a compact
representation of the functional landscape, we need novel architectures or learning
techniques that improve identifiability. The code is available https://github.
com/pollytur/readout_reproducibility.

1

Introduction

One central idea in neuroscience is that neurons cluster into distinct cell types defined by anatomical,
genetic, electrophysiological or functional properties of single cells [23, 49, 54, 59, 69, 70]. Defining
a unified taxonomy of cell types across these different descriptive properties is an active area of
research. The functional properties of neurons, i. e. which computations they implement on the
sensory input, constitute an important dimension along which cell types should manifest. However,
each neuron’s function is a complex object, mapping from a high-dimensional sensory input to
the output of the neuron. Classical work in neuroscience has described neuronal function by a
few parameters such as tuning to orientation, spatial frequency, or phase invariance [1, 2, 5, 8, 9,
13, 25, 40]. However, when considering neurons from higher visual areas, deeper into the brain’s
processing network, neuronal functions become more complex and not easily described by few
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

