CRAYM: Neural Field Optimization
via Camera RAY Matching

Liqiang Lin1 Wenpeng Wu1 Chi-Wing Fu2 Hao Zhang3 Hui Huang1∗
1
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University
linliqiang2020@gmail.com wenpengggg@gmail.com
cwfu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk haoz@sfu.ca hhzhiyan@gmail.com

Abstract
We introduce camera ray matching (CRAYM) into the joint optimization of camera
poses and neural fields from multi-view images. The optimized field, referred to
as a feature volume, can be “probed” by the camera rays for novel view synthesis
(NVS) and 3D geometry reconstruction. One key reason for matching camera
rays, instead of pixels as in prior works, is that the camera rays can be parameterized by the feature volume to carry both geometric and photometric information.
Multi-view consistencies involving the camera rays and scene rendering can be
naturally integrated into the joint optimization and network training, to impose
physically meaningful constraints to improve the final quality of both the geometric
reconstruction and photorealistic rendering. We formulate our per-ray optimization
and matched ray coherence by focusing on camera rays passing through keypoints
in the input images to elevate both the efficiency and accuracy of scene correspondences. Accumulated ray features along the feature volume provide a means to
discount the coherence constraint amid erroneous ray matching. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of CRAYM for both NVS and geometry reconstruction, over
dense- or sparse-view settings, with qualitative and quantitative comparisons to
state-of-the-art alternatives.

1

Introduction

Recent advances on multi-view 3D reconstruction have been propelled by the emergence of neural
fields [39], including implicit functions [42, 36, 24, 33] and radiance fields (NeRF) [26, 44, 13, 1, 10,
27, 19, 7]. A critical component to all image-to-3D reconstruction methods, including traditional
approaches such as multi-view stereo (MVS) [11], is to obtain camera poses for the input images. In
practice, the camera information may be available from the acquisition devices, e.g., through the GPS
or inertial measurement unit (IMU), while in other cases, it is estimated, e.g., using structure-frommotion (SfM) [8, 29]. In both cases, these camera poses can be noisy, thus hindering the performance
of the multi-view 3D reconstruction.
In light of the importance of having accurate camera poses, various methods have been proposed
to improve their estimations. One line of approaches, which can be referred to as bundle-adjusting
neural fields, jointly optimize [38, 20, 12, 2, 5] camera poses along with results from rendering and
geometry (e.g., depth) estimation, where the camera rays are considered independently for their roles
in color and geometry prediction. By now, more works [3, 4, 32, 18, 16, 30, 6] realize the importance
of exploiting correlations between input images, i.e., multi-view consistency, to impose additional
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

