Latent Learning Progress Drives Autonomous Goal
Selection in Human Reinforcement Learning

Gaia Molinaro
University of California, Berkeley
gaiamolinaro@berkeley.edu

Cédric Colas
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
ccolas@mit.edu

Pierre-Yves Oudeyer
Inria Centre at the University of Bordeaux
pierre-yves.oudeyer@inria.fr

Anne G. E. Collins
University of California, Berkeley
annecollins@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Humans are autotelic agents who learn by setting and pursuing their own goals.
However, the precise mechanisms guiding human goal selection remain unclear.
Learning progress, typically measured as the observed change in performance, can
provide a valuable signal for goal selection in both humans and artificial agents.
We hypothesize that human choices of goals may also be driven by latent learning
progress, which humans can estimate through knowledge of their actions and the
environment – even without experiencing immediate changes in performance. To
test this hypothesis, we designed a hierarchical reinforcement learning task in
which human participants (N = 175) repeatedly chose their own goals and learned
goal-conditioned policies. Our behavioral and computational modeling results
confirm the influence of latent learning progress on goal selection and uncover
inter-individual differences, partially mediated by recognition of the environment’s
hierarchical structure. By investigating the role of latent learning progress in
human goal selection, we pave the way for more effective and personalized learning
experiences as well as the advancement of more human-like autotelic machines.

1

Introduction

Animals often spontaneously explore their environment in the absence of immediate extrinsic payoffs
[1–8]. While seemingly wasteful, such intrinsically motivated behavior is argued to adaptively
guide learning and exploration, paying off across developmental and evolutionary timescales [9–
11]. As a result, researchers and engineers started endowing artificial systems with intrinsic reward
signals that aim to reproduce aspects of human curiosity-driven learning [11–17]. A striking aspect
of human intrinsic motivation is autotelic exploration, wherein people self-generate goals, and
reward themselves for achieving them [18–20]. How people decide which goals to pursue is thus an
outstanding issue in the cognitive sciences [21]. Identifying the key variables affecting goal selection
may in turn enable the development of artificial agents that intelligently set their own objectives,
rather than being optimized for predefined ones [22].
Alongside factors such as performance and novelty, learning progress (LP) – the derivative of
performance with respect to time – has proven a useful signal for goal selection, steering both humans
[23, 24] and artificial agents [25–28] away from tasks that are either too simple or too hard. Most
existing approaches approximate LP using past observations (e.g., differences in recent and earlier
performance [23]), such that LP is greatest when performance changes rapidly ([29], but see [30]).
However, there are often situations where no external change is visible, yet some other form of
progress toward the desired outcome is made. Imagine being tasked with identifying the correct
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

