CoFie: Learning Compact Neural Surface
Representations with Coordinate Fields

Hanwen Jiang Haitao Yang Georgios Pavlakos Qixing Huang
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Austin
{hwjiang,yanght,pavlakos,huangqx}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
This paper introduces CoFie, a novel local geometry-aware neural surface representation. CoFie is motivated by the theoretical analysis of local SDFs with
quadratic approximation. We find that local shapes are highly compressive in an
aligned coordinate frame defined by the normal and tangent directions of local
shapes. Accordingly, we introduce Coordinate Field, which is a composition of
coordinate frames of all local shapes. The Coordinate Field is optimizable and is
used to transform the local shapes from the world coordinate frame to the aligned
shape coordinate frame. It largely reduces the complexity of local shapes and
benefits the learning of MLP-based implicit representations. Moreover, we introduce quadratic layers into the MLP to enhance expressiveness concerning local
shape geometry. CoFie is a generalizable surface representation. It is trained on
a curated set of 3D shapes and works on novel shape instances during testing.
When using the same amount of parameters with prior works, CoFie reduces the
shape error by 48% and 56% on novel instances of both training and unseen shape
categories. Moreover, CoFie demonstrates comparable performance to prior works
when using even 70% fewer parameters. Code and model can be found here:
https://hwjiang1510.github.io/CoFie/

1

Introduction

In the realm of geometry modeling, neural implicit shape representations have become a powerful
tool [33, 7, 4, 13, 41, 39, 2]. These representations typically use latent codes to represent shapes and
employ multilayer perceptions (MLPs) to decode their Signed Distance Functions (SDFs). Early
works in this field use a single latent code to represent an entire shape [33]. Nevertheless, the decoded
SDFs usually lack geometry details. To improve the shape modeling quality, recent approaches have
introduced local-based designs [4, 26, 42]. By decomposing an entire shape into many local surfaces,
the shape modeling task becomes effortless – local surfaces are in simpler geometry which are easier
to represent. Despite the progress, the local-aware design significantly increases the number of
parameters, as each local surface is represented by one or even multiple latent codes. Thus, proposing
a neural surface representation that is both accurate and compact is necessary.
To achieve this goal, we argue it is important to understand the properties of local surfaces. Following
prior works [31, 49, 10, 44], we approximate the local geometry with quadratic patches [9] and
perform analysis. Results show the feasibility of fitting the geometry of a specific category of
quadratic patches. In detail, the quadratic patches are aligned with the coordinate system defined
by the normal, principal directions, and principal curvatures of quadratic patch [9, 31]. However,
when the quadratic patches are not aligned – they are freely transformed with random rotations and
translations in 3D, mimicking real local surfaces – the optimization will be easily trapped into local
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

