JaxMARL: Multi-Agent RL Environments and
Algorithms in JAX

Alexander Rutherford1∗† Benjamin Ellis1∗† Matteo Gallici2∗† Jonathan Cook1†
Andrei Lupu1† Garðar Ingvarsson3† Timon Willi1† Ravi Hammond1†
Akbir Khan3 Christian Schroeder de Witt1 Alexandra Souly3
Saptarashmi Bandyopadhyay4 Mikayel Samvelyan3 Minqi Jiang3 Robert Lange5
Shimon Whiteson1 Bruno Lacerda1 Nick Hawes1 Tim Rocktäschel3
Chris Lu1∗† Jakob Foerster1
1
2
University of Oxford, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, 3 University College London,
4
University of Maryland, 5 Technical University Berlin

Abstract
Benchmarks are crucial in the development of machine learning algorithms, with
available environments significantly influencing reinforcement learning (RL) research. Traditionally, RL environments run on the CPU, which limits their scalability with typical academic compute. However, recent advancements in JAX have
enabled the wider use of hardware acceleration, enabling massively parallel RL
training pipelines and environments. While this has been successfully applied to
single-agent RL, it has not yet been widely adopted for multi-agent scenarios. In
this paper, we present JaxMARL, the first open-source, Python-based library that
combines GPU-enabled efficiency with support for a large number of commonly
used MARL environments and popular baseline algorithms. Our experiments show
that, in terms of wall clock time, our JAX-based training pipeline is around 14 times
faster than existing approaches, and up to 12500x when multiple training runs are
vectorized. This enables efficient and thorough evaluations, potentially alleviating
the evaluation crisis in the field. We also introduce and benchmark SMAX, a JAXbased approximate reimplementation of the popular StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge, which removes the need to run the StarCraft II game engine. This not only
enables GPU acceleration, but also provides a more flexible MARL environment,
unlocking the potential for self-play, meta-learning, and other future applications
in MARL. The code is available at https://github.com/flairox/jaxmarl.

1

Introduction

Benchmarks are crucial for developing new single and multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
algorithms. They define problems, enable comparisons, and focus research efforts. For example, the
development of MuZero was driven by the challenges presented by Go and Chess [54]. Similarly,
decentralised StarCraft Micromanagement tasks [18] led to the creation of algorithms like QMIX [51],
a popular MARL technique.
In RL research, the runtime of simulations and algorithms is a critical factor affecting the efficiency,
thoroughness, and feasibility of experiments. RL training pipelines often require a large number
of environment interactions and long, expensive, experimental runs significantly impede research
progress. Hardware acceleration and parallelization is an approach to address this: by running
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Core Contributor

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

