BPQP: A Differentiable Convex Optimization
Framework for Efficient End-to-End Learning

Jianming Pan1∗, Zeqi Ye2∗,
Xiao Yang , Xu Yang3 , Weiqing Liu3 , Lewen Wang3 , Jiang Bian3
1
University of California, Berkeley, 2 Nankai University
3
Microsoft Research Asia
jianming_pan@berkeley.edu, liamyzq@gmail.com
{xiao.yang, xuyang1, weiqing.liu, lewen.wang, jiang.bian}@microsoft.com
3†

Abstract
Data-driven decision-making processes increasingly utilize end-to-end learnable
deep neural networks to render final decisions. Sometimes, the output of the forward functions in certain layers is determined by the solutions to mathematical
optimization problems, leading to the emergence of differentiable optimization
layers that permit gradient back-propagation. However, real-world scenarios often involve large-scale datasets and numerous constraints, presenting significant
challenges. Current methods for differentiating optimization problems typically
rely on implicit differentiation, which necessitates costly computations on the
Jacobian matrices, resulting in low efficiency. In this paper, we introduce BPQP,
a differentiable convex optimization framework designed for efficient end-to-end
learning. To enhance efficiency, we reformulate the backward pass as a simplified
and decoupled quadratic programming problem by leveraging the structural properties of the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker (KKT) matrix. This reformulation enables the use
of first-order optimization algorithms in calculating the backward pass gradients,
allowing our framework to potentially utilize any state-of-the-art solver. As solver
technologies evolve, BPQP can continuously adapt and improve its efficiency.
Extensive experiments on both simulated and real-world datasets demonstrate
that BPQP achieves a significant improvement in efficiency—typically an order
of magnitude faster in overall execution time compared to other differentiable
optimization layers. Our results not only highlight the efficiency gains of BPQP
but also underscore its superiority over differential optimization layer baselines.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep neural networks have increasingly been used to address data-driven decisionmaking problems and to generate final decisions for end-to-end learning tasks. Beyond explicit
forward functions, some layers of the network may be characterized by behaviors of implicit outputs,
such as the solutions to mathematical optimization problems, which can be described as differentiable
optimization layers [1]. These can be treated as implicit functions where inputs are mapped to
optimal solutions. In this manner, the network can incorporate useful inductive biases, including
domain-specific knowledge, physical structures, and priors, thereby enabling more accurate and
reliable decision-making. This approach has been integrated into deep declarative networks [2] for
end-to-end learning and has proven effective in various applications, such as energy minimization
[3, 4] and predict-then-optimize [5, 6] problems. Here, we focus on convex optimization due to
∗
†

Work done during an internship at Microsoft.
Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

