TSDS: Data Selection for Task-Specific Model
Finetuning

Zifan Liu
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI
zliu676@wisc.edu

Amin Karbasi
Yale University
New Haven, CT
amin.karbasi@yale.edu

Theodoros Rekatsinas
Apple
Zürich, Switzerland
trekatsinas@apple.com

Abstract
Finetuning foundation models for specific tasks is an emerging paradigm in modern machine learning. The efficacy of task-specific finetuning largely depends on
the selection of appropriate training data. We present TSDS (Task-Specific Data
Selection), a framework to select data for task-specific model finetuning, guided
by a small but representative set of examples from the target task. To do so, we
formulate data selection for task-specific finetuning as an optimization problem
with a distribution alignment loss based on optimal transport to capture the discrepancy between the selected data and the target distribution. In addition, we
add a regularizer to encourage the diversity of the selected data and incorporate
kernel density estimation into the regularizer to reduce the negative effects of
near-duplicates among the candidate data. We connect our optimization problem
to nearest neighbor search and design efficient algorithms to compute the optimal
solution based on approximate nearest neighbor search techniques. We evaluate
our method on data selection for both continued pretraining and instruction tuning
of language models. We show that instruction tuning using data selected by our
method with a 1% selection ratio often outperforms using the full dataset and beats
the baseline selection methods by 1.5 points in F1 score on average. Our code is
available at https://github.com/ZifanL/TSDS.

1

Introduction

Finetuning foundation models [3] is the de-facto paradigm for building machine learning applications
that focus on specific tasks. Models such as BERT [10] and LLaMA [43] are large-scale models
pretrained on massive unlabeled data across a wide range of domains. Those models can be specialized
to downstream tasks through finetuning. Finetuning can take a variety of forms depending on the
target task. For instance, continued pretraining [17] extends the pretraining stage of a model on a
dataset that is more closely related to a target domain. As another setting, instruction tuning [51]
trains a generative foundation model on instruction-response pairs to improve its performance in
responding to task-specific instructions.
Finetuning foundation models can lead to significant improvement in downstream tasks, but the
effectiveness heavily relies on the right choice of training data [17, 30, 48, 47]. However, the data
repositories that one considers during training of generative models tend to be large—consider for
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

