DreamScene4D: Dynamic Multi-Object Scene
Generation from Monocular Videos
Wen-Hsuan Chu† , Lei Ke† , Katerina Fragkiadaki
Carnegie Mellon University
{wenhsuac,leik,katef}@cs.cmu.edu

https://dreamscene4d.github.io/

Abstract
View-predictive generative models provide strong priors for lifting object-centric
images and videos into 3D and 4D through rendering and score distillation objectives. A question then remains: what about lifting complete multi-object dynamic
scenes? There are two challenges in this direction: First, rendering error gradients
are often insufficient to recover fast object motion, and second, view predictive
generative models work much better for objects than whole scenes, so, score distillation objectives cannot currently be applied at the scene level directly. We present
DreamScene4D, the first approach to generate 3D dynamic scenes of multiple
objects from monocular videos via 360◦ novel view synthesis. Our key insight
is a “decompose-recompose” approach that factorizes the video scene into the
background and object tracks, while also factorizing object motion into 3 components: object-centric deformation, object-to-world-frame transformation, and
camera motion. Such decomposition permits rendering error gradients and object
view-predictive models to recover object 3D completions and deformations while
bounding box tracks guide the large object movements in the scene. We show
extensive results on challenging DAVIS, Kubric, and self-captured videos with
quantitative comparisons and a user preference study. Besides 4D scene generation, DreamScene4D obtains accurate 2D persistent point track by projecting the
inferred 3D trajectories to 2D. We will release our code and hope our work will
stimulate more research on fine-grained 4D understanding from videos.

1

Introduction

Videos are the result of entities moving and interacting in 3D space and over time, captured from a
moving camera. Inferring the dynamic 4D scene from video projections in terms of complete 3D
object reconstructions and their 3D motions across seen and unseen camera views is a challenging
problem in computer vision. It has multiple important applications, such as 3D object and scene
state tracking for robot perception [16, 36], action recognition, visual imitation, digital content
creation/simulation, and augmented reality.
Video-to-4D is a highly under-constrained problem since multiple 4D generation hypotheses project
to the same video observations. Existing 4D reconstruction works [39, 33, 23, 28, 6, 25] mainly focus
on the visible part of the scene contained in the video by learning a differentiable 3D representation
that is often a neural field [31] or a set of 3D Gaussians [20] with temporal deformation. What about
the unobserved views of the dynamic 3D scene? Existing 4D generation works utilize generative
models to constrain the appearance of objects in unseen views through score distillation losses.
Text-to-4D [46, 2, 53, 24, 1] or image-to-4D [64, 43, 58, 66] setups take a single text prompt or
image as input to create a 4D object. Several works [17, 14, 43, 32, 61, 62] explore the video-to-4D
†

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

