Externally Valid Policy Evaluation from Randomized
Trials Using Additional Observational Data

Sofia Ek
Uppsala University
sofia.ek@it.uu.se

Dave Zachariah
Uppsala University
dave.zachariah@it.uu.se

Abstract
Randomized trials are widely considered as the gold standard for evaluating the
effects of decision policies. Trial data is, however, drawn from a population
which may differ from the intended target population and this raises a problem
of external validity (aka. generalizability). In this paper we seek to use trial data
to draw valid inferences about the outcome of a policy on the target population.
Additional covariate data from the target population is used to model the sampling
of individuals in the trial study. We develop a method that yields certifiably valid
trial-based policy evaluations under any specified range of model miscalibrations.
The method is nonparametric and the validity is assured even with finite samples.
The certified policy evaluations are illustrated using both simulated and real data.

1

Introduction

Randomized controlled trials (RCT) are often considered to be the ‘gold standard’ when evaluating the
effects of different decisions or, more generally, decision policies. RCT studies circumvent the need
to identify and model potential confounding variables that arise in observational studies. They enable
the evaluation and learning of decision policies for use in, e.g., clinical decision support, precision
medicine and recommendation systems (Qian and Murphy, 2011; Zhao et al., 2012; Kosorok and
Laber, 2019).
However, RCTs sample individuals that may differ systematically from a target population of interest.
For instance, clinical trials usually involve only individuals who do not have any relevant comorbidities
and those who volunteer for trials may very well exhibit different characteristics than the target
population. Invalid inferences about a decision policy can be potentially harmful in safety-critical
applications, where the cautionary principle of “above all, do no harm” applies (Smith, 2005). This is
especially challenging since the distributions of population characteristics are unknown. How can we
generalize results from the trial sample to the intended population?
The focus of this paper is the problem of establishing externally valid inferences about outcomes in a
target population, when using experimental results from a trial population (Campbell and Stanley,
1963; Manski, 2007; Westreich, 2019). We consider evaluating a decision policy, denoted π, that
maps covariates X of an individual onto a recommended action A. The outcome of this decision has
an associated loss L (aka. disutility or negative reward). Thus L may directly represent the outcome
of interest. We assume the availability of samples (X, A, L) from the trial population and additional
covariate data X from the target population (Lesko et al., 2016; Li et al., 2022; Colnet et al., 2024).
The covariate data is used to model the sampling of individuals in the trial study. We propose a
method for evaluating policy π that
• is nonparametric and makes no assumptions about the distributional forms of the data,
• takes into account possible covariate shifts from trial to target distribution, even when using
miscalibrated sampling models with unmeasured selection factors,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

