When LLM Meets DRL: Advancing Jailbreaking
Efficiency via DRL-guided Search

Xuan Chen1 , Yuzhou Nie2 , Wenbo Guo2 , Xiangyu Zhang1
1
Purdue University
2
University of California, Santa Barbara
{chen4124, xyzhang}@cs.purdue.edu
{yuzhounie, henrygwb}@ucsb.edu

Abstract
Warning: This paper contains unfiltered and potentially harmful content.

Recent studies developed jailbreaking attacks, which construct jailbreaking prompts
to “fool” LLMs into responding to harmful questions. Early-stage jailbreaking attacks require access to model internals or significant human efforts. More advanced
attacks utilize genetic algorithms for automatic and black-box attacks. However,
the random nature of genetic algorithms significantly limits the effectiveness of
these attacks. In this paper, we propose RLbreaker, a black-box jailbreaking attack
driven by deep reinforcement learning (DRL). We model jailbreaking as a search
problem and design an RL agent to guide the search, which is more effective and
has less randomness than stochastic search, such as genetic algorithms. Specifically, we design a customized DRL system for the jailbreaking problem, including
a novel reward function and a customized proximal policy optimization (PPO)
algorithm. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that RLbreaker is much
more effective than existing jailbreaking attacks against six state-of-the-art (SOTA)
LLMs. We also show that RLbreaker is robust against three SOTA defenses and
its trained agents can transfer across different LLMs. We further validate the key
design choices of RLbreaker via a comprehensive ablation study. Code is available
at https://github.com/XuanChen-xc/RLbreaker.

1

Introduction

Recent research discovered jailbreaking attacks against LLMs, i.e., the attacker constructs jailbreaking
prompts embedded with harmful or unethical questions [10, 3, 15, 69, 73, 21, 61, 54, 30, 72, 39].
These jailbreaking prompts can force an aligned LLM to respond to the embedded harmful questions.
Early-stage attacks mainly rely on handcrafted jailbreaking prompts [33, 50, 57], or require accessing
model internals [76, 49]. More recent works explore automatic and black-box jailbreaking attacks.
These attacks either leverage in-context learning [6, 35, 66, 28, 5] or genetic methods [65, 27, 32].
Specifically, in-context learning attacks keep querying another helper LLM to generate and refine
jailbreaking prompts. As shown in Section 4, purely relying on in-context learning has a limited
ability to continuously refine the prompts. Genetic method-based attacks design different mutators
that leverage the helper LLM to modify the jailbreaking prompts. They refine the prompts by
iteratively selecting the promising prompts as the seeds for the next round. While outperforming
in-context learning-based attacks on some open-source models, their efficacy remains constrained by
the stochastic nature of genetic methods, as they randomly select mutators without a proper strategy.
In this paper, we model jailbreaking attacks as a search problem and design a DRL system RLbreaker,
to enable a more efficient and guided search. At a high level, we train our DRL agent to select proper
mutators for different harmful questions, which is more efficient than random mutator selection.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

