S MOOTHIE: Label Free Language Model Routing

Neel Guha ∗ Mayee F. Chen⋆ Trevor Chow Ishan S. Khare Christopher Ré
Stanford University, Department of Computer Science
{nguha, mfchen, tmychow, iskhare, chrismre}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly used in applications where LLM
inputs may span many different tasks. Recent work has found that the choice of
LLM is consequential, and different LLMs may be good for different input samples.
Prior approaches have thus explored how engineers might select an LLM to use for
each sample (i.e. routing). While existing routing methods mostly require training
auxiliary models on human-annotated data, our work explores whether it is possible
to perform unsupervised routing. We propose S MOOTHIE, a weak supervisioninspired routing approach that requires no labeled data. Given a set of outputs
from different LLMs, S MOOTHIE constructs a latent variable graphical model
over embedding representations of observable LLM outputs and unknown “true”
outputs. Using this graphical model, we estimate sample-dependent quality scores
for each LLM, and route each sample to the LLM with the highest corresponding
score. We find that S MOOTHIE’s LLM quality-scores correlate with ground-truth
model quality (correctly identifying the optimal model on 9/14 tasks), and that
S MOOTHIE outperforms baselines for routing by up to 10 points accuracy.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly being deployed in multi-capability regimes where
data inputs may span a diverse range of tasks, each of which requires different capabilities [8]. For
instance, an LLM-powered chatbot may be asked to write code, answer questions about different
domains, summarize documents, perform extraction, and more [3, 8, 14, 30]. One challenge is that
while engineers often have access to numerous pre-trained LLMs (i.e., through Huggingface or
various APIs), they do not know which LLM is optimal for each possible user input [86]. Because
the quality of generations can significantly vary across LLMs, choosing the right LLM for each input
sample is important for ensuring high task performance [41].
Recent work has explored various ways to utilize ensembles of pretrained LLMs in multi-capability
settings, by (1) collecting a diverse pool of LLMs and (2) identifying which LLM to route each
sample to [55, 86]. However, the majority of existing approaches require labeled data; engineers
typically either (1) train an auxiliary model using labeled data to rank or predict which LLM each
sample should be routed to [41, 79], or (2) directly use labeled data to determine which LLM is the
best on average [86]. As a result, engineers designing routing protocols face the practical difficulty of
constructing labeled datasets.
Given a candidate pool of LLMs and an unlabeled test dataset, this paper explores how to best
select LLM outputs for each sample in an entirely unsupervised manner—without labeled data, or
models trained on labeled data. To make progress in addressing this question, we face two technical
challenges:
• Unknown LLM quality: The first challenge is estimating the quality of each LLM. Access
to labeled data allows engineers to identify higher performing LLMs by measuring the accu∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

