Knowledge Graph Completion by Intermediate
Variables Regularization

Changyi Xiao, Yixin Cao∗
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
changyi_xiao@fudan.edu.cn, caoyixin2011@gmail.com

Abstract
Knowledge graph completion (KGC) can be framed as a 3-order binary tensor
completion task. Tensor decomposition-based (TDB) models have demonstrated
strong performance in KGC. In this paper, we provide a summary of existing TDB
models and derive a general form for them, serving as a foundation for further
exploration of TDB models. Despite the expressiveness of TDB models, they are
prone to overfitting. Existing regularization methods merely minimize the norms of
embeddings to regularize the model, leading to suboptimal performance. Therefore,
we propose a novel regularization method for TDB models that addresses this
limitation. The regularization is applicable to most TDB models and ensures
tractable computation. Our method minimizes the norms of intermediate variables
involved in the different ways of computing the predicted tensor. To support our
regularization method, we provide a theoretical analysis that proves its effect in
promoting low trace norm of the predicted tensor to reduce overfitting. Finally,
we conduct experiments to verify the effectiveness of our regularization technique
as well as the reliability of our theoretical analysis. The code is available at
https://github.com/changyi7231/IVR.

1

Introduction

A knowledge graph (KG) can be represented as a 3rd-order binary tensor, in which each entry
corresponds to a triplet of the form (head entity, relation, tail entity). A value of 1 denotes a
known true triplet, while 0 denotes a false triplet. Despite containing a large number of known
triplets, KGs are often incomplete, with many triplets missing. Consequently, the 3rd-order tensors
representing the KGs are incomplete. The objective of knowledge graph completion (KGC) is to
infer the true or false values of the missing triplets based on the known ones, i.e., to predict which of
the missing entries in the tensor are 1 or 0.
A number of models have been proposed for KGC, which can be classified into translation-based
models, tensor decomposition-based (TDB) models and neural networks models [Zhang et al., 2021].
We only focus on TDB models in this paper due to their wide applicability and great performance
[Lacroix et al., 2018, Zhang et al., 2020]. TDB models can be broadly categorized into two groups:
CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) decomposition-based models, including CP [Lacroix et al., 2018],
DistMult [Yang et al., 2014] and ComplEx [Trouillon et al., 2017], and Tucker decomposition-based
models, including SimplE [Kazemi and Poole, 2018], ANALOGY [Liu et al., 2017], QuatE [Zhang
et al., 2019] and TuckER [Balažević et al., 2019]. To provide a thorough understanding of TDB
models, we present a summary of existing models and derive a general form that unifies them, which
provides a fundamental basis for further exploration of TDB models.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

