Data Free Backdoor Attacks
Bochuan Cao1 , Jinyuan Jia1 , Chuxuan Hu2 , Wenbo Guo3 ,
Zhen Xiang4 , Jinghui Chen1 , Bo Li2 , Dawn Song5
1

2
The Pennsylvania State University
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
3
4
University of California, Santa Barbara
University of Georgia
5
University of California Berkeley

bccao@psu.edu, jinyuan@psu.edu, chuxuan3@illinois.edu,
henrygwb@ucsb.edu, zhen.xiang.lance@gmail.com, jzc5917@psu.edu,
lbo@illinois.edu, dawnsong@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Backdoor attacks aim to inject a backdoor into a classifier such that it predicts
any input with an attacker-chosen backdoor trigger as an attacker-chosen target
class. Existing backdoor attacks require either retraining the classifier with some
clean data or modifying the model’s architecture. As a result, they are 1) not
applicable when clean data is unavailable, 2) less efficient when the model is large,
and 3) less stealthy due to architecture changes. In this work, we propose DFBA, a
novel retraining-free and data-free backdoor attack without changing the model
architecture. Technically, our proposed method modifies a few parameters of a
classifier to inject a backdoor. Through theoretical analysis, we verify that our
injected backdoor is provably undetectable and unremovable by various state-of-theart defenses under mild assumptions. Our evaluation on multiple datasets further
demonstrates that our injected backdoor: 1) incurs negligible classification loss, 2)
achieves 100% attack success rates, and 3) bypasses six existing state-of-the-art
defenses. Moreover, our comparison with a state-of-the-art non-data-free backdoor
attack shows our attack is more stealthy and effective against various defenses while
achieving less classification accuracy loss. The code for our experiment can be
found at https://github.com/AAAAAAsuka/DataFree_Backdoor_Attacks

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNN) have achieved remarkable success in multiple application domains
such as computer vision. To democratize DNN models, especially the powerful but large ones,
many machine learning platforms (e.g., ModelZoo [1], TensorFlow Model Garden [2], and Hugging
Face [3]) share their pre-trained classifiers to customers with limited resources. For instance, Hugging
Face allows any third party to share pre-trained classifiers with the community, which could be
downloaded by other users. Despite the benefits brought by those machine learning platforms,
existing studies [4, 5, 6] show that this model sharing mechanism is vulnerable to backdoor attacks.
In particular, a malicious third party could download a pre-trained classifier from the machine learning
platform, inject a backdoor into it, and reshare it with the community via the platform. Backdoor
attacks pose severe concerns for the deployment of classifiers downloaded from the machine learning
platforms for security and safety-critical applications such as autonomous deriving [7]. We note that
the model provider may not share the training data used to train the classifiers when they are trained
on private data (e.g., face images).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

