Understanding Scaling Laws with Statistical and
Approximation Theory for Transformer Neural
Networks on Intrinsically Low-dimensional Data

Alex Havrilla
Department of Mathematics
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA, 30308
ahavrilla3@gatech.edu

Wenjing Liao
Department of Mathematics
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA, 30308
wliao60@gatech.edu

Abstract
When training deep neural networks, a model’s generalization error is often observed to follow a power scaling law dependent both on the model size and the
data size. Perhaps the best known example of such scaling laws are for transformerbased large language models (LLMs), where networks with billions of parameters
are trained on trillions of tokens of text. Yet, despite sustained widespread interest,
a rigorous understanding of why transformer scaling laws exist is still missing. To
answer this question, we establish novel statistical estimation and mathematical
approximation theories for transformers when the input data are concentrated on a
low-dimensional manifold. Our theory predicts a power law between the generalization error and both the training data size and the network size for transformers,
where the power depends on the intrinsic dimension d of the training data. Notably,
the constructed model architecture is shallow, requiring only logarithmic depth in d.
By leveraging low-dimensional data structures under a manifold hypothesis, we are
able to explain transformer scaling laws in a way which respects the data geometry.
Moreover, we test our theory with empirical observation by training LLMs on
natural language datasets. We find the observed empirical scaling laws closely
agree with our theoretical predictions. Taken together, these results rigorously
show the intrinsic dimension of data to be a crucial quantity affecting transformer
scaling laws in both theory and practice.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has made remarkable breakthroughs in various real-world applications, such as natural
language processing [Graves et al., 2013, Bahdanau et al., 2014, Liu et al., 2023, Vaswani et al., 2017],
computer vision [Krizhevsky et al., 2012, Goodfellow et al., 2014, Song et al., 2020], healthcare
[Miotto et al., 2018], and robotics [Gu et al., 2017]. A neural scaling law between the generalization
error (or test loss) and several quantities, including the model size, the training data size, and the
amount of compute, plays a key role in the performance of neural networks. Perhaps the best known
example of such scaling laws are for transformer-based LLMs. Recent works in Hestness et al.
[2017], Rosenfeld et al. [2019], Kaplan et al. [2020], Bahri et al. [2021] demonstrated a power law
between the test loss and the network size, the training data size, and the amount of compute for
transformer-based LLMs. Yet, despite sustained widespread interest, a rigorous understanding of
why transformer scaling laws exist is still missing.
Understanding the theory behind neural scaling laws provides invaluable insights into practical
applications of deep learning. A mathematical principal of neural scaling laws enables researchers
and practitioners to describe and analyze the performance of neural networks with precision and
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

