Non-asymptotic Analysis of Biased Adaptive
Stochastic Approximation

Sobihan Surendran1,2 ∗, Adeline Fermanian2 , Antoine Godichon-Baggioni1 , Sylvain Le Corff1
1
Sorbonne Université, CNRS,
Laboratoire de Probabilités, Statistique et Modélisation, Paris, France
2
LOPF, Califrais’ Machine Learning Lab, Paris, France

Abstract
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) with adaptive steps is widely used to train deep
neural networks and generative models. Most theoretical results assume that it is
possible to obtain unbiased gradient estimators, which is not the case in several
recent deep learning and reinforcement learning applications that use Monte Carlo
methods. This paper provides a comprehensive non-asymptotic analysis of SGD
with biased gradients and adaptive steps for non-convex smooth functions. Our
study incorporates time-dependent bias and emphasizes the importance of controlling the bias of the gradient estimator. In particular, we establish that Adagrad,
RMSProp, and AMSGRAD, an exponential moving average variant of Adam, with
biased gradients, converge to critical points for smooth non-convex functions at a
rate similar to existing results in the literature for the unbiased case. Finally, we
provide experimental results using Variational Autoenconders (VAE) and applications to several learning frameworks that illustrate our convergence results and
show how the effect of bias can be reduced by appropriate hyperparameter tuning.

1

Introduction

Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) algorithms are standard methods to train statistical models based
on deep architectures. Consider a general optimization problem:
θ∗ ∈ argmin V (θ) ,

(1)

θ∈Rd

where V is the objective function. Then, Gradient Descent methods produce a sequence of parameter
estimates as follows: θ0 ∈ Rd and for all n ∈ N,
θn+1 = θn − γn+1 ∇V (θn ) ,
where ∇V denotes the gradient of V and for all n ≥ 1, γn > 0 is the learning rate. In many cases,
it is not possible to compute the exact gradient of the objective function, hence the introduction of
vanilla Stochastic Gradient Descent, defined for all n ∈ N by:
d (θn ) ,
θn+1 = θn − γn+1 ∇V
d (θn ) is an estimator of ∇V (θn ). For example, in deep learning, stochasticity emerges with
where ∇V
the use of mini-batches. While these algorithms have been extensively studied, both theoretically
and practically, see, e.g., [10], many questions remain open. In particular, most results are based
d is unbiased. Although this assumption is valid in the case of
on the case where the estimator ∇V
vanilla SGD, it breaks down in many common applications. For example, zeroth-order methods used
∗

Corresponding author: sobihan.surendran@sorbonne-universite.fr

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

