A Simple yet Scalable Granger Causal Structural
Learning Approach for Topological Event Sequences

Mingjia Li∗ Shuo Liu∗ Hong Qian† Aimin Zhou
Shanghai Institute of AI for Education and School of Computer Science and Technology,
East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, China
{limj,shuoliu}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn
{hqian,amzhou}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
In modern telecommunication networks, faults manifest as alarms, generating
thousands of events daily. Network operators need an efficient method to identify
the root causes of these alarms to mitigate potential losses. This task is challenging
due to the increasing scale of telecommunication networks and the interconnected
nature of devices, where one fault can trigger a cascade of alarms across multiple
devices within a topological network. Recent years have seen a growing focus
on causal approaches to addressing this problem, emphasizing the importance of
learning a Granger causal graph from topological event sequences. Such causal
graphs delineate the relations among alarms and can significantly aid engineers
in identifying and rectifying faults. However, existing methods either ignore the
topological relationships among devices or suffer from relatively low scalability and efficiency, failing to deliver high-quality responses in a timely manner.
To this end, this paper proposes S2 GCSL, a simple yet scalable Granger causal
structural learning approach for topological event sequences. S2 GCSL utilizes a
linear kernel to model activation interactions among various event types within
a topological network, and employs gradient descent to efficiently optimize the
likelihood function. Notably, it can seamlessly incorporate expert knowledge as
constraints within the optimization process, which enhances the interpretability
of the outcomes. Extensive experimental results on both large-scale synthetic and
real-world problems verify the scalability and efficacy of S2 GCSL.

1

Introduction

Telecommunication networks are an important component of infrastructure of modern society, where
thousands of alarms may be generated by various types of faults on a daily basis. It is crucial for
network operators to efficiently identify the root causes of these alarms since for every additional
minute that a fault persists in telecommunication networks, it can lead to significant economic losses
and cause negative public sentiment. However, the increasing scale of telecommunication networks
and the interconnected nature of devices make this task particularly challenging. A single fault has
the potential to trigger a cascade of alarms across multiple devices within a topological network. How
to model the generation of event sequences, especially in large-scale, multi-event-type scenarios, has
become more and more urgent in the telecommunication network fault diagnosis (TNFD) task.
One promising approach to understanding and predicting the generation and propagation of event
sequences is the application of Granger causality analysis [Granger, 1969], which in the context of
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Hong Qian is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

