PrefPaint: Aligning Image Inpainting Diffusion Model
with Human Preference
Kendong Liu1∗, Zhiyu Zhu1∗†, Chuanhao Li2∗ , Hui Liu3 ,
Huanqiang Zeng4 , Junhui Hou1
1
City University of Hong Kong 2 Yale University 3 Saint Francis University 4 Huaqiao University
{kdliu2-c, zhiyuzhu2-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk
chuanhao.li.cl2637@yale.edu h2liu@sfu.edu.hk jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we make the first attempt to align diffusion models for image inpainting with human aesthetic standards via a reinforcement learning framework,
significantly improving the quality and visual appeal of inpainted images. Specifically, instead of directly measuring the divergence with paired images, we train
a reward model with the dataset we construct, consisting of nearly 51,000 images annotated with human preferences. Then, we adopt a reinforcement learning
process to fine-tune the distribution of a pre-trained diffusion model for image
inpainting in the direction of higher reward. Moreover, we theoretically deduce
the upper bound on the error of the reward model, which illustrates the potential
confidence of reward estimation throughout the reinforcement alignment process,
thereby facilitating accurate regularization. Extensive experiments on inpainting
comparison and downstream tasks, such as image extension and 3D reconstruction,
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, showing significant improvements
in the alignment of inpainted images with human preference compared with stateof-the-art methods. This research not only advances the field of image inpainting
but also provides a framework for incorporating human preference into the iterative
refinement of generative models based on modeling reward accuracy, with broad
implications for the design of visually driven AI applications. Our code and dataset
are publicly available at https://prefpaint.github.io.

1

Introduction

Image inpainting, the process of filling in missing or damaged parts of images, is a critical task in
computer vision with applications ranging from photo restoration [1, 2] to content creation [3, 4].
Traditional approaches have leveraged various techniques, from simple interpolation [5–7] to complex
texture synthesis [8, 9], to achieve visually plausible results. The recent advent of deep learning,
particularly diffusion models, has revolutionized the field by enabling more coherent and contextually
appropriate inpaintings [3, 10–12]. Despite these advancements, a significant gap remains between
the technical success of these models and their alignment with human aesthetic preferences, which are
inherently subjective and intricate. As shown in Fig. 1, the existing stable diffusion-based inpainting
model tends to generate weird and discord reconstruction.
Human preference for visual content is influenced by complex and mutual factors, including but not
limited to personal background, experiences, and the context in which the content is viewed [13, 14].
This makes the task of aligning inpainting models with human preference particularly challenging, as
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

