The Surprising Effectiveness of SP Voting with Partial
Preferences
Hadi Hosseini
College of Information Sciences and Technology
Penn State University, USA
hadi@psu.edu

Debmalya Mandal
Department of Computer Science
University of Warwick, UK
Debmalya.Mandal@warwick.ac.uk

Amrit Puhan
College of Information Sciences and Technology
Penn State University, USA
avp6267@psu.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of recovering the ground truth ordering (ranking, top-k,
or others) over a large number of alternatives. The wisdom of crowd is a heuristic
approach based on Condorcet’s Jury theorem to address this problem through
collective opinions. This approach fails to recover the ground truth when the
majority of the crowd is misinformed. The surprisingly popular (SP) algorithm [36]
is an alternative approach that is able to recover the ground truth even when
experts are in minority. The SP algorithm requires the voters to predict other
voters’ report in the form of a full probability distribution over all rankings of
alternatives. However, when the number of alternatives, m, is large, eliciting
the prediction report or even the vote over m alternatives might be too costly.
In this paper, we design a scalable alternative of the SP algorithm which only
requires eliciting partial preferences from the voters, and propose new variants
of the SP algorithm. In particular, we propose two versions—Aggregated-SP
and Partial-SP—that ask voters to report vote and prediction on a subset of size
k (≪ m) in terms of top alternative, partial rank, or an approval set. Through
a large-scale crowdsourcing experiment on MTurk, we show that both of our
approaches outperform conventional preference aggregation algorithms for the
recovery of ground truth rankings, when measured in terms of Kendall-Tau distance
and Spearman’s ρ. We further analyze the collected data and demonstrate that
voters’ behavior in the experiment, including the minority of the experts, and the
SP phenomenon, can be correctly simulated by a concentric mixtures of Mallows
model. Finally, we provide theoretical bounds on the sample complexity of SP
algorithms with partial rankings to demonstrate the theoretical guarantees of the
proposed methods.

1

Introduction

The wisdom of the crowds is a systematic approach to statistically combine the opinions of a diverse
group of (non-expert) individuals to achieve a final collective truth. It dates back to Sir Francis
Galton’s observation—based on Aristotle’s hypothesis—that the point estimation of a continuous
value using the noisy individual opinions can recover its true value with high accuracy [22]. In the
modern era, the wisdom of the crowd has been the foundation of legal, political, and social systems
with the premise that one can recover the truth by collecting the opinion of a large number of diverse
individuals (e.g. trial by jury, election polling, and Q&A platforms such as Reddit/Quora).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

