Toward Real Ultra Image Segmentation: Leveraging
Surrounding Context to Cultivate General
Segmentation Model

Sai Wang, Yutian Lin, Yu Wu∗, Bo Du
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
{wangsai23, wuyucs, yutian.lin, dubo}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing ultra image segmentation methods suffer from two major challenges,
namely the scalability issue (i.e. they lack the stability and generality of standard
segmentation models, as they are tailored to specific datasets), and the architectural issue (i.e. they are incompatible with real-world ultra image scenes, as they
compromise between image size and computing resources). To tackle these issues,
we revisit the classic sliding inference framework, upon which we propose a Surrounding Guided Segmentation framework (SGNet) for ultra image segmentation.
The SGNet leverages a larger area around each image patch to refine the general
segmentation results of local patches. Specifically, we propose a surrounding
context integration module to absorb surrounding context information and extract
specific features that are beneficial to local patches. Note that, SGNet can be seamlessly integrated to any general segmentation model. Extensive experiments on five
datasets demonstrate that SGNet achieves competitive performance and consistent
improvements across a variety of general segmentation models, surpassing the
traditional ultra image segmentation methods by a large margin.

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of computing and imaging equipment, ultra-high resolution images
with millions or even billions of pixels emerge in endlessly and driving the need for more advanced
analytical techniques. Accurate understanding of information conveyed by images [1, 47, 43] has
become imperative in diverse fields such as remote sensing [29, 48, 44, 50] and medical analysis [37,
36, 31], and ultra image segmentation has emerged as an essential tool for achieving this goal.
To achieve ultra image segmentation, most of the methods adhere to the concept of integrating
global and local information, utilizing the global context clues to aid local region refinement [6, 20].
Typically, these networks have two branches: one receives the down-sampled ultra image and extracts
global context information of whole image, while the other extracts local information from sliced
patches or the complete image, as shown in Fig. 1(a). The final result is generated by fusing the
global and local features. Despite numerous improvements made to ultra image segmentation, we
observe that it still suffer from issues in both their scalability and architecture:
(1) Scalability Issue. The existing ultra image segmentation methods (UIS) often rely on datasetspecific parameters, which limit their model capacity and scalability. The UIS methods struggle to
scale up to larger image sizes, with performance significantly degrading as image resolution increases.
Moreover, UIS has complex training procedures that need multi-stage parameter tuning [8, 24]. In
contrast, general semantic segmentation (GSS) methods are more effective and demonstrate greater
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

