Is Score Matching Suitable for Estimating Point
Processes?
Haoqun Cao1 , Zizhuo Meng2 , Tianjun Ke1 , Feng Zhou1,3∗
Center for Applied Statistics and School of Statistics, Renmin University of China
2
Data Science Institute, University of Technology Sydney
3
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Future Blockchain and Privacy Computing
hcao65@wisc.edu, feng.zhou@ruc.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Score matching estimators have gained widespread attention in recent years partly
because they are free from calculating the integral of normalizing constant, thereby
addressing the computational challenges in maximum likelihood estimation (MLE).
Some existing works have proposed score matching estimators for point processes.
However, this work demonstrates that the incompleteness of the estimators proposed in those works renders them applicable only to specific problems, and they
fail for more general point processes. To address this issue, this work introduces
the weighted score matching estimator to point processes. Theoretically, we prove
the consistency of our estimator and establish its rate of convergence. Experimental results indicate that our estimator accurately estimates model parameters on
synthetic data and yields results consistent with MLE on real data. In contrast,
existing score matching estimators fail to perform effectively. Codes are publicly
available at https://github.com/KenCao2007/WSM_TPP.

1

Introduction

Point processes are a class of statistical models used to characterize event occurrences. Typical models
include Poisson processes [9] and Hawkes processes [3]. Their applications span various fields such as
seismology [16; 17], finance [1; 4], criminology [15], and neuroscience [11; 26]. In the field of point
processes, maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) has been a conventional estimator. However, MLE
has an inherent limitation: it requires the computation of the normalizing constant, which corresponds
to the intensity integral term in the likelihood. Except for simple cases, calculating the intensity
integral analytically is generally infeasible. This necessitates the use of numerical integration methods
like Monte Carlo or quadrature for approximating the computation. This introduces approximation
errors, and more importantly, for high-dimensional problems, numerical integration encounters the
curse of dimensionality, rendering training infeasible.
To address this issue, prior research has introduced the concept of score matching (SM) [5] to the field
of point processes. For instance, [18] derived the application of SM to the estimation of traditional
statistical Poisson processes. Furthermore, [24] extended the use of SM to the estimation of deep
covariate spatio-temporal point processes. [10] also generalized the application of SM to Hawkes
processes. These works have greatly advanced the utilization of SM for point processes. However, in
practical applications, we have found that these estimators only work for specific point processes.
For more general cases, these estimators cannot accurately estimate model parameters, even for
some simple statistical point processes. One of the core contribution of this work is to theoretically
demonstrate the incompleteness of the estimators proposed in the aforementioned studies.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

