CTIBench: A Benchmark for Evaluating LLMs in
Cyber Threat Intelligence

Md Tanvirul Alam
Rochester Institute of Technology
Rochester, NY, USA

Dipkamal Bhusal
Rochester Institute of Technology
Rochester, NY, USA

Le Nguyen
Rochester Institute of Technology
Rochester, NY, USA

Nidhi Rastogi
Rochester Institute of Technology
Rochester, NY, USA

Abstract
Cyber threat intelligence (CTI) is crucial in today’s cybersecurity landscape, providing essential insights to understand and mitigate the ever-evolving cyber threats.
The recent rise of Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown potential in this
domain, but concerns about their reliability, accuracy, and hallucinations persist.
While existing benchmarks provide general evaluations of LLMs, there are no
benchmarks that address the practical and applied aspects of CTI-specific tasks.
To bridge this gap, we introduce CTIBench, a benchmark designed to assess
LLMs’ performance in CTI applications. CTIBench includes multiple datasets
focused on evaluating knowledge acquired by LLMs in the cyber-threat landscape. Our evaluation of several state-of-the-art models on these tasks provides
insights into their strengths and weaknesses in CTI contexts, contributing to a
better understanding of LLM capabilities in CTI. Code and dataset available at
https://github.com/aiforsec/cti-bench.

1

Introduction

The evolving landscape of the digital world has led to an unprecedented growth in cyber attacks,
posing significant challenges for many organizations. Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI), which involves
the collection, analysis, and dissemination of information about potential or current threats to an
organization’s cyber systems [36], can provide actionable insights to help organizations defend against
these attacks. Large Language Models (LLMs) have the potential to revolutionize the field of CTI
by enhancing the ability to process and analyze vast amounts of unstructured threat and attack data;
allowing security analysts to utilize more intelligence sources than ever before. However, LLMs are
prone to hallucinations [53] and misunderstandings of text, especially in specific technical domains,
that can lead to a lack of truthfulness from the model [35]. This necessitates the careful consideration
of using LLMs in CTI as their limitations can lead to them producing false or unreliable intelligence
which could be disastrous if used to address real cyber threats.
The lack of proper benchmark tasks and datasets to evaluate LLM capabilities in CTI leaves their
reliability and usefulness an open research question. Without standardized benchmarks, it is difficult
to objectively measure and compare how effectively LLMs handle CTI tasks and generally understand
the domain. General benchmarks like GLUE [52], SuperGLUE [51], MMLU [27], HELM [32],
KOLA [54], and various domain-specific benchmarks [26, 55, 56] provide datasets and frameworks
for evaluating LLMs in terms of general language understanding or domain-specific capabilities.
However, these benchmarks fail to capture the practical aspects of cybersecurity. Limited works on
LLM evaluations in cybersecurity [15, 16, 31, 33, 34] have primarily catered to specific cybersecurity
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

