4+3 Phases of Compute-Optimal Neural Scaling Laws

Elliot Paquette∗
McGill University
elliot.paquette@mcgill.ca

Courtney Paquette
Google DeepMind & McGill University
courtney.paquette@mcgill.ca

Lechao Xiao†
Google DeepMind

Jeffrey Pennington†
Google DeepMind

Abstract
We consider the solvable neural scaling model with three parameters: data complexity, target complexity, and model-parameter-count. We use this neural scaling
model to derive new predictions about the compute-limited, infinite-data scaling
law regime. To train the neural scaling model, we run one-pass stochastic gradient
descent on a mean-squared loss. We derive a representation of the loss curves
which holds over all iteration counts and improves in accuracy as the model parameter count grows. We then analyze the compute-optimal model-parameter-count,
and identify 4 phases (+3 subphases) in the data-complexity/target-complexity
phase-plane. The phase boundaries are determined by the relative importance of
model capacity, optimizer noise, and embedding of the features. We furthermore
derive, with mathematical proof and extensive numerical evidence, the scalinglaw exponents in all of these phases, in particular computing the optimal modelparameter-count as a function of floating point operation budget. We include a
colab notebook nanoChinchilla3 that reproduces some key results of the paper.

1

Introduction

The advent of large language models (LLMs) has changed our perceptions of the landscape of
optimization and is resulting in the emergence of new interesting questions related to scaling. Prior
to LLMs and other large models, we often viewed the large-scale optimization problems as being
limited by the amount of data. In training language models, in contrast, data can be effectively infinite.
Thus, compute budgets can be the limitation. This leads to the following natural question: given an
architecture, given a fixed compute budget, and having unlimited data, how should one select the
model size to minimize loss?
To formally address this question, let us consider the general learning problem,

min P(θ) = Ex [R(θ; x)] , where R : Rd → R,
θ∈Rd

(1)

the number of parameters d is large, and the data vector x is drawn from an unknown distribution.
We solve (1) using stochastic algorithms, such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with batch size
B, under various parameter sizes d, that produce a sequence of iterates {θr }. A standard formula
used in practice to measure compute is the "6ND" formula [26], that is,
Compute (flops4 f) = (iterations of alg. (r) × batch size (B)) × parameters (d).
∗

Corresponding author; website: https://elliotpaquette.github.io/.
The authors contributed equally to the paper.
3
Available at: https://tinyurl.com/2saj6bkj

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

(2)

