Benchmarking Out-of-Distribution Generalization
Capabilities of DNN-based Encoding Models for the
Ventral Visual Cortex.
Spandan Madan

Will Xiao

Mingran Cao

Harvard University

Harvard Medical School

Francis Crick Institute

Hanspeter Pfister

Margaret Livingstone

Gabriel Kreiman

Harvard University

Harvard Medical School

Harvard Medical School

Abstract
We characterized the generalization capabilities of deep neural network encoding models when predicting neuronal responses from the visual cortex to flashed
images. We collected MacaqueITBench, a large-scale dataset of neuronal population responses from the macaque inferior temporal (IT) cortex to over 300, 000
images, comprising 8, 233 unique natural images presented to seven monkeys over
109 sessions. Using MacaqueITBench, we investigated the impact of distribution
shifts on models predicting neuronal activity by dividing the images into OutOf-Distribution (OOD) train and test splits. The OOD splits included variations
in image contrast, hue, intensity, temperature, and saturation. Compared to the
performance on in-distribution test images—the conventional way in which these
models have been evaluated—models performed worse at predicting neuronal
responses to out-of-distribution images, retaining as little as 20% of the performance on in-distribution test images. Additionally, the relative ranking of different
models in terms of their ability to predict neuronal responses changed drastically
across OOD shifts. The generalization performance under OOD shifts can be well
accounted by a simple image similarity metric—the cosine distance between image
representations extracted from a pre-trained object recognition model is a strong
predictor of neuronal predictivity under different distribution shifts. The dataset of
images, neuronal firing rate recordings, and computational benchmarks are hosted
publicly at: MacaqueITBench Link.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) for vision have internal representations that purportedly share
similarities with neural representations in the primate ventral visual cortex stream [2, 3]. Such
correlations between the representations in artificial and biological neural networks allow for models
that use image representations extracted from a pre-trained DNN (e.g., ResNet [4]) to predict
neuronal firing rates [5] (Fig. 1(a)). However, DNNs are known to struggle with generalization under
distribution shifts such as Out-of-Distribution (OOD) viewpoints [6, 7, 8], materials and lighting
[9, 10], and noise [11, 12]. The problem of OOD generalization constitutes a key standing challenge
in computer vision. Here we investigate whether this difficulty in generalization also affects models
of the visual cortex that rely on a DNN to extract image representations.
We hypothesize that, even within an image set where DNN-based models predict neural responses
well under random splits across images, specific train-test splits with distribution shifts will impair
model performance, proportional to the size of distribution shift. To test this hypothesis, we collected
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

