FuseMoE: Mixture-of-Experts Transformers for
Fleximodal Fusion
Xing Han

Huy Nguyen∗

Department of Computer Science

Department of Statistics and Data Sciences

Johns Hopkins University

The University of Texas at Austin

xhan56@jhu.edu

huynm@utexas.edu

Carl Harris∗

Nhat Ho+

Department of Biomedical Engineering

Department of Statistics and Data Sciences

Johns Hopkins University

The University of Texas at Austin

charr165@jhu.edu

minhnhat@utexas.edu
Suchi Saria+

Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
ssaria@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
As machine learning models in critical fields increasingly grapple with multimodal data, they face the dual challenges of handling a wide array of modalities,
often incomplete due to missing elements, and the temporal irregularity and sparsity of collected samples. Successfully leveraging this complex data, while overcoming the scarcity of high-quality training samples, is key to improving these
models’ predictive performance. We introduce “FuseMoE”, a mixture-of-experts
framework incorporated with an innovative gating function. Designed to integrate
a diverse number of modalities, FuseMoE is effective in managing scenarios with
missing modalities and irregularly sampled data trajectories. Theoretically, our
unique gating function contributes to enhanced convergence rates, leading to better performance in multiple downstream tasks. The practical utility of FuseMoE
in the real world is validated by a diverse set of challenging prediction tasks.

1

Introduction

Multimodal fusion is a critical and extensively studied problem in many significant domains
[78, 94, 90, 9], such as sentiment analysis [26, 54], image and video captioning [42, 41], and medical prediction [33, 83]. Previous research has shown that embracing multimodality can improve
predictive performance by capturing complementary information across modalities, outperforming
single-modality approaches in similar tasks [71, 32]. However, an ongoing challenge lies in the
creation of scalable frameworks for fusing multimodal data under a variety of conditions, and in
creating reliable models that consistently surpass their single-modal counterparts.
∗

Equal Contribution, + Equal Advising.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

