BOLD: Boolean Logic Deep Learning

Van Minh Nguyen∗ Cristian Ocampo

Aymen Askri

Louis Leconte

Ba-Hien Tran

Mathematical and Algorithmic Sciences Laboratory,
Huawei Paris Research Center, France
vanminh.nguyen@huawei.com

Abstract
Computational intensiveness of deep learning has motivated low-precision arithmetic designs. However, the current quantized/binarized training approaches are
limited by: (1) significant performance loss due to arbitrary approximations of
the latent weight gradient through its discretization/binarization function, and (2)
training computational intensiveness due to the reliance on full-precision latent
weights. This paper proposes a novel mathematical principle by introducing the
notion of Boolean variation such that neurons made of Boolean weights and/or
activations can be trained —for the first time— natively in Boolean domain instead
of latent-weight gradient descent and real arithmetic. We explore its convergence,
conduct extensively experimental benchmarking, and provide consistent complexity evaluation by considering chip architecture, memory hierarchy, dataflow, and
arithmetic precision. Our approach achieves baseline full-precision accuracy in
ImageNet classification and surpasses state-of-the-art results in semantic segmentation, with notable performance in image super-resolution, and natural language
understanding with transformer-based models. Moreover, it significantly reduces
energy consumption during both training and inference.

1

Introduction

Deep learning [59] has become the de facto solution to a wide range of tasks. However, running deep
learning models for inference demands significant computational resources, yet it is just the tip of
the iceberg. Training deep models is even much more intense. The extensive literature on this issue
can be summarized into four approaches addressing different sources of complexity. These include:
(1) model compression, pruning [38, 20, 109] and network design [94, 44, 96] for large model
dimensions; (2) arithmetic approximation [58, 94, 15] for intensive multiplication; (3) quantization
techniques like post-training [106, 34], quantization-aware training [37, 114, 51], and quantized
training to reduce precision [16, 93]; and (4) hardware design [18, 87, 105, 101, 35, 112] to overcome
computing bottleneck by moving computation closer to or in memory.
Aside from hardware and dataflow design, deep learning designs have primarily focused on the
number of compute operations (OPs), such as FLOPS or BOPS, as a complexity measure [33, 83]
rather than the consumed energy or memory, and particularly in inference tasks. However, it has been
demonstrated that OPs alone are inadequate and even detrimental as a measure of system complexity.
Instead, energy consumption provides a more consistent and efficient metric for computing hardware
∗
Van Minh developed the mathematical principle, designed and implemented the Boolean deep learning
framework first in C++ and later in PyTorch, validated the concept on the MNIST and CIFAR-10 benchmarks,
and led all aspects of the project. Cristian evaluated the design using computer vision benchmarks. Aymen
analyzed and evaluated the computational complexity. Louis proposed the incorporation of plasticity effects in
the Boolean optimizer and developed the convergence analysis. Ba Hien contributed to the design and evaluation
of Boolean attention mechanisms and enhanced the quality of the paper’s presentation.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

