Association of Objects May Engender Stereotypes:
Mitigating Association-Engendered Stereotypes in
Text-to-Image Generation
Junlei Zhou1 , Jiashi Gao1 , Xiangyu Zhao2 , Xin Yao3 , Xuetao Wei1∗
Southern University of Science and Technology, 2 City University of Hong Kong
3
Lingnan University
{zhoujl2023,12131101}@mail.sustech.edu.cn, xy.zhao@cityu.edu.hk
xinyao@ln.edu.hk, weixt@sustech.edu.cn

1

Abstract
Text-to-Image (T2I) has witnessed significant advancements, demonstrating superior performance for various generative tasks. However, the presence of stereotypes
in T2I introduces harmful biases that require urgent attention as the T2I technology becomes more prominent. Previous work for stereotype mitigation mainly
concentrated on mitigating stereotypes engendered with individual objects within
images, which failed to address stereotypes engendered by the association of multiple objects, referred to as Association-Engendered Stereotypes. For example,
mentioning “black people” and “houses” separately in prompts may not exhibit
stereotypes. Nevertheless, when these two objects are associated in prompts, the
association of “black people” with “poorer houses” becomes more pronounced.
To tackle this issue, we propose a novel framework, MAS, to Mitigate Associationengendered Stereotypes. This framework models the stereotype problem as a
probability distribution alignment problem, aiming to align the stereotype probability distribution of the generated image with the stereotype-free distribution. The
MAS framework primarily consists of the Prompt-Image-Stereotype CLIP (PIS
CLIP) and Sensitive Transformer. The PIS CLIP learns the association between
prompts, images, and stereotypes, which can establish the mapping of prompts to
stereotypes. The Sensitive Transformer produces the sensitive constraints, which
guide the stereotyped image distribution to align with the stereotype-free probability distribution. Moreover, recognizing that existing metrics are insufficient
for accurately evaluating association-engendered stereotypes, we propose a novel
metric, Stereotype-Distribution-Total-Variation (SDTV), to evaluate stereotypes
in T2I. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that our framework effectively
mitigates association-engendered stereotypes.

1

Introduction

Text-to-Image (T2I) (Nichol et al. [2021], Rombach et al. [2022], Ramesh et al. [2022], Saharia et al.
[2022]), based on the diffusion model, has achieved significant breakthroughs in image generation,
showing potential for various downstream tasks such as image creation, editing (Brooks et al. [2023]),
etc. In addition, the scale of T2I applications has expanded impressively. For example, the opensource stable diffusion project (Rombach et al. [2022]) has gained the favor of more than 10 million
users. As of August 2023, the number of images created through T2I has surpassed 15 billion† .
* Corresponding author.
†

https://journal.everypixel.com/ai-image-statistics

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

