A Retrospective on the Robot Air Hockey Challenge:
Benchmarking Robust, Reliable, and Safe Learning
Techniques for Real-world Robotics

Puze Liu1 2
Jonas Günster1
Niklas Funk1
Simon Gröger1
3
4
Dong Chen
Haitham Bou-Ammar
Julius Jankowski5
Ante Marić5
5
6
6
Sylvain Calinon
Andrej Orsula
Miguel Olivares-Mendez
Hongyi Zhou7
7
7
Rudolf Lioutikov
Gerhard Neumann
Amarildo Likmeta8 9
9
Amirhossein Zhalehmehrabi
Thomas Bonenfant9
Marcello Restelli9
1
3
Davide Tateo
Ziyuan Liu
Jan Peters1 2 10
air-hockey-challenge@robot-learning.net

Abstract
Machine learning methods have a groundbreaking impact in many application
domains, but their application on real robotic platforms is still limited. Despite
the many challenges associated with combining machine learning technology
with robotics, robot learning remains one of the most promising directions for
enhancing the capabilities of robots. When deploying learning-based approaches
on real robots, extra effort is required to address the challenges posed by various
real-world factors. To investigate the key factors influencing real-world deployment
and to encourage original solutions from different researchers, we organized the
Robot Air Hockey Challenge at the NeurIPS 2023 conference. We selected the
air hockey task as a benchmark, encompassing low-level robotics problems and
high-level tactics. Different from other machine learning-centric benchmarks,
participants need to tackle practical challenges in robotics, such as the sim-toreal gap, low-level control issues, safety problems, real-time requirements, and
the limited availability of real-world data. Furthermore, we focus on a dynamic
environment, removing the typical assumption of quasi-static motions of other
real-world benchmarks. The competition’s results show that solutions combining
learning-based approaches with prior knowledge outperform those relying solely on
data when real-world deployment is challenging. Our ablation study reveals which
real-world factors may be overlooked when building a learning-based solution. The
successful real-world air hockey deployment of best-performing agents sets the
foundation for future competitions and follow-up research directions.
1

Intelligent Autonomous Systems, TU Darmstadt, Germany
German Research Center for AI (DFKI)
3
Huawei German research center
4
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, London and University College London
5
Idiap Research Institute, Martigny, Switzerland and EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
6
Space Robotics Research Group (SpaceR), University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg
7
Karlsruher Institut für Technologie, Karlsruhe, Germany
8
Universita di Bologna, Bologna, Italy
9
Politecnico di Milano, Milano, Italy
10
Centre for Cognitive Science, Hessian.AI
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

