CSPG: Crossing Sparse Proximity Graphs for
Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search

Ming Yang, Yuzheng Cai, Weiguo Zheng
School of Data Science, Fudan University, China
{ yangm24, yuzhengcai21 } @m.fudan.edu.cn zhengweiguo@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
The state-of-the-art approximate nearest neighbor search (ANNS) algorithm builds
a large proximity graph on the dataset and performs a greedy beam search, which
may bring many unnecessary explorations. We develop a novel framework, namely
corssing sparse proximity graph (CSPG), based on random partitioning of the
dataset. It produces a smaller sparse proximity graph for each partition and routing
vectors that bind all the partitions. An efficient two-staged approach is designed
for exploring CSPG, with fast approaching and cross-partition expansion. We
theoretically prove that CSPG can accelerate the existing graph-based ANNS
algorithms by reducing unnecessary explorations. In addition, we conduct extensive
experiments on benchmark datasets. The experimental results confirm that the
existing graph-based methods can be significantly outperformed by incorporating
CSPG, achieving 1.5x to 2x speedups of QPS in almost all recalls.

1

Introduction

Nearest Neighbor Search (NNS) aims to find some vectors in a set of high-dimensional vectors with
the smallest distance to a query vector. It is becoming increasingly popular in various application
domains [1–7], such as information retrieval [8, 9], pattern recognition [10, 11], recommendation
systems [12, 13], and retrieval augmented generation (RAG) [14, 15]. However, it is costly to find the
exact nearest neighbors in practice, thus recent studies have focused on Approximate Nearest Neighbor
Search (ANNS), which targets efficiency while mildly relaxing accuracy constraints [16, 17].
Existing ANNS algorithms can be divided into four categories [16], including tree-based approaches
[1, 18–22], hashing-based approaches [23–27], quantization-based approaches [28–31], and graphbased approaches [6, 32–35]. Among these approaches, graph-based ANNS algorithms stand out
with the high answer quality and low latency [16], by constructing a Proximity Graph (shorted as
PG) on the given vector dataset. As shown in Figure 1, each vector is represented by a node in the
graph, and each node is connected to its nearby neighbors.
For the greedy beam search over the proximity graph, it is observed that the distance computation
dominates the overall time cost [36, 37]. Since at each step, all neighbors of the current node
are pushed into the candidate set according to the computed distance. The number of distance
computations can be calculated as σ multiplied by the number of explored nodes [6], where σ is the
average degree of the graph. Intuitively, searching within a smaller graph requires less exploration
and thus reduces the overall cost, which has been proved for a particular type of proximity graph, i.e.,
Monotonic Search Network (MSNET) [6, 38]. However, for most proximity graphs, it is very likely
to degrade the answer quality when the graph is smaller.
In this paper, we present a novel and effective framework, namely Crossing Sparse Proximity Graph
(CSPG), enabling efficient search while not sacrificing answer quality. The basic idea is to reduce the
number of explored vectors by searching in the much smaller graphs. Specifically, we randomly divide
the whole dataset into several partitions, and for each partition, we construct a proximity graph that is
smaller than the proximity graph built on the whole dataset. These partitions share a set of routing
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

