In-Context Learning of a Linear Transformer Block:
Benefits of the MLP Component
and One-Step GD Initialization

Ruiqi Zhang
UC Berkeley
rqzhang@berkeley.edu

Jingfeng Wu
UC Berkeley
uuujf@berkeley.edu

Peter L. Bartlett
UC Berkeley and Google DeepMind
peter@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study the in-context learning (ICL) ability of a Linear Transformer Block (LTB)
that combines a linear attention component and a linear multi-layer perceptron
(MLP) component. For ICL of linear regression with a Gaussian prior and a
non-zero mean, we show that LTB can achieve nearly Bayes optimal ICL risk. In
contrast, using only linear attention must incur an irreducible additive approximation error. Furthermore, we establish a correspondence between LTB and one-step
gradient descent estimators with learnable initialization (GD-β), in the sense that
every GD-β estimator can be implemented by an LTB estimator and every optimal
LTB estimator that minimizes the in-class ICL risk is effectively a GD-β estimator.
Finally, we show that GD-β estimators can be efficiently optimized with gradient
flow, despite a non-convex training objective. Our results reveal that LTB achieves
ICL by implementing GD-β, and they highlight the role of MLP layers in reducing
approximation error.

1

Introduction

The recent dramatic progress in natural language processing can be attributed in large part to the
development of large language models based on Transformers [34], such as BERT [11], LLaMA
[32], PaLM [8], and the GPT series [28, 29, 6, 25]. In some pioneering pre-trained large language
models, a new learning paradigm known as in-context learning (ICL) was observed (see, for example,
[6, 7, 24, 20]). ICL refers to the capability of a pre-trained model to solve a new task based on a few
in-context demonstrations without updating the model parameters.
A recent line of work quantifies ICL in tractable statistical learning setups such as linear regression
with a Gaussian prior (see [14, 3] and references thereafter). Specifically, an ICL model takes a
sequence (x1 , y1 , ..., xM , yM , xquery ) as input and outputs a prediction of yquery , where (xi , yi )M
i=1
and (xquery , yquery ) are independent samples from an unknown task-specific distribution (where the
task admits a prior distribution). The ICL model is pre-trained by fitting many empirical observations
of such sequence-label pairs. Experiments show that Transformers can achieve an ICL risk close to
that achieved by Bayes optimal estimators in many statistical learning tasks [14, 3].
For ICL of linear regression with a Gaussian prior, the data is generated as

e x∼N β
e ⊤ x, σ 2 ,
x ∼ N (0, H), y | β,

e is a task parameter that satisfies a Gaussian prior, β
e ∼ N 0, ψ 2 I . In this setup, [14,
where β
3] showed in experiments that Transformers can achieve nearly optimal ICL by matching the
performance of the Bayes optimal estimator, that is, an optimally tuned ridge regression. Besides,
[35] showed by construction that a single linear self-attention (LSA) can implement one-step gradient
descent with zero initialization (GD-0), offering an insight into the ICL mechanism of the Transformer.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

