Initialization is Critical to Whether Transformers Fit
Composite Functions by Reasoning or Memorizing

Zhongwang Zhang1,2 , Pengxiao Lin1,2 , Zhiwei Wang1,2 , Yaoyu Zhang1,2 , Zhi-Qin John Xu1,2,3,4,5∗
1
Institute of Natural Sciences, MOE-LSC, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Key Laboratory of Marine Intelligent Equipment and System, Ministry of Education, P.R. China
4
Shanghai Seres Information Technology Co., Ltd, Shanghai, P.R. China
5
Center for LLM, Institute for Advanced Algorithms Research, Shanghai

Abstract
Transformers have shown impressive capabilities across various tasks, but their
performance on compositional problems remains a topic of debate. In this work,
we investigate the mechanisms of how transformers behave on unseen compositional tasks. We discover that the parameter initialization scale plays a critical role
in determining whether the model learns inferential (reasoning-based) solutions,
which capture the underlying compositional primitives, or symmetric (memorybased) solutions, which simply memorize mappings without understanding the
compositional structure. By analyzing the information ﬂow and vector representations within the model, we reveal the distinct mechanisms underlying these solution types. We further ﬁnd that inferential (reasoning-based) solutions exhibit
low complexity bias, which we hypothesize is a key factor enabling them to learn
individual mappings for single anchors. We validate our conclusions on various
real-world datasets. Our ﬁndings provide valuable insights into the role of initialization scale in tuning the reasoning and memorizing ability and we propose the
initialization rate γ to be a convenient tunable hyper-parameter in common deep
learning frameworks, where 1/dγin is the standard deviation of parameters of the
layer with din input neurons.

1

Introduction

Large-scale transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) demonstrate unprecedented capabilities (Achiam
et al., 2023; Brown et al., 2020; Choi et al., 2021; Teubner et al., 2023), even noted as “sparks
of AGI" (Bubeck et al., 2023). However, their performance on compositional tasks, which are
considered a key property of human cognition (Marcus, 2003; Smolensky et al., 2022), has long been
the subject of intense debate, especially in terms of the out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization
ability. This raises critical open questions about how to faithfully interpret transformers’ capabilities
on compositional tasks. Can transformers learn the underlying compositional primitives within the
data, or do they merely learn input-output mappings? When transformers produce incorrect outputs
on compositional tasks, do their responses follow any discernible patterns or logic?
In this work, we use anchor functions (Zhang et al., 2024), a framework for creating controlled
synthetic data, to investigate how transformers generalize to unseen compositional tasks. In our
setup, each sequence contains an anchor pair, a key item, and noise items unrelated to the output
(right side of Fig. 1(a)). The single anchors are speciﬁc tokens (i.e., 1, 2, 3, 4), each corresponding
to a particular arithmetic operation (left side of Fig. 1(a)). A composite function is deﬁned as the
∗

Corresponding author: xuzhiqin@sjtu.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

