Adapting Diffusion Models for Improved Prompt
Compliance and Controllable Image Synthesis

Deepak Sridhar

Abhishek Peri

Rohith Rachala

Nuno Vasconcelos

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego
{desridha, aperi, rrachala, nvasconcelos}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in generative modeling with diffusion processes (DPs) enabled
breakthroughs in image synthesis. Despite impressive image quality, these models
have various prompt compliance problems, including low recall in generating
multiple objects, difficulty in generating text in images, and meeting constraints
like object locations and pose. For fine-grained editing and manipulation, they
also require fine-grained semantic or instance maps that are tedious to produce
manually. While prompt compliance can be enhanced by addition of loss functions
at inference, this is time consuming and does not scale to complex scenes. To
overcome these limitations, this work introduces a new family of Factor Graph
Diffusion Models (FG-DMs) that models the joint distribution of images and
conditioning variables, such as semantic, sketch, depth or normal maps via a
factor graph decomposition. This joint structure has several advantages, including
support for efficient sampling based prompt compliance schemes, which produce
images of high object recall, semi-automated fine-grained editing, text-based
editing of conditions with noise inversion, explainability at intermediate levels,
ability to produce labeled datasets for the training of downstream models such as
segmentation or depth, training with missing data, and continual learning where
new conditioning variables can be added with minimal or no modifications to
the existing structure. We propose an implementation of FG-DMs by adapting a
pre-trained Stable Diffusion (SD) model to implement all FG-DM factors, using
only COCO dataset, and show that it is effective in generating images with 15%
higher recall than SD while retaining its generalization ability. We introduce an
attention distillation loss that encourages consistency among the attention maps
of all factors, improving the fidelity of the generated conditions and image. We
also show that training FG-DMs from scratch on MM-CelebA-HQ, Cityscapes,
ADE20K, and COCO produce images of high quality (FID) and diversity (LPIPS).
Project Page: FG-DM

1

Introduction

Diffusion models (DMs) (44; 15; 10; 41) have recently shown great promise for image synthesis and
popularized text-to-image (T2I) synthesis, where an image is generated in response to a text prompt.
However, T2I synthesis offers limited control over image details. Even models trained at scale, such
as Stable Diffusion (SD) (41) or DALL·E 2 (37), have significant prompt compliance problems, such
as difficulty in generating multiple objects (7; 34), difficulty in generating text in images (26; 46), or to
consistently produce images under certain spatial constraints, like object locations and poses (56; 6; 1).
These limitations have been addressed through two main lines of research. One possibility is to
use inference-based prompt-compliance (IBPC) methods (7; 34; 40), which use loss functions that
operate on the cross-attention maps between image and prompt tokens to improve prompt compliance
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

