How Transformers Utilize Multi-Head Attention in
In-Context Learning?
A Case Study on Sparse Linear Regression

Xingwu Chen∗
The University of Hong Kong
xingwu@connect.hku.hk

Lei Zhao∗
University of Pennsylvania
leizhao7@wharton.upenn.edu

Difan Zou
The University of Hong Kong
dzou@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
Despite the remarkable success of transformer-based models in various real-world
tasks, their underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. Recent studies
have suggested that transformers can implement gradient descent as an in-context
learner for linear regression problems and have developed various theoretical analyses accordingly. However, these works mostly focus on the expressive power of
transformers by designing specific parameter constructions, lacking a comprehensive understanding of their inherent working mechanisms post-training. In this
study, we consider a sparse linear regression problem and investigate how a trained
multi-head transformer performs in-context learning. We experimentally discover
that the utilization of multi-heads exhibits different patterns across layers: multiple
heads are utilized and essential in the first layer, while usually one single head
is dominantly utilized for subsequent layers. We provide a theoretical rationale
for this observation: the first layer undertakes data preprocessing on the context
examples, and the following layers execute simple optimization steps based on the
preprocessed context. Moreover, we prove that such a preprocess-then-optimize
algorithm can outperform naive gradient descent and ridge regression algorithms,
which is also supported by our further experiments. Our findings offer insights
into the benefits of multi-head attention and contribute to understanding the more
intricate mechanisms hidden within trained transformers.

1

Introduction

Transformers [45] have emerged as a dominant force in machine learning, particularly in natural
language processing. Transformer-based large language models such as Llama [42, 43] and the GPT
family [36, 2, 12, 38], equipped with multiple heads and layers, showcasing exceptional learning
and reasoning capabilities. One of the fundamental capabilities is in-context learning [12, 52], i.e.,
transformer can solve new tasks after prompting with a few context examples, without any further
parameter training. Understanding their working mechanisms and developing reasonable theoretical
explanations for their performance is vital and has gathered considerable research attention.
Numerous studies have been conducted to explore the expressive power of transformers, aiming to
showcase their ability to tackle challenging tasks related to memorization [33], reasoning [24, 8,
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

