SampDetox: Black-box Backdoor Defense via
Perturbation-based Sample Detoxification

Yanxin Yang1 , Chentao Jia1 , DengKe Yan1 , Ming Hu2 ∗ , Tianlin Li3 , Xiaofei Xie2 ,
Xian Wei1 , Mingsong Chen1 ∗
1
MoE Eng. Research Center of SW/HW Co-Design Tech. and App., East China Normal University
2
Singapore Management University, 3 Nanyang Technological University
{52275902023, 51265902040, 51265902053}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn,
hu.ming.work@gmail.com, tianlin001@ntu.edu.sg, xfxie@smu.edu.sg,
{xwei, mschen}@sei.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
The advancement of Machine Learning has enabled the widespread deployment of
Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS) applications. However, the untrustworthy
nature of third-party ML services poses backdoor threats. Existing defenses in
MLaaS are limited by their reliance on training samples or white-box model analysis, highlighting the need for a black-box backdoor purification method. In our
paper, we attempt to use diffusion models for purification by introducing noise in a
forward diffusion process to destroy backdoors and recover clean samples through
a reverse generative process. However, since a higher noise also destroys the
semantics of the original samples, it still results in a low restoration performance.
To investigate the effectiveness of noise in eliminating different types of backdoors,
we conducted a preliminary study, which demonstrates that backdoors with low
visibility can be easily destroyed by lightweight noise and those with high visibility
need to be destroyed by high noise but can be easily detected. Based on the study,
we propose SampDetox, which strategically combines lightweight and high noise.
SampDetox applies weak noise to eliminate low-visibility backdoors and compares
the structural similarity between the recovered and original samples to localize
high-visibility backdoors. Intensive noise is then applied to these localized areas,
destroying the high-visibility backdoors while preserving global semantic information. As a result, detoxified samples can be used for inference even by poisoned
models. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of SampDetox
in defending against various state-of-the-art backdoor attacks. The source code of
this work is publicly available at https://github.com/easywood0204/SampDetox.

1

Introduction

With Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies showing advantages in tasks such as image classification and target detection, they are widely used in safety- and security-critical applications such
as autonomous processing [1, 2], IoT System [3, 4] and health-care [5, 6]. As Machine Learning
as a Service (MLaaS) [7, 8, 9] becomes increasingly popular, AI applications are relying on AI
services provided by third parties. However, since users cannot guarantee the trustworthiness of
service providers, they face serious threats of backdoor attacks [10, 11, 12]. Typically, adversaries
inject backdoors into deep models on numerous occasions, especially when the training samples are
collected from unreliable sources, or the pre-trained deep models are obtained from untrusted third
parties. During the inference phase, when fed clean samples, the backdoored models behave normally
∗

Ming Hu and Mingsong Chen are the corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

