Shaving Weights with Occam’s Razor:
Bayesian Sparsification for Neural Networks
using the Marginal Likelihood
Rayen Dhahri1,2 , Alexander Immer3,4 , Betrand Charpentier5 , Stephan Günnemann1,2 , and
Vincent Fortuin1,2,6
1

Department of Computer Science, Technical University of Munich
2
Munich Center for Machine Learning
3
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
4
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
5
Pruna AI, Munich
6
Helmholtz AI, Munich

Abstract
Neural network sparsification is a promising avenue to save computational time
and memory costs, especially in an age where many successful AI models are
becoming too large to naïvely deploy on consumer hardware. While much work
has focused on different weight pruning criteria, the overall sparsifiability of the
network, i.e., its capacity to be pruned without quality loss, has often been overlooked. We present Sparsifiability via the Marginal likelihood (SpaM), a pruning
framework that highlights the effectiveness of using the Bayesian marginal likelihood in conjunction with sparsity-inducing priors for making neural networks more
sparsifiable. Our approach implements an automatic Occam’s razor that selects
the most sparsifiable model that still explains the data well, both for structured
and unstructured sparsification. In addition, we demonstrate that the pre-computed
posterior precision from the Laplace approximation can be re-used to define a cheap
pruning criterion, which outperforms many existing (more expensive) approaches.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework, especially at high sparsity
levels, across a range of different neural network architectures and datasets.

1

Introduction

The availability of large datasets and powerful computing infrastructure has fueled the growth of deep
learning, enabling the training of increasingly complex neural networks (NNs). While catalyzing
performance gains across various domains, such as image recognition [1] and text generation [2],
this development has amplified the challenge of over-parameterization [3, 4] and raised concerns
about the increase in model size and computational cost. Over-parameterized neural networks present
significant deployment challenges, particularly in hardware-constrained environments [5, 6]. This has
sparked the research field of NN sparsification or pruning, where the goal is to remove a (potentially
large) number of parameters from a trained network to make it smaller and ultimately cheaper to
apply [7, 8]. However, most existing research in this domain has focused on the question of finding
better pruning criteria, that is, scoring functions that decide which parameters to prune away [9, 4, 10].
This ignores the challenge that many trained networks are not inherently sparsifiable, i.e., they resist
Correspondence to rayen.dhahri@tum.de
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

