Introspective Planning: Aligning Robots’ Uncertainty
with Inherent Task Ambiguity

Kaiqu Liang

Zixu Zhang Jaime Fernández Fisac
Princeton University
{kl2471,zixuz,jfisac}@princeton.edu

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) exhibit advanced reasoning skills, enabling robots
to comprehend natural language instructions and strategically plan high-level actions through proper grounding. However, LLM hallucination may result in robots
confidently executing plans that are misaligned with user goals or even unsafe in
critical scenarios. Additionally, inherent ambiguity in natural language instructions
can introduce uncertainty into the LLM’s reasoning and planning processes. We
propose introspective planning, a systematic approach that align LLM’s uncertainty
with the inherent ambiguity of the task. Our approach constructs a knowledge
base containing introspective reasoning examples as post-hoc rationalizations of
human-selected safe and compliant plans, which are retrieved during deployment.
Evaluations on three tasks, including a newly introduced safe mobile manipulation
benchmark, demonstrate that introspection substantially improves both compliance and safety over state-of-the-art LLM-based planning methods. Furthermore,
we empirically show that introspective planning, in combination with conformal
prediction, achieves tighter confidence bounds, maintaining statistical success guarantees while minimizing unnecessary user clarification requests. The webpage and
code are accessible at https://introplan.github.io.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs), when pre-trained on internet-scale text corpora, demonstrate
emergent capabilities that extend far beyond mere text comprehension and generation as their
scale increases [5, 40]. Through prompting [9] and in-context learning [26], these models have
shown remarkable adaptability ranging from answering complex questions and solving mathematical
problems to generating computer code and engaging in sophisticated reasoning processes during
inference [36]. Robots interacting with humans can leverage the capabilities of LLMs to interpret task
instructions in natural language, employ common sense reasoning to understand their environment,
and devise high-level action plans grounded in the capabilities and affordances of the robot [1, 21].
The reliability of LLM outputs has direct implications downstream robotics tasks. Language models
are prone to hallucinations [13], which cause models to generate plans that are at odds with commonsense knowledge, not executable by the robot, or incompatible with the environment constraints [48].
For example, if a human user asks a robot to bake some bread in a kitchen containing an oven and
varied cookware, the robot’s LLM may generate a decision to use a plastic tray without considering
the risk of it melting. Furthermore, possible ambiguities in the user’s request can also introduce
uncertainty into the LLM’s reasoning and planning [37]. In our example, while multiple containers
are suitable for the stated task, biases inherited from training data may tilt action generation towards
certain options. Therefore, the robot needs to calibrate its uncertainty quantification and seek further
communication with users when ambiguities are identified.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

