Temporally Consistent Atmospheric Turbulence
Mitigation with Neural Representations
Haoming Cai* 1 , Jingxi Chen∗ 1 , Brandon Y. Feng2 , Weiyun Jiang3 , Mingyang Xie1 ,
Kevin Zhang1 , Cornelia Fermuller1 , Yiannis Aloimonos1 , Ashok Veeraraghavan3 ,
Christopher A. Metzler† 1
1

University of Maryland, 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 3 Rice University

Abstract
Atmospheric turbulence, caused by random fluctuations in the atmosphere’s refractive index, introduces complex spatio-temporal distortions in imagery captured
at long range. Video Atmospheric Turbulence Mitigation (ATM) aims to restore
videos affected by these distortions. However, existing video ATM methods,
both supervised and self-supervised, struggle to maintain temporally consistent
mitigation across frames, leading to visually incoherent results. This limitation
arises from the stochastic nature of atmospheric turbulence, which varies across
space and time. Inspired by the observation that atmospheric turbulence induces
high-frequency temporal variations, we propose ConVRT, a novel framework for
consistent video restoration through turbulence. ConVRT introduces a neural video
representation that explicitly decouples spatial and temporal information into a spatial content field and a temporal deformation field, enabling targeted regularization
of the network’s temporal representation capability. By leveraging the low-pass
filtering properties of the regularized temporal representations, ConVRT effectively mitigates turbulence-induced temporal frequency variations and promotes
temporal consistency. Furthermore, our training framework seamlessly integrates
supervised pre-training on synthetic turbulence data with self-supervised learning
on real-world videos, significantly improving the temporally consistent mitigation
of ATM methods on diverse real-world data. More information can be found on
our project page: https://convrt-2024.github.io/

1

Introduction

Atmospheric turbulence poses a significant challenge in long-range imaging applications, causing
unique distortions in captured videos. These turbulence-distorted videos suffer from spatially-varying
and time-varying degradations, including blur and warping effects, due to the random fluctuations
of the refractive index in the atmosphere. These distortions significantly hinder the performance
of computer vision applications like object detection, recognition, and surveillance systems by
obscuring the true shapes, edges, and visual details of objects. Therefore, this work focuses on Video
Atmospheric Turbulence Mitigation (ATM), aiming to recover videos degraded by these atmospheric
distortions.
Mathematically, the process of capturing video through atmospheric turbulence can be modeled by
the following equation
∗

Equal contributions † Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

