UniBench: Visual Reasoning Requires Rethinking
Vision-Language Beyond Scaling

Haider Al-Tahan1 , Quentin Garrido1,2 , Randall Balestriero3 ,
Diane Bouchacourt1 , Caner Hazirbas1 , Mark Ibrahim1
1
Meta FAIR, 2 Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, LIGM, 3 Brown University

Abstract
Significant research efforts have been made to scale and improve vision-language
model (VLM) training approaches. Yet, with an ever-growing number of benchmarks, researchers are tasked with the heavy burden of implementing each protocol, bearing a non-trivial computational cost, and making sense of how all these
benchmarks translate into meaningful axes of progress. To facilitate a systematic
evaluation of VLM progress, we introduce UniBench: a unified implementation
of 50+ VLM benchmarks spanning a range of carefully categorized vision-centric
capabilities from object recognition to spatial awareness, counting, and much
more. We showcase the utility of UniBench for measuring progress by evaluating
nearly 60 publicly available vision-language models, trained on scales of up to
12.8B samples. We find that while scaling training data or model size can boost
many vision-language model capabilities, scaling offers little benefit for reasoning or relations. Surprisingly, we also discover today’s best VLMs struggle on
simple digit recognition and counting tasks, e.g. MNIST, which much simpler
networks can solve. Where scale falls short, we find that more precise interventions, such as data quality or tailored-learning objectives offer more promise. For
practitioners, we also offer guidance on selecting a suitable VLM for a given
application. Finally, we release an easy-to-run UniBench code-base with the
full set of 50+ benchmarks and comparisons across 59 models as well as a distilled, representative set of benchmarks that runs in 5 minutes on a single GPU.
UniBench with model evaluations on all benchmarks are provided as a toolbox at:
https://github.com/facebookresearch/unibench

1

Introduction

The growing investment in vision-language models (VLMs), capable of a range of open-world
multimodal tasks, has spurred the development of numerous benchmarks. Although in principle a
more thorough set of evaluations is welcome, the ever-growing number of benchmarks has resulted
in a complex, fragmented landscape for evaluation. Researchers are tasked with the heavy burden
of implementing the protocol for each benchmark and making sense of how all these benchmarks
translate into meaningful axes of progress. Of course, running such a large number of benchmarks
also carries a non-trivial computational burden. Consequently, many new models are evaluated only
on a subset of available benchmarks. When benchmarks are omitted, the research community is faced
with blind spots in model strengths and weaknesses. Additionally, comparing the performance of one
model versus others becomes challenging as the underlying set of benchmarks is not comparable.
Ultimately, drawing well-founded conclusions about the best strategies to advance VLMs in this
fragmented landscape of benchmarks is a challenge.
To help researchers navigate this overwhelming landscape of benchmarks and ease the burden of
systematically evaluating VLMs, we introduce UniBench. In UniBench we implement 53 vision38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

