Elliptical Attention

Stefan K. Nielsen∗
FPT Software AI Center
Ha Noi, Vietnam
stefannvkp@fpt.com

Laziz U. Abdullaev∗
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
Singapore 119077, Singapore
laziz.abdullaev@u.nus.edu

Rachel S.Y. Teo
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
Singapore 119077, Singapore
rachel.teo@u.nus.edu

Tan M. Nguyen
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
Singapore 119077, Singapore
tanmn@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Pairwise dot-product self-attention is key to the success of transformers that achieve
state-of-the-art performance across a variety of applications in language and vision. This dot-product self-attention computes attention weights among the input
tokens using Euclidean distance, which makes the model prone to representation
collapse and vulnerable to contaminated samples. In this paper, we propose using
a Mahalanobis distance metric for computing the attention weights to stretch the
underlying feature space in directions of high contextual relevance. In particular,
we define a hyper-ellipsoidal neighborhood around each query to increase the
attention weights of the tokens lying in the contextually important directions. We
term this novel class of attention Elliptical Attention. Our Elliptical Attention
provides two benefits: 1) reducing representation collapse, and 2) enhancing the
model’s robustness as Elliptical Attention pays more attention to contextually
relevant information, rather than focusing on some small subset of informative
features. We empirically demonstrate the advantages of Elliptical Attention over
the baseline dot-product attention and state-of-the-art attention methods on various practical tasks, including object classification, image segmentation, and language modeling across different data modalities. The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/stefvk/Elliptical-Attention.

1

Introduction

Attention mechanisms and transformers [82] have achieved state of the art performance across a wide
variety of tasks in machine learning [27, 35, 75] and, in particular, within natural language processing
[1, 2, 13, 65, 12], computer vision [16, 39, 78, 66, 62], and reinforcement learning [25, 5]. They
have also demonstrated strong performance in knowledge transfer from pretraining tasks to various
downstream tasks with weak or no supervision [63, 64, 15]. At the core of these models is the dotproduct self-attention mechanism, which learns self-alignment between tokens in an input sequence
by estimating the relative importance of each token with respect to all others. The mechanism then
transforms each token into a weighted average of the feature representations of the other tokens
with weights proportional to the learned importance scores. The relative importance scores capture
contextual information among tokens and are key to the success of the transformer architecture
[83, 76, 8, 59, 36, 55].
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to stefannvkp@fpt.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

