Finding Transformer Circuits with Edge Pruning

Adithya Bhaskar
Alexander Wettig
Dan Friedman
Danqi Chen
Princeton Language and Intelligence (PLI), Princeton University
adithyab@princeton.edu
{awettig, dfriedman, danqic}cs.@princeton.edu

Abstract
The path to interpreting a language model often proceeds via analysis of circuits—
sparse computational subgraphs of the model that capture specific aspects of
its behavior. Recent work has automated the task of discovering circuits. Yet,
these methods have practical limitations, as they rely either on inefficient search
algorithms or inaccurate approximations. In this paper, we frame automated circuit
discovery as an optimization problem and propose Edge Pruning as an effective
and scalable solution. Edge Pruning leverages gradient-based pruning techniques,
but instead of removing neurons or components, it prunes the edges between
components. Our method finds circuits in GPT-2 that use less than half the number
of edges compared to circuits found by previous methods while being equally
faithful to the full model predictions on standard circuit-finding tasks. Edge Pruning
is efficient even with as many as 100K examples, outperforming previous methods
in speed and producing substantially better circuits. It also perfectly recovers the
ground-truth circuits in two models compiled with Tracr. Thanks to its efficiency,
we scale Edge Pruning to CodeLlama-13B, a model over 100× the scale that prior
methods operate on. We use this setting for a case study comparing the mechanisms
behind instruction prompting and in-context learning. We find two circuits with
more than 99.96% sparsity that match the performance of the full model and reveal
that the mechanisms in the two settings overlap substantially. Our case study shows
that Edge Pruning is a practical and scalable tool for interpretability and sheds light
on behaviors that only emerge in large models.1

1

Introduction

Mechanistic interpretability strives to understand models via bottom-up descriptions of their components (e.g., attention heads and MLPs in Transformers [Vaswani et al., 2017]). This typically
proceeds via the identification and analysis of a circuit [Olah et al., 2020, Elhage et al., 2021]—a
sparse computational subgraph of the model that captures the aspects of its behavior we wish to
study. The arduous process of identifying circuits (e.g., Wang et al. [2023]) was recently automated
by ACDC [Conmy et al., 2023] and EAP [Syed et al., 2023]. However, ACDC uses an expensive
greedy search that ablates each edge to estimate its importance. It cannot scale to datasets beyond a
few hundred examples or to billion-parameter models. EAP, on the other hand, uses gradient-based
linear approximations of activation patching to estimate the importance of all edges simultaneously.
While fast, these first-order approximations often sacrifice faithfulness to the full model. Besides,
this approach ignores the impact of the presence/absence of other edges on the score.
In this paper, we frame circuit discovery as an optimization problem and tackle it via gradient-based
pruning, rather than discrete search or first-order approximations. As such, we adapt pruning for
the goal of circuit discovery instead of model compression. Rather than components, we prune the
1

We release our code and data publicly at https://github.com/princeton-nlp/Edge-Pruning.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

