Approximately Equivariant Neural Processes

Matthew Ashman∗
University of Cambridge
mca39@cam.ac.uk

Cristiana Diaconu∗
University of Cambridge
cdd43@cam.ac.uk

Wessel Bruinsma
Microsoft Research AI for Science
wessel.p.bruinsma@gmail.com

Adrian Weller
University of Cambridge
The Alan Turing Institute
aw665@cam.ac.uk

Richard E. Turner
University of Cambridge
Microsoft Research AI for Science
The Alan Turing Institute
ret23@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Equivariant deep learning architectures exploit symmetries in learning problems to
improve the sample efficiency of neural-network-based models and their ability to
generalise. However, when modelling real-world data, learning problems are often
not exactly equivariant, but only approximately. For example, when estimating the
global temperature field from weather station observations, local topographical
features like mountains break translation equivariance. In these scenarios, it is
desirable to construct architectures that can flexibly depart from exact equivariance
in a data-driven way. Current approaches to achieving this cannot usually be applied
out-of-the-box to any architecture and symmetry group. In this paper, we develop
a general approach to achieving this using existing equivariant architectures. Our
approach is agnostic to both the choice of symmetry group and model architecture,
making it widely applicable. We consider the use of approximately equivariant
architectures in neural processes (NPs), a popular family of meta-learning models.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on a number of synthetic and realworld regression experiments, showing that approximately equivariant NP models
can outperform both their non-equivariant and strictly equivariant counterparts.

1

Introduction

The development of equivariant deep learning architectures has spearheaded many advancements in
machine learning, including CNNs [LeCun et al., 1989], group equivariant CNNs [Cohen and Welling,
2016a, Finzi et al., 2020], transformers [Vaswani et al., 2017], DeepSets [Zaheer et al., 2017], and
GNNs [Scarselli et al., 2008]. When appropriate, equivariances provide useful inductive biases that
can drastically improve sample complexity [Mei et al., 2021] and generalisation capabilities [Elesedy
and Zaidi, 2021, Bulusu et al., 2021, Petrache and Trivedi, 2023] by exploiting symmetries present in
the data. Yet, real-world data are seldom strictly equivariant. As an example, consider modelling daily
precipitation across space and time. Such data may be close to translation equivariant—and therefore
translation equivariance serves as a useful inductive bias—however, it is clear that it is not strictly
translation equivariant due to geographical and seasonal variations. More generally, whilst there are
aspects of modelling problems which are universal and exhibit symmetries such as equivariance (e.g.
atmospheric physics) there are often unknown local factors (e.g. precise local topography) which
break these symmetries and which the models do not have access to. It is thus desirable for the
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

