Auditing Local Explanations is Hard

Robi Bhattacharjee
University of Tübingen and Tübingen AI Center
robi.bhattacharjee@wsii.uni-tuebingen.de
Ulrike von Luxburg
University of Tübingen and Tübingen AI Center
ulrike.luxburg@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
In sensitive contexts, providers of machine learning algorithms are increasingly
required to give explanations for their algorithms’ decisions. However, explanation
receivers might not trust the provider, who potentially could output misleading or
manipulated explanations. In this work, we investigate an auditing framework in
which a third-party auditor or a collective of users attempts to sanity-check explanations: they can query model decisions and the corresponding local explanations,
pool all the information received, and then check for basic consistency properties.
We prove upper and lower bounds on the amount of queries that are needed for
an auditor to succeed within this framework. Our results show that successful
auditing requires a potentially exorbitant number of queries – particularly in high
dimensional cases. Our analysis also reveals that a key property is the “locality” of
the provided explanations — a quantity that so far has not been paid much attention
to in the explainability literature. Looking forward, our results suggest that for
complex high-dimensional settings, merely providing a pointwise prediction and
explanation could be insufficient, as there is no way for the users to verify that the
provided explanations are not completely made-up.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models are increasingly used to support decision making in sensitive contexts
such as credit lending, hiring decisions, admittance to social benefits, crime prevention, and so on.
In all these cases, it would be highly desirable for the customers/applicants/suspects to be able to
judge whether the model’s predictions or decisions are “trustworthy”. New AI regulation such as
the European Union’s AI Act can even legally require this. One approach that is often held up
as a potential way to achieve transparency and trust is to provide local explanations, where every
prediction/decision comes with a human-understandable explanation for this particular outcome (e.g.,
LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016), SHAP (Lundberg and Lee, 2017), or Anchors (Ribeiro et al., 2018)).
However, in many real-world scenarios, the explanation receivers may not necessarily trust the
explanation providers (Bordt et al., 2022). Imagine a company that uses machine learning tools to
assist in screening job applications. Because the company is well-advised to demonstrate fair and
equitable hiring, it is plausible that it might bias its explanations towards depicting these properties.
And this is easy to achieve: the company is under full control of the machine learning model and the
setup of the explanation algorithm, and prior literature (Ghorbani et al., 2019; Dombrowski et al.,
2019) has shown that current explainability tools can be manipulated to output desirable explanations.
This motivates the question: what restrictions or procedures could be applied to prevent such
explanation cheating, and more specifically, what are ways to verify that the provided explanations
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

