Voxel Mamba: Group-Free State Space Models for
Point Cloud based 3D Object Detection

Guowen Zhang1,2 , Lue Fan3 , Chenhang He1 , Zhen Lei2,3,4 ,
Zhaoxiang Zhang2,3,4,∗ , Lei Zhang1,∗
1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI, CAS
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
guowen.zhang@connect.polyu.hk, {csche, cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk
{lue.fan, zlei, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Serialization-based methods, which serialize the 3D voxels and group them into
multiple sequences before inputting to Transformers, have demonstrated their
effectiveness in 3D object detection. However, serializing 3D voxels into 1D
sequences will inevitably sacrifice the voxel spatial proximity. Such an issue
is hard to be addressed by enlarging the group size with existing serializationbased methods due to the quadratic complexity of Transformers with feature sizes.
Inspired by the recent advances of state space models (SSMs), we present a Voxel
SSM, termed as Voxel Mamba, which employs a group-free strategy to serialize
the whole space of voxels into a single sequence. The linear complexity of SSMs
encourages our group-free design, alleviating the loss of spatial proximity of
voxels. To further enhance the spatial proximity, we propose a Dual-scale SSM
Block to establish a hierarchical structure, enabling a larger receptive field in the 1D
serialization curve, as well as more complete local regions in 3D space. Moreover,
we implicitly apply window partition under the group-free framework by positional
encoding, which further enhances spatial proximity by encoding voxel positional
information. Our experiments on Waymo Open Dataset and nuScenes dataset
show that Voxel Mamba not only achieves higher accuracy than state-of-the-art
methods, but also demonstrates significant advantages in computational efficiency.
The source code is available at https://github.com/gwenzhang/Voxel-Mamba.

1

Introduction

LiDAR-based 3D object detection from point clouds plays an important role in applications of
autonomous driving [19, 4], virtual reality [47], and robots [45]. The sparsely, unevenly and irregularly
distributed point cloud data make the efficient and effective 3D object detection a very challenging
task. To address these long-standing challenges, researchers have recently proposed several strategies
to improve the model architecture. One strategy is to switch from PointNet-based models [49, 79, 56]
to sparse convolutional neural network (SpCNN)-based models [70, 54, 10, 14, 55, 27] in order for
more effective feature extraction. However, the sparse convolution is unfriendly for deployment and
optimization, requiring tremendous engineering efforts. Therefore, another strategy is to switch from
SpCNN to serialization-based Transformers to address this issue [13, 65, 38, 69, 42]. These methods
usually group non-empty 3D voxels into multiple short sequences by serialization techniques such as
∗

Corresponding Authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

