Spider2-V: How Far Are Multimodal Agents From
Automating Data Science and Engineering Workflows?

Ruisheng Cao∗12 Fangyu Lei 1 Haoyuan Wu 1 Jixuan Chen 1 Yeqiao Fu 1 Hongcheng Gao 1
Xinzhuang Xiong 1 Hanchong Zhang 2 Yuchen Mao 1 Wenjing Hu 1 Tianbao Xie 1 Hongshen Xu 2
Danyang Zhang 12 Sida Wang Ruoxi Sun 3 Pengcheng Yin 4 Caiming Xiong 5 Ansong Ni 6
Qian Liu 7 Victor Zhong 8 Lu Chen 2 Kai Yu 2 Tao Yu 1
1

3

The University of Hong Kong 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Google Cloud AI Research 4 Google DeepMind 5 Salesforce Research
6
Yale University 7 Sea AI Lab 8 University of Waterloo

ruishengcao@gmail.com

tyu@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
Data science and engineering workflows often span multiple stages, from warehousing to orchestration, using tools like BigQuery, dbt, and Airbyte. As vision
language models (VLMs) advance in multimodal understanding and code generation, VLM-based agents could potentially automate these workflows by generating
SQL queries, Python code, and GUI operations. This automation can improve the
productivity of experts while democratizing access to large-scale data analysis. In
this paper, we introduce Spider2-V, the first multimodal agent benchmark focusing
on professional data science and engineering workflows, featuring 494 real-world
tasks in authentic computer environments and incorporating 20 enterprise-level
professional applications. These tasks, derived from real-world use cases, evaluate
the ability of a multimodal agent to perform data-related tasks by writing code
and managing the GUI in enterprise data software systems. To balance realistic
simulation with evaluation simplicity, we devote significant effort to developing
automatic configurations for task setup and carefully crafting evaluation metrics
for each task. Furthermore, we supplement multimodal agents with comprehensive
documents of these enterprise data software systems. Our empirical evaluation
reveals that existing state-of-the-art LLM/VLM-based agents do not reliably automate full data workflows (14.0% success). Even with step-by-step guidance, these
agents still underperform in tasks that require fine-grained, knowledge-intensive
GUI actions (16.2%) and involve remote cloud-hosted workspaces (10.6%). We
hope that Spider2-V paves the way for autonomous multimodal agents to transform
the automation of data science and engineering workflow. Our code and data are
available at https://spider2-v.github.io.

1

Introduction

Data science and engineering pipelines usually rely on professional data software systems such
as BigQuery, dbt, and Airbyte to acquire, process, and orchestrate large-scale data. Utilizing
these enterprise systems involves writing SQL and Python code, as well as frequent and repetitive
graphical user interface (GUI) controls, which can be complex even for experienced data scientists and engineers. With rapid advances in large language models (LLMs) and vision language
models (VLMs), LLM/VLM-based autonomous agents have the potential to automate these work∗

Work done while interning at the University of Hong Kong.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

