Fractal Patterns May Illuminate the Success of
Next-Token Prediction
Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin∗
Google Deepmind
Zürich, Switzerland
ibomohsin@google.com

Vinh Q. Tran
Google Deepmind
New York, USA
vqtran@google.com

Mostafa Dehghani
Google Deepmind
Mountain View, USA
dehghani@google.com

Abstract
We study the fractal structure of language, aiming to provide a precise formalism
for quantifying properties that may have been previously suspected but not formally
shown. We establish that language is: (1) self-similar, exhibiting complexities at
all levels of granularity, with no particular characteristic context length, and (2)
long-range dependent (LRD), with a Hurst parameter of approximately H = 0.70±
0.09. Based on these findings, we argue that short-term patterns/dependencies
in language, such as in paragraphs, mirror the patterns/dependencies over larger
scopes, like entire documents. This may shed some light on how next-token
prediction can capture the structure of text across multiple levels of granularity,
from words and clauses to broader contexts and intents. In addition, we carry out an
extensive analysis across different domains and architectures, showing that fractal
parameters are robust. Finally, we demonstrate that the tiny variations in fractal
parameters seen across LLMs improve upon perplexity-based bits-per-byte (BPB)
in predicting their downstream performance. We hope these findings offer a fresh
perspective on language and the mechanisms underlying the success of LLMs.

1

Introduction

How does the training objective of predicting the next token in large language models (LLMs) yield
remarkable capabilities? Consider, for instance, the two models: Gemini [5] and GPT4 [50]. These
models have demonstrated capabilities that extend to quantitative reasoning, summarization, and even
coding, which has led some researchers to ponder if there was more to intelligence than “on-the-fly
improvisation” [11]. While providing a satisfactory explanation is a difficult endeavor, a possible
insight can be drawn from fractals and self-similarity. We elucidate the connection in this work.
Self-Similarity. Self-similar processes were introduced by Kolmogorov in 1940 [36]. The notion
garnered considerable attention during the late 1960s, thanks to the extensive works of Mandelbrot
and his peers [19]. Broadly speaking, an object is called “self-similar” if it is invariant across scales,
meaning its statistical or geometric properties stay consistent irrespective of the magnification applied
to it (see Figure 1). Nature and geometry furnish us with many such patterns, such as coastlines,
snowflakes, the Cantor set and the Kuch curve. Despite the distinction, self-similarity is often
discussed in the context of “fractals,” another term popularized by Mandelbrot in his seminal book
The Fractal Geometry of Nature [45]. However, the two concepts are different [26]. See Section 2.
In language, in particular, there have been studies arguing for the presence of a self-similar structure.
Nevertheless, due to computational constraints, it was not feasible to holistically model the joint
probability distribution of language. As such, linguists often resorted to rudimentary approximations
in their arguments, such as by substituting a word with its frequency or length [9], or by focusing on
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

