Optimal ablation for interpretability

Maximilian Li
Harvard University

Lucas Janson
Harvard University

Abstract
Interpretability studies often involve tracing the flow of information through machine learning models to identify specific model components that perform relevant
computations for tasks of interest. Prior work quantifies the importance of a model
component on a particular task by measuring the impact of performing ablation on
that component, or simulating model inference with the component disabled. We
propose a new method, optimal ablation (OA), and show that OA-based component
importance has theoretical and empirical advantages over measuring importance
via other ablation methods. We also show that OA-based component importance
can benefit several downstream interpretability tasks, including circuit discovery,
localization of factual recall, and latent prediction.

1

Introduction

Interpretability work in machine learning (ML) seeks to develop tools that make models more
intelligible to humans in order to better monitor model behavior and predict failure modes. Early
work in interpretability sought to identify relationships between model outputs and input features
(Ribeiro et al., 2016; Covert et al., 2022), but with only black-box query access to observe inputs
and outputs, it can be difficult to evaluate a model’s internal logic. Hence, recent interpretability
work often seeks to take advantage of access to an ML model’s intermediate computations to gain
insights about its decision-making, focusing on deciphering internal units like neurons, weights, and
activations (Räuker et al., 2022). In addition to finding associations between latent representations
and semantic concepts (Bau et al., 2017; Mu and Andreas, 2021; Burns et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023;
Gurnee and Tegmark, 2024), interpretability studies aim to investigate how intermediate results are
used in later computation and identify specific model components that extract relevant information or
perform necessary computation to produce low loss on particular inputs.
A key instrumental goal in interpretability is quantifying the importance of a particular model
component for prediction. Studies often measure a component’s importance by performing ablation
on that component and comparing model performance with and without the component ablated.
Ablating a component typically entails replacing its value with a counterfactual value during inference,
sometimes referred to as “activation patching.” However, the details vary greatly and there is a lack of
consensus on best practices (Heimersheim and Nanda, 2024). For example, Meng et al. (2022) adds
Gaussian noise to ablated components’ values, while Geva et al. (2023) replaces these values with
zeros, and Ghorbani and Zou (2020) replaces them with their means over the training distribution.
In this paper, we present optimal ablation (OA), a new method that sets a component’s value
to a constant that minimizes the expected loss of the ablated model. In section 2, we introduce
OA and show that it is, in a certain sense, a canonical choice of ablation method for measuring
component importance. We then show that using OA produces meaningful improvements for several
common downstream applications of measuring component importance. In section 3, we apply
OA to algorithmic circuit discovery (Conmy et al., 2023), or the identification of a sparse subset
of components sufficient for performance on a subset of the training distribution. We demonstrate
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

