ProvNeRF: Modeling per Point Provenance in NeRFs
as a Stochastic Field
Kiyohiro Nakayama1
Mikaela Angelina Uy1,2
Yang You1
Ke Li3
Leonida J. Guibas1
1
2
3
Stanford University
Nvidia
Simon Fraser University
w4756677@stanford.edu
keli@sfu.ca
{mikacuy, yangyou, guibas}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Neural radiance fields (NeRFs) have gained popularity with multiple works showing promising results across various applications. However, to the best of our
knowledge, existing works do not explicitly model the distribution of training
camera poses, or consequently the triangulation quality, a key factor affecting
reconstruction quality dating back to classical vision literature. We close this gap
with ProvNeRF, an approach that models the provenance for each point – i.e., the
locations where it is likely visible – of NeRFs as a stochastic field. We achieve
this by extending implicit maximum likelihood estimation (IMLE) to functional
space with an optimizable objective. We show that modeling per-point provenance
during the NeRF optimization enriches the model with information on triangulation
leading to improvements in novel view synthesis and uncertainty estimation under
the challenging sparse, unconstrained view setting against competitive baselines1 .

1

Introduction

Neural radiance fields (NeRFs) [42], allowing for learning 3D scenes given only 2D images, have
grown in popularity in recent years. It has shown promise in many different applications such as
novel view synthesis [4, 6], depth estimation [14], robotics [22, 1], localization [36, 38], etc. Existing
literature [11, 15, 45] show that the quality of NeRF reconstruction is correlated with the selection of
training camera poses. Similar correlations are observed in the classical literature too, triangulation is
highly dependent on camera poses [47, 44, 3], which greatly influences the reconstruction quality.
One common and important setting in computer vision literature [2, 37, 40, 16] is the sparse view [18]
setting in unconstrained [53] environments, and triangulation is even more critical, affecting the
reconstruction quality as limited input views make the system more sensitive to noise.
Despite the correlation between triangulation and reconstruction quality, to the best of our knowledge,
existing works do not explicitly model the former when optimizing the latter. In this work, we address
this gap in the literature by modeling for each point the locations where it is likely visible. We dub
this as the provenances of a point. Modeling and learning per-point provenance can help NeRF
understand how the training cameras are distributed in space, which inherently links it to triangulation
and reconstruction quality.
However, determining the provenances of a point x without the underlying geometry is not straightforward as many factors influence the visibility of each point in the reconstructed geometry. For
example, the literature on stereo matching [44, 47] has extensively studied the influences of camera
locations on 3D reconstruction. One such well-known challenge arises when selecting the baseline of
a pair of cameras in a stereo system. As shown in Fig. 2, points’ visibility can suffer from different
sets of errors when the length of the camera pair’s baseline changes. For NeRFs, the dependence
1

Code will be available at https://github.com/georgeNakayama/ProvNeRF.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

