Expanding Sparse Tuning for Low Memory Usage

Shufan Shen1,2

Junshu Sun1,2 Xiangyang Ji3 Qingming Huang1,2,4 Shuhui Wang1,4∗
Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Tsinghua University 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory
{shenshufan22z, sunjunshu21s, wangshuhui}@ict.ac.cn xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn
qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn
1

Abstract
Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) is an effective method for adapting pretrained vision models to downstream tasks by tuning a small subset of parameters.
Among PEFT methods, sparse tuning achieves superior performance by only adjusting the weights most relevant to downstream tasks, rather than densely tuning
the whole weight matrix. However, this performance improvement has been accompanied by increases in memory usage, which stems from two factors, i.e.,
the storage of the whole weight matrix as learnable parameters in the optimizer
and the additional storage of tunable weight indexes. In this paper, we propose a
method named SNELL (Sparse tuning with kerNELized LoRA) for sparse tuning
with low memory usage. To achieve low memory usage, SNELL decomposes
the tunable matrix for sparsification into two learnable low-rank matrices, saving
from the costly storage of the whole original matrix. A competition-based sparsification mechanism is further proposed to avoid the storage of tunable weight
indexes. To maintain the effectiveness of sparse tuning with low-rank matrices,
we extend the low-rank decomposition by applying nonlinear kernel functions
to the whole-matrix merging. Consequently, we gain an increase in the rank of
the merged matrix, enhancing the ability of SNELL in adapting the pre-trained
models to downstream tasks. Extensive experiments on multiple downstream tasks
show that SNELL achieves state-of-the-art performance with low memory usage,
endowing PEFT with sparse tuning to large-scale models. Codes are available at
https://github.com/ssfgunner/SNELL.

1

Introduction

Fine-tuning has become a predominant way for adapting large pre-trained models to downstream tasks
with limited training samples [13, 9, 24, 23]. Nevertheless, fine-tuning all model parameters requires
substantial memory usage and is susceptible to over-fitting, making it costly and infeasible for largescale models [58, 2, 11]. To address these limitations, parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) [64, 27,
62, 30, 8, 22] has been proposed to tune a small subset of parameters while keeping other parameters
frozen. PEFT methods can be categorized into addition-based and reparameterization-based methods.
The former attaches additional parameters to a frozen pre-trained backbone, while the latter adjusts
the original parameters in the pre-trained backbone.
Addition-based methods [53, 62, 30] have achieved remarkable performance on vision tasks. However,
adopting additional parameters incurs extra computational costs during the inference process. In
contrast, reparameterization-based methods [5, 7, 27] directly fine-tune the original parameters. These
methods select specific parameters, involving reduced memory usage compared to full-parameter
fine-tuning. Based on the granularity of parameter selection, one primary approach focuses on
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

