Statistical Multicriteria Benchmarking
via the GSD-Front
Christoph Jansen1,∗
c.jansen@lancaster.ac.uk
Julian Rodemann2,∗
julian@stat.uni-muenchen.de

Georg Schollmeyer2,∗
georg.schollmeyer@stat.uni-muenchen.de
Hannah Blocher2,∗
hannah.blocher@stat.uni-muenchen.de

Thomas Augustin2
thomas.augustin@stat.uni-muenchen.de
1

School of Computing & Communications
Lancaster University Leipzig
Leipzig, Germany

2
Department of Statistics
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München
Munich, Germany

Abstract
Given the vast number of classifiers that have been (and continue to be) proposed,
reliable methods for comparing them are becoming increasingly important. The
desire for reliability is broken down into three main aspects: (1) Comparisons
should allow for different quality metrics simultaneously. (2) Comparisons should
take into account the statistical uncertainty induced by the choice of benchmark
suite. (3) The robustness of the comparisons under small deviations in the underlying assumptions should be verifiable. To address (1), we propose to compare
classifiers using a generalized stochastic dominance ordering (GSD) and present the
GSD-front as an information-efficient alternative to the classical Pareto-front. For
(2), we propose a consistent statistical estimator for the GSD-front and construct
a statistical test for whether a (potentially new) classifier lies in the GSD-front
of a set of state-of-the-art classifiers. For (3), we relax our proposed test using
techniques from robust statistics and imprecise probabilities. We illustrate our
concepts on the benchmark suite PMLB and on the platform OpenML.

1

Introduction

The comparison of classifiers in machine learning is usually carried out using quality metrics
ϕ : C × D → [0, 1], i.e., bounded functions assigning a real number to every pair (C, D) of classifier
and data set from a suitable domain C × D, where, by construction, higher numbers indicate better
quality. However, in many applications, the choice of a unique quality metric used for the comparison
is not self-evident. Instead, competing quality metrics are available, each of which can be wellmotivated but may lead to a different ranking of the analyzed classifiers. One attempt to safeguard
against this effect is to use multidimensional quality metrics: instead of a single metric, one chooses
a set of metrics Φ := (ϕ1 , . . . , ϕn ) : C × D → [0, 1]n that – taken together – provide a balanced
∗

marks equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

