CausalStock: Deep End-to-end Causal Discovery
for News-driven Stock Movement Prediction
Shuqi Li1∗ Yuebo Sun1∗ Yuxin Lin2 Xin Gao3 Shuo Shang4 Rui Yan1†
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Peking University 3 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
4
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{shuqili, sunyuebo0418, ruiyan}@ruc.edu.cn
linyuxin@stu.pku.edu.cn, xin.gao@kaust.edu.sa, jedi.shang@gmail.com

Abstract
There are two issues in news-driven multi-stock movement prediction tasks that are
not well solved in the existing works. On the one hand, “relation discovery” is a
pivotal part when leveraging the price information of other stocks to achieve accurate stock movement prediction. Given that stock relations are often unidirectional,
such as the “supplier-consumer” relationship, causal relations are more appropriate
to capture the impact between stocks. On the other hand, there is substantial
noise existing in the news data leading to extracting effective information with
difficulty. With these two issues in mind, we propose a novel framework called
CausalStock for news-driven multi-stock movement prediction, which discovers
the temporal causal relations between stocks. We design a lag-dependent temporal causal discovery mechanism to model the temporal causal graph distribution.
Then a Functional Causal Model is employed to encapsulate the discovered causal
relations and predict the stock movements. Additionally, we propose a Denoised
News Encoder by taking advantage of the excellent text evaluation ability of large
language models (LLMs) to extract useful information from massive news data.
The experiment results show that CausalStock outperforms the strong baselines
for both news-driven multi-stock movement prediction and multi-stock movement
prediction tasks on six real-world datasets collected from the US, China, Japan,
and UK markets. Moreover, getting benefit from the causal relations, CausalStock
could offer a clear prediction mechanism with good explainability.

1

Introduction

The financial services industry has maintained a leading position in embracing data science methodologies to inform investment determinations. Within this domain, quantitative trading has garnered
substantial attention from both academia and industry. Researchers have consistently worked on exploring different approaches to predict the stock movement (rise or fall of stock price) for many years,
such as uni-stock movement prediction [21], multi-stock movement prediction [44, 23], news-driven
stock movement prediction [42, 19] and so on, which have shown significant success. These methods
usually model the stock movement prediction task as a time series classification problem.
In this paper, we focus on the news-driven multi-stock movement prediction task. A prevalent
model paradigm for this task often takes the historical price features and the stock-related news
of multiple stocks as inputs and then leverages the well-designed neural networks to make stock
movement predictions. There are two key modeling points for tackling this task: modeling the stock
∗
†

The first two authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author: Rui Yan (ruiyan@ruc.edu.cn).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

