Reimagining Mutual Information for Defense
against Data Leakage in Collaborative Inference

Lin Duan1∗, Jingwei Sun1∗ , Jinyuan Jia2 , Yiran Chen1 , Maria Gorlatova1
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University
2
College of Information Sciences and Technology, Pennsylvania State University
1
{lin.duan, jingwei.sun, yiran.chen, maria.gorlatova}@duke.edu
2
jinyuan@psu.edu

Abstract
Edge-cloud collaborative inference empowers resource-limited IoT devices to
support deep learning applications without disclosing their raw data to the cloud
server, thus protecting user’s data. Nevertheless, prior research has shown that
collaborative inference still results in the exposure of input and predictions from
edge devices. To defend against such data leakage in collaborative inference, we
introduce InfoScissors, a defense strategy designed to reduce the mutual information
between a model’s intermediate outcomes and the device’s input and predictions.
We evaluate our defense on several datasets in the context of diverse attacks. Besides
the empirical comparison, we provide a theoretical analysis of the inadequacies of
recent defense strategies that also utilize mutual information, particularly focusing
on those based on the Variational Information Bottleneck (VIB) approach. We
illustrate the superiority of our method and offer a theoretical analysis of it.

1

Introduction

Edge devices are becoming smarter and more versatile. These devices are expected to efficiently
perform a wide range of deep learning (DL) inference tasks with remarkable performance. However,
implementing DL inference applications on such edge devices is challenging due to the constraints
imposed by the on-device resource availability. As we see the rise of state-of-the-art (SOTA) DL
models, such as Large Language Models [1, 2], they are becoming increasingly complex, housing
a colossal number of parameters. This escalation in complexity and size makes it difficult to store
a DL model on an edge device, which typically has limited memory space. Furthermore, the restricted
computational resources could lead to prolonged latency during inference. One potential solution
to this predicament is to transmit the input data directly from the edge device to a cloud server. The
server, which houses the DL model, then conducts inference and sends the prediction back to the
device. However, this approach carries a risk of data leakage, particularly if the input data are sensitive
in nature - such as facial images. In addition, the output data (i.e., predictions) can also contain
confidential information, such as the patient’s diagnostic results.
Collaborative inference [3–9] has emerged as an approach to prevent data leakage when deploying
DL inference applications on commodity edge devices with constrained computing resources. Fig. 1
shows a general collaborative inference system. Suppose an edge device and a cloud server conduct
collaborative inference. The deep learning model can be divided into three parts2 . The first and last
few layers of the network are deployed on the edge device, while the remaining layers are offloaded
∗

Co-first authors.
Note that some applications might divide the model into two parts, and the edge devices might hold the first or
the last few layers, which have different data leakage problems. This paper considers the general setting.
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

