Guiding a Diffusion Model with a Bad Version of Itself

Tero Karras
NVIDIA

Miika Aittala
NVIDIA

Jaakko Lehtinen
NVIDIA, Aalto University

Tuomas Kynkäänniemi
Aalto University

Timo Aila
NVIDIA

Samuli Laine
NVIDIA

Abstract
The primary axes of interest in image-generating diffusion models are image
quality, the amount of variation in the results, and how well the results align with
a given condition, e.g., a class label or a text prompt. The popular classifier-free
guidance approach uses an unconditional model to guide a conditional model,
leading to simultaneously better prompt alignment and higher-quality images at
the cost of reduced variation. These effects seem inherently entangled, and thus
hard to control. We make the surprising observation that it is possible to obtain
disentangled control over image quality without compromising the amount of
variation by guiding generation using a smaller, less-trained version of the model
itself rather than an unconditional model. This leads to significant improvements in
ImageNet generation, setting record FIDs of 1.01 for 64×64 and 1.25 for 512×512,
using publicly available networks. Furthermore, the method is also applicable to
unconditional diffusion models, drastically improving their quality.

1

Introduction

Denoising diffusion models [15, 46, 47, 48, 49] generate synthetic images by reversing a stochastic
corruption process. Essentially, an image is revealed from pure noise by denoising it little by little
in successive steps. A neural network that implements the denoiser (equivalently [53], the score
function [20]) is a central design element, and various architectures have been proposed (e.g., [2, 7, 9,
19, 21, 24, 38]). Equally important are the details of the multi-step denoising process that corresponds
mathematically to solving an ordinary [35, 47] or a stochastic [49] differential equation, for which
many different parameterizations, solvers, and step schedules have been evaluated [22, 23, 30, 43, 57].
To control the output image, the denoiser is typically conditioned on a class label, an embedding of a
text prompt, or some other form of conditioning input [36, 41, 45, 56].
The training objective of a diffusion model aims to cover the entire (conditional) data distribution. This
causes problems in low-probability regions: The model gets heavily penalized for not representing
them, but it does not have enough data to learn to generate good images corresponding to them.
Classifier-free guidance (CFG) [16] has become the standard method for “lowering the sampling
temperature”, i.e., focusing the generation on well-learned high-probability regions. By training a
denoiser network to operate in both conditional and unconditional setting, the sampling process can
be steered away from the unconditional result — in effect, the unconditional generation task specifies
a result to avoid. This results in better prompt alignment and improved image quality, where the
former effect is due to CFG implicitly raising the conditional part of the probability density to a
power greater than one [10].
However, CFG has drawbacks that limit its usage as a general low-temperature sampling method.
First, it is applicable only for conditional generation, as the guidance signal is based on the difference
between conditional and unconditional denoising results. Second, because the unconditional and
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

