PRODuctive bandits: Importance Weighting No More

Julian Zimmert
Google Research
zimmert@google.com

Teodor V. Marinov
Google Research
tvmarinov@google.com

Abstract
Prod is a seminal algorithm in full-information online learning, which has been
conjectured to be fundamentally sub-optimal for multi-armed bandits. By leveraging the interpretation of Prod as a first-order OMD approximation, we present
the following surprising results: 1. Variants of Prod can obtain optimal regret
for adversarial multi-armed bandits. 2. There exists a simple and (arguably)
importance-weighting free variant with optimal rate. 3. One can even achieve
best-both-worlds guarantees with logarithmic regret in the stochastic regime.
The bandit algorithms in this work use simple arithmetic update rules without the
need of solving optimization problems typical in prior work. Finally, the results
directly improve the state of the art of incentive-compatible bandits.

1

Introduction

The adversarial multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is a seminal online learning problem with
applications in experimental design, online advertisement and more [Thompson, 1933, Lai and
Robbins, 1985, Auer et al., 2002a,b]. MABs are characterized by the limited feedback given to the
learner in every round, the so-called bandit feedback, in which the learner only observes the loss of
their selected action, unlike in the full information, also known as the experts, setting where the loss
of all actions are provided as feedback.
The first nearly optimal algorithm for the adversarial MAB problem is EXP3 [Auer et al., 2002b].
EXP3 is a direct adaptation of the Hedge algorithm [Littlestone and Warmuth, 1994, Cesa-Bianchi
et al., 1997, Freund and Schapire, 1997] with importance weighting to handle partial bandit feedback. Hedge and EXP3 are special versions of online mirror descent (OMD), where the Bregman
divergence is the KL divergence induced by the Negative entropy potential. The OMD view of
online learning [Abernethy et al., 2008] has lead to a wide range of MAB algorithms such as TsallisINF [Audibert and Bubeck, 2009] and Logbarrier [Agarwal et al., 2017], which enjoy improved regret
guarantees. These guarantees can be attributed to regularizers more suited to the bandit feedback
setting, compared to the negative entropy regularizer. A downside of OMD is that usually the mirror
descent update is not closed form and requires (approximately) solving optimization problems at
every iteration.
Alternative full-information algorithms with simple arithmetic updates are Prod [Cesa-Bianchi et al.,
2007, Even-Dar et al., 2008, Gaillard et al., 2014], which enjoys second order regret bounds and
Multiplicative Weights Update (MWU) [Arora et al., 2012]. Prod is known to be closely related to
Hedge, both of which are different generalizations of the weighted majority algorithm [Littlestone
and Warmuth, 1994] to non-binary feedback.
More recently, Freeman et al. [2020] studied incentive-compatible online learning, a setting where
experts are not necessarily truthful but make predictions strategically with regard to the agent’s
algorithm. Motivated by deriving an algorithm where the incentives of experts align with the agent,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

