How JEPA Avoids Noisy Features: The Implicit Bias of
Deep Linear Self Distillation Networks

Etai Littwin Omid Saremi Madhu Advani
Vimal Thilak Preetum Nakkiran Chen Huang Joshua Susskind
Apple

Abstract
Two competing paradigms exist for self-supervised learning of data representations.
Joint Embedding Predictive Architecture (JEPA) is a class of architectures in which
semantically similar inputs are encoded into representations that are predictive of
each other. A recent successful approach that falls under the JEPA framework is
self-distillation, where an online encoder is trained to predict the output of the
target encoder, sometimes using a lightweight predictor network. This is contrasted
with the Masked AutoEncoder (MAE) paradigm, where an encoder and decoder
are trained to reconstruct missing parts of the input in the data space rather, than
its latent representation. A common motivation for using the JEPA approach over
MAE is that the JEPA objective prioritizes abstract features over fine-grained pixel
information (which can be unpredictable and uninformative). In this work, we seek
to understand the mechanism behind this empirical observation by analyzing the
training dynamics of deep linear models. We uncover a surprising mechanism:
in a simplified linear setting where both approaches learn similar representations,
JEPAs are biased to learn high-influence features, i.e., features characterized by
having high regression coefficients. Our results point to a distinct implicit bias of
predicting in latent space that may shed light on its success in practice.

1

Introduction

Representation learning has arguably been one of the most promising prospects and longest-standing
goals of deep learning. In simple terms, representation learning refers to the process of automatically
discovering and extracting meaningful features or representations from raw data. The learned
representations can then be used to solve various downstream tasks, such as classification, and
regression, or as general-purpose representations in robotics and embodied agents. In recent years,
the practice of representation learning has witnessed remarkable strides, particularly in the domain of
Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. The SSL paradigm has garnered
significant attention due to its ability to exploit vast amounts of unlabeled data, freeing practitioners
from the burden of expensive annotation efforts. While many SSL approaches have been proposed in
the literature, two paradigms have emerged as particularly successful, driving the bulk of the recent
breakthroughs in the field:
Masked AutoEncoders (MAE) The original MAE [8] and its successive variants (e.g. [13, 14])
introduced a training objective that seeks to reconstruct missing pieces of data from its partially
masked input. This approach, while simple, has proven efficient and scalable [15]. Formally, the MAE
objective uses an encoder function fW (X) : Rd → Rd and a decoder function gV (f ) : Rd → Rd to
predict a target y given input x:
LMAE =

1
Ex,y∼p(x,y) ∥gV (fW (x)) − y∥2 ,
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

(1)

