Using Noise to Infer Aspects of Simplicity
Without Learning

Zachery Boner1∗ Harry Chen1∗ Lesia Semenova2∗ Ronald Parr1 Cynthia Rudin1
1
Department of Computer Science, Duke University, 2 Microsoft Research
zachery.boner@duke.edu, harry.chen084@duke.edu, lsemenova@microsoft.com,
ronald.parr@duke.edu, cynthia.rudin@duke.edu

Abstract
Noise in data significantly influences decision-making in the data science process.
In fact, it has been shown that noise in data generation processes leads practitioners to find simpler models. However, an open question still remains: what
is the degree of model simplification we can expect under different noise levels?
In this work, we address this question by investigating the relationship between
the amount of noise and model simplicity across various hypothesis spaces, focusing on decision trees and linear models. We formally show that noise acts
as an implicit regularizer for several different noise models. Furthermore, we
prove that Rashomon sets (sets of near-optimal models) constructed with noisy
data tend to contain simpler models than corresponding Rashomon sets with nonnoisy data. Additionally, we show that noise expands the set of “good” features
and consequently enlarges the set of models that use at least one good feature.
Our work offers theoretical guarantees and practical insights for practitioners and
policymakers on whether simple-yet-accurate machine learning models are likely
to exist, based on knowledge of noise levels in the data generation process.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) is being used more and more for high-stakes decisions, and there is a need
for clear policy guidance. Simple models have advantages: they are much easier to troubleshoot and
use. However, there is a concern that they are not as accurate as more complex black box models,
which makes it challenging to provide guidance for policy makers to recommend simple models.
We believe we have barely scratched the surface of understanding simplicity in machine learning.
Recent work suggests we consider the Rashomon Effect [Breiman, 2001], which is the phenomenon
that datasets often admit many different good models. Semenova et al. [2022] shows that when there
are a lot of good models, some of them are probably simple, meaning that there is no accuracysimplicity trade-off. But we do not know in advance how simple these models can get. For some
applications, very sparse additive models or decision trees perform as well as the best black box
models; these datasets do not benefit from complex models at all. When does that happen? How
extreme on the simplicity scale do we expect these models to go?
A key insight into this question comes from Semenova et al. [2023], who showed that the simplicity
we can expect seems to be related to the amount of outcome noise in the data generation process,
which we denote informally as “ρ.” When ρ is larger, we can get simpler models with performance
comparable to the best models. However, while Semenova et al. [2023] showed that noise levels are
important, they did not provide a quantitative relationship between noise and simplicity.
In this work, we ask a question that allows us to better understand the connections among noise
in the data generation processes, model simplicity, and the Rashomon Effect. The question is as
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work. The names are listed in alphabetical order.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

