AdaNeg: Adaptive Negative Proxy Guided
OOD Detection with Vision-Language Models

Yabin Zhang
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
csybzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Lei Zhang∗
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Recent research has shown that pre-trained vision-language models are effective at
identifying out-of-distribution (OOD) samples by using negative labels as guidance.
However, employing consistent negative labels across different OOD datasets often
results in semantic misalignments, as these text labels may not accurately reflect
the actual space of OOD images. To overcome this issue, we introduce adaptive
negative proxies, which are dynamically generated during testing by exploring
actual OOD images, to align more closely with the underlying OOD label space
and enhance the efficacy of negative proxy guidance. Specifically, our approach
utilizes a feature memory bank to selectively cache discriminative features from
test images, representing the targeted OOD distribution. This facilitates the creation
of proxies that can better align with specific OOD datasets. While task-adaptive
proxies average features to reflect the unique characteristics of each dataset, the
sample-adaptive proxies weight features based on their similarity to individual test
samples, exploring detailed sample-level nuances. The final score for identifying
OOD samples integrates static negative labels with our proposed adaptive proxies,
effectively combining textual and visual knowledge for enhanced performance.
Our method is training-free and annotation-free, and it maintains fast testing speed.
Extensive experiments across various benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach, abbreviated as AdaNeg. Notably, on the large-scale ImageNet
benchmark, our AdaNeg significantly outperforms existing methods, with a 2.45%
increase in AUROC and a 6.48% reduction in FPR95. Codes are available at
https://github.com/YBZh/OpenOOD-VLM.

1

Introduction

In real applications, artificial intelligence (AI) systems often encounter test samples of unknown
classes, termed out-of-distribution (OOD) data. These OOD data often result in overly confident
errors [52, 44], posing security threats. Therefore, accurately identifying OOD data is essential for
ensuring the reliability and security of AI systems in open-world environments.
Traditional OOD detection methods in image domain primarily rely on vision-only models [20, 33, 36].
Recent advancements in vision-language models (VLMs) have demonstrated remarkable OOD
detection performance by leveraging multi-modal knowledge [17, 15, 39]. Recently, NegLabel [27]
explores negative labels by identifying text labels that are semantically distant from the in-distribution
(ID) labels. This method achieves state-of-the-art performance by detecting test images closer to
negative labels as OOD. In other words, NegLabel regards these negative labels as proxies of OOD
data. However, employing consistent negative labels across different OOD datasets often leads to
semantic misalignment, where these text labels may not accurately reflect the actual label space
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

