ReF-LDM: A Latent Diffusion Model for
Reference-based Face Image Restoration

Chi-Wei Hsiao1
1

Yu-Lun Liu2
Cheng-Kun Yang1
Sheng-Po Kuo1
1
1
Yucheun Kevin Jou
Chia-Ping Chen

MediaTek

2

National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University

Abstract
While recent works on blind face image restoration have successfully produced
impressive high-quality (HQ) images with abundant details from low-quality (LQ)
input images, the generated content may not accurately reflect the real appearance
of a person. To address this problem, incorporating well-shot personal images as
additional reference inputs could be a promising strategy. Inspired by the recent
success of the Latent Diffusion Model (LDM), we propose ReF-LDM—an adaptation of LDM designed to generate HQ face images conditioned on one LQ image
and multiple HQ reference images. Our model integrates an effective and efficient
mechanism, CacheKV, to leverage the reference images during the generation
process. Additionally, we design a timestep-scaled identity loss, enabling our
LDM-based model to focus on learning the discriminating features of human faces.
Lastly, we construct FFHQ-Ref, a dataset consisting of 20,405 high-quality (HQ)
face images with corresponding reference images, which can serve as both training
and evaluation data for reference-based face restoration models.

1

Introduction

Recent works [5, 26, 32] have achieved impressive results in generating a realistic high-quality (HQ)
face image from an input low-quality (LQ) image. However, the important features of a person’s face
may be corrupted in the LQ image, and thus the reconstructed image may look like a different person.
To tackle this problem, besides the LQ image, additional HQ images of this person can be used as
reference input. Moreover, allowing multiple reference images may lead to better quality because
they offer more comprehensive appearance of this person in different conditions, e.g., different poses,
expressions, or lighting.
A previous work [16] has explored using multiple reference images for face restoration. Their
method, however, depends on a face landmark model to detect facial components (i.e., eyes, nose, and
mouse), which may become unreliable when the input LQ image is severely degraded. Besides, latent
diffusion model (LDM) [22] has also been used in different image generating tasks with different
input conditions, such as low-resolution images, semantic maps, or sketch images [22, 29].
Inspired by the recent success of LDM, we propose ReF-LDM for reference-based face image
restoration. Unlike previous conditional LDM methods where their input conditions are usually
spatially aligned with the target image, the reference images are not aligned with the target HQ image
in our case. Therefore, we design a CacheKV mechanism, which effectively and efficiently integrates
the reference images, albeit with different poses and expressions. Furthermore, we introduce a
timestep-scaled identity loss to drive the reconstructed image to look like the same person of the
LQ and reference images. Lastly, we also construct a new large-scale dataset of face images with
corresponding reference images, which can serve as both training and evaluation datasets for future
reference-based face restoration research.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

