A Layer-Wise Natural Gradient Optimizer for
Training Deep Neural Networks
Xiaolei Liu∗
Ant Group
Hangzhou, China
liuxiaolei.lxl@mybank.cn

Shaoshuai Li∗
Ant Group
Hangzhou, China
lishaoshuai.lss@mybank.cn

Kaixin Gao†
Ocean University of China
Qingdao, China
gaokaixin06@163.com

Binfeng Wang
Ant Group
Hangzhou, China
wangbinfeng.wbf@mybank.cn

Abstract
Second-order optimization algorithms, such as the Newton method and the natural gradient descent (NGD) method exhibit excellent convergence properties for
training deep neural networks, but the high computational cost limits its practical
application. In this paper, we focus on the NGD method and propose a novel layerwise natural gradient descent (LNGD) method to further reduce computational
costs and accelerate the training process. Specifically, based on the block diagonal
approximation of the Fisher information matrix, we first propose the layer-wise
sample method to compute each block matrix without performing a complete backpropagation. Then, each block matrix is approximated as a Kronecker product
of two smaller matrices, one of which is a diagonal matrix, while keeping the
traces equal before and after approximation. By these two steps, we provide a new
approximation for the Fisher information matrix, which can effectively reduce the
computational cost while preserving the main information of each block matrix.
Moreover, we propose a new adaptive layer-wise learning rate to further accelerate
training. Based on these new approaches, we propose the LNGD optimizer. The
global convergence analysis of LNGD is established under some assumptions.
Experiments on image classification and machine translation tasks show that our
method is quite competitive compared to the state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

With the rapid increase in the size of deep neural networks (DNNs) models in both areas of computer
vision (CV) and natural language processing (NLP), there have been remarkable attentions given to
optimizing algorithms. An effective optimizer can significantly improve the training speed of models
while ensuring high prediction performance. First-order gradient descent methods are workhorses
of training DNNs, which can be broadly divided into two categories: methods use a same learning
rate, such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [1] and its accelerations [2, 3], and methods use
adaptive learning rate, such as AdaDelta [4], RMSProp [5], ADAM [6] and Adabelief [7]. Although
first-order gradient descent methods enjoy low computational cost and ease of implementation, they
might suffer from sensitivity to hyperparameters and slow convergence. It is challenging to reduce
the number of iterations and computational time of these methods.
∗
†

Joint first author, these authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

