Identification of Analytic Nonlinear Dynamical
Systems with Non-asymptotic Guarantees

Negin Musavi
nmusavi2@illinois.edu

Ziyao Guo
ziyaog2@illinois.edu

Geir Dullerud
dullerud@illinois.edu

Yingying Li
yl101@illinois.edu

Coordinated Science Laboratory
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
This paper focuses on the system identification of an important class of nonlinear
systems: nonlinear systems that are linearly parameterized, which enjoy wide
applications in robotics and other mechanical systems. We consider two system
identification methods: least-squares estimation (LSE), which is a point estimation
method; and set-membership estimation (SME), which estimates an uncertainty
set that contains the true parameters. We provide non-asymptotic convergence
rates for LSE and SME under i.i.d. control inputs and control policies with i.i.d.
random perturbations, both of which are considered as non-active-exploration
inputs. Compared with the counter-example based on piecewise-affine systems
in the literature, the success of non-active exploration in our setting relies on a
key assumption about the system dynamics: we require the system functions to
be real-analytic. Our results, together with the piecewise-affine counter-example,
reveal the importance of differentiability in nonlinear system identification through
non-active exploration. Lastly, we numerically compare our theoretical bounds
with the empirical performance of LSE and SME on a pendulum example and a
quadrotor example.

1

Introduction

Learning control-dynamical systems with statistical methodology has received significant attention in
the past decade (Sarker et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023b; Chen and Hazan, 2021; Simchowitz and Foster,
2020; Wagenmaker and Jamieson, 2020; Simchowitz et al., 2018; Dean et al., 2018; Abbasi-Yadkori
and Szepesvári, 2011; Li et al., 2021b). In particular, the estimation of linear dynamical systems, e.g.
xt+1 = A∗ xt +B ∗ ut +wt , is relatively well-studied: it has been shown that non-active exploration by
i.i.d. noises on control inputs ut and system disturbances wt are already enough for accurate system
identification, and least square estimation (LSE) can achieve the optimal estimation convergence rate
(Simchowitz and Foster, 2020; Simchowitz et al., 2018).
However, nonlinear control systems are ubiquitous in real-world applications, e.g. robotics (Siciliano
et al., 2010; Alaimo et al., 2013), power systems (Simpson-Porco et al., 2016), transportation (Kong
et al., 2015), etc. Motivated by this, there has been a lot of attention on learning nonlinear systems
recently. One natural and popular direction to study nonlinear system identification is on learning
linearly parameterized nonlinear systems as defined below, which is a straightforward extension from
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

