Efficient Centroid-Linkage Clustering
MohammadHossein Bateni
Google Research
New York, USA

Laxman Dhulipala
University of Maryland
College Park, USA

Willem Fletcher
Brown University
Providence, USA

Kishen N. Gowda
University of Maryland
College Park, USA

D Ellis Hershkowitz
Brown University
Providence, USA

Rajesh Jayaram
Google Research
New York, USA

Jakub Łącki
Google Research
New York, USA

Abstract
We give an algorithm for Centroid-Linkage Hierarchical Agglomerative Clustering
2
(HAC), which computes a c-approximate clustering in roughly n1+O(1/c ) time.
We obtain our result by combining a new Centroid-Linkage HAC algorithm with a
novel fully dynamic data structure for nearest neighbor search which works under
adaptive updates.
We also evaluate our algorithm empirically. By leveraging a state-of-the-art
nearest-neighbor search library, we obtain a fast and accurate Centroid-Linkage
HAC algorithm. Compared to an existing state-of-the-art exact baseline, our
implementation maintains the clustering quality while delivering up to a 36×
speedup due to performing fewer distance comparisons.

1

Introduction

Hierarchical Agglomerative Clustering (HAC) is a widely-used clustering method, which is available
in many standard data science libraries such as SciPy [39], scikit-learn [34], fastcluster [29], Julia [20],
R [35], MATLAB [28], Mathematica [25] and many more [31, 32, 36]. HAC takes as input a
collection of n points in Rd . Initially, it puts each point in a separate cluster, and then proceeds in up
to n − 1 steps. In each step, it merges the two “closest” clusters by replacing them with their union.
The formal notion of closeness is given by a linkage function; choosing different linkage functions
gives different variants of HAC. In this paper, we study Centroid-Linkage HAC wherein the distance
between two clusters is simply the distance between their centroids. This method is available in most
of the aforementioned libraries. Other common choices include single-linkage (the distance between
two clusters is the minimum distance between a point in one cluster and a point in the other cluster) or
average-linkage (the distance between two clusters is the average pairwise distance between them).
HAC’s applicability has been hindered by its limited scalability. Specifically, running HAC with
any popular linkage function requires essentially quadratic time under standard complexity-theory
assumptions. This is because (using most linkage functions) the first step of HAC is equivalent to
finding the closest pair among the input points. In high-dimensional Euclidean spaces, this problem
was shown to (conditionally) require Ω(n2−α ) time for any constant α > 0 [23]. In contrast, solving
HAC in essentially Θ(n2 ) time is easy for many popular linkage functions (including centroid, single,
average, complete, Ward), as it suffices to store all-pairs distances between the clusters in a priority
queue and update them after merging each pair of clusters.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

