Humor in AI: Massive Scale Crowd-Sourced
Preferences and Benchmarks for Cartoon Captioning

Jifan Zhang1∗, Lalit Jain2∗ , Yang Guo1∗ , Jiayi Chen1†, Kuan Lok Zhou1† ,
Siddharth Suresh1 , Andrew Wagenmaker2 , Scott Sievert1 , Timothy Rogers1 ,
Kevin Jamieson2 , Robert Mankoff3 , Robert Nowak1
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2 University of Washington, Seattle,
3
Air Mail and Cartoon Collections
lalitj@uw.edu, {jifan,yguo}@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
We present a novel multimodal preference dataset for creative tasks, consisting of over 250 million
human ratings on more than 2.2 million captions, collected through crowdsourcing rating data for The
New Yorker’s weekly cartoon caption contest over the past eight years. This unique dataset supports
the development and evaluation of multimodal large language models and preference-based fine-tuning
algorithms for humorous caption generation. We propose novel benchmarks for judging the quality
of model-generated captions, utilizing both GPT4 and human judgments to establish ranking-based
evaluation strategies. Our experimental results highlight the limitations of current fine-tuning methods,
such as RLHF and DPO, when applied to creative tasks. Furthermore, we demonstrate that even stateof-the-art models like GPT4 and Claude currently underperform top human contestants in generating
humorous captions. As we conclude this extensive data collection effort, we release the entire preference
dataset to the research community, fostering further advancements in AI humor generation and evaluation.

1

Introduction

This paper presents a dataset and benchmark for investigating alignment in Large Language Models
(LLMs). Our dataset contains over a quarter of a billion human ratings from the New Yorker’s
cartoon caption contest. Writing funny captions presents significant challenges due to the subjectivity
of humor and variability in human judgments. This benchmark offers a unique challenge for AI
alignment, reflecting complexities found in tasks where expert humans consistently outperform
current AI systems. Our study examines fundamental questions about aligning them to generate
funny captions similar to the winning captions that are most highly rated by the New Yorker readers.
We explore humor expression in LLMs, investigating whether these models can recognize humor
and generate amusing captions that resonate with human audiences. While LLMs are not specifically
designed for humor, their training on diverse content suggests a potential for humor recognition and
expression. We propose a benchmark for evaluating a model’s humor capabilities using advanced
systems like GPT-4.
Our empirical analysis shows that current LLMs can generate humorous captions but significantly
underperform compared to high-ranking human submissions in the New Yorker’s caption contests.
Generating successful captions requires multiple advanced capabilities: understanding of cultural
references, recognition of humor patterns, logical reasoning, systematic planning, and visual analysis.
The multi-component nature of caption generation makes this benchmark an effective test of broad
LLM capabilities. Progress in aligning LLMs for this task will require both advancing these individual
capabilities and developing methods to integrate them effectively. This benchmark therefore provides
a comprehensive integration test for LLM capabilities.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

