UGC: Universal Graph Coarsening

Mohit Kataria1
Sandeep Kumar2,1,3
Jayadeva2,1
Mohit.Kataria@scai.iitd.ac.in
ksandeep@ee.iitd.ac.in
jayadeva@ee.iitd.ac.in
1
Yardi School of Artificial Intelligence
2
Department of Electrical Engineering
3
Bharti School of Telecommunication Technology and Management
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi

Abstract
In the era of big data, graphs have emerged as a natural representation of intricate
relationships. However, graph sizes often become unwieldy, leading to storage,
computation, and analysis challenges. A crucial demand arises for methods that
can effectively downsize large graphs while retaining vital insights. Graph coarsening seeks to simplify large graphs while maintaining the basic statistics of the
graphs, such as spectral properties and ϵ-similarity in the coarsened graph. This
ensures that downstream processes are more efficient and effective. Most published
methods are suitable for homophilic datasets, limiting their universal use. We
propose Universal Graph Coarsening (UGC), a framework equally suitable for
homophilic and heterophilic datasets. UGC integrates node attributes and adjacency
information, leveraging the dataset’s heterophily factor. Results on benchmark
datasets demonstrate that UGC preserves spectral similarity while coarsening. In
comparison to existing methods, UGC is 4× to 15× faster, has lower eigen-error,
and yields superior performance on downstream processing tasks even at 70%
coarsening ratios.1

1

Introduction

Graphs have emerged as highly expressive tools to represent diverse structures and knowledge
in various fields such as social networks, bio-informatics, transportation, and natural language
processing [1–3]. They are essential for tasks like community detection, drug discovery, route
optimization, and text analysis. With the growing importance of graph-based solutions, dealing with
large graphs has become a challenge. Graph Coarsening(GC), a widely used technique to simplify
graphs while retaining vital information, making them more manageable for analysis [4]. It has been
applied successfully in various tasks [5–10]. Preserving the structural information of the graph is
crucial in graph coarsening algorithms to ensure the fidelity of the coarsened graphs. A high-quality
coarsened graph retains essential features and relationships, enabling accurate results for downstream
tasks. Additionally, computational efficiency is equally vital for scalability, as large-scale graphs
are common in real-world applications. An efficient coarsening method should ensure that the
reduction in graph size does not come at the expense of excessive computation time but existing
graph coarsening methods often face trade-offs between scalability and the quality of the coarsened
graph. Our method draws inspiration from hashing techniques, which provide us with advantages
in terms of computational efficiency. As a result, our approach exhibits a linear time complexity,
making it highly efficient even for large graphs.
Graph datasets often exhibit a blend of homophilic and heterophilic traits [11, 12]. Graph
Coarsening(GC) has been widely explored on homophilic datasets, but, to the best of our knowledge,
has never been applied to heterophilic graphs. We propose Universal Graph Coarsening U GC, an
approach that works well on both. Figure 2 illustrates how UGC uses a graph’s adjacency matrix as
1

Code is available at UGC

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

