WAGLE: Strategic Weight Attribution for Effective and
Modular Unlearning in Large Language Models

Jinghan Jia† Jiancheng Liu† Yihua Zhang†
Parikshit Ram‡ Nathalie Baracaldo‡ Sijia Liu†,‡
†
Dept. CSE, Michigan State University
‡
IBM Research

Abstract
The need for effective unlearning mechanisms in large language models (LLMs)
is increasingly urgent, driven by the necessity to adhere to data regulations and
foster ethical generative AI practices. LLM unlearning is designed to reduce the
impact of undesirable data influences and associated model capabilities without
diminishing the original utility of the model. Despite growing interest, much of
the existing research has focused on varied unlearning method designs to boost
effectiveness and efficiency. However, the inherent relationship between model
weights and LLM unlearning has not been extensively examined. In this paper,
we systematically explore how model weights interact with unlearning processes
in LLMs and propose the weight attribution-guided LLM unlearning framework,
WAGLE, which unveils the interconnections between ‘influence’ of weights and
‘influence’ of data to forget and retain in LLMs. By strategically guiding the LLM
unlearning across different types of unlearning methods and tasks, WAGLE can
erase the undesired content, while maintaining the performance of the original
tasks. Our experiments show that WAGLE boosts unlearning performance across
a range of LLM unlearning methods such as gradient difference and (negative)
preference optimization, and applications such as fictitious unlearning (TOFU
benchmark) and malicious use prevention (WMDP benchmark), under models
including Zephyr-7b-beta and Llama2-7b. To the best of our knowledge, our work
offers the first principled method for attributing and pinpointing the influential
weights in enhancing LLM unlearning. It stands in contrast to previous methods
that lack weight attribution and simpler weight attribution techniques. Codes are
available at https://github.com/OPTML-Group/WAGLE.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated exceptional proficiency in generating text that
closely resembles human-authored content. However, their capacity to memorize extensive corpora
can raise ethical and security concerns, such as the generation of biased, private, harmful, or even
illegal contents [1]. These issues highlight the necessity of effectively and efficiently tailoring
pre-trained LLMs to remove these undesired data influences and associated generation capabilities,
ensuring they are suitable for diverse application contexts. Therefore, the problem of machine
unlearning (MU) for LLMs (referred to as LLM unlearning) arises [2], aiming to equip trained LLMs
with data- and model-erasing capabilities.
The concept of MU has gained increasing popularity due to its significance in assessing and manipulating the impact of data on model performance. Its importance originated from the need to protect
data privacy [3–6], in response to data protection regulations like the ‘right to be forgotten’ [6]. The
majority of past research efforts have focused on solving the problem of MU for classification models
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

