Local Curvature Smoothing with Stein’s Identity for
Efficient Score Matching

Genki Osada
LY Corporation, Japan
genki.osada@lycorp.co.jp

Makoto Shing
Sakana AI, Japan
mkshing@sakana.ai

Takashi Nishide
University of Tsukuba, Japan
nishide@risk.tsukuba.ac.jp

Abstract
The training of score-based diffusion models (SDMs) is based on score matching.
The challenge of score matching is that it includes a computationally expensive Jacobian trace. While several methods have been proposed to avoid this computation,
each has drawbacks, such as instability during training and approximating the learning as learning a denoising vector field rather than a true score. We propose a novel
score matching variant, local curvature smoothing with Stein’s identity (LCSS).
The LCSS bypasses the Jacobian trace by applying Stein’s identity, enabling regularization effectiveness and efficient computation. We show that LCSS surpasses
existing methods in sample generation performance and matches the performance
of denoising score matching, widely adopted by most SDMs, in evaluations such
as FID, Inception score, and bits per dimension. Furthermore, we show that LCSS
enables realistic image generation even at a high resolution of 1024 × 1024.

1

Introduction

Score-based diffusion models (SDMs) [35, 30, 7, 31, 12] have emerged as powerful generative models
that have achieved remarkable results in various fields [27, 26, 24]. While likelihood-based models
learn the density of observed (i.e., training) data as points [25, 5, 28, 38, 37, 14], SDMs learn the
gradient of logarithm density called the score — a vector field pointing toward increasing data density.
The sample generation process of SDMs has two steps: 1) learning the score for a given dataset and
2) generating samples by guiding a random noise vector toward high-density regions based on the
learned score using stochastic differential equation (SDE).
Score matching used for learning the score includes a computationally expensive Jacobian trace,
making it challenging to apply to high-dimensional data. While some methods have been proposed
to avoid computing the Jacobian trace, each has its drawbacks. Denoising score matching (DSM)
[39], ubiquitously employed in SDMs, learns not the ground truth score but its approximation and
imposes constraints on the design of SDE. On the other hand, sliced score matching (SSM) [33] and
its variant, finite-difference SSM (FD-SSM) [23], suffer from high variance due to using random
projection.
In this paper, we propose a novel score matching variant, local curvature smoothing with Stein’s
identity (LCSS). The key idea of LCSS is to use Stein’s identity to bypass the expensive computation
of Jacobian trace. To apply Stein’s identity, we take the expectation over a Gaussian distribution
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).
The code will be released after the paper is published.

