Barely Random Algorithms
and Collective Metrical Task Systems

Romain Cosson
Inria, Paris
romain.cosson@inria.fr

Laurent Massoulié
Inria, Paris
laurent.massoulie@inria.fr

Abstract
We consider metrical task systems on general metric spaces with n points, and show
that any fully randomized algorithm can be turned into a randomized algorithm
that uses only 2 log n random bits, and achieves the same competitive ratio up
to a factor 2. This provides the first order-optimal barely random algorithms for
metrical task systems, i.e. which use a number of random bits that does not depend
on the number of requests addressed to the system. We discuss implications on
various aspects of online decision making such as: distributed systems, advice
complexity and transaction costs, suggesting broad applicability. We put forward
an equivalent view that we call collective metrical task systems where k agents in a
metrical task system team up, and suffer the average cost paid by each agent. Our
results imply that such team can be O(log2 n)-competitive as soon as k ≥ n2 . In
comparison, a single agent is always Ω(n)-competitive.

1

Introduction

Recent progress on the competitive analysis of important online problems, such as the k-server
problem, metrical service systems and metrical task systems have relied on the introduction of
continuous optimization methods, such as the online primal-dual framework (see e.g. the book of
[17]), and more recently, the online mirror descent framework [13–15, 5]. By design, these methods
assume that the online algorithm is provided with an infinite number of random bits. In this paper, we
address the question of whether this requirement is inherent to the online problem, or specific to the
methods at hand, by focusing on the influential example of metrical task systems [46, 10, 33, 14, 22].
To answer this question, we study the notion of barely random algorithm, introduced by [44] in the
early days of competitive analysis of online algorithms: “We call an algorithm that uses a bounded
number of random bits regardless of the number of requests barely random”. In the case of metrical
task systems, we will observe that this notion is particularly fruitful, as it connects various aspects of
online decision making such as collective systems, switching costs, and advice complexity.
Metrical Task Systems (MTS) is a central problem in online algorithms and online learning [43, 19,
28, 35, 18, 26] which recently attracted the interest of the community working on learning-augmented
algorithms [1, 20, 3, 21, 4]. In essence, the problem is similar to the classical learning setting of
‘prediction with expert advice’ [41], with the key difference that there is a cost associated to switching
between experts. We now describe the setting of metrical task systems [12] in a way that highlights
the role played by the source of randomness.
Metrical Task Systems. The problem is defined on a metric space X = (X, d) where X is a finite set
N
of cardinality |X| = n. The input is a sequence of cost vectors c(·) = (c(t))t∈N ∈ (RX
+ ) and the
N
output is a sequence of states ρ(·) = (ρ(t))t∈N ∈ X . The cost associated to each time t ∈ N is the
sum of the movement cost d(ρ(t − 1), ρ(t)) and the service cost cρ(t) (t). The cost over all time steps
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

