DAPE: Data-Adaptive Positional Encoding for Length
Extrapolation

Chuanyang Zheng1∗† Yihang Gao2∗ Han Shi3 Minbin Huang1 Jingyao Li1
Jing Xiong4 Xiaozhe Ren3 Michael Ng5 Xin Jiang3 Zhenguo Li3 Yu Li1
1
CUHK 2 NUS 3 Noah’s Ark Lab 4 HKU 5 HKBU

Abstract
Positional encoding plays a crucial role in transformers, significantly impacting model performance and length generalization. Prior research has introduced
absolute positional encoding (APE) and relative positional encoding (RPE) to
distinguish token positions in given sequences. However, both APE and RPE
remain fixed after model training regardless of input data, limiting their adaptability
and flexibility. Hence, we expect that the desired positional encoding should be
data-adaptive and can be dynamically adjusted with the given attention. In this
paper, we propose a Data-Adaptive Positional Encoding (DAPE) method, which
dynamically and semantically adjusts based on input context and learned fixed
priors. Experimental validation on real-world datasets (Arxiv, Books3, and CHE)
demonstrates that DAPE enhances model performances in terms of trained length
and length generalization, where the improvements are statistically significant. The
model visualization suggests that our model can keep both local and anti-local
information. Finally, we successfully train the model on sequence length 128 and
achieve better performance at evaluation sequence length 8192, compared with
other static positional encoding methods, revealing the benefit of the adaptive
positional encoding method.

1

Introduction

Transformer-based models have shown state-of-the-art performances in many language processing
tasks, including translation [6], question-and-answer [82, 29, 3], and commonsense reasoning [65].
The transformer mainly consists of attention block, feed-forward block, and positional encoding.
Recent works [8] have proved that quadratic-cost attention from the softmax is necessary for better
performance, especially in long-context processing. The attention block was originally designed
by applying softmax to the key-query multiplication, which requires quadratic computational cost.
To address such challenges, some efficient transformers were proposed, including sliding window
transformers (e.g., Streaming LLMs [77]), linear transformers (e.g., Performer [17]), and sparse
transformers (e.g., Reformer and sparse Sinkhorn transformer [66, 25]), etc. However, some negative
results exist regarding efficient transformers’ performances [80].
It has been noticed recently that well-designed positional encoding significantly improves the model
performances, especially in the long-context tasks [33]. While transformer-based models exhibit
satisfying performances in tasks of consistent length and distribution, their effectiveness tends to
diminish sharply when the input length exceeds the training length, e.g., long document summarization, “needle in a haystack” search, and long text generation. To avoid the expensive computation in
training, the training length is usually preferred to be relatively small due to the quadratic cost of
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Contact Email: cyzheng21@link.cuhk.edu.hk

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

