FT-AED: Benchmark Dataset for Early Freeway
Traffic Anomalous Event Detection
Austin Coursey1,2,† , Junyi Ji1,3,† , Marcos Quinones-Grueiro1 , William Barbour1 ,
Yuhang Zhang1,3 , Tyler Derr2 , Gautam Biswas1,2 , Daniel B. Work1,2,3
1
Institute for Software Integrated Systems, 2 Department of Computer Science
3
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
Vanderbilt University
†
Corresponding authors: {austin.c.coursey, junyi.ji}@vanderbilt.edu

Abstract
Early and accurate detection of anomalous events on the freeway, such as accidents,
can improve emergency response and clearance. However, existing delays and
mistakes from manual crash reporting records make it a difficult problem to solve.
Current large-scale freeway traffic datasets are not designed for anomaly detection
and ignore these challenges. In this paper, we introduce the first large-scale lanelevel freeway traffic dataset for anomaly detection. Our dataset consists of a month
of weekday radar detection sensor data collected in 4 lanes along an 18-mile
stretch of Interstate 24 heading toward Nashville, TN, comprising over 3.7 million
sensor measurements. We also collect official crash reports from the Tennessee
Department of Transportation Traffic Management Center and manually label all
other potential anomalies in the dataset. To show the potential for our dataset to
be used in future machine learning and traffic research, we benchmark numerous
deep learning anomaly detection models on our dataset. We find that unsupervised
graph neural network autoencoders are a promising solution for this problem and
that ignoring spatial relationships leads to decreased performance. We demonstrate
that our methods can reduce reporting delays by over 10 minutes on average while
detecting 75% of crashes. Our dataset and all preprocessing code needed to get
started are publicly released at https://vu.edu/ft-aed/ to facilitate future
research.

1

Introduction

One primary concern of a freeway traffic management center revolves around anomalous incident
detection and response [8]. On the freeway, these events could be vehicle accidents, vehicle malfunctions, slow-moving vehicles, or severe weather conditions. Early and accurate detection could
reduce the risk of secondary accidents and ease traffic congestion [6]. A current operational system
for handling incidents on highways involves staff continuously monitoring live camera feeds. They
must wait to receive an accident report before initiating management actions, and these actions are
only triggered after the incident is either reported by a driver or observed by an officer through the
cameras. These systems highly rely on manual efforts, and there is a clear need to automate the
incident detection process to improve intelligent transportation systems [21]. Additionally, numerous
incidents go unreported but lead to more severe secondary crashes as traffic conditions worsen [11].
Recently, researchers have explored deep-learning techniques for incident detection. Some of
these have been supervised, using common approaches like Convolutional Neural Networks [6],
Support Vector Machines and Probabilistic Neural Networks [22], Recurrent Neural Networks [27],
and models that combine spatial and temporal information [13, 12]. Accurate crash or incident
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

