Improving Alignment and Robustness with
Circuit Breakers
Andy Zou†1,2,3 , Long Phan3 , Justin Wang1 ,
Derek Duenas , Maxwell Lin1 , Maksym Andriushchenko1 , Rowan Wang1 ,
Zico Kolter‡1,2 , Matt Fredrikson†1,2 , Dan Hendrycks1,3
1

1

Gray Swan AI, 2 Carnegie Mellon University, 3 Center for AI Safety

Abstract
AI systems can take harmful actions and are highly vulnerable to adversarial attacks.
We present an approach, inspired by recent advances in representation engineering,
that interrupts the models as they respond with harmful outputs with “circuit breakers.” Existing techniques aimed at improving alignment, such as refusal training,
are often bypassed. Techniques such as adversarial training try to plug these holes
by countering specific attacks. As an alternative to refusal training and adversarial
training, circuit-breaking directly controls the representations that are responsible
for harmful outputs in the first place. Our technique can be applied to both
text-only and multimodal language models to prevent the generation of harmful
outputs without sacrificing utility—even in the presence of powerful unseen attacks.
Notably, while adversarial robustness in standalone image recognition remains
an open challenge, circuit breakers allow the larger multimodal system to reliably
withstand image “hijacks” that aim to produce harmful content. Finally, we extend
our approach to AI agents, demonstrating considerable reductions in the rate of
harmful actions when they are under attack. Our approach represents a significant
step forward in the development of reliable safeguards to harmful behavior and
adversarial attacks. Code is available at github.com/GraySwanAI/circuit-breakers.

1

Introduction

The landscape of artificial intelligence (AI) has long been marred by the persistent threat of adversarial
attacks, particularly those targeting neural networks. These attacks exploit inherent vulnerabilities
within AI systems, often leading to compromised outputs and raising concerns regarding their
reliability and safety. Despite significant attention, existing mitigations have failed to achieve high
reliability without dramatically compromising model performance. Thus, the trade-off between
adversarial robustness and utility is widely accepted as an unavoidable fact [64].
The rise of generative models has further complicated this issue. Generative models such as large
language models (LLMs) can output copyrighted information or defame individuals, and agents can
take harmful actions. To make models less harmful, they are “aligned” with refusal training [12, 54],
but it has become common to use adversarial attacks as a means of bypassing their safeguards. In
these settings, vulnerability to attacks that break alignment poses a serious threat to utility, and raises
pressing questions about whether it is feasible to deploy such systems with a high standard of safety
and reliability—especially against dedicated adversaries who intend to misuse them.
The fragility of alignment techniques to sophisticated attacks has motivated defenses that target
specific attack methods, such as adversarial training, an approach originally proposed in the context
†

Work done while at Gray Swan AI. ‡ Work done in advising capacity to Gray Swan AI.
Correspondence to: andy@grayswan.ai
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

