Bias in Motion: Theoretical Insights
into the Dynamics of Bias in SGD Training

Anchit Jain∗
University of Cambridge
aj625@cantab.ac.uk

Rozhin Nobahari
MILA - Quebec AI institute
Université de Montréal

Aristide Baratin
Samsung - SAIT AI Lab Montreal

Stefano Sarao Mannelli
Gatsby & SWC - University College London
s.saraomannelli@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Machine learning systems often acquire biases by leveraging undesired features
in the data, impacting accuracy variably across different sub-populations. Current
understanding of bias formation mostly focuses on the initial and final stages
of learning, leaving a gap in knowledge regarding the transient dynamics. To
address this gap, this paper explores the evolution of bias in a teacher-student
setup modeling different data sub-populations with a Gaussian-mixture model. We
provide an analytical description of the stochastic gradient descent dynamics of
a linear classifier in this setting, which we prove to be exact in high dimension.
Notably, our analysis reveals how different properties of sub-populations influence
bias at different timescales, showing a shifting preference of the classifier during
training. Applying our findings to fairness and robustness, we delineate how and
when heterogeneous data and spurious features can generate and amplify bias.
We empirically validate our results in more complex scenarios by training deeper
networks on synthetic and real datasets, including CIFAR10, MNIST, and CelebA.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, the problem of assessing the fairness of classifiers has garnered significant
attention, revealing that machine learning (ML) systems not only reproduce existing biases in the
data but also tend to amplify them [21, 40, 11]. Given the complexity of the ML pipeline, isolating
and characterising the key drivers of this amplification is challenging. Recent studies have begun to
disentangle the contributions from architectural design choices, including overparameterisation [37],
model complexity, activation functions [5, 12], learning protocols [43, 13], post-processing practices
such as pruning [19], and intrinsic aspects of the data like its geometrical properties [38].
Theoretical results in this area (e.g., [37, 38]) are mostly based on asymptotic analysis, leaving the
transient learning regime poorly understood. Due to limitations on computational resources, a trained
ML system may operate far from the asymptotic regime and hence existing results may not always
apply. Insights from class imbalance literature [43, 12] indicate that classifiers converge faster for
classes with more data, but how this applies to fairness, where datasets might be balanced by label
but imbalanced by demographics, remains unclear.
Our analysis addresses this gap by providing a precise characterisation of the transient dynamics
of online stochastic gradient descent (SGD) in a high dimensional prototypical model of linear
∗

Work done as an intern at the Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College London

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

