Scaling Laws and Compute-Optimal Training
Beyond Fixed Training Durations

Alexander Hägele1∗ Elie Bakouch2 Atli Kosson1 Loubna Ben Allal2
Leandro Von Werra2 Martin Jaggi1
1
EPFL 2 Hugging Face
∗
alexander.hagele@epfl.ch

Abstract
Scale has become a main ingredient in obtaining strong machine learning models.
As a result, understanding a model’s scaling properties is key to effectively
designing both the right training setup as well as future generations of architectures.
In this work, we argue that scale and training research has been needlessly complex
due to reliance on the cosine schedule, which prevents training across different
lengths for the same model size. We investigate the training behavior of a direct
alternative — constant learning rate and cooldowns — and find that it scales predictably and reliably similar to cosine. Additionally, we show that stochastic weight
averaging yields improved performance along the training trajectory, without additional training costs, across different scales. Importantly, with these findings we
demonstrate that scaling experiments can be performed with significantly reduced
compute and GPU hours by utilizing fewer but reusable training runs. Our code
is available at https://github.com/epfml/schedules-and-scaling/.

1

Introduction

Training large language models is expensive — in time, energy, and compute. Moreover, it requires
a complex algorithmic recipe of model architecture and training data to obtain high-quality models.
Therefore, the workflow of training large models consists of iterating over small experiments to
verify success before extrapolating to larger scales. This is then either done by computing specialized
scaling laws (OpenAI, 2023; Bi et al., 2024; Hu et al., 2024; Team et al., 2023), relying on established
laws (Hoffmann et al., 2022; Anil et al., 2023) or training past compute-optimality to save cost at
inference (Touvron et al., 2023a,b).
Despite large advances across data and training recipes, one aspect of large language model (LLM)
pretraining has remained surprisingly prevalent: the cosine learning rate schedule (Loshchilov &
Hutter, 2016; Radford et al., 2018; Rae et al., 2021). Importantly, the Chinchilla project (Hoffmann
et al., 2022) showed that the cosine schedule achieves optimal loss only when the cycle length matches
the training duration, but underestimates the model performance during training. This means that
when performing experiments — e.g., for architectural changes or data mixtures — one must train
multiple models for different lengths, from scratch, to have reliable estimates of the quality of training
and the scaling behavior. This is much more expensive than training a suite of models just once. Even
more, it is restrictive for the final model for which the training length must be decided in advance.
In this work, our goal is to revisit and question the necessity of the cosine learning rate schedule for
large model training. Through a multitude of training runs, we demonstrate how a simple alternative
of performing a cooldown after a constant learning rate — which was already suggested in the
literature (Zhai et al., 2022) and recently used by released models (Hu et al., 2024; Shen et al., 2024)
— matches the performance of cosine. We expand on this and provide and analyze different recipes
for the decay form and length, which scale as reliable as cosine, outperforming it for sufficiently long
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

