B I S COPE: AI-generated Text Detection by Checking
Memorization of Preceding Tokens

Hanxi Guo
Purdue University
guo778@purdue.edu

Siyuan Cheng
Purdue University
cheng535@purdue.edu

Xiaolong Jin
Purdue University
jin509@purdue.edu

Zhuo Zhang
Purdue University
zhan3299@purdue.edu

Kaiyuan Zhang
Purdue University
zhan4057@purdue.edu

Guanhong Tao
University of Utah
guanhong.tao@utah.edu

Guangyu Shen
Purdue University
shen447@purdue.edu

Xiangyu Zhang
Purdue University
xyzhang@cs.purdue.edu

Abstract
Detecting text generated by Large Language Models (LLMs) is a pressing need in
order to identify and prevent misuse of these powerful models in a wide range of
applications, which have highly undesirable consequences such as misinformation
and academic dishonesty. Given a piece of subject text, many existing detection
methods work by measuring the difficulty of LLM predicting the next token in
the text from their prefix. In this paper, we make a critical observation that
how well the current token’s output logits memorizes the closely preceding input
tokens also provides strong evidence. Therefore, we propose a novel bi-directional
calculation method that measures the cross-entropy losses between an output
logits and the ground-truth token (forward) and between the output logits and
the immediately preceding input token (backward). A classifier is trained to
make the final prediction based on the statistics of these losses. We evaluate our
system, named B I S COPE, on texts generated by five latest commercial LLMs
across five heterogeneous datasets, including both natural language and code.
B I S COPE demonstrates superior detection accuracy and robustness compared to
nine existing baseline methods, exceeding the state-of-the-art non-commercial
methods’ detection accuracy by over 0.30 F1 score, achieving over 0.95 detection
F1 score on average. It also outperforms the best commercial tool GPTZero that is
based on a commercial LLM trained with an enormous volume of data. Code is
available at https://github.com/MarkGHX/BiScope.

1

Introduction

Given the superior performance of Large Language Models (LLMs) in understanding and generating
text, they have become an integral part of human society, assisting people with daily activities such
as summarizing articles, polishing emails, and more. However, the widespread use of LLMs also
raises concerns about the misuse of AI-generated text. For instance, students and academics may
utilize LLMs to produce content for their assignments and research [10, 37, 30], compromising
academic integrity. Adversarial individuals could leverage LLMs to efficiently create inflammatory
and fraudulent content on social media [22]. Additionally, the development of LLMs themselves faces
challenges related to the quality of existing datasets, which may be compromised by the significant
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

