Read-ME: Refactorizing LLMs as Router-Decoupled
Mixture of Experts with System Co-Design

Ruisi Cai∗1 , Yeonju Ro∗1 , Geon-Woo Kim1 , Peihao Wang1 ,
Babak Ehteshami Bejnordi2 , Aditya Akella1 , Zhangyang Wang1
1
The University of Texas at Austin, 2 Qualcomm AI Research
{ruisi.cai, gwkim, peihaowang, atlaswang}@utexas.edu,
{yro, akella}@cs.utexas.edu, behtesha@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
The proliferation of large language models (LLMs) has led to the adoption of
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architectures that dynamically leverage specialized
subnetworks for improved efficiency and performance. Despite their benefits, MoE
models face significant challenges during inference, including inefficient memory
management and suboptimal batching, due to misaligned design choices between
the model architecture and the system policies. Furthermore, the conventional
approach of training MoEs from scratch is increasingly prohibitive in terms of
cost. In this paper, we propose a novel framework Read-ME that transforms
pre-trained dense LLMs into smaller MoE models (in contrast to “upcycling"
generalist MoEs), avoiding the high costs of ground-up training. Our approach
employs activation sparsity to extract experts. To compose experts, we examine
the widely-adopted layer-wise router design and show its redundancy, and thus we
introduce the pre-gating router decoupled from the MoE backbone that facilitates
system-friendly pre-computing and lookahead scheduling, enhancing expert-aware
batching and caching. Our codesign therefore addresses critical gaps on both the
algorithmic and system fronts, establishing a scalable and efficient alternative for
LLM inference in resource-constrained settings. Read-ME outperforms other
popular open-source dense models of similar scales, achieving improvements of up
to 10.1% on MMLU, and improving mean end-to-end latency up to 6.1%. Codes
are available at: https://github.com/VITA-Group/READ-ME.

1

Introduction

The success of Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) [1, 2] - such as recently exemplified by the Mixtral model
[3] in the era of large language models (LLMs) - lies in its remarkable ability to leverage the collective
expertise of specialized sub-networks, or "experts," each proficient in handling specific subsets or
aspects of the data. By dynamically routing data through these experts, MoE models effectively
capture complex patterns, adapt to diverse data distributions, and offer superior predictive accuracy
compared to traditional single-model approaches. In addition to performance promise, MoEs also
have a natural appeal for resource-limited devices due to their high sparsity, and therefore reduced
activated parameters per token, which can potentially save inference costs [4, 5, 6, 7].
However, MoE inference presents significant challenges for key system-level objectives:
• Memory Management: Although MoEs activate only a subnetwork during inference, expert
selection is determined on the fly by a layerwise router, complicating efficient prefetching.
This often forces reliance on naive prefetching algorithms. For example, prior work has
* Equal contribution: authors are listed alphabetically. A. Akella and Z. Wang also advised this work equally.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

