AlchemistCoder: Harmonizing and Eliciting Code
Capability by Hindsight Tuning on Multi-source Data

Zifan Song1,2∗ Yudong Wang2∗ Wenwei Zhang2∗ Kuikun Liu2
Chengqi Lyu2 Demin Song2 Qipeng Guo2 Hang Yan2
Dahua Lin2,3,4 Kai Chen2† Cairong Zhao1†
1
Tongji University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
MMLab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
HKGAI under InnoHK
https://internlm.github.io/AlchemistCoder

Abstract
Open-source Large Language Models (LLMs) and their specialized variants, particularly Code LLMs, have recently delivered impressive performance. However, previous Code LLMs are typically fine-tuned on single-source data with limited quality
and diversity, which may insufficiently elicit the potential of pre-trained LLMs.
In this paper, we present AlchemistCoder, a series of Code LLMs with enhanced
code generation and generalization capabilities fine-tuned on multi-source data.
To achieve this, we pioneer to unveil inherent conflicts among the various styles
and qualities in multi-source code corpora and introduce data-specific prompts
with hindsight relabeling, termed AlchemistPrompts, to harmonize different data
sources and instruction-response pairs. Additionally, we propose incorporating the
data construction process into the fine-tuning data as code comprehension tasks,
including instruction evolution, data filtering, and code review. Extensive experiments demonstrate that AlchemistCoder holds a clear lead among all models of the
same size (6.7B/7B) and rivals or even surpasses larger models (15B/33B/70B),
showcasing the efficacy of our method in refining instruction-following capabilities
and advancing the boundaries of code intelligence. Source code and models are
available at https://github.com/InternLM/AlchemistCoder.

1

33.3%
Improvement
49.9%
Improvement

Introduction

Closed-source Large Language Models (LLMs)
like ChatGPT and GPT-4 [33, 34] exhibit impressive code intelligence by learning on largescale and diverse code corpus, which also benefits many other applications, such as math
reasoning [6], embodied control [25], and
agent [46]. Since open-source LLMs [40] still
lag behind closed-source LLMs [34] in this field,
there has been growing interest in investigating
the acquisition of code capabilities by developing specialized Code LLMs [35, 14].

176.6%
Improvement

Inferior performance from
directly mixing multi-source data

The training of Code LLMs mainly goes through
pre-training and fine-tuning stages [35]. Pioneer Figure 1: Performance scatter plot (top right
is better) of open-source models on mainstream
∗
Equal contributions
code benchmarks, HumanEval and MBPP. Our
†
Corresponding author
AlchemistCoder series demonstrates astonishing
performance across all open-source Code LLMs.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

