FairQueue: Rethinking Prompt Learning for
Fair Text-to-Image Generation

Christopher T. H. Teo∗
christopher_teo@mymail.sutd.edu.sg
Xinda Ma
xinda_ma@sutd.edu.sg

Milad Abdollahzadeh∗
milad_abdollahzadeh@sutd.sg
Ngai-Man Cheung†
ngaiman_cheung@sutd.edu.sg

Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD)

Abstract
Recently, prompt learning has emerged as the state-of-the-art (SOTA) for fair textto-image (T2I) generation. Specifically, this approach leverages readily available
reference images to learn inclusive prompts for each target Sensitive Attribute (tSA),
allowing for fair image generation. In this work, we first reveal that this prompt
learning-based approach results in degraded sample quality. Our analysis shows that
the approach’s training objective–which aims to align the embedding differences of
learned prompts and reference images–could be sub-optimal, resulting in distortion
of the learned prompts and degraded generated images.
To further substantiate this claim, as our major contribution, we deep dive into
the denoising subnetwork of the T2I model to track down the effect of these learned
prompts by analyzing the cross-attention maps. In our analysis, we propose novel
prompt switching analysis: I2H and H2I. Furthermore, we propose new quantitative
characterization of cross-attention maps. Our analysis reveals abnormalities in
the early denoising steps, perpetuating improper global structure that results in
degradation in the generated samples. Building on insights from our analysis, we
propose two ideas: (i) Prompt Queuing and (ii) Attention Amplification to address
the quality issue. Extensive experimental results on a wide range of tSAs show
that our proposed method outperforms SOTA approach’s image generation quality,
while achieving competitive fairness. More resources at Project Page.

1

Introduction

There has been significant progress in the quality of text-to-image (T2I) generation [1–3] resulting in
increasing adoption in different applications [4–10]. With this comes concerns regarding the fairness
of these T2I models and their societal impacts [11–15].
Fair T2I Generation. T2I models may inherit biases present in their training data. Several approaches
have been proposed to mitigate these biases [16–19] (See related work in Supp). Particularly,
Inclusive T2I Generation (ITI-G EN) [16]–the existing SOTA–suggests that fair T2I approaches
based on hard prompts (HP) (e.g., “A headshot of a person with fair skin tone”) are limited
by linguistic ambiguity. For example, Skin Tone is often challenging to define and interpret based
on HP, resulting in sub-optimal performance. To overcome this linguistic ambiguity, ITI-G EN
adopts the notion that “a picture is worth a thousand words” and leverages readily available reference
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

