Efficient Leverage Score Sampling for Tensor Train
Decomposition
∗,1

∗,2

3

2,4

Vivek Bharadwaj , Beheshteh T. Rakhshan , Osman Asif Malik , Guillaume Rabusseau
1
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department, UC Berkeley
3
Encube Technologies
2
Mila & DIRO, Université de Montréal
4
CIFAR AI Chair

Abstract
Tensor Train (TT) decomposition is widely used in the machine learning and quantum physics communities as a popular tool to efficiently compress high-dimensional
tensor data. In this paper, we propose an efficient algorithm to accelerate computing the TT decomposition with the Alternating Least Squares (ALS) algorithm
relying on exact leverage scores sampling. For this purpose, we propose a data
structure that allows us to efficiently sample from the tensor with time complexity
logarithmic in the tensor size. Our contribution specifically leverages the canonical
form of the TT decomposition. By maintaining the canonical form through each
iteration of ALS, we can efficiently compute (and sample from) the leverage scores,
thus achieving significant speed-up in solving each sketched least-square problem.
Experiments on synthetic and real data on dense and sparse tensors demonstrate
that our method outperforms SVD-based and ALS-based algorithms.

1

Introduction

Tensor decomposition methods have recently found numerous applications in machine learning. Their
ability to perform operations efficiently on very high-dimensional tensors makes them suitable for
data science and machine learning problems. For example, they have been used for neuro-imaging,
and signal processing [Zhou et al., 2013, Sidiropoulos et al., 2017, Cichocki and Phan, 2009], supervised learning [Novikov et al., 2016, Stoudenmire and Schwab, 2016], feature extraction [Bengua
et al., 2015] and scaling up Gaussian processes [Izmailov et al., 2018]. The most popular decompositions are the CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP), Tucker [Hitchcock, 1927, Tucker, 1966], Tensor
Train (TT) Oseledets [2011] and Tensor Ring (TR) Zhao et al. [2016] decompositions. However,
finding a rank-r CP decomposition is NP-hard [Kolda and Bader, 2009, Hillar and Lim, 2013] and in
the Tucker decomposition, the number of parameters grows exponentially with the order of the tensor.
While the number of parameters is linear in the tensor’s order for both TT and TR decompositions,
TR is known to have numerical stability issues. The TT decomposition, in contrast, can be used to
represent a tensor in a compressed format where the number of parameters scales linearly with the
order of a tensor. Additionally, finding a good approximation to the best rank-r TT decomposition is
feasible which lets the user perform various linear algebra operations efficiently and compute the TT
decomposition with stable algorithms.
Due to the high-dimensional nature of tensors, designing efficient algorithms for computing the
TT decomposition is crucial. A popular method for computing the TT decomposition of an N dimensional tensor X is the TT-SVD algorithm [Oseledets, 2011] which uses a sequence of singular
values decompositions on the tensor unfoldings to produce the TT representation in a single pass.
*

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

