Constrained Human-AI Cooperation: An Inclusive
Embodied Social Intelligence Challenge
Z

\

Weihua Du∗1 , Qiushi Lyu∗2 , Jiaming Shan3 , Zhenting Qi4 , Hongxin Zhang5 , Sunli Chen5
“
Andi Peng6 , Tianmin Shu7 , Kwonjoon Lee8 , Behzad Dariush8 , Chuang Gan5ˇ
1
2
3
Carnegie Mellon University, Peking University, University of California, Santa Barbara
4
Harvard University, 5 University of Massachusetts Amherst, 6 MIT
7
Johns Hopkins University, 8 Honda Research Institute USA
“
weihuad@cs.cmu.edu, lvqiushi@stu.pku.edu.cn, ˇ chuangg@umass.edu

Z

\

Abstract
We introduce Constrained Human-AI Cooperation (CHAIC), an inclusive embodied
social intelligence challenge designed to test social perception and cooperation
in embodied agents. In CHAIC, the goal is for an embodied agent equipped with
egocentric observations to assist a human who may be operating under physical
constraints—e.g., unable to reach high places or confined to a wheelchair—in
performing common household or outdoor tasks as efficiently as possible. To
achieve this, a successful helper must: (1) infer the human’s intents and constraints
by following the human and observing their behaviors (social perception), and (2)
make a cooperative plan tailored to the human partner to solve the task as quickly
as possible, working together as a team (cooperative planning). To benchmark this
challenge, we create four new agents with real physical constraints and eight longhorizon tasks featuring both indoor and outdoor scenes with various constraints,
emergency events, and potential risks. We benchmark planning- and learningbased baselines on the challenge and introduce a new method that leverages large
language models and behavior modeling. Empirical evaluations demonstrate the
effectiveness of our benchmark in enabling systematic assessment of key aspects
of machine social intelligence. Our benchmark and code are publicly available at
https://github.com/UMass-Foundation-Model/CHAIC.

1

Introduction

Humans possess a remarkable ability to observe, infer, and help others, even when others have
different mental models and physical constraints in the world from themselves (Warneken and
Tomasello, 2006). From a young age, humans are able to watch other people attempt to perform a
task, and if other people fail, they can develop plans of action that best assist them. In contrast, AI
agents struggle to exhibit such basic social skills and fail to adjust their plans for the specific humans
they wish to aid (Valmeekam et al., 2022; Ngo et al., 2022), rendering them poor personalized helpers.
For AI agents to best assist human partners in performing tasks in the real world, they must possess
two fundamental capabilities: (1) contextual perception, i.e., the ability to follow and observe human
behavior and identify the specific goals and constraints faced by each human; and (2) cooperative
planning, i.e., the ability to plan actions that are best tailored to helping each human with different
goals and constraints. While there have been some embodied benchmarks and environments designed
to test general multi-agent intelligence (Puig et al., 2021, 2023b; Gan et al., 2021), such efforts have
largely excluded the unique accessibility challenges that real humans may possess in the world and
∗

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

