Particle Semi-Implicit Variational Inference

Jen Ning Lim
University of Warwick
Coventry, United Kingdom
Jen-Ning.Lim@warwick.ac.uk

Adam M. Johansen
University of Warwick
Coventry, United Kingdom
a.m.johansen@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
Semi-implicit variational inference (SIVI) enriches the expressiveness of variational
families by utilizing a kernel and a mixing distribution to hierarchically define the
variational distribution. Existing SIVI methods parameterize the mixing distribution
using implicit distributions, leading to intractable variational densities. As a result,
directly maximizing the evidence lower bound (ELBO) is not possible, so they
resort to one of the following: optimizing bounds on the ELBO, employing costly
inner-loop Markov chain Monte Carlo runs, or solving minimax objectives. In this
paper, we propose a novel method for SIVI called Particle Variational Inference
(PVI) which employs empirical measures to approximate the optimal mixing
distributions characterized as the minimizer of a free energy functional. PVI arises
naturally as a particle approximation of a Euclidean–Wasserstein gradient flow and,
unlike prior works, it directly optimizes the ELBO whilst making no parametric
assumption about the mixing distribution. Our empirical results demonstrate that
PVI performs favourably compared to other SIVI methods across various tasks.
Moreover, we provide a theoretical analysis of the behaviour of the gradient flow
of a related free energy functional: establishing the existence and uniqueness of
solutions as well as propagation of chaos results.

1

Introduction

R
In Bayesian inference, a quantity of vital importance is the posterior p(x|y) = p(x, y)/ p(x, y)dx,
where p(x, y) is a probabilistic model, y denotes the observed data, and x the latent variable. An
ever-present issue in Bayesian inference is that the posterior is often intractable. This is because the
normalizing constant is available only in the form of an integral, and approximation methods are
required. One popular method is variational inference (VI) (Jordan, 1999; Wainwright and Jordan,
2007; Blei et al., 2017). The essence of VI is to approximate the posterior with a member from a
variational family Q where each element of Q is a distribution qθ (called “variational distribution”)
parameterized by θ. These parameters θ are obtained via minimizing a distance or discrepancy (or an
approximation of it) between the posterior p(·|y) and the variational distribution qθ .
Here, we focus on semi-implicit variational inference (SIVI) (Yin and Zhou, 2018). It enables
a rich variational family by utilizing variational distributions, which we refer to as semi-implicit
distributions (SIDs), defined as
Z
qk,r (x) := k(x|z)r(z) dz,
(1)
R
where k : Rdx × Rdz → R+ is a kernel satisfying k(x|z)dx = 1; r ∈ P(Rdz ) is the mixing
distribution and P(Rdz ) denotes the space of distributions with support Rdz , with its usual Borel
σ-field, with finite second moments. Here, and throughout, we assume that the distributions and
kernels of interest admit densities. SIDs are very flexible (Yin and Zhou, 2018) and can express
complex properties, such as skewness, multimodality, and kurtosis. These properties might be present
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

