On Sparse Canonical Correlation Analysis

Yongchun Li
University of Tennessee
ycli@utk.edu

Santanu S. Dey
Georgia Tech
santanu.dey@isye.gatech.edu

Weijun Xie
Georgia Tech
wxie@gatech.edu

Abstract
The classical Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) identifies the correlations between two sets of multivariate variables based on their covariance, which has been
widely applied in diverse fields such as computer vision, natural language processing, and speech analysis. Despite its popularity, CCA can encounter challenges in
explaining correlations between two variable sets within high-dimensional data contexts. Thus, this paper studies Sparse Canonical Correlation Analysis (SCCA) that
enhances the interpretability of CCA. We first show that SCCA generalizes three
well-known sparse optimization problems, sparse PCA, sparse SVD, and sparse
regression, which are all classified as NP-hard problems. This result motivates us
to develop strong formulations and efficient algorithms. Our main contributions
include (i) the introduction of a combinatorial formulation that captures the essence
of SCCA and allows the development of approximation algorithms; (ii) the establishment of the complexity results for two low-rank special cases of SCCA; and
(iii) the derivation of an equivalent mixed-integer semidefinite programming model
that facilitates a specialized branch-and-cut algorithm with analytical cuts. The
effectiveness of our proposed formulations and algorithms is validated through
numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

The Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA), proposed by H. Hotelling [23], aims to identify the
correlations between two sets of multivariate variables based on their covariance. Since then, CCA
has become a powerful statistical technique used for multivariate data analysis, with its applications
across diverse fields such as computer vision [24], natural language processing [38], and speech
analysis [21]. Despite its popularity, CCA can encounter challenges in explaining correlations
between two variable sets within high-dimensional data contexts, such as genomic datasets [36]. In
contrast, Sparse Canonical Correlation Analysis (SCCA), which seeks sparse linear combinations of
these variable sets, offers substantially enhanced interpretability [41, 42, 44].
Formally, this paper studies the SCCA problem:
 ⊤
v ∗ :=
max
x Ay : x⊤ Bx ≤ 1, y ⊤ Cy ≤ 1, ∥x∥0 ≤ s1 , ∥y∥0 ≤ s2 ,
n
m
x∈R ,y∈R



(SCCA)


B A
denotes a covariance matrix of (n + m)
A⊤ C
random variables. Specifically, B and C are the covariance matrices of the n and m random variables,
respectively,
and 
A ∈ Rn×m is the cross-covariance matrix between n and m random variables.

B A
Hence,
, B, C are positive semidefinite matrices of size (n + m), n, and m, respectively.
A⊤ C
Here, matrices B, C can be singular, i.e., some random variables may be dependent on others. In fact,
the covariance matrices B, C are often low-rank, especially within the high-dimension low-sample
size data context (see, e.g., the gene expression data in [41]).

where s1 ≤ n, s2 ≤ m are positive integers and

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

