Strategic Multi-Armed Bandit Problems Under
Debt-Free Reporting

Ahmed Ben Yahmed
CREST, ENSAE, Palaiseau, France
Criteo AI Lab, Paris, France
FairPlay joint team
a.benyahmed@criteo.com

Clément Calauzènes
Criteo AI Lab, Paris, France
FairPlay joint team
c.calauzenes@criteo.com

Vianney Perchet
CREST, ENSAE, Palaiseau, France
Criteo AI Lab, Paris, France
FairPlay joint team
vianney.perchet@normalesup.org

Abstract
We consider the classical multi-armed bandit problem, but with strategic arms. In
this context, each arm is characterized by a bounded support reward distribution
and strategically aims to maximize its own utility by potentially retaining a portion
of its reward, and disclosing only a fraction of it to the learning agent. This scenario
unfolds as a game over T rounds, leading to a competition of objectives between
the learning agent, aiming to minimize their regret, and the arms, motivated by
the desire to maximize their individual utilities. To address these dynamics, we
introduce a new mechanism that establishes an equilibrium wherein each arm
behaves truthfully and discloses as much of its rewards as possible. With this
mechanism, the agent can attain the second-highest average (true) reward among
arms,
p with a cumulative regret bounded by O(log(T )/∆) (problem-dependent) or
O( T log(T )) (worst-case).

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem serves as a fundamental modeling framework for exploring
the interplay between a decision-making agent (or player) and a set of arms. Its primary aim is
to enable the player to learn the most favorable sequence of decisions over time. In formal terms,
we consider a scenario involving K arms, where, at each time step t, the player selects one arm
kt from the set {1, 2, . . . , K} and receives a reward, denoted as rkt ,t . These rewards can either be
generated stochastically or determined adversarially. The player’s overarching objective is to strike a
balance between two key aspects: exploration and exploitation. Initially, he must explore all arms
adequately to gain confidence in identifying the best-performing arm. Once this is accomplished, he
focuses on exploiting this knowledge to maximize his cumulative reward over subsequent rounds.
Established algorithms for this problem ensure that the player’s performance is nearly as good as
selecting the best individual arm, thus minimizing his regret [1, 2, 3]. This modeling framework
has broad real-world applications, including domains such as clinical trials [4, 5], recommender
systems [6], and resource allocation problems [7]. However, in many of these scenarios, arms are
traditionally viewed as passive entities, faithfully reporting their generated rewards rkt ,t to the player.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

