Aligner: Efficient Alignment by Learning to Correct

Jiaming Ji∗,1,2

Boyuan Chen∗,1,2

Hantao Lou1,2

Donghai Hong1,2

Borong Zhang1 Xuehai Pan1 Juntao Dai1 Tianyi Qiu1 Yaodong Yang†
1

2

Institute for AI, Peking University
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Institute for AI, Peking University
{jiamg.ji,cbylll,lht_pku,donghai.hong}@stu.pku.edu.cn
yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
With the rapid development of large language models (LLMs) and ever-evolving
practical requirements, finding an efficient and effective alignment method has
never been more critical. However, the tension between the complexity of current
alignment methods and the need for rapid iteration in deployment scenarios necessitates the development of a model-agnostic alignment approach that can operate
under these constraints. In this paper, we introduce Aligner, a novel and simple
alignment paradigm that learns the correctional residuals between preferred and
dispreferred answers using a small model. Designed as a model-agnostic, plug-andplay module, Aligner can be directly applied to various open-source and API-based
models with only one-off training, making it suitable for rapid iteration. Notably,
Aligner can be applied to any powerful, large-scale upstream models. Moreover,
it can even iteratively bootstrap the upstream models using corrected responses
as synthetic human preference data, breaking through the model’s performance
ceiling. Our experiments demonstrate performance improvements by deploying
the same Aligner model across 11 different LLMs, evaluated on the 3H dimensions
(helpfulness, harmlessness, and honesty). Specifically, Aligner-7B has achieved an
average improvement of 68.9% in helpfulness and 22.8% in harmlessness across
the tested LLMs while also effectively reducing hallucination. In the Alpaca-Eval
leaderboard, stacking Aligner-2B on GPT-4 Turbo improved its LC Win Rate from
55.0% to 58.3%, surpassing GPT-4 Omni’s 57.5% Win Rate (community report).

1

Introduction

The alignment of LLMs with human intentions and values has recently gained significant attention [1].
Among the various methods, supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and reinforcement learning from human
feedback (RLHF) [2, 3] have emerged as practical approaches. SFT leverages human demonstrations
to fine-tune LLMs and instruct the model on desired actions, whereas RLHF trains a reward model
(RM) based on human preferences and fine-tunes LLMs using feedback signals from the RM through
reinforcement learning (RL) methods [4].
Despite the effectiveness of these methods [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10] in meeting 3H (helpfulness, harmlessness,
and honesty) standards [11], they suffer from challenges such as high training resource consumption
and difficulty in ensuring consistent performance [12]. Meanwhile, in real-world scenarios, alignment
requirements are dynamically changing [13, 14]. Models may encounter cases outside of alignment
training and exhibit undesirable behaviors, which are difficult to address immediately using timeconsuming methods such as SFT and RLHF.
∗

Equal contribution, † Corresponding author. Project Website: https://pku-aligner.github.io.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

