An Autoencoder-Like Nonnegative Matrix
Co-Factorization for Improved Student Cognitive
Modeling

Shenbao Yu 1 Yinghui Pan 2∗ Yifeng Zeng 3 Prashant Doshi 4
Guoquan Liu 5 Kim-Leng Poh 6 Mingwei Lin 1
1

College of Computer and Cyber Security, Fujian Normal University, China
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology,
Shenzhen University, China
3
Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Northumbria University, UK
4
Intelligent Thought and Action Lab, School of Computing, University of Georgia, USA
5
Financial Technology Research Institute, Fudan University, China
6
College of Design and Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore
2

{yushenbao,lmwfjnu}@fjnu.edu.cn, panyinghui@szu.edu.cn
yifeng.zeng@northumbria.ac.uk, pdoshi@uga.edu
liugq@fudan.edu.cn, pohkimleng@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Student cognitive modeling (SCM) is a fundamental task in intelligent education,
with applications ranging from personalized learning to educational resource allocation. By exploiting students’ response logs, SCM aims to predict their exercise
performance as well as estimate knowledge proficiency in a subject. Data mining
approaches such as matrix factorization can obtain high accuracy in predicting student performance on exercises, but the knowledge proficiency is unknown or poorly
estimated. The situation is further exacerbated if only sparse interactions exist
between exercises and students (or knowledge concepts). To solve this dilemma, we
root monotonicity (a fundamental psychometric theory on educational assessments)
in a co-factorization framework and present an autoencoder-like nonnegative matrix co-factorization (AE-NMCF), which improves the accuracy of estimating the
student’s knowledge proficiency via an encoder-decoder learning pipeline. The
resulting estimation problem is nonconvex with nonnegative constraints. We introduce a projected gradient method based on block coordinate descent with Lipschitz
constants and guarantee the method’s theoretical convergence. Experiments on
several real-world data sets demonstrate the efficacy of our approach in terms of
both performance prediction accuracy and knowledge estimation ability, when
compared with existing student cognitive models.

1

Introduction

With the explosion of open educational resources, student cognitive modeling is receiving growing
attention. As illustrated in Figure 1, given a set of exercises (could be recommended by a learning
platform) with the expert-annotated knowledge concepts in a subject domain, a student is required to
finish the exercises and leaves the responses. Based on the response log, cognitive modeling aims to
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

