Data Attribution for Text-to-Image Models
by Unlearning Synthesized Images

Sheng-Yu Wang1 Aaron Hertzmann2 Alexei A. Efros3 Jun-Yan Zhu1 Richard Zhang2
1
2
3
Carnegie Mellon University
Adobe Research
UC Berkeley

Abstract
The goal of data attribution for text-to-image models is to identify the training
images that most influence the generation of a new image. Influence is defined
such that, for a given output, if a model is retrained from scratch without the most
influential images, the model would fail to reproduce the same output. Unfortunately, directly searching for these influential images is computationally infeasible,
since it would require repeatedly retraining models from scratch. In our work, we
propose an efficient data attribution method by simulating unlearning the synthesized image. We achieve this by increasing the training loss on the output image,
without catastrophic forgetting of other, unrelated concepts. We then identify training images with significant loss deviations after the unlearning process and label
these as influential. We evaluate our method with a computationally intensive but
“gold-standard” retraining from scratch and demonstrate our method’s advantages
over previous methods.

1

Introduction

Data attribution for text-to-image generation aims to identify which training images “influenced”
a given output. The black-box nature of modern image generation models [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8],
together with the enormous datasets required [9], makes it extremely challenging to understand the
contributions of individual training images. Although generative models can, at times, replicate
training data [10, 11], they typically create samples distinct from any specific training image.
We believe that a counterfactual definition of “influence” best matches the intuitive goal of attribution [12, 13]. Specifically, a collection of training images is influential for a given output image if
removing those images from the training set and then retraining from scratch makes the model unable
to reproduce the same synthesized image. Unfortunately, directly searching for the most influential
images according to this definition is computationally infeasible since it would require training an
exponentially large number of new models from scratch.
Hence, practical influence estimation requires effective approximations. For example, many approaches replace retraining with a closed-form approximation, computed separately for each training
image [12, 14, 15, 13, 16]. For text-to-image attribution, these methods are outperformed by simple
matching of off-the-shelf image features [17]. Wang et al. [18] use model customization [19] to study
the effect of training a model towards an exemplar, but find limited generalization to the general
large-scale training case. We aim for a tractable method that accurately predicts influence according
to the counterfactual definition.
We propose an influence prediction approach with two key ideas (Figure 1). First, we approximate the
removal of a training image from a model through an optimization procedure termed unlearning [20,
21, 22], which increases the training loss of the target image while preserving unrelated concepts.
We then compute the training loss for the original synthesized image. However, directly applying this
idea would require unlearning separately for every single training image, which is also costly. Our
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

