FlexSBDD: Structure-Based Drug Design with Flexible
Protein Modeling

Zaixi Zhang1,2,3 , Mengdi Wang3 , Qi Liu1,2∗,
1: School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2:State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, Hefei, Anhui, China
3:Princeton University
zaixi@mail.ustc.edu.cn, mengdiw@princeton.edu, qiliuql@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Structure-based drug design (SBDD), which aims to generate 3D ligand molecules
binding to target proteins, is a fundamental task in drug discovery. Existing SBDD
methods typically treat protein as rigid and neglect protein structural change when
binding with ligand molecules, leading to a big gap with real-world scenarios and inferior generation qualities (e.g., many steric clashes). To bridge the gap, we propose
FlexSBDD, a deep generative model capable of accurately modeling the flexible
protein-ligand complex structure for ligand molecule generation. FlexSBDD adopts
an efficient flow matching framework and leverages E(3)-equivariant network with
scalar-vector dual representation to model dynamic structural changes. Moreover,
novel data augmentation schemes based on structure relaxation/sidechain repacking
are adopted to boost performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate that FlexSBDD achieves state-of-the-art performance in generating high-affinity molecules
and effectively modeling the protein’s conformation change to increase favorable
protein-ligand interactions (e.g., Hydrogen bonds) and decrease steric clashes.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models are profoundly impacting drug discovery, particularly within the challenging
subfield of structure-based drug design (SBDD) [1, 54, 36]. SBDD focuses on generating drug-like
ligand molecules conditioned on target-binding proteins, necessitating precise modeling of complex
geometric structures and detailed protein-ligand interactions. Some early attempts adopt autoregressive models to generate 3D ligand molecules atom-by-atom [53, 57] or fragment-by-fragment
[85]. To overcome the limitations of autoregressive methods (e.g., error accumulation), recent works
[28, 29] leverage non-autoregressive diffusion-based models [31] to predict the distribution of ligand
atom types and positions via denoising and have achieved the state-of-the-art performance.
Despite the remarkable success, most existing SBDD models treat target proteins as rigid and neglect
the conformation change. However, according to the “induced fit” theory in biochemistry [43],
proteins are flexible structures that undergo structural changes upon ligand binding, leading to
enhanced interactions and binding affinity. In structural biology, the protein structure that has a bound
small molecule is referred to as ligand-bound or holo conformation, and the protein structure without
a bound small molecule is called ligand-free or apo conformation [16]. For example, Figure. 1
(a)&(b) shows the aligned apo and holo-structures of two proteins, and the extent of structural change
is influenced by the specific properties and structures of the proteins and ligands. The neglect of
protein flexibility in SBDD leads to several significant drawbacks: (1) The generated protein-ligand
complexes are prone to have sub-optimal protein structures and steric clashes as the protein cannot
adaptively adjust structures according to different generated molecules [30]. (2) The chemical search
∗

Qi Liu is the corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

