Realizable H-Consistent and Bayes-Consistent
Loss Functions for Learning to Defer

Anqi Mao
Courant Institute
New York, NY 10012
aqmao@cims.nyu.edu

Mehryar Mohri
Google Research & CIMS
New York, NY 10011
mohri@google.com

Yutao Zhong
Courant Institute
New York, NY 10012
yutao@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
We present a comprehensive study of surrogate loss functions for learning to defer.
We introduce a broad family of surrogate losses, parameterized by a non-increasing
function Ψ, and establish their realizable H-consistency under mild conditions. For
cost functions based on classification error, we further show that these loss functions
admit H-consistency bounds when the hypothesis set is symmetric and complete,
a property satisfied by common neural network and linear function hypothesis
sets. Our results also resolve an open question raised in previous work [Mozannar
et al., 2023] by proving the realizable H-consistency and Bayes-consistency of
a specific surrogate loss. Furthermore, we identify choices of Ψ that lead to
H-consistent surrogate losses for any general cost function, thus achieving Bayesconsistency, realizable H-consistency, and H-consistency bounds simultaneously.
We also investigate the relationship between H-consistency bounds and realizable
H-consistency in learning to defer, highlighting key differences from standard
classification. Finally, we empirically evaluate our proposed surrogate losses and
compare them with existing baselines.

1

Introduction

In many practical scenarios, combining expert insights with established models can yield significant
enhancements. These experts can be human domain specialists or more complex, albeit resourceintensive, models. For example, modern language and dialogue models are prone to producing
hallucinations or inaccurate information. The quality of their responses can be significantly enhanced
by delegating uncertain predictions to more specialized or advanced pre-trained models. This problem
is particularly crucial for large language models (LLMs), as noted in [Wei et al., 2022, Bubeck et al.,
2023]. The same principle applies to other generative systems, like those for images or videos,
and to learning models in diverse applications such as image classification, annotation, and speech
recognition. Thus, the task of learning to defer (L2D) with experts has become increasingly critical
across a wide array of applications.
Directly optimizing the deferral loss function, which is the target loss in L2D, is computationally
intractable for many choices of the hypothesis set. Therefore, a common approach is to optimize a
surrogate loss that facilitates the optimization of the deferral loss function. Recent work in L2D has
proposed several surrogate losses [Mozannar and Sontag, 2020, Verma and Nalisnick, 2022, Mozannar
et al., 2023, Mao et al., 2024a] and studied their consistency guarantees, including Bayes-consistency,
realizable H-consistency, and H-consistency bounds (see definitions in Section 3.2). In particular,
Mozannar and Sontag [2020] proposed the first Bayes-consistent surrogate loss by generalizing the
cross-entropy loss for L2D. Verma and Nalisnick [2022] proposed an alternative Bayes-consistent
surrogate loss by generalizing the one-versus-all loss for L2D. Mozannar et al. [2023] showed that
these surrogate losses are not realizable H-consistent. They proposed an alternative surrogate loss
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

