Large language model validity via enhanced
conformal prediction methods

John J. Cherian
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
jcherian@stanford.edu

Isaac Gibbs
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
igibbs@stanford.edu

Emmanuel J. Candès
Department of Statistics
Department of Mathematics
Stanford University
candes@stanford.edu

Abstract
We develop new conformal inference methods for obtaining validity guarantees on
the output of large language models (LLMs). Prior work in conformal language
modeling identiﬁes a subset of the text that satisﬁes a high-probability guarantee
of correctness. These methods work by ﬁltering claims from the LLM’s original
response if a scoring function evaluated on the claim fails to exceed a threshold
calibrated via split conformal prediction. Existing methods in this area suffer
from two deﬁciencies. First, the guarantee stated is not conditionally valid. The
trustworthiness of the ﬁltering step may vary based on the topic of the response.
Second, because the scoring function is imperfect, the ﬁltering step can remove
many valuable and accurate claims. We address both of these challenges via two
new conformal methods. First, we generalize the conditional conformal procedure
of Gibbs et al. (2023) in order to adaptively issue weaker guarantees when they
are required to preserve the utility of the output. Second, we show how to systematically improve the quality of the scoring function via a novel algorithm for
differentiating through the conditional conformal procedure. We demonstrate the
efﬁcacy of our approach on biography and medical question-answering datasets.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are a breakthrough in machine learning. In addition to their extraordinary performance on natural language processing benchmarks, LLMs such as ChatGPT and
Gemini are now used by hundreds of millions of users around the world [24]. But even though
these models match or even surpass human performance on an increasingly complex and diverse set
of tasks, their reliability remains in doubt. For example, LLMs often conﬁdently hallucinate facts
that do not exist, and can generate toxic outputs that may offend or discriminate [22]. This “misalignment” between user goals and model behavior hinders LLM deployment in settings where the
potential for AI assistance appears highest, e.g., legal work or customer service interaction [31].
Since an LLM output is not always trustworthy, a growing body of work aims to quantify uncertainty
regarding a given output’s validity. While there are many approaches to this problem [28, 4, 9, 18],
this paper considers a particularly popular method for black-box uncertainty quantiﬁcation: conformal inference [30, 2, 3]. Conformal inference provides a generic methodology for transforming
the predictions of any modeling procedure into valid prediction sets that are guaranteed to contain
the true outcome with high probability. Several recent papers have applied conformal inference
to deﬁne a set of LLM responses that contains at least one factual response with high probability
[3, 17, 25, 32]. But while generating a candidate set of outputs may be a reasonable strategy in some
question-answering problems, it is not a generalizable approach for the diverse and unstructured
tasks faced in real-world deployment.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

