Neural Krylov Iteration for Accelerating
Linear System Solving

Jian Luo1 Jie Wang1∗ Hong Wang1 Huanshuo Dong1
Zijie Geng1 Hanzhu Chen1 Yufei Kuang1
1
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China
{jianluo,wanghong1700}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
jiewangx@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Solving large-scale sparse linear systems is essential in fields like mathematics, science, and engineering. Traditional numerical solvers, mainly based on the Krylov
subspace iteration algorithm, suffer from the low-efficiency problem, which primarily arises from the less-than-ideal iteration. To tackle this problem, we propose a
novel method, namely Neural Krylov Iteration (NeurKItt), for accelerating linear
system solving. Specifically, NeurKItt employs a neural operator to predict the
invariant subspace of the linear system and then leverages the predicted subspace
to accelerate linear system solving. To enhance the subspace prediction accuracy,
we utilize QR decomposition for the neural operator outputs and introduce a novel
projection loss function for training. NeurKItt benefits the solving by using the
predicted subspace to guide the iteration process, significantly reducing the number
of iterations. We provide extensive experiments and comprehensive theoretical
analyses to demonstrate the feasibility and efficiency of NeurKItt. In our main
experiments, NeurKItt accelerates the solving of linear systems across various
settings and datasets, achieving up to a 5.5× speedup in computation time and a
16.1× speedup in the number of iterations.

1

Introduction

Solving linear systems is the cornerstone of scientific computing, with applications in various fields
including mathematics, science, and engineering[28]. Traditional solvers rely on the Krylov subspace
iteration algorithm to tackle large-scale sparse linear systems[59]. It starts with a random initial
vector, which corresponds to a one-dimensional linear subspace, and progressively expands this
subspace to approximate the solution by iteratively minimizing the residual error.
However, the convergence speed and stability of the Krylov subspace iteration algorithms are
significantly influenced by the dimensions and characteristics of the employed subspaces in the
iterations[3]. Computational inefficiency and instability often arise in scenarios involving highdimensional problems or large matrices, especially when the matrices exhibit poor conditioning[9].
This inefficiency primarily arises from the less-than-ideal iteration, which leads to a higher number of
iterations and consequently longer solving time. To address these challenges, our key insight is that
prior knowledge about the linear system’s invariant subspace benefits the Krylov subspace iteration
by guiding the iteration process, which reduces the required number of iterations[13].
Motivated by this insight, we introduce Neural Krylov Iteration (NeurKItt), a novel method that
leverages neural networks to accelerate linear system solving. NeurKItt comprises two modules:
∗

Corresponding author. Email: jiewangx@ustc.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

