QUEST: Quadruple Multimodal Contrastive Learning
with Constraints and Self-Penalization
Qi Song1∗, Tianxiang Gong2∗ , Shiqi Gao2 ,
Haoyi Zhou1,3 †, Jianxin Li2,3
1
School of Software, Beihang University
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
3
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing
{songqi23, gongtx, gaoshiqi, haoyi, lijx}@buaa.edu

Abstract
Multimodal contrastive learning (MCL) has recently demonstrated significant success across various tasks. However, the existing MCL treats all negative samples
equally and ignores the potential semantic association with positive samples, which
limits the model’s ability to achieve fine-grained alignment. In multi-view scenarios, MCL tends to prioritize shared information while neglecting modality-specific
unique information across different views, leading to feature suppression and suboptimal performance in downstream tasks. To address these limitations, we propose
a novel contrastive framework named QUEST: Quadruple Multimodal Contrastive
Learning with Constraints and Self-Penalization. In the QUEST framework, we
propose quaternion contrastive objectives and orthogonal constraints to extract sufficient unique information. Meanwhile, a shared information-guided penalization
is introduced to ensure that shared information does not excessively influence the
optimization of unique information. Our method leverages quaternion vector spaces
to simultaneously optimize shared and unique information. Experiments on multiple datasets show that our method achieves superior performance in multimodal
contrastive learning benchmarks. On public benchmark, our approach achieves
state-of-the-art performance, and on synthetic shortcut datasets, we outperform
existing baseline methods by an average of 97.95% on the CLIP model.

1

Introduction

Multimodal Contrastive Learning (MCL) has demonstrated robust representation capabilities and
generalizability and effectively transferring to various downstream tasks (e.g. cross-modal retrieval [40, 39, 33], image captioning [37, 72, 73]). However, simply applying contrastive learning in
multimodal scenarios presents significant challenges. Ê In particular, contrastive learning treats all
negative samples equally, ignoring the potential semantic relationships between negative samples and
the anchor. Ë Besides, current contrastive learning methods focus on maximizing mutual information
between two views [68, 70] while ignoring unique information [41]. In multi-view scenarios, the
assumption that modalities share substantial task-related information often does not hold, especially
in complex datasets with minimal inter-modal overlap. Ì Meanwhile, recent studies [56, 75] indicate that contrastive learning often neglects significant portions of input information, leading to
feature suppression [1, 8] and shortcut learning [25, 57], where models minimize loss through the
simplest path (e.g. shared information [3]), sacrificing deeper learning. These issues are prevalent
in multimodal [45, 54, 32] and multi-view tasks [76, 82, 50, 43]. Recent approaches focus on pre∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

