Implicit Curriculum in Procgen Made Explicit

Zhenxiong Tan∗
National University of Singapore
zhenxiong@u.nus.edu

Kaixin Wang∗†
National University of Singapore
kaixin96.wang@gmail.com

Xinchao Wang‡
National University of Singapore
xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Procedurally generated environments such as Procgen Benchmark provide a testbed
for evaluating the agent’s ability to robustly learn a relevant skill, by situating the
agent in ever-changing levels. The diverse levels associated with varying contexts
are naturally connected to curriculum learning. Existing works mainly focus on
arranging the levels to explicitly form a curriculum. In this work, we take a
close look at the learning process itself under the multi-level training in Procgen.
Interestingly, the learning process exhibits a gradual shift from easy contexts to hard
contexts, suggesting an implicit curriculum in multi-level training. Our analysis
is made possible through C-Procgen, a benchmark we build upon Procgen that
enables explicit control of the contexts. We believe our findings will foster a deeper
understanding of learning in diverse contexts, and our benchmark will benefit
future research in curriculum reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

Training deep reinforcement learning agents in singleton environments is often susceptible to overfitting (Zhang et al., 2018a,b; Song et al., 2019; Cobbe et al., 2019, 2020). Recently, procedurally
generated environments, which take into account the agent’s generalization ability, have received
increasing attention (Justesen et al., 2018; Risi and Togelius, 2020; Cobbe et al., 2020). In those
environments, the agent faces an entirely new level in each episode (e.g., different maze layouts).
Succeeding in such ever-changing levels demands that the agent learn robust policies. Compared
to singleton environments, the diverse levels in procedurally generated environments pose new
challenges for reinforcement learning training, calling for a better understanding of how learning
progresses in this multi-level setting.
In procedurally generated environments, each level is associated with some environment parameters (Dennis et al., 2020) that vary across levels, e.g., the agent’s max speed, the size of the maze, or
the number of obstacles. We refer to these various combinations of environment parameters as the
contexts of the environment. The varying contexts give rise to levels of varying difficulties, suggesting
a possible connection to curriculum learning (Bengio et al., 2009). While some previous works
explore this connection, they mainly focus on arranging the order of levels to form a curriculum (Jiang
et al., 2021b), or adaptively generating new levels to create a curriculum (Wang et al., 2019, 2020;
Dennis et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2021a; Parker-Holder et al., 2022). The learning process itself in the
face of diverse levels is less investigated.
∗

Equal Contributions
Currently in Microsoft Research Asia, work done during his time in NUS.
‡
Corresponding Author.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

