Towards Neuron Attributions in Multimodal
Large Language Models

Zongze Bi, Ruipeng Wang, Houcheng Jiang, Yuan Gao, Kun Wang∗
University of Science and Technology of China
{fjf,zacb2018,wrp20021021,janghc,gaoy,wk520529}@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Junfeng Fang,

An Zhang
National University of Singapore
an_zhang@nus.edu.sg
Xiang Wang∗
University of Science and Technology of China
xiangwang1223@gmail.com

Jie Shi
Huawei
shi.jie1@huawei.com
Tat-Seng Chua
National University of Singapore
dcscts@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
As Large Language Models (LLMs) demonstrate impressive capabilities, demystifying their internal mechanisms becomes increasingly vital. Neuron attribution,
which attributes LLM outputs to specific neurons to reveal the semantic properties
they learn, has emerged as a key interpretability approach. However, while neuron
attribution has made significant progress in deciphering text-only LLMs, its application to Multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) remains less explored. To address this gap,
we propose a novel Neuron Attribution method tailored for MLLMs, termed NAM.
Specifically, NAM not only reveals the modality-specific semantic knowledge
learned by neurons within MLLMs, but also highlights several intriguing properties
of neurons, such as cross-modal invariance and semantic sensitivity. These properties collectively elucidate the inner workings mechanism of MLLMs, providing a
deeper understanding of how MLLMs process and generate multi-modal content.
Through theoretical analysis and empirical validation, we demonstrate the efficacy
of NAM and the valuable insights it offers. Furthermore, leveraging NAM, we
introduce a multi-modal knowledge editing paradigm, underscoring the practical
significance of our approach for downstream applications of MLLMs. Our code is
available at https://github.com/littlelittlenine/NAM_1.

1

Introduction

As Large Language Models (LLMs) demonstrate impressive capabilities [1, 2, 3, 4], demystifying their
internal mechanisms becomes increasingly vital, particularly in applications emphasizing fairness,
trust, and ethical decision-making [5, 6, 7]. To interpret LLMs, “neuron attribution” stands out as
a pivotal approach. This method involves attributing text outputs to individual model components
(e.g., neurons and hidden layers) to reveal the knowledge and linguistic properties they learn [5, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12]. Such insights not only facilitate tasks like model editing and pruning [13, 14, 15],
but also offer a deeper understanding of how LLMs internalize knowledge. For instance, leading
neuron-attribution studies [16, 17, 13, 14, 18, 19] suggest that this capability of internalization may
predominantly originate from their Feedforward Neural Networks (FFNs).
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

