Differentially Private Equivalence Testing for
Continuous Distributions and Applications

Daniel Omer
Math. Dept.
Bar-Ilan University
omerdan@biu.ac.il

Or Sheffet
Faculty of Engineering
Bar-Ilan University
or.sheffet@biu.ac.il

Abstract
We present the first algorithm for testing equivalence between two continuous
distributions using differential privacy (DP). Our algorithm is a private version
of the algorithm of Diakonikolas et al [16]. The algorithm of [16] uses the data
itself to repeatedly discretize the real line so that — when the two distributions
are far apart in Ak -norm — one of the discretized distributions exhibits large
L2 -norm difference; and upon repeated sampling such large gap would be detected.
Designing its private analogue poses two difficulties. First, our DP algorithm can
not resample new datapoints as a change to a single datapoint may lead to a very
large change in the descretization of the real line. In contrast, the (sorted) index of
the discretization point changes only by 1 between neighboring instances, and so
we use a novel algorithm that set the discretization points using random Bernoulli
noise, resulting in only a few buckets being affected under the right coupling.
Second, our algorithm, which doesn’t resample data, requires we also revisit the
utility analysis of the original algorithm and prove its correctness w.r.t. the original
sorted data; a problem we tackle using sampling a subset of Poisson-drawn size
from each discretized bin. Lastly, since any distribution can be reduced to a
continuous distribution, our algorithm is successfully carried to multiple other
families of distributions and thus has numerous applications.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy (DP), a mathematically rigorous notion that bounds the effect of any single datum
on the output distribution, is the current (de facto) gold-standard of privacy preserving data analysis.
By now we have a myriad of DP-algorithms for learning and for various tasks of statistical inference.
Indeed, the design of DP-hypothesis testers is crucial for the dissipation of DP into other data-centric
fields — such as economics, education and health — that analyze sensitive data in massive quantities.
However, by and large the design of DP-hypothesis testing is confined to distributions over finite (and
thus discrete) domains rather than contiunuous distributions.
Hypothesis testing over continuous distributions poses a special challenge due to infinitesimally
small perturbations — two continuous distributions can have Total-Variation distance of α using,
say, exponentially many intervals each with an exponentially small shift of probability mass, which
clearly cannot be detected with polynomially-size sample. Luckily, this issue was resolved in the
works of [10, 15, 16] who restricted the TV-distance to using k-intervals. Formally, these works
measure distance in Ak -norm: where for any two distributions P and Q we have that ∥P − Q∥Ak =
Pk
sup j=1 |P(Ij ) − Q(Ij )| where I is a partition of the real-line R into k intervals I1 , I2 , ..., Ik .
I

But the fact remains that continuous distributions pose a special challenge for DP-algorithm designers.
In fact, releasing even a simple statistics like the median is impossible over infinite domains [6, 7].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

