Provable Tempered Overfitting of
Minimal Nets and Typical Nets

Itamar Harel
Technion
itamarharel01@gmail.com
Itay Evron
Technion

William M. Hoza
The University of Chicago

Gal Vardi
Weizmann Institute of Science

Nathan Srebro
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago

Daniel Soudry
Technion

Abstract
We study the overfitting behavior of fully connected deep Neural Networks (NNs)
with binary weights fitted to perfectly classify a noisy training set. We consider
interpolation using both the smallest NN (having the minimal number of weights)
and a random interpolating NN. For both learning rules, we prove overfitting is
tempered. Our analysis rests on a new bound on the size of a threshold circuit
consistent with a partial function. To the best of our knowledge, ours are the first
theoretical results on benign or tempered overfitting that: (1) apply to deep NNs,
and (2) do not require a very high or very low input dimension.

1

Introduction

Neural networks (NNs) famously exhibit strong generalization capabilities, seemingly in defiance
of traditional generalization theory. Specifically, NNs often generalize well empirically even when
trained to interpolate the training data perfectly [97]. This motivated an extensive line of work
attempting to explain the overfitting behavior of NNs, and particularly their generalization capabilities
when trained to perfectly fit a training set with corrupted labels (e.g., [5, 28, 57, 48]).
In an attempt to better understand the aforementioned generalization capabilities of NNs, Mallinar
et al. [57] proposed a taxonomy of benign, tempered, and catastrophic overfitting. An algorithm that
perfectly interpolates a training set with corrupted labels, i.e., an interpolator, is said to have tempered
overfitting if its generalization error is neither benign nor catastrophic — not optimal but much better
than trivial. However, the characterization of overfitting in NNs is still incomplete, especially in deep
NNs when the input dimension is neither very high nor very low. In this paper, we aim to understand
the overfitting behavior of deep NNs in this regime.
We start by analyzing tempered overfitting in “min-size” NN interpolators, i.e., whose neural layer
widths are selected to minimize the total number of weights. The number of parameters in a model is
a natural complexity measure in learning theory and practice. For instance, it is theoretically well
understood that L1 regularization in a sparse linear regression setting yields a sparse regressor. Practically, finding small-sized deep models is a common objective used in pruning (e.g., [33]) and neural
architecture search (e.g., [54]). Recently, Manoj and Srebro [58] proved that the shortest program
(Turing machine) that perfectly interpolates noisy datasets exhibits tempered overfitting, illustrating
how a powerful model can avoid catastrophic overfitting by returning a min-size interpolator.
Furthermore, we study tempered overfitting in random (“typical”) interpolators — NNs sampled
uniformly from the set of parameters that perfectly fit the training set. Given a narrow teacher model
and no label noise, Buzaglo et al. [13] recently proved that such typical interpolators, which may be
highly overparameterized, generalize well. This is remarkable since these interpolators do not rely on
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

