Large Scale Transfer Learning for Tabular Data
via Language Modeling

Josh Gardner♮,∗
♮

Juan C. Perdomo#

Ludwig Schmidt♮,♭

University of Washington, # Harvard University, ♭ Stanford University
∗
Corresponding author, jpgard@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Tabular data – structured, heterogeneous, spreadsheet-style data with rows and
columns – is widely used in practice across many domains. However, while recent
foundation models have reduced the need for developing task-specific datasets and
predictors in domains such as language modeling and computer vision, this transfer
learning paradigm has not had similar impact in the tabular domain. In this work,
we seek to narrow this gap and present TABU L A -8B, a language model for tabular
prediction. We define a process for extracting a large, high-quality training dataset
from the TabLib corpus, proposing methods for tabular data filtering and quality
control. Using the resulting dataset, which comprises over 2.1B rows from 4.2M
unique tables, we fine-tune a Llama 3-8B large language model (LLM) for tabular
data prediction (classification and binned regression) using a novel packing and
attention scheme for tabular prediction. Through evaluation across a test suite of
329 datasets, we find that TABU L A -8B has zero-shot accuracy on unseen tables
that is over 15 percentage points (pp) higher than random guessing, a feat that is
not possible with existing state-of-the-art tabular prediction models (e.g. XGBoost,
TabPFN). In the few-shot setting (1-32 shots), without any fine-tuning on the target
datasets, TABU L A -8B is 5-15 pp more accurate than XGBoost and TabPFN models
that are explicitly trained on equal, or even up to 16× more data. We release our
model, code, and data along with the publication of this paper. 1

Zero- and Few-Shot Performance
Over 191 32-Shot Benchmark Tasks

Introduction

Transfer learning - the ability of a model to accurately
solve prediction tasks on data it was not trained on - is
one of the defining hallmarks of recent foundation models
in domains such as vision [38] and language [6]. Among
their many advantages, transferable models expand the
scope of problems that can be tackled via machine learning
by reducing the need for curated, task-specific models and
datasets. Such models also can provide both absolute performance and sample-efficiency gains over task-specific
models when applied to new tasks [38, 41, 53].

0.7

Open-Vocabulary Accuracy

1

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

TabuLa 8B
Llama 3 8B (no fine-tuning)
XGBoost trained + tuned on k samples
TabPFN on k samples
Random baseline
10
15
20
25
30

In this work, we introduce a new model and dataset for
0.2
0
5
large-scale transfer learning on tabular data. Tabular,
Number of Shots
spreadsheet-style data underlies applications in healthcare,
finance, government, and the natural sciences [4, 16, 50]. Figure 1: TABU L A -8B outperforms
SOTA tabular baselines across 0 − 321
For links to all code, data, and model, see Section 7.
shot tasks from five tabular benchmarks.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

