OASIS: Conditional Distribution Shaping for
Offline Safe Reinforcement Learning

Yihang Yao∗1 , Zhepeng Cen∗1 , Wenhao Ding1 , Haohong Lin1 , Shiqi Liu1 ,
Tingnan Zhang2 , Wenhao Yu2 , Ding Zhao1
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Google DeepMind
∗
Equal contribution, {yihangya, zcen}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Offline safe reinforcement learning (RL) aims to train a policy that satisfies constraints using a pre-collected dataset. Most current methods struggle with the
mismatch between imperfect demonstrations and the desired safe and rewarding
performance. In this paper, we mitigate this issue from a data-centric perspective
and introduce OASIS (cOnditionAl diStributIon Shaping), a new paradigm in
offline safe RL designed to overcome these critical limitations. OASIS utilizes a
conditional diffusion model to synthesize offline datasets, thus shaping the data distribution toward a beneficial target domain. Our approach makes compliance with
safety constraints through effective data utilization and regularization techniques to
benefit offline safe RL training. Comprehensive evaluations on public benchmarks
and varying datasets showcase OASIS’s superiority in benefiting offline safe RL
agents to achieve high-reward behavior while satisfying the safety constraints, outperforming established baselines. Furthermore, OASIS exhibits high data efficiency
and robustness, making it suitable for real-world applications, particularly in tasks
where safety is imperative and high-quality demonstrations are scarce. More details
are available at the website https://sites.google.com/view/saferl-oasis/home.

1

Introduction

Offline Reinforcement Learning (RL), which aims to learn high-reward behaviors from a pre-collected
dataset [1, 2], has emerged as a powerful paradigm for handling sequential decision-making tasks
such as autonomous driving [3, 4, 5, 6], and robotics [7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. Although standard offline RL
has achieved remarkable success in some environments, many real-world tasks cannot be adequately
addressed by simply maximizing a scalar reward function due to the existence of various safety
constraints that limit feasible solutions. The requirement for safety, or constraint satisfaction, is
particularly crucial in RL algorithms when deployed in real-world tasks [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19].
To develop an optimal policy within a constrained manifold [20, 21], offline safe RL has been actively
studied in recent years, offering novel ways to integrate safety requirements into offline RL [22].
Existing research in this area incorporates techniques from both offline RL and safe RL, including the
use of stationary distribution correction [23, 24], regularization [25, 26], and constrained optimization
formulations [27]. Researchers have also proposed the use of sequential modeling methods, such as
the decision transformer [28, 29] and the decision diffuser [30, 31] to achieve advantageous policies
and meet safety requirements.
Although these methods show promise, it is difficult to handle state-action pairs that are absent from
the dataset, which is known notably as out-of-distribution (OOD) extrapolation issues [31, 32, 33,
34, 35, 36, 37]. To solve this, many works utilize regularization methods to push the policy toward
behavior policy to achieve pessimism [35, 36]. However, this approach worsens the situation when
the dataset is imbalanced and biased: regularization by imperfect demonstrations such as datasets
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

