Scalable Constrained Policy Optimization for
Safe Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning

Lijun Zhang1 , Lin Li1 , Wei Wei1∗, Huizhong Song1 , Yaodong Yang2 , Jiye Liang1
1. Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence and Chinese Information Processing of
Ministry of Education, School of Computer and Information Technology,
Shanxi University, Taiyuan, Shanxi, China.
2. Institute for AI, Peking University, Beijing, China.

Abstract
A challenging problem in seeking to bring multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) techniques into real-world applications, such as autonomous driving
and drone swarms, is how to control multiple agents safely and cooperatively
to accomplish tasks. Most existing safe MARL methods learn the centralized
value function by introducing a global state to guide safety cooperation. However,
the global coupling arising from safety constraints and the exponential growth
of the state-action space size limit their applicability in instant communication
or computing resource-constrained systems and larger multi-agent systems. In
this paper, we develop a novel scalable and theoretically-justified multi-agent
constrained policy optimization method. This method integrates the rigorous
bounds of the trust region method and the bounds of the truncated advantage
function to provide a new local policy optimization objective for each agent. Also,
we prove that the safety constraints and the joint policy improvement can be
met when each agent adopts a sequential update scheme to optimize a κ-hop
policy. Furthermore, we propose a practical algorithm called Scalable MAPPOLagrangian (Scal-MAPPO-L). The proposed method’s effectiveness is verified on a
collection of benchmark tasks, and the results support our theory that decentralized
training with local interactions can still improve reward performance and satisfy
safe constraints.

1

Introduction

With the advanced and rapid developments of reinforcement learning technology, many researchers
have gradually shifted their focus from virtual simulation to real-world cyber-physical applications
[1, 2]. In this process, safety challenges are inevitable, especially in multi-agent safety-critical
scenarios, e.g., autonomous vehicle navigation [3], power grids [4], and drone swarms [5], in which
agents perform complex cooperative tasks while adhering to a variety of local and system-wide
limitations or constraints. These constraints can be derived from domain-specific knowledge and
are intended to prevent damage to people or other environmental elements, such as equipment and
infrastructure, or to prevent the inability to accomplish specific tasks or objectives. Take multi-robot
control as an example. Each running robot must not take certain actions or not visit certain states,
which may imply unsafe for itself, its collaborators, or the infrastructure of its environment [6]. These
widespread potential dangers exacerbate the difficulty of safety decision-making when applying
MARL. Consequently, it is necessary to research the safe decision-making problem in MARL to
ensure that agents can work together safely and cooperatively to accomplish tasks.
∗

Correspondence to <weiwei@sxu.edu.cn>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

