User-Creator Feature Polarization in Recommender
Systems with Dual Influence

Tao Lin∗
Harvard University

Kun Jin∗
Google

tlin@g.harvard.edu

kunjin@google.com

Andrew Estornell
ByteDance

Xiaoying Zhang
ByteDance

andrew.estornell@bytedance.com

zhangxiaoying.xy@bytedance.com

Yiling Chen
Harvard University

Yang Liu
University of California, Santa Cruz

yiling@seas.harvard.edu

yangliu@ucsc.edu

Abstract
Recommender systems serve the dual purpose of presenting relevant content to
users and helping content creators reach their target audience. The dual nature of
these systems naturally influences both users and creators: users’ preferences are
affected by the items they are recommended, while creators may be incentivized
to alter their content to attract more users. We define a model, called user-creator
feature dynamics, to capture the dual influence of recommender systems. We prove
that a recommender system with dual influence is guaranteed to polarize, causing
diversity loss in the system. We then investigate, both theoretically and empirically,
approaches for mitigating polarization and promoting diversity in recommender
systems. Unexpectedly, we find that common diversity-promoting approaches do
not work in the presence of dual influence, while relevancy-optimizing methods
like top-k truncation can prevent polarization and improve diversity of the system.

1

Introduction

From restaurant selection, video watching, to apartment renting, recommender systems play a pivotal
role across a plethora of real-world domains. These systems match users with content they like, and
help creators (those producing the content) identify their target audiences. Nevertheless, behind such
success, concerns have emerged regarding possible harmful outcomes of recommender systems, in
particular, filter bubbles [32, 5] and polarization [36] – outcomes with insufficient recommendation
diversity and creation diversity. Recommendation diversity, meaning the diversity of the contents
recommended to a user, is key to users’ engagement and retention on the platform. Meanwhile,
creation diversity, meaning the variety of content created on the platform, is a determinant of the
platform’s long-term health. In extreme cases, insufficient creation diversity can lead to consensus or
polarization, where the latter can cause conflict and hatred, diminish people’s mutual understanding,
and cause societal crises. Therefore, from both business and social responsibility perspectives,
championing and improving diversity in recommender systems is equally important as optimizing
recommendation relevancy.
∗

The first two authors contributed equally to this work. And this work was done when Kun was at TikTok.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

