Pruning neural network models for gene regulatory
dynamics using data and domain knowledge

Intekhab Hossain*, §
Department of Biostatistics
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
Boston, MA 02115
ihossain@g.harvard.edu
Rebekka Burkholz†
Helmholtz Center CISPA
for Information Security
Saarbrücken, Germany
burkholz@cispa.de

Jonas Fischer*
Dep. for Computer Vision and Machine Learning
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarbrücken, Germany
jonas.fischer@mpi-inf.mpg.de
John Quackenbush†
Department of Biostatistics
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
Boston, MA 02115
johnq@hsph.harvard.edu

Abstract
The practical utility of machine learning models in the sciences often hinges on
their interpretability. It is common to assess a model’s merit for scientific discovery, and thus novel insights, by how well it aligns with already available domain
knowledge–a dimension that is currently largely disregarded in the comparison
of neural network models. While pruning can simplify deep neural network architectures and excels in identifying sparse models, as we show in the context of
gene regulatory network inference, state-of-the-art techniques struggle with biologically meaningful structure learning. To address this issue, we propose DASH‡ ,
a generalizable framework that guides network pruning by using domain-specific
structural information in model fitting and leads to sparser, better interpretable
models that are more robust to noise. Using both synthetic data with ground truth
information, as well as real-world gene expression data, we show that DASH, using
knowledge about gene interaction partners within the putative regulatory network,
outperforms general pruning methods by a large margin and yields deeper insights
into the biological systems being studied.

1

Introduction

With ever-growing neural network architectures encouraged by the success of overparametrization,
with over a trillion parameters in a single model such as GPT4, there is a similarly growing demand for
sparser, more parameter-efficient neural networks that are more resource-friendly and interpretable.
The Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH) provides an empirical existence proof of sparse, trainable
network architectures [18], that eventually achieve a similar performance as their dense counterpart.
Subsequent work introduced structured pruning approaches, facilitating group-wise neuron- [32, 62],
or channel-sparsity [34, 25, 26], which are, however, focused on the structure of the architecture
design, aiming for better alignment with hardware implementations to eliminate operations, rather
than structure that reflects relevant domain information. Especially for scientific discovery, an
‡

Code is available at https://github.com/QuackenbushLab/DASH.
*,†
These authors contributed equally to this work.
§
IH is currently employed by Analysis Group, Inc.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

