Apathetic or Empathetic? Evaluating LLMs’
Emotional Alignments with Humans

Jen-tse Huang1∗ Man Ho Lam1
Eric John Li1
Shujie Ren2
1∗†
3†
3
Wenxuan Wang
Wenxiang Jiao
Zhaopeng Tu
Michael R. Lyu1
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Institute of Psychology, Tianjin Medical University 3 Tencent AI Lab
{jthuang,wxwang,lyu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk {mhlam,ejli}@link.cuhk.edu.hk
shujieren@tmu.edu.cn {joelwxjiao,zptu}@tencent.com

Abstract
Evaluating Large Language Models’ (LLMs) anthropomorphic capabilities has
become increasingly important in contemporary discourse. Utilizing the emotion
appraisal theory from psychology, we propose to evaluate the empathy ability of
LLMs, i.e., how their feelings change when presented with specific situations.
After a careful and comprehensive survey, we collect a dataset containing over
400 situations that have proven effective in eliciting the eight emotions central
to our study. Categorizing the situations into 36 factors, we conduct a human
evaluation involving more than 1,200 subjects worldwide. With the human evaluation results as references, our evaluation includes seven LLMs, covering both
commercial and open-source models, including variations in model sizes, featuring
the latest iterations, such as GPT-4, Mixtral-8x22B, and LLaMA-3.1. We find
that, despite several misalignments, LLMs can generally respond appropriately to
certain situations. Nevertheless, they fall short in alignment with the emotional
behaviors of human beings and cannot establish connections between similar situations. Our collected dataset of situations, the human evaluation results, and
the code of our testing framework, i.e., EmotionBench, are publicly available at
https://github.com/CUHK-ARISE/EmotionBench.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have recently made significant strides in Artificial Intelligence (AI),
representing a noteworthy milestone in computer science. LLMs have showcased their capabilities
across various tasks, including sentence revision (Wu et al., 2023), text translation (Jiao et al.,
2023), program repair (Fan et al., 2023), and program testing (Deng et al., 2023; Kang et al.,
2023). Not limited to research level, LLMs, such as ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022), have revolutionized
the way people interact with traditional software, enhancing fields such as education (Dai et al.,
2023), legal advice (Deroy et al., 2023), and clinical medicine (Cascella et al., 2023). LLMs
also facilitate the emergence of AI companion applications, including Yuna (https://www.yuna.
io/), Pimento (https://www.pimento.design/), and Luzia (https://www.luzia.com/en).
Consequently, there is a growing need for evaluating LLMs’ communicative dynamics compared to
human behaviors, beyond mere performance on downstream tasks.
This paper delves into an unexplored area of evaluating LLMs’ emotional alignment with humans.
Consider our daily experiences: (1) When faced with certain situations, humans often experience
∗
†

This work was partially done when Jen-tse Huang and Wenxuan Wang were interning at Tencent AI Lab.
Wenxuan Wang and Wenxiang Jiao are corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

