Multi-LLM Debate: Framework, Principals, and
Interventions
Andrew Estornell
ByteDance Research
andrew.estornell@bytedance.com

Yang Liu
University of California, Santa Cruz
yangliu@ucsc.edu

Abstract
The flexible and generalized nature of large language models has allowed for their
application in a wide array of language-based domains. Much like their human
contemporaries, these models are capable of engaging in discussions and debates
as a means of improving answer quality. We first take a theoretical approach to
analyzing debate and provide a framework through which debate can be mathematically examined. Building on this framework, we provide several theoretical
results for multi-agent debate. In particular, we demonstrate that similar model
capabilities, or similar model responses, can result in static debate dynamics where
the debate procedure simply converges to the majority opinion. When this majority
opinion is the result of a common misconception (possibly ingrained in the models
through shared training data) debate is likely to converge to answers associated
with that common misconception. Using insights from our theoretical results, we
then propose three interventions that improve the efficacy of debate. For each
intervention, we provide theoretical results demonstrating how debate is improved.
We also demonstrate that these interventions result in better performance on four
common benchmark tasks.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated a remarkable ability to perform unseen tasks with
high efficacy. This behavior, often referred to as emergent, allows LLMs to serve as general-purpose
tools for a wide array of language-based functions. One such behavior of particular interest is the
ability of LLMs to intake and process opinions from other models (or humans). As shown in several
previous works, this ability allows LLMs to collaboratively solve tasks by engaging in debate Chan
et al. [2023], Liang et al. [2023], Du et al. [2023]. For a given task, multi-agent debate operates
by eliciting responses from each model, distributing those responses among the models, and then
eliciting updated responses from each model.
In this work, we aim to explore the debate procedure, by first providing a theoretical framework
through which debate can be better understood. This framework draws inspiration from Bayesian
inference and in-context learning, showing that debate can be partially viewed as a special type of
in-context learning. Through this framework, we then provide several theoretical insights into the
debate procedure. In particular, we demonstrate the susceptibility of multi-agent debate to echochamber effects. These echo-chamber effects are especially consequential when they stem from a
shared misconception between a majority of models, which can arise from circumstances such as
highly correlated training data between each model.
We then leverage results from our theoretical framework to improve the efficacy of the debate
procedure. In particular, we propose three interventions (modifications to the debate procedure).
First, diversity-pruning which aims to maximize the information entropy in model responses at each
round of debate; this intervention has the added benefit of reducing the severity of the echo chamber
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

