S AFE W ORLD: Geo-Diverse Safety Alignment

Da Yin∗
UCLA
da.yin@cs.ucla.edu
Kung-Hsiang Huang
Salesforce AI Research
kh.huang@salesforce.com

Haoyi Qiu∗
UCLA
haoyiqiu@cs.ucla.edu

Kai-Wei Chang
UCLA
kwchang@cs.ucla.edu

Nanyun Peng
UCLA
violetpeng@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Content Warning: This paper may contain examples of harmful contents by nature.
In the rapidly evolving field of Large Language Models (LLMs), ensuring safety
is a crucial and widely discussed topic. However, existing works often overlook
the geo-diversity of cultural and legal standards across the world. To demonstrate
the challenges posed by geo-diverse safety standards, we introduce S AFE W ORLD,
a novel benchmark specifically designed to evaluate LLMs’ ability to generate
responses that are not only helpful but also culturally sensitive and legally compliant across diverse global contexts. S AFE W ORLD encompasses 2,775 test user
queries, each grounded in high-quality, human-verified cultural norms and legal
policies from 50 countries and 493 regions/races. On top of it, we propose a multidimensional automatic safety evaluation framework that assesses the contextual
appropriateness, accuracy, and comprehensiveness of responses. Our evaluations
reveal that current LLMs struggle to meet these criteria. To enhance LLMs’ alignment with geo-diverse safety standards, we synthesize helpful preference pairs for
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) alignment training. The preference pair
construction aims to encourage LLMs to behave appropriately and provide precise
references to relevant cultural norms and policies when necessary. Our trained
S AFE W ORLD LM outperforms all competing models, including GPT-4o on all the
three evaluation dimensions by a large margin. Global human evaluators also note
a nearly 20% higher winning rate in helpfulness and harmfulness evaluation.
Send a green hat as gift
Take 18-year-old friend to pub
Gamble in casino

Send a green hat as gift
Take 18-year-old friend to pub
Gamble in casino

🌍 SafeWorld : Geo-Diverse Safety Alignment Benchmark
Domains

Locations / Races

Evaluation Dimensions

🕌 Culture Safety

50 Countries
493 Regions /
Races

Response Type Matching

⚖ Legal Safety

🌍 SafeWorld Example

Send a green hat as gift
Take 18-year-old friend to pub
Gamble in casino

🌍 Safety standards vary geographically!

User

… invite a high-school friend to a NYC
American pub. Any recommendations
and how can we get there …?
Fantastic! But aware of the US policy
about legal drinking age … … Instead
of inviting the friend to the pub, there

LLM

could be other awesome places: … …

Reference-Based
Faithfulness and Coverage
Reference-Free Factuality
Whether the response behavior is
aligned with the query type
Faithfulness and coverage of the output norms
and policies compared to ground-truth
Factual accuracy of output norms and policies
that are not covered by the ground-truth

Figure 1: Examples of geo-diverse safety standards and the overall introduction of S AFE W ORLD
benchmark and its multi-dimensional evaluation.
∗

The authors contributed equally to this work and are listed in alphabetical order by first name.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

