GarmentLab: A Unified Simulation and Benchmark
for Garment Manipulation

Haoran Lu1,2∗ Ruihai Wu1∗ Yitong Li1,3∗
Sijie Li1,2 Ziyu Zhu1,2 Chuanruo Ning1 Yan Shen1
Longzan Luo1,2 Yuanpei Chen1 Hao Dong 1
1
CFCS, School of CS, PKU 2 School of EECS, PKU 3 Weiyang College, THU

Abstract
Manipulating garments and fabrics has long been a critical endeavor in the development of home-assistant robots. However, due to complex dynamics and topological
structures, garment manipulations pose significant challenges. Recent successes in
reinforcement learning and vision-based methods offer promising avenues for learning garment manipulation. Nevertheless, these approaches are severely constrained
by current benchmarks, which offer limited diversity of tasks and unrealistic simulation behavior. Therefore, we present GarmentLab, a content-rich benchmark
and realistic simulation designed for deformable object and garment manipulation.
Our benchmark encompasses a diverse range of garment types, robotic systems
and manipulators. The abundant tasks in the benchmark further explores of the
interactions between garments, deformable objects, rigid bodies, fluids, and human
body. Moreover, by incorporating multiple simulation methods such as FEM and
PBD, along with our proposed sim-to-real algorithms and real-world benchmark,
we aim to significantly narrow the sim-to-real gap. We evaluate state-of-the-art
vision methods, reinforcement learning, and imitation learning approaches on
these tasks, highlighting the challenges faced by current algorithms, notably their
limited generalization capabilities. Our proposed open-source environments and
comprehensive analysis show promising boost to future research in garment manipulation by unlocking the full potential of these methods. We guarantee that
we will open-source our code as soon as possible. You can watch the videos in
supplementary files to learn more about the details of our work. Our project page
is available at: https://garmentlab.github.io/

1

Introduction

The next-generation assistant robots should possess not only the abilities to separately manipulate
a wide variety of objects, including rigid, articulated[59], and deformable objects[58], but also the
capability to leverage interactions between those physical media, including flow and fluids, in order
to assist humans[39]. Among various daily tasks [69, 59, 56], garment manipulation stands out as one
of the most challenging, crucial, and extensively discussed tasks in the robotics and computer vision,
due to its demanding requirements for understanding dynamic properties of physical instances and
interactions between them. For instance, washing clothes entails the interaction between garments
and fluids, while dressing up requires collaboration between robots and humans.
Garment manipulation tasks mainly presents three challenges. Firstly, each individual garment
possesses nearly infinite states and exhibits complex kinematic and dynamic properties. Therefore, it
is crucial for models to comprehend the various self-deform states of garments, which usually requires
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

