Visual Perception by Large Language Model’s Weights

Feipeng Ma1,2∗, Hongwei Xue1,2,3†, Yizhou Zhou2‡, Guangting Wang2 , Fengyun Rao2
Shilin Yan4 , Yueyi Zhang1‡, Siying Wu5 , Mike Zheng Shou3 , Xiaoyan Sun1,5‡
1

University of Science and Technology of China 2 WeChat, Tencent Inc.
3
4
Show Lab, National University of Singapore
Fudan University
5
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{mafp,xuehongwei}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
harryizzhou@tencent.com, {zhyuey,sunxiaoyan}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) follow the paradigm that
perceives visual information by aligning visual features with the input space of
Large Language Models (LLMs) and concatenating visual tokens with text tokens
to form a unified sequence input for LLMs. These methods demonstrate promising
results on various vision-language tasks but are limited by the high computational
effort due to the extended input sequence resulting from the involvement of visual tokens. In this paper, instead of input space alignment, we propose a novel
parameter space alignment paradigm that represents visual information as model
weights. For each input image, we use a vision encoder to extract visual features,
convert features into perceptual weights, and merge the perceptual weights with
LLM’s weights. In this way, the input of LLM does not require visual tokens,
which reduces the length of the input sequence and greatly improves efficiency.
Following this paradigm, we propose VLoRA with the perceptual weights generator. The perceptual weights generator is designed to convert visual features
to perceptual weights with low-rank property, exhibiting a form similar to LoRA.
The experimental results show that our VLoRA achieves comparable performance
on various benchmarks for MLLMs, while significantly reducing the computational costs for both training and inference. Code and models are released at
https://github.com/FeipengMa6/VLoRA.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) [57, 65, 47] have achieved promising performance on most natural
language tasks and have shown great generalization ability in solving real-world problems. Derived
from LLMs, multimodal large language models (MLLMs) [36, 66, 4, 62, 55, 48] take a step toward
artificial general intelligence (AGI) by perceiving visual information from the real world. Therefore,
the way of perceiving visual information is the key to moving from LLM to MLLM.
To perceive visual information, recent MLLMs follow an input space alignment paradigm that aligns
visual features with the input space of LLM and concatenates visual tokens with text tokens to form
a unified sequence as input for LLM. For instance, LLaVA [36] uses CLIP-ViT-L-14 [50] as the
visual encoder and introduces a linear projector to align the visual tokens with the input space of
LLM. Monkey [31] divides input images into uniform patches and equips individual adapters for each
∗

This work was performed while Feipeng Ma and Hongwei Xue were interns at WeChat, Tencent Inc.
Project Leader.
‡
Corresponding authors.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

