Graph Neural Flows for Unveiling Systemic
Interactions Among Irregularly Sampled Time Series

Giangiacomo Mercatali ∗
HES-SO Genève
University of Manchester
giangiacomo.mercatali@hesge.ch

Andre Freitas
Idiap Research Institute
University of Manchester
NBC, CRUK Manchester Institute
andre.freitas@idiap.ch

Jie Chen
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research
chenjie@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Interacting systems are prevalent in nature. It is challenging to accurately predict the
dynamics of the system if its constituent components are analyzed independently.
We develop a graph-based model that unveils the systemic interactions of time series
observed at irregular time points, by using a directed acyclic graph to model the
conditional dependencies (a form of causal notation) of the system components and
learning this graph in tandem with a continuous-time model that parameterizes the
solution curves of ordinary differential equations (ODEs). Our technique, a graph
neural flow, leads to substantial enhancements over non-graph-based methods, as
well as graph-based methods without the modeling of conditional dependencies.
We validate our approach on several tasks, including time series classification and
forecasting, to demonstrate its efficacy.

1

Introduction

Real-life dynamical systems consist of a group of components interacting in a complex manner. With
time series data for each component, predicting the system dynamics remains challenging, because
modeling each component independently is straightforward while accounting for their interactions is
hard without a priori knowledge. Sometimes, these interactions are causal. For example, “phantom
jams” in which a small disturbance (e.g., a driver hitting the brake too hard) in a heavy traffic can be
amplified over a large area of the transportation network [16]. While traffic congestion often enjoys
spatial proximity, outage of a power network can be propagated non-locally over the grid; i.e., a
sequence of blackouts jumps across hundreds of kilometers [21]. We pose this question: What time
series models best capture the interactive nature of different system dynamics?
Graph neural networks (GNNs) [49, 46] are modern tools to enhance time series models when
multiple time series are interconnected by a given graph [33]. In these models, time series are
encoded by using a recurrent neural network (RNN); at every time step, a GNN is used to aggregate
features over the graph. When the graph is unknown, graph-structure learning approaches have been
proposed; some approaches learn a single interaction graph over time [30, 41, 11] while others infer
a different one at each time step [20]. These models are in general discrete-time models, suitable for
regularly spaced time points [39, 40].
∗

Work done while at the University of Manchester

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

