AllClear: A Comprehensive Dataset and Benchmark
for Cloud Removal in Satellite Imagery

Hangyu Zhou1 ∗, Chia-Hsiang Kao1∗ , Cheng Perng Phoo1 ,
Utkarsh Mall2 , Bharath Hariharan1 , Kavita Bala1
1

2

Computer Science, Cornell University
Computer Science, Columbia University

Abstract
Clouds in satellite imagery pose a significant challenge for downstream applications. A major challenge in current cloud removal research is the absence of a
comprehensive benchmark and a sufficiently large and diverse training dataset.
To address this problem, we introduce the largest public dataset — AllClear for
cloud removal, featuring 23,742 globally distributed regions of interest (ROIs) with
diverse land-use patterns, comprising 4 million images in total. Each ROI includes
complete temporal captures from the year 2022, with (1) multi-spectral optical imagery from Sentinel-2 and Landsat 8/9, (2) synthetic aperture radar (SAR) imagery
from Sentinel-1, and (3) auxiliary remote sensing products such as cloud masks
and land cover maps. We validate the effectiveness of our dataset by benchmarking
performance, demonstrating the scaling law — the PSNR rises from 28.47 to 33.87
with 30× more data, and conducting ablation studies on the temporal length and the
importance of individual modalities. This dataset aims to provide comprehensive
coverage of the Earth’s surface and promote better cloud removal results.

1

Introduction

Satellite image recognition enables environmental monitoring, disaster response, urban planning [Pham et al., 2011, Wellmann et al., 2020], crop-yield prediction [Doraiswamy et al., 2003],
and many more applications, but is held back significantly due to occlusion by clouds. Roughly 67%
of the Earth’s surface is covered by clouds at any given moment [King et al., 2013]. The limited
availability of cloud-free captures is especially problematic for time-sensitive events like wildfire
control [Kyzirakos et al., 2014, Thangavel et al., 2023] and flood damage assessment [Rahman and
Di, 2020]. Consequently, developing effective cloud removal techniques is crucial for maximizing
the utility of remote sensing data in various domains.
A major challenge holding back research into cloud removal is the lack of comprehensive datasets
and benchmarks. A survey of publicly available datasets for cloud removal (Table 1) reveals several
problems. First, most existing datasets are sampled from a small set of locations and thus have
limited geographical diversity [Ebel et al., 2020, Huang and Wu, 2022, Ebel et al., 2022], impacting
both the effectiveness of training and the rigor of evaluation. Second, many existing datasets filter
out very cloudy images (e.g., more than 30% cloud coverage), thus preventing trained models from
tackling practical situations with extensive cloud cover [Sarukkai et al., 2020, Requena-Mesa et al.,
2021] (Figure 1). Third, some existing benchmarks use ground-truth cloud-free images captured
at a very different time point from the time the input images are captured [Sarukkai et al., 2020,
Ebel et al., 2022]. This means that many changes may have occurred on the ground between the
∗

Contributed Equally. Correspondence to Hangyu Zhou and Chia-Hsiang Kao at {hz477,ck696}@cornell.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

