Scalable Early Childhood Reading
Performance Prediction
Zhongkai Shangguan1 Zanming Huang1 Eshed Ohn-Bar1
Ola Ozernov-Palchik1,2 Derek Kosty3 Michael Stoolmiller1 Hank Fien1
1

Boston University

2

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

3

Oregon Research Institute

Abstract
Models for student reading performance can empower educators and institutions to
proactively identify at-risk students, thereby enabling early and tailored instructional interventions. However, there are no suitable publicly available educational
datasets for modeling and predicting future reading performance. In this work, we
introduce the Enhanced Core Reading Instruction (ECRI) dataset, a novel largescale longitudinal tabular dataset collected across 44 schools with 6,916 students
and 172 teachers. We leverage the dataset to empirically evaluate the ability of
state-of-the-art machine learning models to recognize early childhood educational
patterns in multivariate and partial measurements. Specifically, we demonstrate a
simple self-supervised strategy in which a Multi-Layer Perception (MLP) network
is pre-trained over masked inputs to outperform several strong baselines while
generalizing over diverse educational settings. To facilitate future developments
in precise modeling and responsible use of models for individualized and early
intervention strategies, our data and code are available at https://ecri-data.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Approximately 37% of fourth graders in the United States are not reading at grade level—a trend
that persists into other grades [46]. As reading proficiency is closely correlated with academic,
economic, and social outcomes [37], there is an urgent need to improve reading instruction practices.
Currently, students are identified as needing additional educational support using a ‘wait-to-fail’
approach, i.e., waiting until a child has not made expected gains in reading before there is a reevaluation of their instructional needs. A prediction model identifying which children would benefit
from specific educational interventions could hold significant implications for achieving early and
effective remediation. However, despite unprecedented interest in AI and education (e.g., the recently
introduced AI Education Act [11]), there are no suitable publicly available datasets for training
and evaluation of models for reading performance prediction and intervention success. As a result,
predictive Machine Learning (ML) techniques have yet to be rigorously studied in early educational
settings, such as for improving risk identification and proactively ensuring foundational reading
abilities [12, 14, 36, 49, 51, 67].
Field datasets in early childhood education can be difficult to collect due to logistical factors related
to working with young children, e.g., educators have limited time available for data collection.
Students often transfer between schools and programs, making tracking difficult. Moreover, reliably
assessing students with learning disabilities can present additional logistical issues, such as the need
for specialized assessment tools and trained personnel to accurately evaluate and accommodate
unique needs. These challenges have limited prior research to small-scale studies [15, 16, 25, 58]
that did not release data nor can be leveraged to train high-capacity predictive ML models, i.e., for
modeling complex relationships among multidimensional individual and instructional factors.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

