Beware of Road Markings: A New Adversarial Patch
Attack to Monocular Depth Estimation

Hangcheng Liu1 , Zhenhu Wu2 , Hao Wang3 , Xingshuo Han1∗, Shangwei Guo3 ,
Tao Xiang3 , and Tianwei Zhang1
1
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
3
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, China
{hangcheng.liu, tianwei.zhang}@ntu.edu.sg
xingshuo001@e.ntu.edu.sg, wuzhenhu@bupt.edu.cn
{hwang, swguo, txiang}@cqu.edu.cn

Abstract
Monocular Depth Estimation (MDE) enables the prediction of scene depths from
a single RGB image, having been widely integrated into production-grade autonomous driving systems, e.g., Tesla Autopilot. Current adversarial attacks to
MDE models focus on attaching an optimized adversarial patch to a designated
obstacle. Although effective, this approach presents two inherent limitations: its
reliance on specific obstacles and its limited malicious impact. In contrast, we
propose a pioneering attack to MDE models that decouples obstacles from patches
physically and deploys optimized patches on roads, thereby extending the attack
scope to arbitrary traffic participants. This approach is inspired by our groundbreaking discovery: various MDE models with different architectures, trained for
autonomous driving, heavily rely on road regions when predicting depths for different obstacles. Based on this discovery, we design the Adversarial Road Marking
(AdvRM) attack, which camouflages patches as ordinary road markings and deploys
them on roads, thereby posing a continuous threat within the environment. Experimental results from both dataset simulations and real-world scenarios demonstrate
that AdvRM is effective, stealthy, and robust against various MDE models, achieving
about 1.507 of Mean Relative Shift Ratio (MRSR) over 8 MDE models. The code
is available at this Github Repo.

1

Introduction

Monocular Depth Estimation (MDE) [6, 7, 8, 9] is a technology that extracts depth information from
monocular RGB images, enabling the projection of pixels from a 2D image into a 3D space. Due to
its commendable efficiency and performance, MDE has been successfully employed in autonomous
driving [10], e.g., Tesla’s production-grade Autopilot system [11, 12, 13].
Recent studies [5, 14, 15] have demonstrated that MDE models are vulnerable to adversarial attacks,
leading to erroneous depth predictions. Unlike global imperceptible adversarial perturbations [14, 15],
which are effective only in the digital domain, adversarial patches [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 16, 17] exhibit robust
performance in the physical world, thus garnering significant attention. To our knowledge, existing
patch attacks focus on single obstacle scenarios. They deploy an obstacle-dependent patch on a
specific obstacle to attack the victim vehicle behind this obstacle, as illustrated in Fig. 1. These
obstacle-dependent patches have two inherent limitations: 1) limited impact: the patch is only
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

