Slicing Vision Transformer for Flexible Inference

Yitian Zhang1,2∗ Huseyin Coskun1 Xu Ma2 Huan Wang2 Ke Ma1
Xi (Stephen) Chen1 Derek Hao Hu3 Yun Fu2
1
Snap Inc. 2 Northeastern University 3 Meta

Abstract
Vision Transformers (ViT) is known for its scalability. In this work, we target
to scale down a ViT to fit in an environment with dynamic-changing resource
constraints. We observe that smaller ViTs are intrinsically the sub-networks of a
larger ViT with different widths. Thus, we propose a general framework, named
Scala, to enable a single network to represent multiple smaller ViTs with flexible
inference capability, which aligns with the inherent design of ViT to vary from
widths. Concretely, Scala activates several subnets during training, introduces
Isolated Activation to disentangle the smallest sub-network from other subnets,
and leverages Scale Coordination to ensure each sub-network receives simplified,
steady, and accurate learning objectives. Comprehensive empirical validations on
different tasks demonstrate that with only one-shot training, Scala learns slimmable
representation without modifying the original ViT structure and matches the performance of Separate Training. Compared with the prior art, Scala achieves an
average improvement of 1.6% on ImageNet-1K with fewer parameters. Code is
available at here.

1

Introduction

Vision Transformers (ViTs) [9] are renowned for its scalability and various avenues [41, 5, 7] have
been explored to scale up ViT models. To tailor ViTs to run on devices with limited resources, some
recent progress [36, 35] utilize knowledge distillation [13] to scale down ViT. Particularly, DeiT [29]
introduces two smaller variants of DeiT-B: DeiT-Ti and DeiT-S which have been widely used in
resource-limited applications. Although these small ViTs exhibit enhanced efficiency, they lack the
flexibility to implement customized adjustments that accommodate dynamically changing resource
constraints in real-world scenarios, e.g., the computation budget of mobile phones depends on the
energy level (low-power mode) and number of running apps. Consequently, the standard Separate
Training (ST) protocol trains models with different sizes separately to provide a spectrum of options
with diversified performance and computation. ST requires repetitive training procedures to produce
multiple model choices, and the challenge is amplified for foundation models [26, 24, 17]. From
users’ perspective, they are only offered limited model choices, that might not cater to all scenarios.
Analyzing the architectures of ViT-Ti/S/B, we observe that these ViTs are the same architecture with
the only difference in the number of embedding dimensions (we ignore the difference in the number
of heads as it does not impact the overall model size), indicating smaller ViTs are intrinsically the
sub-networks of larger model with different widths (see Fig. 1). This suggests that a large ViT can be
transformed to represent small models by uniformly slicing the weight matrix at each layer. Given
a width ratio r, we adjust the size of the network by this single hyperparameter, allowing a single
ViT to represent multiple small variants with the weights of those sub-networks shared in a nested
nature, e.g., ViT-B (r=0.25) equals ViT-Ti and ViT-B (r=0.5) corresponds to ViT-S. In this manner,
we empower ViTs for flexible inference capability, and we aim to slice a ViT within a broad slicing
∗

Work done when Yitian was an intern at Snap Inc.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

