Differentiable Quantum Computing for
Large-scale Linear Control
Connor Clayton∗,1,2

Jiaqi Leng∗,1,3,5

Gengzhi Yang∗,1,3

Yi-Ling Qiao2,4

Ming C. Lin2,4

Xiaodi Wu†,1,2

1

Joint Center for Quantum Information and Computer Science, University of Maryland
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland
3
Department of Mathematics, University of Maryland
4
Center for Machine Learning, University of Maryland
5
Department of Mathematics and Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing, UC Berkeley
∗
Equal Contribution
†
xiaodiwu@umd.edu

Abstract
As industrial models and designs grow increasingly complex, the demand for
optimal control of large-scale dynamical systems has significantly increased.
However, traditional methods for optimal control incur significant overhead
as problem dimensions grow. In this paper, we introduce an end-to-end
quantum algorithm for linear-quadratic control with provable speedups.
Our algorithm, based on a policy gradient method, incorporates a novel
quantum subroutine for solving the matrix Lyapunov equation. Specifically,
we build a quantum-assisted differentiable simulator for efficient gradient
estimation that is more accurate and robust than classical methods relying
on stochastic approximation. Compared to the classical approaches, our
method achieves a super-quadratic speedup. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first end-to-end quantum application to linear control problems
with provable quantum advantage.

1

Introduction

Over the past few decades, the growing complexity of modern engineering designs has made
the control of large-scale dynamical systems a crucial task across various application fields,
such as power grid management [56], swarm robotics [16, 18], sensor networks [21], and
airline scheduling [57]. These challenges often involve high-dimensional solution spaces with
tens of thousands of degrees of freedom, presenting a significant obstacle for traditional
optimal control methods.
The emergence of quantum computing has expanded the potential for designing efficient
algorithms in numerical optimization and machine learning [1, 36, 62]. By leveraging
the principles of quantum mechanics, such as superposition and entanglement, quantum
computers excel at efficient data processing, making them promising for accelerating solutions
to large-scale computational challenges [31].
Although there has been some progress in quantum algorithms for some specific optimal
control problems arising in quantum sciences [37, 39], a viable pathway for accelerating
general large-scale optimal control problems remains unclear. A conventional approach to
optimal control involves solving the Algebraic Riccati Equation (ARE, see Section 1.1 for
details), which is a nonlinear matrix equation. This problem has been less explored in the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

