Learning Discrete Concepts in Latent Hierarchical
Models
Lingjing Kong1 , Guangyi Chen1,2 , Biwei Huang3 , Eric P. Xing1,2 , Yuejie Chi1 , and Kun Zhang1,2
2

1
Carnegie Mellon University
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
3
University of California San Diego

Abstract
Learning concepts from natural high-dimensional data (e.g., images) holds potential
in building human-aligned and interpretable machine learning models. Despite
its encouraging prospect, formalization and theoretical insights into this crucial
task are still lacking. In this work, we formalize concepts as discrete latent causal
variables that are related via a hierarchical causal model that encodes different
abstraction levels of concepts embedded in high-dimensional data (e.g., a dog breed
and its eye shapes in natural images). We formulate conditions to facilitate the
identification of the proposed causal model, which reveals when learning such
concepts from unsupervised data is possible. Our conditions permit complex causal
hierarchical structures beyond latent trees and multi-level directed acyclic graphs in
prior work and can handle high-dimensional, continuous observed variables, which
is well-suited for unstructured data modalities such as images. We substantiate our
theoretical claims with synthetic data experiments. Further, we discuss our theory’s
implications for understanding the underlying mechanisms of latent diffusion
models and provide corresponding empirical evidence for our theoretical insights.

1

Introduction

Learning semantic discrete concepts from unstructured high-dimensional data, such as images
and text, is crucial to building machine learning models with interpretability, transferability, and
compositionality, as empirically demonstrated by extensive existing work [1–11]. Despite these
empirical successes, limited work is devoted to the theoretical front: the notions of concepts and
their relations are often heuristically defined. For example, concept bottleneck models [12, 13] use
human-specified annotations and recent methods [14–16] employ pretrained multimodal models like
CLIP [17] to explain features with neural language. This lack of rigorous characterization impedes a
deeper understanding of this task and the development of principled learning algorithms.
In natural images, the degree/extent of certain attributes (e.g., position, lighting) is often presented in
a continuous form and main concepts of practical concern are often discrete in nature (e.g., object
classes and shapes). Moreover, these concepts are often statistically dependent, with the dependence
potentially resulting from some higher-level concepts. For example, the correlation between a
specific dog’s eye features and fur features may arise from a high-level concept for breeds (Figure 1).
Similarly, even higher-level concepts may exist and induce dependence between high-level concepts,
giving rise to a hierarchical model that characterizes all discrete concepts at different abstraction
levels underlying high-dimensional data distributions. In this work, we focus on concepts that can be
defined as discrete latent variables and related via a hierarchical model. Under this formalization,
the query on the recoverability of concepts and their relations from unstructured high-dimensional
distribution (e.g., images) amounts to the following causal identification problem:
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

