LaSe-E2V: Towards Language-guided Semantic-aware
Event-to-Video Reconstruction
Kanghao Chen1 Hangyu Li1 Jiazhou Zhou1
1
AI Thrust, 2 CMA Thrust, HKUST(GZ)

Zeyu Wang2,1,3 Lin Wang1,2,3∗
Dept. of CSE, HKUST

3

kchen879@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, linwang@ust.hk
Project Page: https://vlislab22.github.io/LaSe-E2V/

Abstract
Event cameras harness advantages such as low latency, high temporal resolution,
and high dynamic range (HDR), compared to standard cameras. Due to the distinct
imaging paradigm shift, a dominant line of research focuses on event-to-video
(E2V) reconstruction to bridge event-based and standard computer vision. However, this task remains challenging due to its inherently ill-posed nature: event
cameras only detect the edge and motion information locally. Consequently, the
reconstructed videos are often plagued by artifacts and regional blur, primarily
caused by the ambiguous semantics of event data. In this paper, we find language
naturally conveys abundant semantic information, rendering it stunningly superior in ensuring semantic consistency for E2V reconstruction. Accordingly, we
propose a novel framework, called LaSe-E2V, that can achieve semantic-aware
high-quality E2V reconstruction from a language-guided perspective, buttressed by
the text-conditional diffusion models. However, due to diffusion models’ inherent
diversity and randomness, it is hardly possible to directly apply them to achieve
spatial and temporal consistency for E2V reconstruction. Thus, we first propose an
Event-guided Spatiotemporal Attention (ESA) module to condition the event data
to the denoising pipeline effectively. We then introduce an event-aware mask loss
to ensure temporal coherence and a noise initialization strategy to enhance spatial
consistency. Given the absence of event-text-video paired data, we aggregate existing E2V datasets and generate textual descriptions using the tagging models for
training and evaluation. Extensive experiments on three datasets covering diverse
challenging scenarios (e.g., fast motion, low light) demonstrate the superiority of
our method. Demo videos for the results are attached to the project page.

1

Introduction

Event cameras are bio-inspired sensors that detect per-pixel intensity changes, producing asynchronous event streams [5] with high dynamic range (HDR) and high temporal resolution. They
particularly excel in capturing the edge information of moving objects, thus discarding the redundant
visual information. Such a distinct imaging shift poses challenges for integration with the off-the-shelf
vision algorithms designed for standard cameras. To bridge the event-based and standard computer
vision [27, 31, 3, 29], a promising way is event-to-video (E2V) reconstruction.
Recently, deep learning has been applied to E2V reconstruction [49, 54, 64], and remarkable performance is achieved thanks to the availability of synthetic event-video datasets and the development
of model architectures. Most existing research emphasizes on the network design [64, 13, 54, 34]
or high-quality data synthesis [57, 34]. However, this task remains challenging due to its inherently
ill-posed nature: event cameras capture edge and motion information locally but neglect semantic
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

