Can an AI Agent Safely Run a Government?
Existence of Probably Approximately Aligned Policies

Frédéric Berdoz
ETH Zürich
fberdoz@ethz.ch

Roger Wattenhofer
ETH Zürich
wattenhofer@ethz.ch

Abstract
While autonomous agents often surpass humans in their ability to handle vast and
complex data, their potential misalignment (i.e., lack of transparency regarding
their true objective) has thus far hindered their use in critical applications such as
social decision processes. More importantly, existing alignment methods provide
no formal guarantees on the safety of such models. Drawing from utility and social
choice theory, we provide a novel quantitative definition of alignment in the context
of social decision-making. Building on this definition, we introduce probably
approximately aligned (i.e., near-optimal) policies, and we derive a sufficient condition for their existence. Lastly, recognizing the practical difficulty of satisfying this
condition, we introduce the relaxed concept of safe (i.e., nondestructive) policies,
and we propose a simple yet robust method to safeguard the black-box policy of
any autonomous agent, ensuring all its actions are verifiably safe for the society.

1

Introduction

The deployment of AI systems in critical applications, such as social decision-making, is often stalled
by the following two shortcomings: 1) They are brittle and usually provide no guarantees on their
expected performance when deployed in the real world [8], and 2) there is no formal guarantee that
the objective they have been trained against, typically a scalar quantity such as a loss or a reward,
faithfully represents human interest at large [41]. Addressing these limitations is commonly referred
to as AI alignment, an umbrella term including a wide array of methods supposed to make AI systems
of different modalities behave as intended [17, 24].
Yet, to our knowledge, every metric for alignment is a posteriori, i.e., a system is deemed aligned as
long as it does not display misaligned behavior (e.g., through red teaming [14]). This stems from
the fact that most of these methods focus on aligning generative models of complex modalities (text,
images, video, audio, etc.) where the input and output domains are particularly vast, and where no
single metric can perfectly represent the intended behavior.
In the context of critical (e.g., social) decision processes, where an autonomous agent must repeatedly
take actions in a complex environment with many stakeholders, a posteriori alignment is not sufficient.
Indeed, for the same reasons that a society would not trust a human policymaker with hidden motives
and unknown track record, it would also distrust an autonomous policymaker whose objective is not,
a priori, perfectly clear and verifiably aligned, as the cost of a single bad action (due to their known
brittleness) could easily outweigh the benefits of leveraging such systems. This issue is accentuated
by the fact that, unlike humans, holding a deceptive AI agent accountable remains a challenge [25].
Conversely, recent breakthroughs in AI have significantly increased its potential for beneficial use
in these critical settings. For example, tax rates and public spending are typically set periodically
by a parliament. However, this small group of representatives is inevitably overwhelmed by the
vast amount of complex economic data as well as the pleas of millions of individuals. Due to this
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

