Time-Constrained Robust MDPs
Adil Zouitine∗1,2 , David Bertoin∗1,3,6 , Pierre Clavier∗4,5
Matthieu Geist7 , Emmanuel Rachelson2,6
1

IRT Saint-Exupéry, 2 ISAE-SUPAERO, Université de Toulouse,3 IMT, INSA Toulouse
4
École Polytechnique, CMAP, 5 Inria Paris, HeKA
6
ANITI, 7 Cohere
{adil.zouitine, david.bertoin}@irt-saintexupery.com,
pierre.clavier@polytechnique.edu

Abstract
Robust reinforcement learning is essential for deploying reinforcement learning
algorithms in real-world scenarios where environmental uncertainty predominates.
Traditional robust reinforcement learning often depends on rectangularity assumptions, where adverse probability measures of outcome states are assumed to be
independent across different states and actions. This assumption, rarely fulfilled
in practice, leads to overly conservative policies. To address this problem, we introduce a new time-constrained robust MDP (TC-RMDP) formulation that considers
multifactorial, correlated, and time-dependent disturbances, thus more accurately
reflecting real-world dynamics. This formulation goes beyond the conventional
rectangularity paradigm, offering new perspectives and expanding the analytical
framework for robust RL. We propose three distinct algorithms, each using varying
levels of environmental information, and evaluate them extensively on continuous
control benchmarks. Our results demonstrate that these algorithms yield an efficient tradeoff between performance and robustness, outperforming traditional deep
robust RL methods in time-constrained environments while preserving robustness
in classical benchmarks. This study revisits the prevailing assumptions in robust RL
and opens new avenues for developing more practical and realistic RL applications.

1

Introduction

Robust MDPs capture the problem of finding a control policy for a dynamical system whose transition
kernel is only known to belong to a defined uncertainty set. The most common framework for analyzing and deriving algorithms for robust MDPs is that of sa-rectangularity [1, 2], where probability
measures on outcome states are picked independently in different source states and actions (in formal
notation, P(s′ |s, a) and P(s′ |s̄, ā) are independent of each other). This provides an appreciable
decoupling of worst transition kernel search across time steps and enables sound algorithms like
robust value iteration (RVI). But policies obtained for such sa-rectangular MDPs are by nature very
conservative [3, 4], as they enable drastic changes in environment properties from one time step to
the next, and the algorithms derived from RVI tend to yield very conservative policies even when
applied to non-sa-rectangular robust MDP problems.
In this paper, we depart from the rectangularity assumption and turn towards a family of robust MDPs
whose transition kernels are parameterized by a vector ψ. This parameter vector couples together
the outcome probabilities in different (s, a) pairs, hence breaking the independence assumption that
is problematic, especially in large dimension [3]. This enables accounting for the notion of transition
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

