Doubly Hierarchical Geometric Representations for
Strand-based Human Hairstyle Generation

Yunlu Chen†∗, Francisco Vicente Carrasco† , Christian Häne‡ , Giljoo Nam‡ ,
Jean-Charles Bazin‡ , and Fernando De la Torre†
†

Carnegie Mellon University

‡

Meta Reality Labs

Abstract
We introduce a doubly hierarchical generative representation for strand-based 3D
hairstyle geometry that progresses from coarse, low-pass filtered guide hair to
densely populated hair strands rich in high-frequency details. We employ the
Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) to separate low-frequency structural curves
from high-frequency curliness and noise, avoiding the Gibbs’ oscillation issues
associated with the standard Fourier transform in open curves. Unlike the guide
hair sampled from the scalp UV map grids which may lose capturing details of the
hairstyle in existing methods, our method samples optimal sparse guide strands
by utilising k-medoids clustering centres from low-pass filtered dense strands,
which more accurately retain the hairstyle’s inherent characteristics. The proposed
variational autoencoder-based generation network, with an architecture inspired by
geometric deep learning and implicit neural representations, facilitates flexible, offthe-grid guide strand modelling and enables the completion of dense strands in any
quantity and density, drawing on principles from implicit neural representations.
Empirical evaluations confirm the capacity of the model to generate convincing
guide hair and dense strands, complete with nuanced high-frequency details.1

1

Introduction

The quest for realistic virtual humans is a cornerstone of modern computer graphics, with highquality 3D hair strand generation being one of its most intricate challenges. Our work focuses on
the generation of strand hair with machine learning algorithms, which alleviates the labor-intensive
process inherent in crafting digital hairstyles—a task that requires meticulous attention to detail and
consumes a disproportionate amount of time and artistic resources. In addition, it strives to establish
a generative prior, a foundational blueprint that not only streamlines the creation process but also
enhances the reconstruction capabilities essential for virtual human applications.
Hair exhibits a wide spectrum of morphological details, from the subtlest of low-frequency principle
directions and waves to the complexity of high-frequency curls, as described by the physics of elastic
rods and Kirchhoff’s theories [4, 22] on the dynamics of twisting filaments. These high-frequency
elements often include curly helical structures [3, 15] as well as extraneous noise that can detract
from accurately modelling the hair’s principal growth direction. To counteract this, we advocate for a
frequency decomposition approach to extract the principal direction as a low-frequency signal. This
technique is vital in distilling the essence of the hair’s natural trajectory, ensuring that the core path
of growth is clearly defined and free from the visual clutter of high-frequency noise. Such a focus on
low-frequency signals is not only important but also highly effective in generating hair models that
∗
1

Correspondence: yunluchenxyz@gmail.com.
All data processing and use of models were conducted at CMU.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

