CIFD: Controlled Information Flow to Enhance
Knowledge Distillation

Yashas Malur Saidutta Rakshith S Srinivasa Jaejin Cho Ching-Hua Lee
Chouchang Yang Yilin Shen Hongxia Jin
Samsung Research America, Mountain View, CA
{ym.saidutta, r.srinivasa, jaejin.cho, chinghua.l}@samsung.com
{c.yang1, yilin.shen, hongxia.jin}@samsung.com

Abstract
Knowledge Distillation is the mechanism by which the insights gained from a
larger teacher model are transferred to a smaller student model. However, the
transfer suffers when the teacher model is significantly larger than the student. To
overcome this, prior works have proposed training intermediately sized models,
Teacher Assistants (TAs) to help the transfer process. However, training TAs is
expensive, as training these models is a knowledge transfer task in itself. Further,
these TAs are larger than the student model and training them especially in large
data settings can be computationally intensive. In this paper, we propose a novel
framework called Controlled Information Flow for Knowledge Distillation (CIFD)
consisting of two components. First, we propose a significantly smaller alternatives
to TAs, the Rate-Distortion Module (RDM) which uses the teacher’s penultimate
layer embedding and a information rate-constrained bottleneck layer to replace the
Teacher Assistant model. RDMs are smaller and easier to train than TAs, especially
in large data regimes, since they operate on the teacher embeddings and do not
need to relearn low level input feature extractors. Also, by varying the information
rate across the bottleneck, RDMs can replace TAs of different sizes. Secondly, we
propose the use of Information Bottleneck Module in the student model, which is
crucial for regularization in the presence of a large number of RDMs. We show
comprehensive state-of-the-art results of the proposed method over large datasets
like Imagenet. Further, we show the significant improvement in distilling CLIP
like models over a huge 12M image-text dataset. It outperforms CLIP specialized
distillation methods across five zero-shot classification datasets and two zero-shot
image-text retrieval datasets.

1

Introduction

A decade ago Hinton et al. proposed a mechanism called Knowledge Distillation (KD), where the
insights from a larger model (the teacher) are transferred to a smaller model (the student) [1]. The
teacher model, on account of larger modeling capacity, is capable of learning complex relationships
in the data and is thus better at performing its target task. KD attempts to help the training of
the student model by showing it the insights learned by the teacher. Specifically, Hinton et al.
suggested the transfer of “dark knowledge" in the logits of a teacher classifier to a student classifier
by minimizing the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between a softened version of the predicted
probability distribution of a teacher and a student model. However, dark knowledge is only one way
of quantifying the insights learned by the teacher. In general, how to quantify the insights and how to
transfer them to the student model remain open questions.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

