Ad Auctions for LLMs via
Retrieval Augmented Generation

MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi
University of Maryland
hajiagha@umd.edu

Sébastien Lahaie
Google Research
slahaie@google.com

Keivan Rezaei
University of Maryland
krezaei@umd.edu

Suho Shin
University of Maryland
suhoshin@umd.edu

Abstract
In the field of computational advertising, the integration of ads into the outputs
of large language models (LLMs) presents an opportunity to support these services without compromising content integrity. This paper introduces novel auction
mechanisms for ad allocation and pricing within the textual outputs of LLMs,
leveraging retrieval-augmented generation (RAG). We propose a segment auction
where an ad is probabilistically retrieved for each discourse segment (paragraph,
section, or entire output) according to its bid and relevance, following the RAG
framework, and priced according to competing bids. We show that our auction maximizes logarithmic social welfare, a new notion of welfare that balances allocation
efficiency and fairness, and we characterize the associated incentive-compatible
pricing rule. These results are extended to multi-ad allocation per segment. An
empirical evaluation validates the feasibility and effectiveness of our approach over
several ad auction scenarios, and exhibits inherent tradeoffs in metrics as we allow
the LLM more flexibility to allocate ads.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) [4, 1, 39] have recently gained widespread attention, serving various
functions including question answering, content generation, translation, and code completion [31,
13, 44, 24]. The emergence of AI-driven assistant models like ChatGPT, Gemini, and Claude
has influenced how individuals interact with these technologies, as they increasingly use them to
streamline and enhance their work.
While LLMs provide a fresh way to engage with information, the most advanced models are costly
to operate [27]. To date, online advertising has been one of the most successful business models of
the digital economy. Ads support a wide variety of online content and services, ranging from search
engines, online publishers, to video content and more. However, LLM services today predominantly
follow a subscription model [32]. A natural question to ask in this context is whether advertising
could support LLMs to alleviate serving costs and charges to users, and what format advertising on
LLMs might take.
In this paper, we develop auctions that allocate online ads within the output of LLMs using the
framework of retrieval augmented generation (RAG) [23]. RAG is one of the most popular techniques
to integrate factual information into the output of LLMs. When a query is submitted by a user, RAG
first retrieves the top-k most relevant documents for the query from a database, and then conditions on
these documents to generate the LLM’s output, significantly enhancing the reliability of the generated
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

