Dual-Diffusion for Binocular 3D Human Pose
Estimation
Zhuo Chen Bingzhi Duan Xu Zhao ∗
Department of Automation
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{sherrywaan, chzh9311, DuanBingzhi, zhaoxu}@sjtu.edu.cn
Xiaoyue Wan

Abstract
Binocular 3D human pose estimation (HPE), reconstructing a 3D pose from 2D
poses of two views, offers practical advantages by combining multiview geometry
with the convenience of a monocular setup. However, compared to a multiview
setup, the reduction in the number of cameras increases uncertainty in 3D reconstruction. To address this issue, we leverage the diffusion model, which has shown
success in monocular 3D HPE by recovering 3D poses from noisy data with high
uncertainty. Yet, the uncertainty distribution of initial 3D poses remains unknown.
Considering that 3D errors stem from 2D errors within geometric constraints, we
recognize that the uncertainties of 3D and 2D are integrated in a binocular configuration, with the initial 2D uncertainty being well-defined. Based on this insight,
we propose Dual-Diffusion specifically for Binocular 3D HPE, simultaneously
denoising the uncertainties in 2D and 3D, and recovering plausible and accurate
results. Additionally, we introduce Z-embedding as an additional condition for
denoising and implement baseline-width-related pose normalization to enhance the
model flexibility for various baseline settings. This is crucial as 3D error influence
factors encompass depth and baseline width. Extensive experiments validate the
effectiveness of our Dual-Diffusion in 2D refinement and 3D estimation. The code
and models are available at https://github.com/sherrywan/Dual-Diffusion.

1

Introduciton

3D human pose estimation (HPE) aims to localize the
3D uncertainty
increases！
3D position of human joints, which has a broad range
of downstream applications [49]. To date, monocular
3D HPE [25, 30, 20, 60, 22, 35, 59, 58] has received a
great deal of attention due to its convenient for practical
3D point
applications, while multiview (more than two cameras)
3D HPE [31, 14, 56, 5, 46] has earned popularity due
to its absolute localization under geometric constraints.
image plane
2D uncertainty range
However, the pros and cons of these two setups are
optical center
(b) 2 views
(a) 4 views
“conjugat” to each other, with monocular suffering from
depth ambiguity, while multiview is hindered by strict
scene constraints. Binocular setup [45] offers both ad- Figure 1: Binocular reconstruction has
vantages, yet has long been ignored by the community. higher 3D uncertainty compared to multiThis motivates us to focus on the Binocular 3D HPE, view configurations.
which lifts to a 3D pose from binocular 2D poses.
∗

Corresponding author: Xu Zhao.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

