Self-playing Adversarial Language Game
Enhances LLM Reasoning
Pengyu Cheng1 Tianhao Hu1 Han Xu1 Zhisong Zhang1
Yong Dai1
Lei Han3
Nan Du1
Xiaolong Li2
1
2
3
Tencent AI Lab Shenzhen & Seattle Tencent Robotics X Lab
pengyucheng@tencent.com

Abstract
We explore the potential of self-play training for large language models (LLMs) in
a two-player adversarial language game called Adversarial Taboo. In this game,
an attacker and a defender communicate around a target word only visible to
the attacker. The attacker aims to induce the defender to speak the target word
unconsciously, while the defender tries to infer the target word from the attacker’s
utterances. To win the game, both players must have sufficient knowledge about the
target word and high-level reasoning ability to infer and express in this informationreserved conversation. Hence, we are curious about whether LLMs’ reasoning
ability can be further enhanced by Self-Playing this Adversarial language Game
(SPAG). With this goal, we select several open-source LLMs and let each act
as the attacker and play with a copy of itself as the defender on an extensive
range of target words. Through reinforcement learning on the game outcomes,
we observe that the LLMs’ performances uniformly improve on a broad range of
reasoning benchmarks. Furthermore, iteratively adopting this self-play process
can continuously promote LLMs’ reasoning abilities. The code is available at
https://github.com/Linear95/SPAG.

Figure 1: Reasoning improvements from Self-Playing of Adversarial language Games (SPAG) on
comprehensive reasoning benchmarks. With the SPAG epoch increasing, the LLM reasoning ability
continuously improves. Each axis is normalized by the maximum answer-accuracy value.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs), such as GPT-4 [OpenAI, 2023b] and Gemini [Team et al., 2023],
have reformed the domain of artificial intelligence (AI) with astonishing language capacities, such as
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

