Generative Retrieval Meets Multi-Graded Relevance
Yubao Tang1,2 Ruqing Zhang1,2 Jiafeng Guo1,2∗ Maarten de Rijke3
Wei Chen1,2 Xueqi Cheng1,2
1
CAS Key Lab of Network Data Science and Technology, ICT, CAS
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Amsterdam
{tangyubao21b,zhangruqing,guojiafeng,chenwei2022,cxq}@ict.ac.cn
m.derijke@uva.nl

Abstract
Generative retrieval represents a novel approach to information retrieval. It uses an
encoder-decoder architecture to directly produce relevant document identifiers (docids) for queries. While this method offers benefits, current approaches are limited
to scenarios with binary relevance data, overlooking the potential for documents
to have multi-graded relevance. Extending generative retrieval to accommodate
multi-graded relevance poses challenges, including the need to reconcile likelihood
probabilities for docid pairs and the possibility of multiple relevant documents
sharing the same identifier. To address these challenges, we introduce a framework
called GRaded Generative Retrieval (GR2 ). GR2 focuses on two key components:
ensuring relevant and distinct identifiers, and implementing multi-graded constrained contrastive training. First, we create identifiers that are both semantically
relevant and sufficiently distinct to represent individual documents effectively. This
is achieved by jointly optimizing the relevance and distinctness of docids through a
combination of docid generation and autoencoder models. Second, we incorporate
information about the relationship between relevance grades to guide the training
process. We use a constrained contrastive training strategy to bring the representations of queries and the identifiers of their relevant documents closer together,
based on their respective relevance grades. Extensive experiments on datasets with
both multi-graded and binary relevance demonstrate the effectiveness of GR2 .

1

Introduction

Generative retrieval (GR) [51] is a new paradigm for information retrieval (IR), where all information
in a corpus is encoded into the model parameters and a ranked list is directly produced based on a
single parametric model. In essence, a sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq) encoder-decoder architecture
is used to directly predict identifiers (docids) of documents that are relevant to a given query. Recent
studies have achieved impressive retrieval performance on many search tasks [15, 53, 67, 92].
Current work on GR mainly focuses on binary relevance scenarios, where a binary division into
relevant and irrelevant categories is assumed [20, 52, 83], and a query is usually labeled with a single
relevant document [38, 57] or multiple relevant documents that have the same relevance grade [33].
The standard Seq2Seq objective, via maximizing likelihood estimation (MLE) of the output sequence
with teacher forcing, has been used extensively in GR due to its simplicity. However, in real-world
search scenarios, documents may have different degrees of relevance [18, 71, 72, 82, 91] as binary
relevance may not be sufficiently represent fine-grained relevance. In traditional learning-to-rank
(LTR), multi-graded relevance judgments [23, 69] are widely considered, with nDCG [35] and ERR
[12] being particularly popular. In modeling multi-graded relevance in LTR, a popular approach is
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

