Structured flexibility in recurrent neural networks
via neuromodulation
Julia C. Costacurta*
Stanford University
jcostac@stanford.edu
David Zoltowski
Stanford University
dzoltow@stanford.edu

Shaunak Bhandarkar*
Stanford University
shaunakb@stanford.edu
Scott W. Linderman
Stanford University
scott.linderman@stanford.edu

Abstract
A core aim in theoretical and systems neuroscience is to develop models that help us
better understand biological intelligence. Such models range broadly in both complexity and biological plausibility. One widely-adopted example is task-optimized
recurrent neural networks (RNNs), which have been used to generate hypotheses
about how the brain’s neural dynamics may organize to accomplish tasks. However,
task-optimized RNNs typically have a fixed weight matrix representing the synaptic
connectivity between neurons. From decades of neuroscience research, we know
that synaptic weights are constantly changing, controlled in part by chemicals
such as neuromodulators. In this work we explore the computational implications
of synaptic gain scaling, a form of neuromodulation, using task-optimized lowrank RNNs. In our neuromodulated RNN (NM-RNN) model, a neuromodulatory
subnetwork outputs a low-dimensional neuromodulatory signal that dynamically
scales the low-rank recurrent weights of an output-generating RNN. In empirical
experiments, we find that the structured flexibility in the NM-RNN allows it to
both train and generalize with a higher degree of accuracy than low-rank RNNs on
a set of canonical tasks. Additionally, via theoretical analyses we show how neuromodulatory gain scaling endows networks with gating mechanisms commonly
found in artificial RNNs. We end by analyzing the low-rank dynamics of trained
NM-RNNs, to show how task computations are distributed.

1

Introduction

Humans and animals show an innate ability to adapt and generalize their behavior across various
environments and contexts. This suggests that the neural computations producing these behaviors
must have flexible dynamics that are able to adjust to these novel conditions. Given the popularity of
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) in studying such neural computations, a key question is whether
this flexibility is (1) adequately and (2) accurately portrayed in RNN models of computation.
Traditional RNN models have fixed input, recurrent, and output weight matrices. Thus, the only way
for an input to impact a dynamical computation is via the static input weight matrix. Prior work
has shown that flexible, modular computation is possible with these models [1], but looking to the
biology suggests alternative ways of modeling. In particular, experimental neuroscience research
has shown that synaptic strengths in the brain (akin to weight matrix entries in RNNs) are constantly
changing — in part due to the influence of neuromodulatory signals [2].
Neuromodulatory signals are powerful and prevalent influences on neural activity and subsequent
behavior. Dopamine, a well-known example, is implicated in motor deficits resulting from Parkinson’s
disease and has been the subject of extensive study by neuroscientists [3]. For computational study,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

