On Giant’s Shoulders:
Effortless Weak to Strong by Dynamic Logits Fusion

Chenghao Fan1,2∗,

Zhenyi Lu1,2∗, Wei Wei1,2†, Jie Tian1,2 , Xiaoye Qu1 ,
Dangyang Chen3 , Yu Cheng4
1
School of Computer Science & Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Joint Laboratory of HUST and Pingan Property & Casualty Research (HPL)
3
Ping An Property & Casualty Insurance Company of China, Ltd.
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{facicofan,luzhenyi529}@gmail.com,{weiw,xiaoye}@hust.edu.cn
chendangyang273@pingan.com.cn,chengyu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
“If I have seen further than others, it is by standing on the shoulders of giants.”
— Isaac Newton in 1675

Abstract
Efficient fine-tuning of large language models for task-specific applications is
imperative, yet the vast number of parameters in these models makes their training
increasingly challenging. Despite numerous proposals for effective methods, a
substantial memory overhead remains for gradient computations during updates.
Can we fine-tune a series of task-specific small models and transfer their knowledge
directly to a much larger model without additional training? In this paper, we
explore weak-to-strong specialization using logit arithmetic, facilitating a direct
answer to this question. Existing weak-to-strong methods often employ a static
knowledge transfer ratio and a single small model for transferring complex knowledge, which leads to suboptimal performance. To surmount these limitations, we
propose a dynamic logit fusion approach that works with a series of task-specific
small models, each specialized in a different task. This method adaptively allocates
weights among these models at each decoding step, learning the weights through
Kullback-Leibler divergence constrained optimization problems. We conduct extensive experiments across various benchmarks in both single-task and multi-task
settings, achieving leading results. By transferring expertise from the 7B model to
the 13B model, our method closes the performance gap by 96.4% in single-task
scenarios and by 86.3% in multi-task scenarios compared to full fine-tuning of the
13B model. Notably, we achieve surpassing performance on unseen tasks. Moreover, we further demonstrate that our method can effortlessly integrate in-context
learning for single tasks and task arithmetic for multi-task scenarios.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown impressive performance in a wide range
of tasks [5, 36, 50–52, 54, 61, 62], including code generation [11, 45], mathematical reasoning [2, 37],
tool-use abilities [46, 53], etc. However, training such LLMs requires substantial computational
resources, often involving thousands of GPUs and processing trillions of tokens [30, 42], making the
adaptation of the base model for new knowledge inefficient. To address these challenges, parameterefficient tuning methods [12, 16, 23] have emerged, aiming to achieve comparable performance to
full fine-tuning while reducing GPU memory requirements. However, challenges persist in tuning
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

