Evaluating the World Model Implicit
in a Generative Model
Keyon Vafa
Harvard University

Justin Y. Chen
MIT

Jon Kleinberg
Cornell University

Ashesh Rambachan
MIT
Sendhil Mullainathan
MIT

Abstract
Recent work suggests that large language models may implicitly learn world models.
How should we assess this possibility? We formalize this question for the case
where the underlying reality is governed by a deterministic finite automaton. This
includes problems as diverse as simple logical reasoning, geographic navigation,
game-playing, and chemistry. We propose new evaluation metrics for world model
recovery inspired by the classic Myhill-Nerode theorem from language theory. We
illustrate their utility in three domains: game playing, logic puzzles, and navigation.
In all domains, the generative models we consider do well on existing diagnostics
for assessing world models, but our evaluation metrics reveal their world models
to be far less coherent than they appear. Such incoherence creates fragility: using
a generative model to solve related but subtly different tasks can lead to failures.
Building generative models that meaningfully capture the underlying logic of the
domains they model would be immensely valuable; our results suggest new ways
to assess how close a given model is to that goal.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) appear to have capacities that far exceed the next-token prediction
task they were trained to perform [17, 39, 35]. Recent work suggests a reason: they are implicitly
recovering high-fidelity representations of the underlying domains they are trained on [1, 20].
An algorithm that recovers a “world model” from sequence data would be extremely valuable. As
an example, consider how one might build a navigation tool today: meticulously map each street and
intersection, and then use a search algorithm to provide directions. The success of language models
suggests an alternative approach: collect turn-by-turn sequences from trips in a city (e.g. “East
North...”) and then train a sequence model on them. If the sequence model successfully recovers
the world model, we would obtain a map of the city without ever mapping it and a routing algorithm
simply by predicting the next turn. This example is not far-fetched: it is the reason language models
are used in scientific domains such as protein generation, genetics and chemistry [7, 21, 3, 14, 6].
All of this relies on the presumption that the sequence model has recovered the true world model;
but how can we test whether it actually has? Answering this question requires first defining what
we mean by the true world model. Toshniwal et al. [36] and Li et al. [20] proposed a concrete and
influential approach: study whether sequence models trained on board game transcripts (e.g. chess
and Othello) recover the underlying game rules. Inspired by this approach, we consider the case where
the underlying world can be summarized by a finite collection of states and rules governing transitions
between the states; this includes many domains such as logic [19], location tracking [28, 9], games
[36, 20], and several of the scientific applications described above. As a result, the “world” in these
domains can be modeled as a deterministic finite automaton (DFA).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

