Open-Book Neural Algorithmic Reasoning

Hefei Li, Chao Peng∗, Chenyang Xu∗, Zhengfeng Yang
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Computing
Software Engineering Institute
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
51255902127@stu.ecnu.edu.cn,
{cpeng, cyxu, zfyang}@sei.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Neural algorithmic reasoning is an emerging area of machine learning that focuses
on building neural networks capable of solving complex algorithmic tasks. Recent
advancements predominantly follow the standard supervised learning paradigm –
feeding an individual problem instance into the network each time and training it to
approximate the execution steps of a classical algorithm. We challenge this mode
and propose a novel open-book learning framework. In this framework, whether
during training or testing, the network can access and utilize all instances in the
training dataset when reasoning for a given instance.
Empirical evaluation is conducted on the challenging CLRS Algorithmic Reasoning
Benchmark, which consists of 30 diverse algorithmic tasks. Our open-book learning
framework exhibits a significant enhancement in neural reasoning capabilities.
Further, we notice that there is recent literature suggesting that multi-task training
on CLRS can improve the reasoning accuracy of certain tasks, implying intrinsic
connections between different algorithmic tasks. We delve into this direction via
the open-book framework. When the network reasons for a specific task, we enable
it to aggregate information from training instances of other tasks in an attentionbased manner. We show that this open-book attention mechanism offers insights
into the inherent relationships among various tasks in the benchmark and provides
a robust tool for interpretable multi-task training.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable advancements in various areas, such as image
processing [18, 6] and natural language processing [16, 21]. In recent years, as deep learning
continues to evolve, there has been an increasing desire to see deep neural networks take on more
complex tasks. Algorithmic reasoning tasks [27, 5, 28] have emerged as a particularly crucial category.
In classical domains, deep neural networks have demonstrated their ability to learn predictive patterns
from training data. The aspiration now is to extend this capability to the field of algorithmic reasoning,
which motivates a burgeoning domain — Neural Algorithmic Reasoning (NAR).
Neural algorithmic reasoning was initially coined by [30]. The central objective of this domain is
to develop and train neural networks with the capability to imitate classical rule-based algorithms,
such as sorting algorithms and graph algorithms. Networks built in this manner demonstrate the
ability to perform algorithmic computations similar to traditional algorithms in reasoning tasks,
while showcasing improved computational efficiency compared to them [17]. Moreover, recent
literature [31, 22] shows that owing to the characteristics of deep learning, these networks exhibit
flexibility in handling diverse input formats, making them robust even in scenarios where certain
input features are missing.
∗

Correspondence to Chao Peng and Chenyang Xu. The authors are ordered alphabetically.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

