NetworkGym: Reinforcement Learning
Environments for Multi-Access Trafﬁc Management
in Network Simulation
Momin Haider∗
UC, Santa Barbara

Ming Yin†
Princeton University

Menglei Zhang
Intel Labs

Arpit Gupta
UC, Santa Barbara

Jing Zhu
Intel Labs

Yu-Xiang Wang
UC, San Diego

Abstract
Mobile devices such as smartphones, laptops, and tablets can often connect to
multiple access networks (e.g., Wi-Fi, LTE, and 5G) simultaneously. Recent advancements facilitate seamless integration of these connections below the transport layer, enhancing the experience for apps that lack inherent multi-path support. This optimization hinges on dynamically determining the trafﬁc distribution across networks for each device, a process referred to as multi-access trafﬁc
splitting. This paper introduces NetworkGym, a high-ﬁdelity network environment simulator that facilitates generating multiple network trafﬁc ﬂows and multiaccess trafﬁc splitting. This simulator facilitates training and evaluating different
RL-based solutions for the multi-access trafﬁc splitting problem. Our initial explorations demonstrate that the majority of existing state-of-the-art ofﬂine RL algorithms (e.g. CQL) fail to outperform certain hand-crafted heuristic policies on
average. This illustrates the urgent need to evaluate ofﬂine RL algorithms against
a broader range of benchmarks, rather than relying solely on popular ones such
as D4RL. We also propose an extension to the TD3+BC algorithm, named Pessimistic TD3 (PTD3), and demonstrate that it outperforms many state-of-the-art
ofﬂine RL algorithms. PTD3’s behavioral constraint mechanism, which relies on
value-function pessimism, is theoretically motivated and relatively simple to implement.

1

Introduction

There exists a general lack of standardized benchmarks for reinforcement learning (RL) in the domain of computer networking. Whereas RL has shown promise in addressing various challenges in
computer networking, such as congestion control, routing, and resource allocation, the ﬁeld lacks
widely accepted benchmarks that would facilitate systematic evaluation and comparison of different RL approaches. Hence, we propose NetworkGym, a high-ﬁdelity, end-to-end, full-stack network
Simulation-as-a-Service framework that leverages open-source network simulation tools, such as ns3 Henderson et al. [2008]. Furthermore, NetworkGym offers a closed-loop machine learning (ML)
algorithm development and training pipeline via open-source gym-like APIs. The components of
NetworkGym achieve the following objectives:
∗

Rest in peace.
Most of the work was done while Ming Yin was at UCSB. Correspondence to: my0049@princeton.edu,
jing.zhu.ietf@gmail.com, and yuxiangw@ucsd.edu.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

