Object segmentation from common fate: Motion energy
processing enables human-like zero-shot
generalization to random dot stimuli

Matthias Tangemann

Matthias Kümmerer

Matthias Bethge

University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center
matthias.{lastname}@bethgelab.org

Abstract
Humans excel at detecting and segmenting moving objects according to the Gestalt
principle of “common fate”. Remarkably, previous works have shown that human
perception generalizes this principle in a zero-shot fashion to unseen textures or
random dots. In this work, we seek to better understand the computational basis
for this capability by evaluating a broad range of optical flow models and a neuroscience inspired motion energy model for zero-shot figure-ground segmentation
of random dot stimuli. Specifically, we use the extensively validated motion energy model proposed by Simoncelli and Heeger in 1998 which is fitted to neural
recordings in cortex area MT. We find that a cross section of 40 deep optical flow
models trained on different datasets struggle to estimate motion patterns in random
dot videos, resulting in poor figure-ground segmentation performance. Conversely,
the neuroscience-inspired model significantly outperforms all optical flow models
on this task. For a direct comparison to human perception, we conduct a psychophysical study using a shape identification task as a proxy to measure human
segmentation performance. All state-of-the-art optical flow models fall short of
human performance, but only the motion energy model matches human capability.
This neuroscience-inspired model successfully addresses the lack of human-like
zero-shot generalization to random dot stimuli in current computer vision models,
and thus establishes a compelling link between the Gestalt psychology of human
object perception and cortical motion processing in the brain.
Code, models and datasets are available at https://github.com/mtangemann/
motion_energy_segmentation.

1

Introduction

Motion is a powerful cue that humans use to detect and segment visual objects. A striking example
are camouflaged animals, which are difficult to spot when stationary but become much easier to detect
when moving. Motion segmentation in humans is believed to be driven by the principle of common
fate [47, 48, 42], which posits that elements that move together, belong together. Remarkably, human
perception generalizes this principle in a zero-shot fashion to novel textures or moving random dots.
For example, the seminal work by Johansson [19] showed that humans can easily detect biological
motion from only few moving dots. More recently, Robert et al. [31] introduced random dot stimuli
called object kinematograms that preserve the motion in a video while ensuring that static appearance
cues are uninformative about the video contents (Fig. 1, example video in the supplemental material).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

