Long-Range Feedback Spiking Network Captures
Dynamic and Static Representations of the Visual
Cortex under Movie Stimuli
Liwei Huang1,2 , Zhengyu Ma2∗ , Liutao Yu2 , Huihui Zhou2 , Yonghong Tian1,2,3∗
1

School of Computer Science, Peking University, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
3
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, China
huanglw20@stu.pku.edu.cn,
{mazhy, yult, zhouhh}@pcl.ac.cn, yhtian@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are widely used models for investigating biological
visual representations. However, existing DNNs are mostly designed to analyze
neural responses to static images, relying on feedforward structures and lacking
physiological neuronal mechanisms. There is limited insight into how the visual cortex represents natural movie stimuli that contain context-rich information.
To address these problems, this work proposes the long-range feedback spiking
network (LoRaFB-SNet), which mimics top-down connections between cortical
regions and incorporates spike information processing mechanisms inherent to
biological neurons. Taking into account the temporal dependence of representations under movie stimuli, we present Time-Series Representational Similarity
Analysis (TSRSA) to measure the similarity between model representations and
visual cortical representations of mice. LoRaFB-SNet exhibits the highest level of
representational similarity, outperforming other well-known and leading alternatives across various experimental paradigms, especially when representing long
movie stimuli. We further conduct experiments to quantify how temporal structures
(dynamic information) and static textures (static information) of the movie stimuli
influence representational similarity, suggesting that our model benefits from longrange feedback to encode context-dependent representations just like the brain.
Altogether, LoRaFB-SNet is highly competent in capturing both dynamic and static
representations of the mouse visual cortex and contributes to the understanding
of movie processing mechanisms of the visual system. Our codes are available at
https://github.com/Grasshlw/SNN-Neural-Similarity-Movie.

1

Introduction

Understanding how the biological visual cortex processes information under natural stimuli with
computational models is a critical scientific goal in visual neuroscience. In this realm, deep neural
networks have emerged as the predominant tools [28, 32, 57], surpassing traditional models, due to
their profound success in matching neural representations [58, 5, 4, 7, 6, 40], revealing functional
hierarchies [19, 46, 8, 53, 47], and explaining functionally specialized processing mechanisms
[1, 11] of the biological visual cortex. Despite these advancements, research has mainly focused
on static image stimuli, leaving a gap in the understanding of neural responses to dynamic, contextrich movie stimuli. This oversight is particularly critical given that the visual system receives
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

