Stabilized Proximal-Point Methods for Federated
Optimization

Xiaowen Jiang
Saarland University and CISPA∗
xiaowen.jiang@cispa.de

Anton Rodomanov
CISPA∗
anton.rodomanov@cispa.de

Sebastian U. Stich
CISPA∗
stich@cispa.de

Abstract
In developing efficient optimization algorithms, it is crucial to account for communication constraints—a significant challenge in modern Federated Learning.
The best-known communication complexity among non-accelerated algorithms
is achieved by DANE, a distributed proximal-point algorithm that solves local
subproblems at each iteration and that can exploit second-order similarity among
individual functions. However, to achieve such communication efficiency, the
algorithm requires solving local subproblems sufficiently accurately resulting in
slightly sub-optimal local complexity. Inspired by the hybrid-projection proximalpoint method, in this work, we propose a novel distributed algorithm S-DANE.
Compared to DANE, this method uses an auxiliary sequence of prox-centers while
maintaining the same deterministic communication complexity. Moreover, the
accuracy condition for solving the subproblem is milder, leading to enhanced local
computation efficiency. Furthermore, S-DANE supports partial client participation
and arbitrary stochastic local solvers, making it attractive in practice. We further
accelerate S-DANE and show that the resulting algorithm achieves the best-known
communication complexity among all existing methods for distributed convex
optimization while still enjoying good local computation efficiency as S-DANE.
Finally, we propose adaptive variants of both methods using line search, obtaining
the first provably efficient adaptive algorithms that could exploit local second-order
similarity without the prior knowledge of any parameters.

1

Introduction

Federated learning is a rapidly emerging large-scale machine learning framework that allows training
from decentralized data sources (e.g. mobile phones or hospitals) while preserving basic privacy and
security [43, 24, 31]. Developing efficient federated optimization algorithms becomes one of the
central focuses due to its direct impact on the effectiveness of global machine learning models.
One of the key challenges in modern federated optimization is to tackle communication bottlenecks [32]. The large-scale model parameters, coupled with relatively limited network capacity
and unstable client participation, often make communication highly expensive. Therefore, the primary efficiency metric of a federated optimization algorithm is the total number of communication
rounds required to reach a desired accuracy level. If two algorithms share equivalent communication
complexity, their local computation efficiency becomes the second important metric.
The seminal algorithm DANE [57] is an outstanding distributed optimization method. It achieves the
best-known deterministic communication complexity among existing non-accelerated algorithms (on
the server side) [22]. This efficiency primarily hinges upon a mild precondition regarding the Secondorder Dissimilarity δ. In numerous scenarios, like statistical learning for generalized model [19] and
∗

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Saarbrücken, Germany

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

