Proving Olympiad Algebraic Inequalities without
Human Demonstrations
Chenrui Wei1
chenruiw97@gmail.com
1

Mengzhou Sun2
sunm07@u.nus.edu

Wei Wang1, ∗
wangwei@bigai.ai

State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI, Beijing, China
2
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore

Abstract
Solving Olympiad-level mathematical problems represents a significant advancement in machine intelligence and automated reasoning. Current machine learning
methods, however, struggle to solve Olympiad-level problems beyond Euclidean
plane geometry due to a lack of large-scale, high-quality datasets. The challenge is
even greater in algebraic systems, which involve infinite reasoning spaces within
finite conditions. To address these issues, we propose AIPS, an Algebraic Inequality
Proving System capable of autonomously generating complex inequality theorems
and effectively solving Olympiad-level inequality problems without requiring human demonstrations. During proof search in a mixed reasoning manner, a value
curriculum learning strategy on generated datasets is implemented to improve proving performance, demonstrating strong mathematical intuitions. On a test set of 20
International Mathematical Olympiad-level inequality problems, AIPS successfully
solved 10, outperforming state-of-the-art methods. Furthermore, AIPS automatically generated a vast array of non-trivial theorems without human intervention,
some of which have been evaluated by professional contestants and deemed to
reach the level of the International Mathematical Olympiad. Notably, one theorem was selected as a competition problem in a major city’s 2024 Mathematical
Olympiad. All the materials are available at sites.google.com/view/aips2.

1

Introduction

One of the key milestones in the field of artificial intelligence is the capability to reason (Pearl 1998)
and prove theorems (Wu 1978; Chou et al. 2000; Trinh et al. 2024). However, theorem proving often
involves long reasoning chains, complex mathematical structures, intricate calculations, and infinite
reasoning spaces. Consequently, developing AI capable of proving complex mathematical theorems
requires sophisticated reasoning and the ability to navigate through an extensive search space to
construct a valid proof. The complexity of these problems lies in the need for effective heuristics and
strategies to manage the vast number of possible actions and the lengthy sequences of logical steps
necessary to arrive at a solution.
Existing work on grade school and college admission math problems has achieved notable success,
e.g., GSM8K (Cobbe et al. 2021) and SAT Math (Achiam et al. 2023), which demonstrate better
performance on tasks such as arithmetic and basic algebra. However, research focused on solving
International Mathematical Olympiad (IMO)-level problems remains relatively sparse. Notable
efforts in this area include AlphaGeometry (Trinh et al. 2024), and GPT-f (Polu and Sutskever 2020)
on miniF2F (Zheng et al. 2021), which have made progress in solving Euclidean plane geometry at
the Olympiad level and various mathematical competition problems, respectively.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

