Stability and Generalization of Asynchronous SGD:
Sharper Bounds Beyond Lipschitz and Smoothness

Tao Sun∗ Shengwei Li Dongsheng Li∗ Xicheng Lu
College of Computer Science and Technology
National University of Defense Technology, China
dengxg@nudt.edu.cn, suntao.saltfish@outlook.com, lucasleesw9@gmail.com
dsli@nudt.edu.cn, xclu@nudt.edu.cn
Xiaoge Deng

Abstract
Asynchronous stochastic gradient descent (ASGD) has evolved into an indispensable optimization algorithm for training modern large-scale distributed machine
learning tasks. Therefore, it is imperative to explore the generalization performance
of the ASGD algorithm. However, the existing results are either pessimistic and
vacuous or restricted by strict assumptions that fail to reveal the intrinsic impact
of asynchronous training on generalization. In this study, we establish sharper
stability and generalization bounds for ASGD under much weaker assumptions.
Firstly, this paper studies the on-average model stability of ASGD and provides
a non-vacuous upper bound on the generalization error, without relying on the
Lipschitz assumption. Furthermore, we investigate the excess generalization error
of the ASGD algorithm, revealing the effects of asynchronous delay, model initialization, number of training samples and iterations on generalization performance.
Secondly, for the first time, this study explores the generalization performance of
ASGD in the non-smooth case. We replace smoothness with the much weaker
Hölder continuous assumption and achieve similar generalization results as in the
smooth case. Finally, we validate our theoretical findings by training numerous
machine learning models, including convex problems and non-convex tasks in
computer vision and natural language processing.

1

Introduction

The last decade has witnessed explosive growth in the scale of models and datasets in the machine
learning (ML) community [9, 12]. In light of this tendency, asynchronous distributed optimization
has become crucial to ensure efficient training of large-scale ML models [4]. Specifically, the
asynchronous stochastic gradient descent (ASGD) algorithm eliminates the synchronization barrier
between the distributed training workers, enabling each worker to independently perform idle-free
asynchronous gradient updates, thereby accelerating model training. Despite this asynchronous
updating introduces delays that result in model inconsistency, the convergence of ASGD is still
guaranteed under some mild assumptions [1, 26, 42, 40, 19, 44].
An intriguing observation is that ML models learned by stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [35] not
only achieve zero training error but also demonstrate good generalization performance on unknown
test datasets [52]. Generalizability is a classical topic in the statistical ML fields, and associated
analytical techniques include VC dimension [46], Rademacher complexity [20], PAC-Bayesian [27],
uniform convergence [29, 31], information-based, and compression-based bounds [3, 50]. In this
paper, we are going to study generalizability in the sense of algorithmic stability [8]. This stabilitybased analytical framework allows bypassing the model dimensionality so that we can focus on
∗

Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

