Learning Where to Edit Vision Transformers

Yunqiao Yang1∗ Long-Kai Huang2† Shengzhuang Chen1
Kede Ma1 Ying Wei3†
1
City University of Hong Kong 2 Tencent AI Lab 3 Zhejiang University
{yqyang.cs, szchen9-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk hlongkai@gmail.com
kede.ma@cityu.edu.hk ying.wei@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Model editing aims to data-efficiently correct predictive errors of large pre-trained
models while ensuring generalization to neighboring failures and locality to minimize unintended effects on unrelated examples. While significant progress has
been made in editing Transformer-based large language models, effective strategies
for editing vision Transformers (ViTs) in computer vision remain largely untapped.
In this paper, we take initial steps towards correcting predictive errors of ViTs,
particularly those arising from subpopulation shifts. Taking a locate-then-edit
approach, we first address the “where-to-edit” challenge by meta-learning a hypernetwork on CutMix-augmented data generated for editing reliability. This trained
hypernetwork produces generalizable binary masks that identify a sparse subset of
structured model parameters, responsive to real-world failure samples. Afterward,
we solve the “how-to-edit” problem by simply fine-tuning the identified parameters
using a variant of gradient descent to achieve successful edits. To validate our
method, we construct an editing benchmark that introduces subpopulation shifts
towards natural underrepresented images and AI-generated images, thereby revealing the limitations of pre-trained ViTs for object recognition. Our approach not
only achieves superior performance on the proposed benchmark but also allows for
adjustable trade-offs between generalization and locality. Our code is available at
https://github.com/hustyyq/Where-to-Edit.

1

Introduction

In many scientific and engineering disciplines, computational models serve as approximations of
complex real-world phenomena. As a consequence, they are inherently prone to predictive errors,
aptly encapsulated by George Box’s adage: “All models are wrong, but some are useful.” Model
editing [55, 6, 9, 40] has emerged as a promising technique to make (large) pre-trained models more
useful by enabling targeted updates to model behavior on specific inputs or tasks in a data-efficient
manner without pre-training again from scratch. An ideal model editing method should satisfy three
major desiderata [9, 61]: 1) reliability, ensuring the model behavior is effectively updated for the
current sample; 2) generalization, so that the changes extend to neighboring samples; and 3) locality,
meaning the edit should have minimal impact on the model behavior on unrelated samples.
Model editing has allowed many fascinating applications, including error correction, factual knowledge update, bias mitigation, policy compliance, and personalization, though most of them have
predominantly been within large language models (LLMs) [15, 1, 12] in the natural language processing (NLP) community [9, 40]. With the enormous and often inaccessible pre-training datasets and the
ever-growing model sizes that make retraining computationally demanding, the need for effectively
∗
†

Part of the work was done when the author interned at Tencent AI Lab.
Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

