A Best-of-both-worlds Algorithm for Bandits with
Delayed Feedback with Robustness to Excessive Delays

Saeed Masoudian ∗
Churney ApS, Denmark
saeed@churney.io

Julian Zimmert
Google Research
zimmert@google.com

Yevgeny Seldin
University of Copenhagen
seldin@di.ku.dk

Abstract
We propose a new best-of-both-worlds algorithm for bandits with variably delayed
feedback. In contrast to prior work, which required prior knowledge of the maximal
delay dmax and had a linear dependence of the regret on it, our algorithm can
tolerate arbitrary excessive delays up to order T (where T is the time horizon). The
algorithm is based on three technical innovations, which may all be of independent
interest: (1) We introduce the first implicit exploration scheme that works in bestof-both-worlds setting. (2) We introduce the first control of distribution drift that
does not rely on boundedness of delays. The control is based on the implicit
exploration scheme and adaptive skipping of observations with excessive delays.
(3) We introduce a procedure relating standard regret with drifted regret that does
not rely on boundedness of delays. At the conceptual level, we demonstrate that
complexity of best-of-both-worlds bandits with delayed feedback is characterized
by the amount of information missing at the time of decision making (measured by
the number of outstanding observations) rather than the time that the information
is missing (measured by the delays).

1

Introduction

Delayed feedback is an ubiquitous challenge in real-world applications. Study of multi-armed bandits
with delayed feedback has started at least four decades ago in the context of adaptive clinical trials
(Simon, 1977, Eick, 1988), the same problem that has earlier motivated introduction of the bandit
model itself (Thompson, 1933). We focus on robustness to delay outliers and to the loss generation
mechanism. In practice occasional delay outliers are common (e.g., observations that never arrive).
Robustness to the loss generation mechanism implies that the algorithm does not need to know
whether the losses are stochastic or adversarial, but still provides regret bounds that match the optimal
stochastic rates if the losses happen to be stochastic, while guaranteeing the adversarial rates if they
are not (so-called best-of-both-worlds regret bounds). Such algorithms are important from a practical
viewpoint, because the loss generation mechanism can rarely assumed to be stochastic, but it is still
desirable to have tighter regret bounds if it happens to be. From the theoretical perspective both
forms of robustness are interesting and challenging, requiring novel analysis tools and yielding better
understanding of the problems.
Joulani et al. (2013) have studied multi-armed bandits with delayed feedback under the assumption that the rewards are stochastic and the delays are sampled from a fixed distribution.
∗

The work was done during SM’s employment at the University of Copenhagen.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

