On Learning Multi-Modal Forgery Representation for
Diffusion Generated Video Detection
Xiufeng Song1 , Xiao Guo2 , Jiache Zhang1 , Qirui Li1 ,
Lei Bai3 , Xiaoming Liu2 , Guangtao Zhai1 , Xiaohong Liu∗1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Michigan State University 3 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{akikaze, zjc he, iapple1, zhaiguangtao, xiaohongliu}@sjtu.edu.cn
{guoxia11, liuxm}@cse.msu.edu baisanshi@gmail.com
∗
Corresponding Author

Abstract
Large numbers of synthesized videos from diffusion models pose threats to information security and authenticity, leading to an increasing demand for generated
content detection. However, existing video-level detection algorithms primarily
focus on detecting facial forgeries and often fail to identify diffusion-generated
content with a diverse range of semantics. To advance the field of video forensics,
we propose an innovative algorithm named Multi-Modal Detection(MM-Det) for
detecting diffusion-generated videos. MM-Det utilizes the profound perceptual
and comprehensive abilities of Large Multi-modal Models (LMMs) by generating
a Multi-Modal Forgery Representation (MMFR) from LMM’s multi-modal space,
enhancing its ability to detect unseen forgery content. Besides, MM-Det leverages
an In-and-Across Frame Attention (IAFA) mechanism for feature augmentation in
the spatio-temporal domain. A dynamic fusion strategy helps refine forgery representations for the fusion. Moreover, we construct a comprehensive diffusion video
dataset, called Diffusion Video Forensics (DVF), across a wide range of forgery
videos. MM-Det achieves state-of-the-art performance in DVF, demonstrating the
effectiveness of our algorithm. Both source code and DVF are available at link.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed significant advancements in diffusion generative methods, which have
led to the creation of extraordinarily visually compelling content in video generation [5, 4, 61]. Although the latest generated videos impress society
with their versatility and stability, synthetic media
also poses a risk of malicious attacks, such as counterfeit faces created by deepfakes [49] and falsifications in business, raising public concerns about
information security and privacy. In response to such
issues, researchers have made significant progress in
forgery detection, addressing problems on image editing manipulation [60, 30, 17] and CNN-synthesized
images [53, 40, 55, 36, 18]. To enhance the trustworthiness and reliability of current detectors in the face
of evolving generative video methods, we aim to develop a generalizable detection method for diffusionbased generative videos.

Figure 1: Multi-Modal Detection (MM-Det)
leverages features from spatiotemporal (ST)
information ( ), a CLIP encoder [39] ( ), and
an LMM ( ). The Fused feature ( ) achieves
state-of-the-art performance in our Diffusion
Video Forensics (DVF) dataset.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

