WikiDO: A New Benchmark Evaluating
Cross-Modal Retrieval for Vision-Language Models

T Pavan Kalyan*
IIT Bombay

Piyush Singh Pasi*∗
Amazon

Preethi Jyothi
IIT Bombay

Sahil Nilesh Dharod
IIT Bombay

Aditi Chaudhary
Google, Deepmind

Azeem Azaz Motiwala
IIT Bombay

Krishna Srinivasan
Google, Deepmind

Abstract
Cross-modal (image-to-text and text-to-image) retrieval is an established task
used in evaluation benchmarks to test the performance of vision-language models (VLMs). Several state-of-the-art VLMs (e.g. CLIP, BLIP-2) have achieved
near-perfect performance on widely-used image-text retrieval benchmarks such as
MSCOCO-Test-5K and Flickr30K-Test-1K. As a measure of out-of-distribution
(OOD) generalization, prior works rely on zero-shot performance evaluated on
one dataset (Flickr) using a VLM finetuned on another one (MSCOCO). We argue
that such comparisons are insufficient to assess the OOD generalization capability
of models due to high visual and linguistic similarity between the evaluation and
finetuning datasets. To address this gap, we introduce W IKI DO (drawn from
Wikipedia Diversity Observatory), a new cross-modal retrieval benchmark to assess the OOD generalization capabilities of pretrained VLMs. This consists of
384K image-text pairs from Wikipedia with domain labels, along with carefully
curated, human-verified in-distribution (ID) and OOD test sets of size 3K each.
The image-text pairs are very diverse in topics. We evaluate different VLMs of
varying capacity on the W IKI DO benchmark; BLIP-2 achieves zero-shot performance of R@1≈ 66% on the OOD test set, compared to ≈ 81% on MSCOCO
and ≈ 95% on Flickr. When fine-tuned on W IKI DO, the R@1 improvement is
at most ≈ 5% on OOD instances compared to ≈ 12% on ID instances. W IKI DO
offers a strong cross-modal retrieval benchmark for current VLMs, especially for
evaluating OOD generalization. Our benchmark is hosted as a competition at
https://kaggle.com/competitions/wikido24 with public access to dataset
and code.

1

Introduction

Vision-language models (VLMs) are multimodal models that jointly reason on image and text. VLMs
are pretrained on very large amounts of diverse image and text data, thus making them capable of
robust reasoning. A true measure of this capability is to evaluate how well VLMs generalize to
out-of-distribution (OOD) instances. This has been addressed in prior work [1, 2] by finetuning
VLMs on a given corpus for a given task and conducting zero-shot evaluations on a new corpus.
However, the mere use of an unseen corpus for evaluation does not imply it is OOD. For a more
accurate characterization of generalization, the OOD nature of the evaluation data should be carefully
established.
∗

Work done as a student at IIT Bombay.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

