On the Complexity of Identification in
Linear Structural Causal Models
Julian Dörfler∗
Saarland University

Benito van der Zander∗
University of Lübeck

Markus Bläser†
Saarland University

Maciej Liśkiewicz†
University of Lübeck

Abstract
Learning the unknown causal parameters of a linear structural causal model is a
fundamental task in causal analysis. The task, known as the problem of identification, asks to estimate the parameters of the model from a combination of
assumptions on the graphical structure of the model and observational data, represented as a non-causal covariance matrix. In this paper, we give a new sound and
complete algorithm for generic identification which runs in polynomial space. By
a standard simulation result, namely PSPACE ⊆ EXP, this algorithm has exponential running time which vastly improves the state-of-the-art double exponential
time method using a Gröbner basis approach. The paper also presents evidence
that parameter identification is computationally hard in general. In particular, we
prove, that the task asking whether, for a given feasible correlation matrix, there
are exactly one or two or more parameter sets explaining the observed matrix, is
hard for ∀R, the co-class of the existential theory of the reals. In particular, this
problem is coNP-hard. To our best knowledge, this is the first hardness result for
some notion of identifiability.

1

Introduction

Recognizing and predicting the causal effects and distinguishing them from purely statistical correlations is an important task of empirical sciences. For example, identifying the causes of disease and
health outcomes is of great significance in developing new disease prevention and treatment strategies. A common approach for establishing causal effects is through randomized controlled trials
(Fisher, [20]) – called the gold standard of experimentation – which, however, requires physical intervention in the examined system. Therefore, in many practical applications, experimentation is not
always possible due to cost, ethical constraints, or technical feasibility. E.g., to learn the effects of
radiation on human health one cannot conduct interventional studies involving human participants.
In such cases, a researcher may use an alternative approach and establish cause-effect relationships
by combining existing observed data with the knowledge of the structure of the system under study.
This is called the problem of identification in causal inference (Pearl, [32]) and the approach is
commonly used in various fields, including modern ML.
A key ingredient of this framework is the way the underlying structure models the true mechanism
behind the system. In general, this is done using structural causal models (SCMs) [32, 3]. In this
work, we focus on the problem of identification in linear SCMs, known also as structural equation
models (SEMs) [7, 18]. They represent the causal relationships between observed random variables
∗
†

Equal contribution as first authors.
Equal contribution as last authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

