Vision-Language Navigation with Energy-Based Policy

Rui Liu1,2
1

Wenguan Wang2

Yi Yang1,2,∗

The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
https://github.com/DefaultRui/VLN-ENP

Abstract
Vision-language navigation (VLN) requires an agent to execute actions following
human instructions. Existing VLN models are optimized through expert demonstrations by supervised behavioural cloning or incorporating manual reward engineering. While straightforward, these efforts overlook the accumulation of errors
in the Markov decision process, and struggle to match the distribution of the expert
policy. Going beyond this, we propose an Energy-based Navigation Policy (E NP)
to model the joint state-action distribution using an energy-based model. At each
step, low energy values correspond to the state-action pairs that the expert is most
likely to perform, and vice versa. Theoretically, the optimization objective is equivalent to minimizing the forward divergence between the occupancy measure of the
expert and ours. Consequently, E NP learns to globally align with the expert policy
by maximizing the likelihood of the actions and modeling the dynamics of the
navigation states in a collaborative manner. With a variety of VLN architectures,
E NP achieves promising performances on R2R, REVERIE, RxR, and R2R-CE,
unleashing the power of existing VLN models.

1

Introduction

Vision-language navigation (VLN) [1] entails an embodied agent that executes a sequence of actions
to traverse complex environments based on natural language instructions. VLN is typically considered
as a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) [2], where future states are determined
only by the current state and current action without explicit rewards. Therefore, the central challenge
for VLN is to learn an effective navigation policy. In this context, existing neural agents [1, 3, 4,
5, 6] are naturally constructed as data-driven policy networks by imitation learning (IL) [7] and
bootstrapping from expert demonstrations, i.e., ground-truth trajectories [1].
Most VLN models [1, 3, 8, 4, 5, 6] utilize behavioural cloning (BC), a classic approach for IL, through
supervised training. While conceptually simple, BC suffers seriously from quadratic accumulation
errors [9, 10] along the trajectory due to covariate shift, especially in partially observable settings.
Several efforts introduce ‘student-forcing’ [1, 11] and ‘pseudo interactive demonstrator’ [6], which
are essentially online versions of DAGGER [12], to alleviate this distribution mismatch. DAGGER
assumes interactive access to expert policies (i.e., the shortest path from current state to the goal2 )
and reduces to linear expected errors [12, 10]. Some other studies [13, 3, 8, 4, 5] combine reinforcement learning (RL) [14] and IL algorithms to mitigate the limitations of BC. Though effective, it
presents challenges in designing an optimal reward function [15] and demands careful manual reward
engineering. Such reward functions may not be robust to changes in the environment dynamics and
∗

Corresponding author: Yi Yang.
These approaches require a slightly more interactive setting than traditional imitation learning, allowing
the learner to query the expert at any navigation state during training. Previous studies [1, 6] have adopted this
setting, and this assume is feasible for many real-world imitation learning tasks [12].
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

