YOU D REAM : Generating Anatomically Controllable
Consistent Text-to-3D Animals
Sandeep Mishra†∗ , Oindrila Saha‡∗ , and Alan C. Bovik†
University of Texas at Austin, ‡ University of Massachusetts Amherst
sandy.mishra@utexas.edu, osaha@umass.edu, bovik@ece.utexas.edu
†

Abstract
3D generation guided by text-to-image diffusion models enables the creation of
visually compelling assets. However previous methods explore generation based
on image or text. The boundaries of creativity are limited by what can be expressed
through words or the images that can be sourced. We present YOU D REAM, a
method to generate high-quality anatomically controllable animals. YOU D REAM
is guided using a text-to-image diffusion model controlled by 2D views of a 3D
pose prior. Our method is capable of generating novel imaginary animals that
previous text-to-3D generative methods are unable to create. Additionally, our
method can preserve anatomic consistency in the generated animals, an area where
prior approaches often struggle. Moreover, we design a fully automated pipeline
for generating commonly observed animals. To circumvent the need for human
intervention to create a 3D pose, we propose a multi-agent LLM that adapts poses
from a limited library of animal 3D poses to represent the desired animal. A user
study conducted on the outcomes of YOU D REAM demonstrates the preference of
the animal models generated by our method over others. Visualizations and code
are available at https://youdream3d.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Text-to-3D generative modeling using diffusion models has seen fast-paced growth recently with
methods utilizing text-to-image (T2I) Poole et al. (2022); Chen et al. (2023a); Zhu et al. (2023); Seo
et al. (2023), (text+camera)-to-image (TC2I) Shi et al. (2023); Li et al. (2023) and (image+camera)to-image (IC2I) Liu et al. (2023); Wang and Shi (2023); Ye et al. (2023) diffusion models. These
methods are widely accepted by AI enthusiasts, content creators, and 3D artists to create highquality 3D content. However, generating 3D assets using such methods is dependent on what can
be expressed through text or the availability of an image faithful to the user’s imagination. In this
work, we provide more control to the artist to bring their creative imagination to life. YOU D REAM
can generate high-quality 3D animals based on any 3D skeleton, by utilizing a 2D pose-controlled
diffusion model which generates images adhering to 2D views of a 3D pose. Using depth, edge,
and scribble has also been explored for controllable image generation Zhang et al. (2023). However,
in a 3D context, pose offers both 3D consistency as well as room for creativity. Other controls are
restrictive as edge/depth/boundary of 2D views of a pre-existing object is used to provide control,
thus limiting the generated shape to be very similar to the existing asset. We show that the multi-view
consistency offered by our 3D pose prior results in the generation of anatomically and geometrically
consistent animals. Creating 3D pose control also requires minimal human effort. To further alleviate
this effort, we also present a multi-agent LLM setup that generates 3D poses for novel animals
commonly observed in nature.
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

