Universality in Transfer Learning for Linear Models

Reza Ghane∗
Department of Electrical Engineering
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
rghanekh@caltech.edu

Danil Akhtiamov∗
Department of Computing + Mathematical Sciences
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
dakhtiam@caltech.edu

Babak Hassibi
Department of Electrical Engineering
Department of Computing + Mathematical Sciences
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
hassibi@caltech.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of transfer learning and fine-tuning in linear models for
both regression and binary classification. In particular, we consider the use of
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) on a linear model initialized with pretrained
weights and using a small training data set from the target distribution. In the
asymptotic regime of large models, we provide an exact and rigorous analysis and
relate the generalization errors (in regression) and classification errors (in binary
classification) for the pretrained and fine-tuned models. In particular, we give
conditions under which the fine-tuned model outperforms the pretrained one. An
important aspect of our work is that all the results are "universal", in the sense that
they depend only on the first and second order statistics of the target distribution.
They thus extend well beyond the standard Gaussian assumptions commonly made
in the literature. Furthermore, our universality results extend beyond standard SGD
training to the test error of a classification task trained using ridge regression.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have revolutionized the way data processing and statistical inference are
conducted. Despite their ground-breaking performance, these models often require a plethora of
training samples, which can make the process of data acquisition expensive. Moreover, with the
advent of increasingly complex deep networks and especially Large Language Models (LLMs), the
process of training from scratch has also become prohibitively expensive. To alleviate the scarcity of
prepared data and the high training costs, various strategies have been proposed. One such method is
fine-tuning in which a network previously trained on a source dataset/task different from the target
dataset/task is leveraged as the initialization point for training on the target dataset/task. In many
practical applications, especially for networks containing billions of parameters, only a subset of
weights are updated to adapt the model to the new task. A particularly attractive method involves
fine-tuning only the last layer of the network. A foundational question would be: How effective is
this procedure? Are there fundamental limits to how much one can achieve by utilization of a model
pretrained on a different distribution?
∗ Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

