The Fairness-Quality Trade-off in Clustering

Rashida Hakim
Columbia University

Ana-Andreea Stoica
Max Planck Institute for
Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

Christos H. Papadimitriou
Columbia University

Mihalis Yannakakis
Columbia University

Abstract
Fairness in clustering has been considered extensively in the past; however, the
trade-off between the two objectives — e.g., can we sacrifice just a little in the
quality of the clustering to significantly increase fairness, or vice-versa? — has
rarely been addressed. We introduce novel algorithms for tracing the complete
trade-off curve, or Pareto front, between quality and fairness in clustering problems;
that is, computing all clusterings that are not dominated in both objectives by other
clusterings. Unlike previous work that deals with specific objectives for quality
and fairness, we deal with all objectives for fairness and quality in two general
classes encompassing most of the special cases addressed in previous work. Our
algorithm must take exponential time in the worst case as the Pareto front itself
can be exponential. Even when the Pareto front is polynomial, our algorithm may
take exponential time, and we prove that this is inevitable unless P = NP. However,
we also present a new polynomial-time algorithm for computing the entire Pareto
front when the cluster centers are fixed, and for a fairness objective that minimizes
the sum, over all clusters, of the imbalance between the two groups in each cluster.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a fundamental problem in unsupervised learning with many applications, in which data
points must be grouped into clusters so that the quality or cost of the clustering is optimized — where
the cost can be k-median or k-center, among a long array of different quality objectives treated in the
literature. In some of these applications, the data points being clustered are people — for example,
when households are clustered to determine the location of a bus stop or a hospital — and in those
cases considerations such as fairness and equity come into play. In recent work, various frameworks
and methods have been proposed for improving the representation of different sensitive groups in
clustering, in cases where optimizing for clustering cost alone may be quite unfair. In such works,
the fairness criterion is often set as a constraint, for which we must compute the optimal solution.
This is generally an intractable computational problem even for the simplest fairness objectives, since
clustering on its own is NP-hard. The best one could hope for is an approximate solution based on
a vanilla approximation algorithm for clustering that improves fairness; such approaches have indeed
been recently proposed, e.g., Esmaeili et al. [26], see Chhabra et al. [18] for a survey.
We take a more general approach to fair clustering: We aim to recover the entire Pareto front
of clustering cost and fairness, rather than a single point of that front (such as the best-quality
clustering under a fairness constraint). Our work aims to enable a practitioner to choose any trade-off
point, rather than computing one of them. We give general sufficient conditions for which we can
recover the Pareto front, up to an approximation inherited from the clustering problem itself, and
encompassing a variety of quality and fairness objectives used in the literature.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

