Topological obstruction to the training of shallow
ReLU neural networks
Marco Nurisso
Politecnico di Torino & CENTAI Institute
Torino, 10100 - ITALY
marco.nurisso@polito.it

Pierrick Leroy
Politecnico di Torino
Torino, 10100 - ITALY
pierrick.leroy@polito.it

Francesco Vaccarino
Politecnico di Torino
Torino, 10100 - ITALY
francesco.vaccarino@polito.it

Abstract
Studying the interplay between the geometry of the loss landscape and the optimization trajectories of simple neural networks is a fundamental step for understanding
their behavior in more complex settings. This paper reveals the presence of topological obstruction in the loss landscape of shallow ReLU neural networks trained
using gradient flow. We discuss how the homogeneous nature of the ReLU activation function constrains the training trajectories to lie on a product of quadric
hypersurfaces whose shape depends on the particular initialization of the network’s
parameters. When the neural network’s output is a single scalar, we prove that these
quadrics can have multiple connected components, limiting the set of reachable parameters during training. We analytically compute the number of these components
and discuss the possibility of mapping one to the other through neuron rescaling
and permutation. In this simple setting, we find that the non-connectedness results
in a topological obstruction, which, depending on the initialization, can make the
global optimum unreachable. We validate this result with numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Training a neural network consists of navigating the complex geometry of the loss landscape to reach
one of its deepest valleys. Gradient descent and its variants are, by far, the most commonly used
algorithms to perform this task. While technically correct, the standard picture of the parameter space
as Euclidean space with the trajectory rolling down the loss’s surface in the steepest direction towards
a minimum is slightly misleading because different choices of parameters can be observationally
equivalent i.e. encode the same function [10]. The observational equivalence of parameters shape
the loss landscape by imposing specific geometric structures on the parameter space. Minima are
not isolated points but high-dimensional manifolds with complex geometry [17, 9, 42] and the loss
function’s gradients and Hessian are constrained to obey some specific laws [46, 27]. Gradient-based
optimization methods, where the parameters are updated by performing discrete steps in the gradient’s
direction, are thus very much dependent on the symmetry-induced geometry [12, 29].
In this work, we provide a topological perspective on the constraints induced by some groups of
network symmetries on the optimization trajectories. Topology is a field of mathematics that studies
the properties of a space that are preserved under continuous deformations. Our main goal is to find
and quantify in topological terms the impossibility of the training trajectories to freely explore the
parameter space and get from any initialization to an optimal parameter. This idea is formalized in
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

