Invisible Image Watermarks Are Provably Removable
Using Generative AI

Xuandong Zhao∗
UC Berkeley
Saastha Vasan
UC Santa Barbara

Kexun Zhang∗
Carnegie Mellon University
Ilya Grishchenko
UC Santa Barbara

Yu-Xiang Wang
UC San Diego

Christopher Kruegel
UC Santa Barbara

Zihao Su
UC Santa Barbara
Giovanni Vigna
UC Santa Barbara

Lei Li
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Invisible watermarks safeguard images’ copyrights by embedding hidden messages
only detectable by owners. They also prevent people from misusing images,
especially those generated by AI models. We propose a family of regeneration
attacks to remove these invisible watermarks. The proposed attack method first
adds random noise to an image to destroy the watermark and then reconstructs the
image. This approach is flexible and can be instantiated with many existing imagedenoising algorithms and pre-trained generative models such as diffusion models.
Through formal proofs and extensive empirical evaluations, we demonstrate that
pixel-level invisible watermarks are vulnerable to this regeneration attack. Our
results reveal that, across four different pixel-level watermarking schemes, the
proposed method consistently achieves superior performance compared to existing
attack techniques, with lower detection rates and higher image quality. However,
watermarks that keep the image semantically similar can be an alternative defense
against our attacks. Our finding underscores the need for a shift in research/industry
emphasis from invisible watermarks to semantic-preserving watermarks. Code is
available at https://github.com/XuandongZhao/WatermarkAttacker.

1

Introduction

Generative models like DALL-E [45], Imagen [50], and Stable Diffusion [47] can produce images
that are often visually indistinguishable from those created by human photographers and artists,
potentially leading to misunderstandings and false beliefs due to their visual similarity. To address
this, government leaders [30, 26, 29] advocate for the responsible use of AI, emphasizing the
importance of identifying AI-generated content. In response, leading AI companies such as Google
[20], Microsoft [61], and OpenAI [4] have pledged to incorporate watermarks into their AI-generated
images. Invisible watermarks [62, 17, 9] are preferred as they preserve image quality and are less
likely to be removed by laypersons. However, abusers are aware of these watermarks and may attempt
to remove them, making it crucial for invisible watermarks to be robust against evasion attacks.
Existing attacks can be categorized into two types. The first is destructive, where the watermark is
removed by corrupting the image. Typical destructive attacks include modifying the brightness, JPEG
compression, and adding Gaussian noise. These approaches are effective at removing watermarks, but
∗

Equal contribution. Email addresses: xuandongzhao@berkeley.edu kexunz@andrew.cmu.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

