Neural Collapse Inspired Feature Alignment for
Out-of-Distribution Generalization
Zhikang Chen1 Min Zhang2 Sen Cui5 Haoxuan Li† 3 Gang Niu4
Mingming Gong6,8 Changshui Zhang5 Kun Zhang7,8
1
Tsinghua University 2 East China Normal University 3 Peking University 4 RIKEN
5
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University (THUAI)
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
6
The University of Melbourne 7 Carnegie Mellon University
8
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI)

Abstract
The spurious correlation between the background features of the image and its
label arises due to that the samples labeled with the same class in the training
set often co-occurs with a specific background, which will cause the encoder to
extract non-semantic features for classification, resulting in poor out-of-distribution
generalization performance. Although many studies have been proposed to address
this challenge, the semantic and spurious features are still difficult to accurately
decouple from the original image and fail to achieve high performance with deep
learning models. This paper proposes a novel perspective inspired by neural collapse to solve the spurious correlation problem through the alternate execution of
environment partitioning and learning semantic masks. Specifically, we propose
to assign an environment to each sample by learning a local model for each environment and using maximum likelihood probability. At the same time, we require
that the learned semantic mask neurally collapses to the same simplex equiangular
tight frame (ETF) in each environment after being applied to the original input. We
conduct extensive experiments on four datasets, and the results demonstrate that
our method significantly improves out-of-distribution performance.

1

Introduction

The out-of-distribution (OOD) problem refers to the fact that the training dataset and the test dataset
have different distributions in different environments, after the training process is completed, what
we want is to have correlation between semantic features and label, however, the presence of spurious
feature(environmental information) can make false correlation between environmental information
and labels. The semantic feature in an image refers to the object of the class, while the spurious feature
in an image refers to the background or the environment. As shown in Figure 1, the background color
for digits 0 and 2 is predominantly orange, while the background color for digit 1 is predominantly
green. In this figure, the semantic feature includes digits 0, 1 and 2, whereas the spurious feature
includes orange and green backgrounds.
Recently, many OOD methods have been proposed to learn invariant representations for different
environments by introducing various regularization methods [Ajakan et al., 2014, Arjovsky et al.,
2019, Ahmed et al., 2020, Ahuja et al., 2021, Krueger et al., 2021, Liu et al., 2021, Tong et al.,
2023, Zhu et al., 2023a]. Although these methods achieve good OOD performance on test data with
†

Corresponding author. Email: hxli@stu.pku.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

