Understanding Transformer Reasoning Capabilities
via Graph Algorithms

Clayton Sanford1,2∗, Bahare Fatemi1 , Ethan Hall3 , Anton Tsitsulin1 ,
Mehran Kazemi4 , Jonathan Halcrow1 , Bryan Perozzi1 , and Vahab Mirrokni1
1
Google Research, 2 Columbia University,3 Google, 4 Google DeepMind

Abstract
Which transformer scaling regimes are able to perfectly solve different classes
of algorithmic problems? While tremendous empirical advances have been attained by transformer-based neural networks, a theoretical understanding of their
algorithmic reasoning capabilities in realistic parameter regimes is lacking. We
investigate this question in terms of the network’s depth, width, and number of extra
tokens for algorithm execution. Our novel representational hierarchy separates 9
algorithmic reasoning problems into classes solvable by transformers in different
realistic parameter scaling regimes. We prove that logarithmic depth is necessary
and sufficient for tasks like graph connectivity, while single-layer transformers
with small embedding dimensions can solve contextual retrieval tasks. We also
support our theoretical analysis with ample empirical evidence using the GraphQA
benchmark. These results show that transformers excel at many graph reasoning
tasks, even outperforming specialized graph neural networks.

1

Introduction

The transformer neural network architecture, which was initially introduced for neural machine
translation [6, 77], quickly became the standard neural network architecture across many fields,
powering recent breakthroughs in language modeling [20, 66, 12, 76, 3, 75, 67], computer vision [21,
49], and natural sciences [36, 53]. Across fields, transformers have superseded other architectures,
surpassing them in downstream performance while maintaining reasonable computational footprint.
How can we analyze reasoning capabilities of neural networks? One approach is to study algorithms
executable with their internal representations. Neural algorithmic reasoning [30, 89, 34, 37, 78] is a
field of research dedicated to exploring such capabilities. Algorithmic execution is desirable because
models use it to generalize out-of-distribution [92, 46] and scale to larger problem sizes [93].
In this work, we focus on classes of transformers solving algorithmic reasoning problems on graphs.
Why graph problems in particular? Recent research by Besta et al. [10] suggests that graphs
are an ideal abstraction of complex reasoning with dependencies, including chain-of-thought [82]
and its generalizations [86, 17, 41, 40]. Furthermore, we investigate graph reasoning in order
to evaluate transformer capabilities compared to specialized models that explicitly capture the
structure of data. Graph neural networks (GNNs) [72, 44, 28, 7, 15] offer strong baselines for
algorithmic reasoning [79, 13] and comprehensive theoretical frameworks for their capabilities and
limitations [51, 84]. The complexity of graph reasoning tasks varies greatly; some are easily solved
by non-graph architectures and others require sophistication beyond standard GNNs [90]. This makes
graph tasks a compelling testbed for both theoretical and empirical evaluations.
While transformer-based models are commonly optimized for downstream performance [38, 32, 64],
theoretical investigations of transformer capabilities in realistic parameter regimes have been limited.
∗

Correspondence: chsanford@google.com or baharef@google.com.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

