Spectral Learning of Shared Dynamics Between
Generalized-Linear Processes
Lucine L. Oganesian
Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
loganesi@usc.edu
Omid G. Sani
Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
omid.ghasemsani@usc.edu
Maryam M. Shanechi ∗
Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Thomas Lord Department of Computer Science
Alfred E. Mann Department of Biomedical Engineering
Neuroscience Graduate Program
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
shanechi@usc.edu

Abstract
Generalized-linear dynamical models (GLDMs) remain a widely-used framework
within neuroscience for modeling time-series data, such as neural spiking activity or
categorical decision outcomes. Whereas the standard usage of GLDMs is to model
a single data source, certain applications require jointly modeling two generalizedlinear time-series sources while also dissociating their shared and private dynamics.
Most existing GLDM variants and their associated learning algorithms do not
support this capability. Here we address this challenge by developing a multi-step
analytical subspace identification algorithm for learning a GLDM that explicitly
models shared vs. private dynamics within two generalized-linear time-series. In
simulations, we demonstrate our algorithm’s ability to dissociate and model the
dynamics within two time-series sources while being agnostic to their respective
observation distributions. In neural data, we consider two specific applications of
our algorithm for modeling discrete population spiking activity with respect to a
secondary time-series. In both synthetic and real data, GLDMs learned with our
algorithm more accurately decoded one time-series from the other using lowerdimensional latent states, as compared to models identified using existing GLDM
learning algorithms.

∗

Corresponding author. Project code: https://github.com/ShanechiLab/PGLDM

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

