Belief-State Query Policies for User-Aligned POMDPs

Daniel Bramblett and Siddharth Srivastava
Autonomous Agents and Intelligent Robots Lab
School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence
Arizona State University, AZ, USA
{drbrambl,siddharths}@asu.edu

Abstract
Planning in real-world settings often entails addressing partial observability while
aligning with users’ requirements. We present a novel framework for expressing
users’ constraints and preferences about agent behavior in a partially observable
setting using parameterized belief-state query (BSQ) policies in the setting of goaloriented partially observable Markov decision processes (gPOMDPs). We present
the first formal analysis of such constraints and prove that while the expected
cost function of a parameterized BSQ policy w.r.t its parameters is not convex,
it is piecewise constant and yields an implicit discrete parameter search space
that is finite for finite horizons. This theoretical result leads to novel algorithms
that optimize gPOMDP agent behavior with guaranteed user alignment. Analysis
proves that our algorithms converge to the optimal user-aligned behavior in the limit.
Empirical results show that parameterized BSQ policies provide a computationally
feasible approach for user-aligned planning in partially observable settings.

1

Introduction

Users of sequential decision-making (SDM) agents in partially observable settings often have requirements and preferences on expected behavior, ranging from safety concerns to high-level knowledge
of task completion requirements. However, users are ill-equipped to specify desired behaviors from
such agents. For instance, although reward engineering can often encode fully observable preferences
[Devidze et al., 2021, Gupta et al., 2023], it requires significant trial-and-error, and can produce
unintended behavior even when done by experts working on simple domains [Booth et al., 2023].
These challenges are compounded in partially observable environments, where the agent will not
know the full state on which the users’ requirements and preferences are typically defined. For
example, defining a reward function on the belief state to align the agent’s behavior with the user can
result in wireheading [Everitt and Hutter, 2016] (see Sec. 2 for further discussion on related work).
Consider a simplified, minimal example designed to illustrate the key principles (Fig. 1(a)). A
robot located on a spaceship experiences a communication error with the ship and needs to decide
whether to attempt to repair itself or the ship. Importantly, while a robot error is harder to detect, the
user would rather risk repairing the robot than repairing the ship, as each repair risks introducing
additional failures. In other words, the user may expect the robot to work with the following goals and
preferences: The objective is to fix the communication channel. First, if there is a “high” likelihood
that the robot is broken, it should try to repair itself; otherwise, if there is a “high” likelihood that the
ship is broken, it should try to repair that. Such preferences go beyond preferences in fully observable
settings: they use queries on the current belief state for expressing users’ requirements while using the
conventional paradigm of stating objectives in terms of the true underlying state. Such a formulation
avoids wireheading, allowing users to express their constraints and preferences in partially observable
settings. Although such constraints on behavior are intuitive and common, they leave a significant
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

