Inverse Factorized Soft Q-Learning for Cooperative
Multi-agent Imitation Learning

The Viet Bui
Singapore Management University, Singapore
theviet.bui.2023@phdcs.smu.edu.sg

Tien Mai
Singapore Management University, Singapore
atmai@smu.edu.sg

Thanh Hong Nguyen
University of Oregon Eugene, Oregon, United States
thanhhng@cs.uoregon.edu

Abstract
This paper concerns imitation learning (IL) in cooperative multi-agent systems.
The learning problem under consideration poses several challenges, characterized
by high-dimensional state and action spaces and intricate inter-agent dependencies.
In a single-agent setting, IL was shown to be done efficiently via an inverse
soft-Q learning process. However, extending this framework to a multi-agent
context introduces the need to simultaneously learn both local value functions
to capture local observations and individual actions, and a joint value function
for exploiting centralized learning. In this work, we introduce a new multi-agent
IL algorithm designed to address these challenges. Our approach enables the
centralized learning by leveraging mixing networks to aggregate decentralized Q
functions. We further establish conditions for the mixing networks under which the
multi-agent IL objective function exhibits convexity within the Q function space.
We present extensive experiments conducted on some challenging multi-agent
game environments, including an advanced version of the Star-Craft multi-agent
challenge (SMACv2), which demonstrates the effectiveness of our algorithm.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning (IL) is a powerful approach for sequential decision making in complex environments in which agents can learn desirable behavior by imitating an expert. There are applications of
IL in several real-world domains, including healthcare [40, 34] and autonomous driving [43, 17, 23].
A rich body of IL literature focuses on simple single-agent settings [1, 18, 13, 44, 32, 14] while
many recent works develop new multi-agent IL methods that are tailored to either cooperative or noncooperative settings [36, 42, 22, 4, 19, 37]. Leading methods in [36, 42] explore solution concepts for
Markov games such as Nash equilibria. Findings on underlying properties of these solution concepts
are integrated to extend the single-agent IL models to multi-agent settings. While these methods show
promising results, they face difficulties in training, as the underlying adversarial optimization process
involves biased and high variance gradient estimators, leading to a highly unstable learning process.
Our work studies IL in cooperative multi-agent settings. We leverage recent advanced findings in
both single-agent IL and multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) to build a unified multi-agent
IL algorithm, named Multi-agent Inverse Factorized Q-learning (MIFQ). MIFQ is built upon inverse
soft Q-learning (IQ-Learn) [14], a leading single-agent IL method of which advantage is to learn a
single Q-function that implicitly defines both reward and policy functions, thus avoiding adversarial
training. To adapt this idea for multi-agent settings, following the well-known paradigm of centralised
training with decentralised execution (CTDE) in MARL [26, 21], we develop a centralized learning
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

