Boosted Conformal Prediction Intervals
Ran Xie
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
ranxie@stanford.edu

Rina Foygel Barber
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
rina@uchicago.edu

Emmanuel J. Candès
Department of Statistics
Department of Mathematics
Stanford University
candes@stanford.edu

Abstract
This paper introduces a boosted conformal procedure designed to tailor conformalized prediction intervals toward specific desired properties, such as enhanced
conditional coverage or reduced interval length. We employ machine learning
techniques, notably gradient boosting, to systematically improve upon a predefined conformity score function. This process is guided by carefully constructed
loss functions that measure the deviation of prediction intervals from the targeted
properties. The procedure operates post-training, relying solely on model predictions and without modifying the trained model (e.g., the deep network). Systematic experiments demonstrate that starting from conventional conformal methods, our boosted procedure achieves substantial improvements in reducing interval
length and decreasing deviation from target conditional coverage.

1

Introduction

Black-box machine learning algorithms have been increasingly employed to inform decision-making
in sensitive applications. For instance, deep convolutional neural networks have been applied to diagnose skin cancer [14], and AlphaFold has been utilized in the development of malaria vaccines
[24, 25]; here, scientists have employed AlphaFold to predict the structure of a key protein in the
malaria parasite, facilitating the identification of potential binding sites for antibodies that could
prevent the transmission of the parasite [25]. These instances highlight the critical need for understanding prediction accuracy, and one popular approach to quantify the uncertainty associated with
general predictions relies on the construction of prediction sets guaranteed to contain the target label
or response with high probability. Ideally, we would like the coverage to be valid conditional on the
values taken by the features of the predictive model (e.g., patient demographics).
Conformal prediction [3] stands out as a flexible calibration procedure that provides a wrapper
around any black-box prediction model to produce valid prediction intervals. Imagine we have a
data set {(Xi , Yi )}ni=1 and a test point (Xn+1 , Yn+1 ) drawn exchangeably from an unknown, arbitrary distribution P (e.g. the pairs (Xi , Yi ) may be i.i.d.). Taking the data set and the observed
features Xn+1 as inputs, conformal prediction forms a prediction interval Cn (Xn+1 ) for Yn+1 with
valid marginal coverage, i.e. such that P(Yn+1 ∈ Cn (Xn+1 )) = 0.95 or any nominal level specified
by the user ahead of time. This is achieved by means of a conformity score E(x, y; f ), where (x, y)
represents a data point while f represents any aspects of the distribution that we have estimated. For
instance, the score may be given by the magnitude of the prediction error |y − µ̂(x)|, where µ̂(x)
represents the model prediction of the expected outcome, in which case f is simply µ̂. Roughly, we
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

