Bayesian Adaptive Calibration and Optimal Design

Rafael Oliveira∗
CSIRO’s Data61
Sydney, Australia

Dino Sejdinovic
University of Adelaide
Adelaide, Australia

David Howard
CSIRO’s Data61
Brisbane, Australia

Edwin V. Bonilla
CSIRO’s Data61
Sydney, Australia

Abstract
The process of calibrating computer models of natural phenomena is essential for
applications in the physical sciences, where plenty of domain knowledge can be
embedded into simulations and then calibrated against real observations. Current
machine learning approaches, however, mostly rely on rerunning simulations
over a fixed set of designs available in the observed data, potentially neglecting
informative correlations across the design space and requiring a large amount of
simulations. Instead, we consider the calibration process from the perspective of
Bayesian adaptive experimental design and propose a data-efficient algorithm to
run maximally informative simulations within a batch-sequential process. At each
round, the algorithm jointly estimates the parameters of the posterior distribution
and optimal designs by maximising a variational lower bound of the expected
information gain. The simulator is modelled as a sample from a Gaussian process,
which allows us to correlate simulations and observed data with the unknown
calibration parameters. We show the benefits of our method when compared to
related approaches across synthetic and real-data problems.

1

Introduction

In many scientific and engineering disciplines, computer simulation models form an essential part
of the process of predicting and reasoning about complex phenomena, especially when real data
is scarce. These simulation models depend on the inputs set by the user, commonly referred to
as designs, and on a number of parameters representing unknown physical quantities, known as
calibration parameters. The problem of setting these parameters so as to closely match observations
of the real phenomenon is known as the calibration of computer models [1].
The seminal work by Kennedy and O’Hagan [1] introduces the Bayesian framework for calibration
of simulation models, using Gaussian processes [2] to account for the differences between the model
and reality, as well as for uncertainty in the calibration parameters. While the simulator is an essential
tool when obtaining real data is expensive or unfeasible, each run of a simulator may itself involve
significant computational resources, especially in applications such as climate science or complex
engineering systems. In this situation, it is imperative to run simulations at carefully chosen settings
of designs as well as of calibration inputs, using current knowledge to optimise resource use [3–5].
In this contribution, we bridge Bayesian calibration with adaptive experimental design [6] and use
information-theoretic criteria [7] to guide the selection of simulation settings so that they are most
informative about the true value of the calibration parameters. We refer to our approach as BACON
(Bayesian Adaptive Calibration and Optimal desigN). BACON allows computational resources to
be focused on simulations that provide the most value in terms of reducing epistemic uncertainty.
Importantly, in contrast to prior work, it optimises designs jointly with calibration inputs in order to
capture informative correlations across both spaces. Experimental results on synthetic experiments
and a robotic gripper design problem demonstrate the benefits of BACON compared to competitive
∗

Corresponding author: rafael.dossantosdeoliveira@data61.csiro.au

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

