Automated Efficient Estimation using
Monte Carlo Efficient Influence Functions
Raj Agrawal
Basis Research Institute, Broad Institute
raj@basis.ai

Sam Witty
Basis Research Institute, Broad Institute
sam@basis.ai

Andy Zane
Basis Research Institute, UMass Amherst
andy@basis.ai

Eli Bingham
Basis Research Institute, Broad Institute
eli@basis.ai

Abstract
Many practical problems involve estimating low dimensional statistical quantities
with high-dimensional models and datasets. Several approaches address these estimation tasks based on the theory of influence functions, such as debiased/double
ML or targeted minimum loss estimation. We introduce Monte Carlo Efficient
Influence Functions (MC-EIF), a fully automated technique for approximating
efficient influence functions that integrates seamlessly with existing differentiable
probabilistic programming systems. MC-EIF automates efficient statistical estimation for a broad class of models and functionals that previously required rigorous
custom analysis. We prove
√ that MC-EIF is consistent, and that estimators using
MC-EIF achieve optimal N convergence rates. We show empirically that estimators using MC-EIF are at parity with estimators using analytic EIFs. Finally, we
present a novel capstone example using MC-EIF for optimal portfolio selection.

1

Introduction

Over the past several decades, there has been remarkable progress on robust and efficient statistical
estimation, especially for high dimensional problems. A particularly compelling class of such
methods are built on a foundation of efficient influence functions (EIF), i.e., functional derivatives
in the space of probability distributions [Ken22]. These methods have been particularly fruitful in
causal inference applications, where estimating quantities such as the average treatment effect require
modeling high-dimensional nuisance parameters relating confounders to treatment and outcome
variables. Intuitively, these methods focus finite statistical resources on quantities that matter, and not
on nuisance parameters that only indirectly inform the statistical quantities we wish to estimate.
Despite their successes, estimation methods based on the EIF have lagged behind the kinds of
automation that machine learning practitioners have grown accustomed to, instead requiring complex
manual derivation on a case-by-case basis. This is contrasted with the generality of automatic
differentiation (AD) systems [BPRS18] and probabilistic programming languages (PPLs) such as
Pyro [BCJ+ 19] or Gen [CTSLM19], which automate numerical computations for probabilistic
inference. EIF-based estimators have historically eluded this level of automation and generality,
because exact recovery of the EIF requires solving high-dimensional integral equations.
Contributions. We introduce Monte Carlo Efficient Influence Functions (MC-EIF), a general and
automated technique for numerically computing EIFs using only quantities that are already available
from existing AD and PPL systems. Our key insight is that EIFs can be expressed equivalently as a
product of (i) the gradient of the functional, (ii) the inverse Fisher information matrix, and (iii) the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

