Causal vs. Anticausal merging of predictors

Sergio Hernan Garrido Mejia
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Amazon
Tübingen, Germany
shgm@tuebingen.mpg.de

Patrick Blöbaum
Amazon
Tübingen, Germany

Bernhard Schölkopf
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany

Dominik Janzing
Amazon
Tübingen, Germany

Abstract
We study the differences arising from merging predictors in the causal and anticausal directions using the same data. In particular we study the asymmetries that
arise in a simple model where we merge the predictors using one binary variable
as target and two continuous variables as predictors. We use Causal Maximum
Entropy (CMAXENT) as inductive bias to merge the predictors, however, we
expect similar differences to hold also when we use other merging methods that
take into account asymmetries between cause and effect. We show that if we
observe all bivariate distributions, the CMAXENT solution reduces to a logistic
regression in the causal direction and Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) in the
anticausal direction. Furthermore, we study how the decision boundaries of these
two solutions differ whenever we observe only some of the bivariate distributions
implications for Out-Of-Variable (OOV) generalisation.

1

Introduction

A common problem in machine learning and statistics consists of estimating or combining models
or (expert opinions) of a target variable of interest into a single, hopefully better, model [14]. There
are several reasons of why this problem is important. For example, experts might have access to
different data when creating their models, but might not have access to the data available to other
experts, while there might be a modeller who can access the expert’s opinions and put them together
into a single model. Furthermore, experts might specialise in certain areas of the support of the input
space, so that a modeller with access to the expert’s opinions could potentially produce a single model
exploiting the strengths of each modeller. This problem is commonly known as “mixture of experts”,
“expert aggregation”, “merging of experts” or “expert pooling” [40, 22, 6, 31, 30].
The merging of experts problem is usually ill-defined, in the sense that there are multiple joint
models (that is, models that include all covariates) that after marginalisation would render the same
prediction as the individual experts (that is, those which include only some of the covariates). This
ill-definedness of the problem requires strong inductive biases. One way to provide this inductive bias
in a principled way is through the Maximum Entropy (MAXENT) principle [20]. In brief, MAXENT
suggests finding the distribution with maximum Shannon entropy subject to moment constraints. This
turns out to be the same as choosing the distribution closest to the uniform distribution having the
same moments as those given by the constraints. In Section 2.2 we introduce MAXENT and Causal
MAXENT (CMAXENT) in more detail, the latter being an extension that allows to include causal
information when available [17].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

