Transformers to SSMs: Distilling Quadratic
Knowledge to Subquadratic Models

Aviv Bick1∗ , Kevin Y. Li1∗ , Eric P. Xing12 , J. Zico Kolter1 , Albert Gu13
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 MBZUAI, 3 Cartesia.ai
{abick, kyl2}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Transformer architectures have become a dominant paradigm for domains like
language modeling but suffer in many inference settings due to their quadratic-time
self-attention. Recently proposed subquadratic architectures, such as Mamba, have
shown promise, but have been pretrained with substantially less computational
resources than the strongest Transformer models. In this work, we present a method
that is able to distill a pretrained Transformer architecture into alternative architectures such as state space models (SSMs). The key idea to our approach is that
we can view both Transformers and SSMs as applying different forms of mixing
matrices over the token sequences. We can thus progressively distill the Transformer architecture by matching different degrees of granularity in the SSM: first
matching the mixing matrices themselves, then the hidden units at each block, and
finally the end-to-end predictions. Our method, called MOHAWK, is able to distill
a Mamba-2 variant based on the Phi-1.5 architecture (Phi-Mamba) using only 3B
tokens. Despite using less than 1% of the training data typically used to train models from scratch, Phi-Mamba boasts substantially stronger performance compared
to all past open-source non-Transformer models. MOHAWK allows models like
SSMs to leverage computational resources invested in training Transformer-based
architectures, highlighting a new avenue for building such models.

1

Introduction

Large language models based upon Transformer architectures have become a staple of natural
language processing but suffer from their reliance on quadratic self-attention — the need to compute
inner products between tokens at all positions up to the context length. This has motivated the
development of several alternative subquadratic models, either approximations of self-attention [23]
or entirely different architectures, such as state space models (SSMs) [13, 12, 30, 35]. Training
strong subquadratic models such as SSMs can benefit the community through their cheaper finetuning
and inference costs; however, they have not benefitted from the same amount of community effort in
the form of training and compute as for Transformers. This raises a natural question: is it possible to
leverage the vast amounts of resources that have been invested in training quadratic-time Transformers
and use these models to produce stronger alternative models, such as state-space models?
In this paper, we present an approach for training subquadratic state-space models (specifically from
the class of Mamba SSMs [12]) through the distillation of different elements of a pretrained Transformer model. The key intuition is viewing both Attention and SSMs as sequence transformations
that mix different token embeddings by applying different classes of matrices across them. Sequence
model architectures can then be factored into separate (i) sequence mixing and (ii) channel mixing
blocks, e.g., a Transformer is composed of Attention (sequence mixer) and MLP (channel mixer)
*

Authors contributed equally to this work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

