VeXKD: The Versatile Integration of Cross-Modal
Fusion and Knowledge Distillation for 3D Perception
Yuzhe JI1 , Yijie Chen1 , Liuqing Yang1,2 , Rui Ding3 , Meng Yang3 , Xinhu Zheng† 1,2
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China
2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, China
3
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
{yji755, ychen324}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn
lqyang@hkust-gz.edu.cn dingrui@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
mengyang@xjtu.edu.cn xinhuzheng@hkust-gz.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent advancements in 3D perception have led to a proliferation of network architectures, particularly those involving multi-modal fusion algorithms. While these
fusion algorithms improve accuracy, their complexity often impedes real-time performance. This paper introduces VeXKD, an effective and Versatile framework
that integrates Cross-Modal Fusion with Knowledge Distillation. VeXKD applies
knowledge distillation exclusively to the Bird’s Eye View (BEV) feature maps,
enabling the transfer of cross-modal insights to single-modal students without
additional inference time overhead. It avoids volatile components that can vary
across various 3D perception tasks and student modalities, thus improving versatility. The framework adopts a modality-general cross-modal fusion module
to bridge the modality gap between the multi-modal teachers and single-modal
students. Furthermore, leveraging byproducts generated during fusion, our BEV
query guided mask generation network identiﬁes crucial spatial locations across
different BEV feature maps from different tasks and semantic levels in a datadriven manner, signiﬁcantly enhancing the effectiveness of knowledge distillation. Extensive experiments on the nuScenes dataset demonstrate notable improvements, with up to 6.9%/4.2% increase in mAP and NDS for 3D detection
tasks and up to 4.3% rise in mIoU for BEV map segmentation tasks, narrowing
the performance gap with multi-modal models.

1

Introduction

3D perception, encompassing 3D object detection [31, 1] and BEV map segmentation [63, 22, 72],
is crucial for understanding 3D scenes and controlling autonomous vehicles [48, 6, 38]. Achieving high accuracy and real-time performance simultaneously presents the desirable yet challenging
pursuit in this ﬁeld [12]. Many studies [2, 40, 28] focus on multi-modal fusion, particularly the
fusion of LiDAR and multi-view cameras, to enhance perception accuracy. These methods necessitate handling additional input data, inevitably employ more complex networks, and extend inference
time. Conversely, some studies [69, 52, 66, 65, 60] continue to focus on single-modal algorithms to
maintain system simplicity and enhance accuracy with better training strategies and data pipelines.
Cross-modal Knowledge Distillation (KD) [14, 36, 59] has emerged as a promising strategy for
transferring insights across modalities, using multi-modal models as teachers and single-modal models as students. Cross-modal KD can thus improve the accuracy of student models without incurring
†

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

