A Walsh Hadamard Derived Linear Vector Symbolic
Architecture
Mohammad Mahmudul Alam1 , Alexander Oberle1 , Edward Raff1,2 , Stella Biderman2 ,
Tim Oates1 , James Holt3
1
University of Maryland, Baltimore County,2 Booz Allen Hamilton,
3
Laboratory for Physical Sciences
m256@umbc.edu, aoberle1@umbc.edu, Raff_Edward@bah.com,
biderman_stella@bah.com, oates@cs.umbc.edu, holt@lps.umd.edu

Abstract
Vector Symbolic Architectures (VSAs) are one approach to developing Neurosymbolic AI, where two vectors in Rd are ‘bound’ together to produce a new vector
in the same space. VSAs support the commutativity and associativity of this binding
operation, along with an inverse operation, allowing one to construct symbolicstyle manipulations over real-valued vectors. Most VSAs were developed before
deep learning and automatic differentiation became popular and instead focused
on efficacy in hand-designed systems. In this work, we introduce the Hadamardderived linear Binding (HLB), which is designed to have favorable computational
efficiency, and efficacy in classic VSA tasks, and perform well in differentiable
systems. Code is available at https://github.com/FutureComputing4AI/
Hadamard-derived-Linear-Binding.

1

Introduction

Vector Symbolic Architectures (VSAs) are a unique approach to performing symbolic style AI.
Such methods use a binding operation B : Rd ˆ Rd ÝÑ Rd , where Bpx, yq “ z denotes that two
concepts/vectors x and y are connected to each other. In VSA, any arbitrary concept is assigned to
vectors in Rd (usually randomly). For example, the sentence “the fat cat and happy dog” would be
represented as Bpfat, catq ` Bphappy, dogq “ S. One can then ask, “what was happy” by unbinding
the vector for happy, which will return a noisy version of the vector bound to happy. The unbinding
operation is denoted B ˚ px, yq, and so applying B ˚ pS, happyq « dog.
Because VSAs are applied over vectors, they offer an attractive platform for neuro-symbolic methods
by having natural symbolic AI-style manipulations via differentiable operations. However, current
VSA methods have largely been derived for classical AI tasks or cognitive science-inspired work.
Many such VSAs have shown issues in numerical stability, computational complexity, or otherwise
lower-than-desired performance in the context of a differentiable system.
As noted in [39], most VSAs can be viewed as a linear operation where Bpa, bq “ aJ Gb and
B ˚ pa, bq “ aJ F b, where G and F are d ˆ d matrices. Hypothetically, these matrices could be
learned via gradient descent, but would not necessarily maintain the neuro-symbolic properties of
VSAs without additional constraints. Still, the framework is useful as all popular VSAs we are
aware fit within this framework. By choosing G and F with specified structure, we can change the
computational complexity from Opd2 q, down to Opdq for a diagonal matrix.
In this work, we derive a new VSA that has multiple desirable properties for both classical VSA
tasks, and in deep-learning applications. Our method will have only Opdq complexity for the binding
step, is numerically stable, and equals or improves upon previous VSAs on multiple recent deep
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

