Historical Test-time Prompt Tuning for Vision
Foundation Models
Jingyi Zhang1 , Jiaxing Huang1 , Xiaoqin Zhang2 , Ling Shao3 , Shijian Lu1∗
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology, China
3
UCAS-Terminus AI Lab, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
1

Abstract
Test-time prompt tuning, which learns prompts online with unlabelled test samples
during the inference stage, has demonstrated great potential by learning effective
prompts on-the-fly without requiring any task-specific annotations. However, its
performance often degrades clearly along the tuning process when the prompts
are continuously updated with the test data flow, and the degradation becomes
more severe when the domain of test samples changes continuously. We propose
HisTPT, a Historical Test-time Prompt Tuning technique that memorizes the useful
knowledge of the learnt test samples and enables robust test-time prompt tuning
with the memorized knowledge. HisTPT introduces three types of knowledge
banks, namely, local knowledge bank, hard-sample knowledge bank, and global
knowledge bank, each of which works with different mechanisms for effective
knowledge memorization and test-time prompt optimization. In addition, HisTPT
features an adaptive knowledge retrieval mechanism that regularizes the prediction
of each test sample by adaptively retrieving the memorized knowledge. Extensive
experiments show that HisTPT achieves superior prompt tuning performance consistently while handling different visual recognition tasks (e.g., image classification,
semantic segmentation, and object detection) and test samples from continuously
changing domains.

1

Introduction

Vision Foundation Models (VFMs) [1, 2, 3] have demonstrated impressive zero-shot generalization
capabilities over various downstream tasks at the cost of domain expertise for crafting appropriate
task-specific prompts [4, 5, 6]. To circumvent this limitation, prompt learning [4], which aims to
adapt VFMs to fit downstream tasks by optimizing prompts as learnable vectors with few-shot task
training samples, has been extensively explored recently. However, existing prompt tuning methods
generally suffer from two constraints: 1) they require labelled training data for each downstream task
which can be tedious and laborious to collect [7, 8], and 2) the learnt prompts tend to overfit to the
few-shot training samples, leading to degraded generalization toward downstream tasks [9, 10, 11].
Test-time prompt tuning [7] instead learns prompts with a online flow of unlabelled test samples
during the inference stage. It has attracted increasing attention recently as it allows learning effective
prompts on-the-fly without requiring any task-specific annotations as illustrated in Fig. 1 (a).
Existing test-time prompt tuning methods usually start with an initial template prompt like “a photo
of a [class]" and optimize it with a self-supervised objective over test images together with their
model predictions [7, 8]. However, these methods often experience a clear performance degradation
along the tuning process when the prompts are continuously updated with the test data flow, largely
due to the lack of test-sample annotations as illustrated in Fig. 1 (b). Specifically, these methods
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

