SMART: Towards Pre-trained Missing-Aware Model
for Patient Health Status Prediction
Zhihao Yu1,3

Xu Chu1,2,4,5∗ Yujie Jin1,3 Yasha Wang3,4,5 Junfeng Zhao1,3,4,6
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
National Research and Engineering Center of Software Engineering, Peking University
4
Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies, Ministry of Education, Beijing, China
5
Peking University Information Technology Institute (Tianjin Binhai)
6
Nanhu Laboratory, Jiaxing, China
yuzhihao@stu.pku.edu.cn, chu_xu@pku.edu.cn, wangyasha@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Electronic health record (EHR) data has emerged as a valuable resource for analyzing patient health status. However, the prevalence of missing data in EHR poses
significant challenges to existing methods, leading to spurious correlations and
suboptimal predictions. While various imputation techniques have been developed
to address this issue, they often obsess difficult-to-interpolate details and may introduce additional noise when making clinical predictions. To tackle this problem,
we propose SMART, a Self-Supervised Missing-Aware RepresenTation Learning
approach for patient health status prediction, which encodes missing information
via missing-aware temporal and variable attentions and learns to impute missing
values through a novel self-supervised pre-training approach which reconstructs
missing data representations in the latent space rather than in input space as usual.
By adopting elaborated attentions and focusing on learning higher-order representations, SMART promotes better generalization and robustness to missing data.
We validate the effectiveness of SMART through extensive experiments on six
EHR tasks, demonstrating its superiority over state-of-the-art methods. Our code is
available at https://github.com/yzhHoward/SMART.

1

Introduction

The rapid accumulation of electronic health record (EHR) data, driven by the widespread adoption of
health information systems, has opened up new avenues for analyzing patient health status. EHR data
in Intensive Care Units (ICUs) primarily captures patients’ laboratory tests and vital signs, providing
a rich resource for describing and analyzing their health conditions. These time series data have been
leveraged to predict patient prognosis and physical status, attracting significant attention from both
computer scientists and medical researchers. Various deep learning methods have been developed
to exploit the patterns from EHR data [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9], aiming to assist doctors in making
informed decisions, improving work efficiency, and ultimately enhancing patient outcomes.
Recent advancements in EHR analysis can be divided into two categories. The first category focuses
on improving the learning ability of time series by capturing feature correlations and exploring the
collaborative relationships between variables with various techniques, such as convolutions [10],
attentions [11, 12, 13, 14, 15], and graph neural networks [16, 17]. These methods have achieved
promising results in patient health status prediction tasks, providing valuable insights into modeling
the underlying patterns. However, a critical challenge is the prevalence of missing data in EHRs.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

