LFME: A Simple Framework for Learning from
Multiple Experts in Domain Generalization

Liang Chen1 Yong Zhang2∗ Yibing Song Zhiqiang Shen1 Lingqiao Liu3∗
1 MBZUAI 2 Meituan Inc. 3 The University of Adelaide
{liangchen527, zhangyong201303, yibingsong.cv}@gmail.com
Zhiqing.Shen@mbzuai.ac.ae lingqiao.liu@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Domain generalization (DG) methods aim to maintain good performance in an
unseen target domain by using training data from multiple source domains. While
success on certain occasions are observed, enhancing the baseline across most scenarios remains challenging. This work introduces a simple yet effective framework,
dubbed learning from multiple experts (LFME), that aims to make the target model
an expert in all source domains to improve DG. Specifically, besides learning the
target model used in inference, LFME will also train multiple experts specialized
in different domains, whose output probabilities provide professional guidance by
simply regularizing the logit of the target model. Delving deep into the framework,
we reveal that the introduced logit regularization term implicitly provides effects of
enabling the target model to harness more information, and mining hard samples
from the experts during training. Extensive experiments on benchmarks from
different DG tasks demonstrate that LFME is consistently beneficial to the baseline and can achieve comparable performance to existing arts. Code is available
at https://github.com/liangchen527/LFME.

1

Introduction

Deep networks trained with sufficient labeled data are expected to perform well when the training
and test domains with similar distributions [74, 4]. However, test domains in real-world often exhibit
unexpected characteristics, leading to significant performance degradation for the trained model.
Such a problem is referred to as distribution shift and is ubiquitous in common tasks such as image
classification [43, 27] and semantic segmentation [19, 40]. Various domain generalization (DG)
approaches have been proposed to address the distribution shift problem lately, such as invariant
representation learning [53, 69, 57, 62, 29], augmentation [91, 48, 79, 47], adversarial learning
[24, 46, 81, 49], meta-learning [44, 2, 22, 45], to name a few. Yet, according to [27], most arts
perform inferior to the classical Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) when applied with restricted
hyperparameter search and evaluation protocol. Both the experiments in [27] and our findings suggest
that existing models are incapable of consistently improving ERM in all evaluated datasets. The
consistent improvement for ERM thus becomes our motivation to further explore DG.
Our approach derives from the observation in [10] that some of the data encountered at test time are
similar to one or more source domains, and in which case, utilizing expert models specialized in the
domains might aid the model in making a better prediction. The observation can be better interpreted
with the example in Fig. 1. Given experts trained in the “infograph", “real", and “quickdraw" domains,
and test samples from the novel “sketch" domain. Due to the large domain shift, it would be better to
rely mostly on the expert trained on the similar “quickdraw" domain than others.
∗ Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

