This Too Shall Pass: Removing Stale Observations in
Dynamic Bayesian Optimization

Anthony Bardou
IC, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
anthony.bardou@epfl.ch

Patrick Thiran
IC, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
patrick.thiran@epfl.ch

Giovanni Ranieri
IC, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
giovanni.ranieri@epfl.ch

Abstract
Bayesian Optimization (BO) has proven to be very successful at optimizing a static,
noisy, costly-to-evaluate black-box function f : S → R. However, optimizing a
black-box which is also a function of time (i.e., a dynamic function) f : S ×T → R
remains a challenge, since a dynamic Bayesian Optimization (DBO) algorithm has
to keep track of the optimum over time. This changes the nature of the optimization
problem in at least three aspects: (i) querying an arbitrary point in S × T is
impossible, (ii) past observations become less and less relevant for keeping track
of the optimum as time goes by and (iii) the DBO algorithm must have a high
sampling frequency so it can collect enough relevant observations to keep track of
the optimum through time. In this paper, we design a Wasserstein distance-based
criterion able to quantify the relevancy of an observation with respect to future
predictions. Then, we leverage this criterion to build W-DBO, a DBO algorithm
able to remove irrelevant observations from its dataset on the fly, thus maintaining
simultaneously a good predictive performance and a high sampling frequency,
even in continuous-time optimization tasks with unknown horizon. Numerical
experiments establish the superiority of W-DBO, which outperforms state-of-the-art
methods by a comfortable margin.

1

Introduction

Many real-world problems require the optimization of a costly-to-evaluate objective function f : S ⊆
Rd → R with an unknown closed form (i.e., either the closed form expression of f exists but remains
unknown to the user, or it does not exist). Such a setting occurs frequently, and examples can be found
in hyperparameters tuning [1], networking [2, 3], robotics [4] or computational biology [5]. In such
applications, f can be seen as a black-box and cannot be optimized by usual first-order approaches.
Bayesian Optimization (BO) is an effective framework for black-box optimization. Its core idea is to
leverage a surrogate model, usually a Gaussian Process (GP), to query f at specific inputs. By doing
so, a BO algorithm is able to simultaneously discover and optimize the objective function.
Since its inception, BO has proven to be very effective at optimizing black-boxes in a variety
of contexts, such as high-dimensional input spaces [6, 7, 8], batch mode [9] or multi-objective
optimization [10]. However, few works study BO in dynamic contexts (i.e., with a time-varying
objective function), despite its critical importance. Indeed, dynamic black-box optimization problems
arise whenever an optimization task is conducted within an environment that comprises exogenous
factors that may vary with time and significantly impact the objective function. Dynamic black-boxes
are found in network management [11], unmanned aerial vehicles tasks [12], hyperparameter tuning
in online deep learning [13], online clustering [14] or crossing waypoints location in air routes [15].
In a dynamic context, f : S × T → R is a time-varying, black-box, costly-to-evaluate objective
function with spatial domain S ⊆ Rd and temporal domain T ⊆ R. Unlike common black-box
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

