Length Optimization in Conformal Prediction

Shayan Kiyani, George Pappas, Hamed Hassani
Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering
University of Pennsylvania
{shayank, pappasg, hassani}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Conditional validity and length efficiency are two crucial aspects of conformal
prediction (CP). Conditional validity ensures accurate uncertainty quantification
for data subpopulations, while proper length efficiency ensures that the prediction
sets remain informative. Despite significant efforts to address each of these issues
individually, a principled framework that reconciles these two objectives has been
missing in the CP literature. In this paper, we develop Conformal Prediction with
Length-Optimization (CPL) - a novel and practical framework that constructs prediction sets with (near-) optimal length while ensuring conditional validity under
various classes of covariate shifts, including the key cases of marginal and groupconditional coverage. In the infinite sample regime, we provide strong duality
results which indicate that CPL achieves conditional validity and length optimality.
In the finite sample regime, we show that CPL constructs conditionally valid prediction sets. Our extensive empirical evaluations demonstrate the superior prediction
set size performance of CPL compared to state-of-the-art methods across diverse
real-world and synthetic datasets in classification, regression, and large language
model-based multiple choice question answering. An Implementation of our algorithm can be accessed at the following link: https://github.com/shayankiyani98/CP.

1

Introduction

Consider a distribution D over the domain X × Y, where X is the covariate space and Y is the label
space. Using a set of calibration samples (X1 , Y1 ), . . . , (Xn , Yn ) drawn i.i.d. from D, the objective
of conformal prediction (CP) is to create a prediction set C(x), for each input x, that is likely to
include the true label y. This is formalized through specific coverage guarantees on the prediction
sets. For example, the simplest, and yet the most commonly-used guarantee is the marginal coverage:
The prediction sets C(x) ⊆ Y achieve marginal coverage if, for a test sample (Xn+1 , Yn+1 ), we
have Pr(Yn+1 ∈ C(Xn+1 )) = 1 − α. Here, α is the given miscoverage rate, and the probability is
over the randomness in the calibration and test points.
Conformal Prediction faces two major challenges in practice: conditional validity and length inefficiency. Marginal coverage is often a weak guarantee; in many practical scenarios we need coverage
guarantees that hold across different sub-populations of the data. E.g., in healthcare applications,
obtaining valid prediction sets for different patient demographics is crucial; we often need to construct
accurate prediction sets for certain age groups or medical conditions. This is known as conditional
validity - which ideally seeks a property called full conditional coverage: For every x ∈ X we require
Pr (Yn+1 ∈ C (Xn+1 ) | Xn+1 = x) = 1 − α.

(1)

Alas, achieving full conditional coverage with finite calibration data is known to be impossible
[1–3]. Consequently, in recent years several algorithmic frameworks have been developed that
guarantee relaxations of (1)[4–19]. However, the prediction sets constructed by these methods
are often observed to be (unnecessarily) large in size [2, 20, 21]; i.e., it is possible to find other
conditionally-valid prediction sets with smaller length. Even in the case of marginal coverage, the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

