Robust Prompt Optimization for Defending Language
Models Against Jailbreaking Attacks

Andy Zhou1,2
1

Bo Li1

Haohan Wang1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

2

Lapis Labs

{andyz3,lbo,haohanw}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Despite advances in AI alignment, large language models (LLMs) remain vulnerable to adversarial attacks or jailbreaking, in which adversaries can modify prompts
to induce unwanted behavior. While some defenses have been proposed, they have
not been adapted to newly proposed attacks and more challenging threat models.
To address this, we propose an optimization-based objective for defending LLMs
against jailbreaking attacks and an algorithm, Robust Prompt Optimization (RPO)
to create robust system-level defenses. Our approach directly incorporates the
adversary into the defensive objective and optimizes a lightweight and transferable
suffix, enabling RPO to adapt to worst-case adaptive attacks. Our theoretical and
experimental results show improved robustness to both jailbreaks seen during
optimization and unknown jailbreaks, reducing the attack success rate (ASR) on
GPT-4 to 6% and Llama-2 to 0% on JailbreakBench, setting the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Despite the powerful capabilities and usefulness of large language models (LLMs) [Brown et al.,
2020, Hoffmann et al., 2022, Bai et al., 2022, Touvron et al., 2023, OpenAI, 2023], significant effort
is required to ensure their behavior is helpful and harmless even when trained on harmful material.
This is commonly achieved with alignment training techniques [Christiano et al., 2017, Ouyang et al.,
2022, Bai et al., 2022, Rafailov et al., 2023], which uses a human or AI judge to evaluate if outputs
are desirable and fine-tune a pre-trained LLM to match these preferences.
While this ensures the LLM typically refuses to generate objectionable output, in certain cases, such
as when an adversary is introduced, it can be forced into doing so. This is achievable even with
black-box access of the model through prompting, resulting in a series of jailbreaking attacks that
aim to elicit unwanted behavior with only input modifications. While early attacks require humans
to write jailbreaking prompts [Wei et al., 2023], recently proposed attacks automate attack prompt
generation with gradient signals or LLMs [Chao et al., 2023, Zou et al., 2023, Zhu et al., 2023b,
Jin et al., 2024]. As model capabilities improve, this security risk raises the potential for significant
real-world harm [Ngo et al., 2024, Bengio et al.], making developing more robust LLMs crucial.
Since the discovery of these attacks, various defense mechanisms have been proposed, including
input filters [Jain et al., 2023, Kumar et al., 2023], input smoothing [Robey et al., 2023], and few-shot
examples [Wei et al., 2024, Anil et al., 2024]. While effective for initially proposed attacks such
as Greedy Coordinate Gradient (GCG) [Zou et al., 2023], these often cannot generalize to multiple
jailbreaks or incur additional inference costs, falling short of a strong and practical defense. In
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

