An Eye for an Ear:
Zero-shot Audio Description Leveraging an Image
Captioner using Audiovisual Distribution Alignment

Hugo Malard1 Michel Olvera1 Stéphane Lathuiliere1 Slim Essid1
1
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
{hugo.malard, michel.olvera}@telecom-paris.fr

Abstract
Multimodal large language models have fueled progress in image captioning.
These models, fine-tuned on vast image datasets, exhibit a deep understanding
of semantic concepts. In this work, we show that this ability can be re-purposed
for audio captioning, where the joint image-language decoder can be leveraged to
describe auditory content associated with image sequences within videos featuring
audiovisual content. This can be achieved via multimodal alignment. Yet, this
multimodal alignment task is non-trivial due to the inherent disparity between
audible and visible elements in real-world videos. Moreover, multimodal representation learning often relies on contrastive learning, facing the challenge of the
so-called modality gap which hinders smooth integration between modalities. In
this work, we introduce a novel methodology for bridging the audiovisual modality
gap by matching the distributions of tokens produced by an audio backbone and
those of an image captioner. Our approach aligns the audio token distribution
with that of the image tokens, enabling the model to perform zero-shot audio
captioning in an unsupervised fashion while keeping the initial image captioning
component unaltered. This alignment allows for the use of either audio or audiovisual input by combining or substituting the image encoder with the aligned audio
encoder. Our method achieves significantly improved performances in zero-shot
audio captioning, compared to existing approaches.1

1

Introduction

Recent progress in image captioning has been driven by methods integrating Large Language Models
(LLMs) with vision encoders (1; 2; 3). The impressive capabilities of Vision Language Models
(VLMs) stem from supervised training on large image-text collections and extensive parameterization.
Even the smallest VLMs exceed more than a billion parameters (4; 5). These models excel in
generating human-like text descriptions for images and understanding complex semantic relationships.
Such capabilities can be potentially extended to other tasks, beyond image analysis.
One such task is audio captioning, in which large-scale audio-text collections, with precise descriptions of the audio content, are lacking. Recent works have proposed diverse solutions to address this
limitation. Solutions include augmenting class labels with phrases such as “This is a sound of ” (6; 7)
or prompting LLMs to generate natural language descriptions directly from class labels (8). Further,
datasets from related domains like Speech (9) or Music (10; 11), have been considered to enlarge
training data. While such methods show impressive results, scaling them further is challenging due to
the rarity and low quality of such labels-captions. In particular, these approaches cannot cope with
the annotation noise encountered in existing audio datasets, especially in the largely adopted resource:
audio tracks of AudioSet (12), which is only partially and weakly labeled.
1

https://github.com/hugomalard/AnEyeForAnEar.git

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

