All-in-One Image Coding for Joint Human-Machine
Vision with Multi-Path Aggregation

Xu Zhang Peiyao Guo Ming Lu∗ Zhan Ma
School of Electronic Science and Engineering
Nanjing University
{xu.zhang,peiyao}@smail.nju.edu.cn {minglu,mazhan}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Image coding for multi-task applications, catering to both human perception and
machine vision, has been extensively investigated. Existing methods often rely on
multiple task-specific encoder-decoder pairs, leading to high overhead of parameter
and bitrate usage, or face challenges in multi-objective optimization under a unified
representation, failing to achieve both performance and efficiency. To this end, we
propose Multi-Path Aggregation (MPA) integrated into existing coding models
for joint human-machine vision, unifying the feature representation with an allin-one architecture. MPA employs a predictor to allocate latent features among
task-specific paths based on feature importance varied across tasks, maximizing
the utility of shared features while preserving task-specific features for subsequent
refinement. Leveraging feature correlations, we develop a two-stage optimization
strategy to alleviate multi-task performance degradation. Upon the reuse of shared
features, as low as 1.89% parameters are further augmented and fine-tuned for a
specific task, which completely avoids extensive optimization of the entire model.
Experimental results show that MPA achieves performance comparable to stateof-the-art methods in both task-specific and multi-objective optimization across
human viewing and machine analysis tasks. Moreover, our all-in-one design
supports seamless transitions between human- and machine-oriented reconstruction,
enabling task-controllable interpretation without altering the unified model. Code
is available at https://github.com/NJUVISION/MPA.

1

Introduction

Coding for multi-task that satisfies both human perception and machine vision has been extensively
explored over the past few years [69, 11, 80, 12, 45]. The intuitive and simple solution to achieve
optimal performance for various tasks involves defining distinct encoder-decoder pairs tailored to
specific instances with multiple bitstreams (separate [49, 69, 11, 42, 7, 75] or scalable [51, 80, 30, 74,
12, 26]), which however incurs significant parameter overhead and inefficient bitrate consumption.
As a result, alternative efforts [8, 19, 22, 45] attempt to enhance the compression performance across
multiple tasks by deriving a unified and compact representation of input images. Typically, they
rely on a generalized encoder for feature extraction and deploy diverse decoding models to support
corresponding vision tasks. However, they still suffer from the parametric inefficiency of multiple
dedicated decoders. Recent work has made some progress in designing a unified compression model
for multi-task, where the encoder generates a unified representation, and the decoder focuses on
task-oriented reconstruction. Popular techniques include conditional generation [2, 32] and residual
prediction [33, 24, 41], enabling user-controllable modulation of decoded results through task-driven
guidance. While achieving performance comparable to decoder-specific approaches, they solely
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

