Fine-grained Control of Generative Data
Augmentation in IoT Sensing

Tianshi Wang, Qikai Yang, Ruijie Wang∗, Dachun Sun, Jinyang Li,
Yizhuo Chen, Yigong Hu, Chaoqi Yang, Tomoyoshi Kimura, Denizhan Kara,
Tarek Abdelzaher
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, USA
{tianshi3, qikaiy2, ruijiew2, dsun18, jinyang7, yizhuoc,
yigongh2, chaoqiy2, tkimura4, kara4, zaher}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Internet of Things (IoT) sensing models often suffer from overfitting due to data
distribution shifts between training dataset and real-world scenarios. To address
this, data augmentation techniques have been adopted to enhance model robustness
by bolstering the diversity of synthetic samples within a defined vicinity of existing
samples. This paper introduces a novel paradigm of data augmentation for IoT
sensing signals by adding fine-grained control to generative models. We define
a metric space with statistical metrics that capture the essential features of the
short-time Fourier transformed (STFT) spectrograms of IoT sensing signals. These
metrics serve as strong conditions for a generative model, enabling us to tailor the
spectrogram characteristics in the time-frequency domain according to specific
application needs. Furthermore, we propose a set of data augmentation techniques
within this metric space to create new data samples. Our method is evaluated across
various generative models, datasets, and downstream IoT sensing models. The
results demonstrate that our approach surpasses the conventional transformationbased data augmentation techniques and prior generative data augmentation models.

1

Introduction

IoT sensing applications aim to detect physical world phenomena in specific environments through
time-series data captured by sensors, such as inertial, acoustic, and bioelectrical signals. Given the
wide variety of real-world conditions, IoT sensing models often face potential domain shifts and
unpredictable variations when deployed [23]. Additionally, collecting and labeling IoT sensing data is
expensive because sensing signals are harder for annotators to interpret compared to images, videos,
and natural language [32, 34, 21, 22]. Consequently, enhancing model robustness across diverse
scenarios with minimal collection overhead becomes a key research focus in the IoT field [55, 56].
A spectrum of data augmentation techniques has been proposed to reduce the need for extensive data
collection. The objective is to diversify existing datasets while preserving a plausible data distribution.
Conventional data augmentation methods for IoT sensing signals generally apply manually-crafted
transformations to create different perspectives of the same sample [58, 12]. Typical transformations
include operations in the time domain (such as jittering, rescaling, rotation, and cropping) [12, 29, 39,
50] and the frequency domain (such as spectral flipping, warping, and masking) [58, 11, 38]. They
are designed to modify the original data to reflect possible real-world variations, guided by domain
knowledge in IoT. However, those transformations can be overly simplistic, failing to capture the
∗

Corresponding author. Email: ruijiew2@illinois.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

