LLM Evaluators Recognize and Favor Their Own
Generations

1

MATS

2

Arjun Panickssery1 Samuel R. Bowman2 Shi Feng3
New York University, Anthropic PBC 3 George Washington University
arjun.panickssery@gmail.com

Abstract
Self-evaluation using large language models (LLMs) has proven valuable not only
in benchmarking but also methods like reward modeling, constitutional AI, and
self-refinement. But new biases are introduced due to the same LLM acting as
both the evaluator and the evaluatee. One such bias is self-preference, where an
LLM evaluator scores its own outputs higher than others’ while human annotators
consider them of equal quality. But do LLMs actually recognize their own outputs
when they give those texts higher scores, or is it just a coincidence? In this paper, we
investigate if self-recognition capability contributes to self-preference. We discover
that, out of the box, LLMs such as GPT-4 and Llama 2 have non-trivial accuracy at
distinguishing themselves from other LLMs and humans. By fine-tuning LLMs, we
discover a linear correlation between self-recognition capability and the strength
of self-preference bias; using controlled experiments, we show that the causal
explanation resists straightforward confounders. We discuss how self-recognition
can interfere with unbiased evaluations and AI safety more generally.

1

Introduction

Self-evaluation is becoming a prominent part of the large language model (LLM) lifecycle. In methods
like reward modeling (Leike et al., 2018; Stiennon et al., 2020), model-based benchmarks (Shashidhar
et al., 2023; Zeng et al., 2023; Yuan et al., 2023; Fu et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024), self-refinement (Saunders et al., 2022; Madaan et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2023; Shridhar et al., 2023), and constitutional
AI (Bai et al., 2022), LLMs are increasingly used to provide assessment, supervision, and oversight
for themselves and other LLMs. LLM evaluators are shown to be highly accurate at approximating
human annotators on various tasks, and are significantly more scalable (Hackl et al., 2023).
In self-evaluation, as the name suggests, the same underlying LLM acts as both the evaluator and
the evaluatee. As a result, the neutrality of the evaluator is in question, and the evaluation can suffer
from biases where the LLM evaluators diverge from humans in systematic ways (Zheng et al., 2024;
Bai et al., 2024). One such bias is self-preference, where an LLM rates its own outputs higher
than texts written by other LLMs or humans, while human annotators judge them as equal quality.
Self-preference has been observed in GPT-4-based dialogue benchmarks (Bitton et al., 2023; Koo
et al., 2023), as well as for text summarization (Liu et al., 2023).
Towards understanding and mitigating self-preference, we study self-recognition—an LLM’s capability of recognizing its own outputs. We ask: Is self-preference truly self -preference, in the sense that
the LLM prefers a text because it was generated by itself?
We measure their correlation while using prompting and fine-tuning to alter the LLM’s self-recognition
capability. In order to provide signals for the causal link between self-recognition and self-preference,
we also fine-tune the LLM on a comprehensive set of potential confounding properties.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

