A benchmark for prediction of transcriptomic
responses to chemical perturbations across cell types

Artur Szałata1∗ , Andrew Benz2∗ , Robrecht Cannoodt3,4,5 , Mauricio Cortes2 , Jason Fong2 ,
Sunil Kuppasani2 , Richard Lieberman2 , Tianyu Liu6 , Javier A. Mas-Rosario2 ,
Rico Meinl7 , Jalil Nourisa8 , Jared Tumiel7 , Tin M. Tunjic9 , Mengbo Wang10 ,
Noah Weber11 , Hongyu Zhao6 , Benedict Anchang12 , Fabian J. Theis1† ,
Malte D. Luecken1† , Daniel B. Burkhardt2†
1

Helmholtz Munich, 2 Cellarity, 3 Data Intuitive, 4 VIB Center for Inflammation Research,
5
Ghent University, 6 Yale University, 7 Retro Biosciences, 8 Helmholtz Center Hereon,
9
TU Vienna, 10 Purdue University, 11 Olden Labs, 12 NIH, ∗,† Equal contribution
{artur.szalata, fabian.theis, malte.luecken}@helmholtz-munich.de;
{abenz, dburkhardt}@cellarity.com

Abstract
Single-cell transcriptomics has revolutionized our understanding of cellular heterogeneity and drug perturbation effects. However, its high cost and the vast chemical
space of potential drugs present barriers to experimentally characterizing the effect
of chemical perturbations in all the myriad cell types of the human body. To
overcome these limitations, several groups have proposed using machine learning
methods to directly predict the effect of chemical perturbations either across cell
contexts or chemical space. However, advances in this field have been hindered
by a lack of well-designed evaluation datasets and benchmarks. To drive innovation in perturbation modeling, the Open Problems Perturbation Prediction (OP3)
benchmark introduces a framework for predicting the effects of small molecule perturbations on cell type-specific gene expression. OP3 leverages the Open Problems
in Single-cell Analysis benchmarking infrastructure and is enabled by a new singlecell perturbation dataset, encompassing 146 compounds tested on human blood
cells. The benchmark includes diverse data representations, evaluation metrics,
and winning methods from our “Single-cell perturbation prediction: generalizing experimental interventions to unseen contexts“ competition at NeurIPS 2023.
We envision that the OP3 benchmark and competition will drive innovation in
single-cell perturbation prediction by improving the accessibility, visibility, and
feasibility of this challenge, thereby promoting the impact of machine learning in
drug discovery.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

21

22
23
24
25
26

1

Introduction

Examining gene expression in individual cells via single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) provides
high-resolution insights into cellular behavior within healthy and diseased tissue. One emerging
application of single-cell technology is to profile cells under basal and perturbed states to characterize
the changes in cellular states associated with chemical treatments and to associate these changes with
healthy or pathological tissue phenotypes [1–5]. These technologies have the potential to transform
Submitted to the 38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets
and Benchmarks. Do not distribute.

