Enhancing Large Vision Language Models with
Self-Training on Image Comprehension

Yihe Deng∗1 , Pan Lu∗1,3 , Fan Yin1 , Ziniu Hu1 , Sheng Shen2
Quanquan Gu1 , James Zou3 , Kai-Wei Chang1 , Wei Wang1
2

1
University of California, Los Angeles
University of California, Berkeley 3 Stanford University

https://stic-lvlm.github.io/

Abstract
Large vision language models (LVLMs) integrate large language models (LLMs)
with pre-trained vision encoders, thereby activating the model’s perception capability to understand image inputs and conduct subsequent reasoning for different
queries. Improving this capability requires high-quality vision-language data,
which is costly and labor-intensive to acquire. Self-training approaches have
been effective in single-modal settings to alleviate the need for labeled data by
leveraging model’s own generation. However, effective self-training remains a challenge regarding the unique visual perception and reasoning capability of LVLMs.
To address this, we introduce Self-Training on Image Comprehension (STIC),
which emphasizes a self-training approach specifically for image comprehension.
First, the model self-constructs a preference dataset for image descriptions using unlabeled images. Preferred responses are generated through a step-by-step
prompt, while dis-preferred responses are generated from either corrupted images
or misleading prompts. To further self-improve reasoning on the extracted visual information, we let the model reuse a small portion of existing instruction-tuning data
and append its self-generated image descriptions to the prompts. We validate the
effectiveness of STIC across seven different benchmarks, demonstrating substantial
performance gains of 4.0% on average while using 70% less supervised fine-tuning
data than the current method. Further studies investigate various components of
STIC and highlight its potential to leverage vast quantities of unlabeled images for
self-training. Code and data are made publicly available on GitHub.

1

Introduction

In recent years, we have witnessed remarkable advancements in large language models (LLMs),
such as GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023a) and the LLaMA family (Touvron et al., 2023a,b). The increasing
importance of processing multimodal inputs, including images and text, has significantly driven
progress in vision language models (Radford et al., 2021; Jia et al., 2021b; Goel et al., 2022).
Leveraging the powerful language understanding and generation capabilities of LLMs, researchers
have advanced vision language models into large vision language models (LVLMs). This enhancement
is achieved by integrating LLMs with image encoders (Radford et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023a), which
were pre-trained on large-scale image-text pairs to ensure alignment between the two domains. For
instance, LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023b) integrates a vision encoder from CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)
with the LLM Vicuna (Chiang et al., 2023b), which is further fine-tuned on carefully constructed
vision-language instructional datasets to activate the model’s perception capability of capturing the
vision information according to different queries. This recent development has substantially expanded
the requirement for large-scale instruction fine-tuning data for LVLMs (Gao et al., 2023b; Bai et al.,
2023; Chen et al., 2023b; Gao et al., 2024; Anthropic, 2024; McKinzie et al., 2024).
∗

Equal contribution.
Contribution statement is provided after Section 7.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).
†

