Agent Planning with World Knowledge Model

Shuofei Qiao♠∗, Runnan Fang♠∗, Ningyu Zhang♠†, Yuqi Zhu♠ , Xiang Chen♠ ,
Shumin Deng♣ , Yong Jiang♢ , Pengjun Xie♢ , Fei Huang♢ , Huajun Chen♠♡†
♠
Zhejiang University ♣ National University of Singapore, NUS-NCS Joint Lab ♢ Alibaba Group
♡
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Big Data Intelligent Computing
{shuofei,zhangningyu}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent endeavors towards directly using large language models (LLMs) as agent
models to execute interactive planning tasks have shown commendable results.
Despite their achievements, however, they still struggle with brainless trial-anderror in global planning and generating hallucinatory actions in local planning
due to their poor understanding of the “real” physical world. Imitating humans’
mental world knowledge model which provides global prior knowledge before
the task and maintains local dynamic knowledge during the task, in this paper,
we introduce parametric World Knowledge Model (WKM) to facilitate agent
planning. Concretely, we steer the agent model to self-synthesize knowledge from
both expert and sampled trajectories. Then we develop WKM, providing prior
task knowledge to guide the global planning and dynamic state knowledge to assist
the local planning. Experimental results on three complex real-world simulated
datasets with three state-of-the-art open-source LLMs, Mistral-7B, Gemma-7B,
and Llama-3-8B, demonstrate that our method can achieve superior performance
compared to various strong baselines. Other interesting findings include: 1) our
instance-level task knowledge can generalize better to unseen tasks, 2) weak WKM
can guide strong agent model planning, and 3) unified WKM training has promising
potential for further development3 .
agent model

agent model
trial-and-error

correct path

task knowledge

correct path

first step

first step

state
know_probs
knowledge

[

…

]

world knowledge
model

…

…

agent_probs

] +[

…

hallucinatory
action

…

…

(a)

trajectories

…

…

(b)

Figure 1: Traditional agent planning vs. Agent planning with world knowledge model.

1

Introduction

The remarkable advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) have witnessed a rapid development of
various natural language processing tasks [25, 16, 28, 47, 60, 33]. Recently, multiple attempts that
∗

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author.
3
The code is available at https://github.com/zjunlp/WKM.

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

