Group Robust Preference Optimization
in Reward-free RLHF
Shyam Sundhar Ramesh1
University College London (UCL)

Yifan Hu
ETH Zurich, EPFL

Viraj Mehta
TensorZero

Iason Chaimalas
University College London (UCL)

Pier Giuseppe Sessa
ETH Zurich

Haitham Bou Ammar
University College London (UCL)
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Ilija Bogunovic
University College London (UCL)

Abstract
Adapting large language models (LLMs) for specific tasks usually involves finetuning through reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF) on preference
data. While these data often come from diverse labelers’ groups (e.g., different
demographics, ethnicities, company teams, etc.), traditional RLHF approaches
adopt a "one-size-fits-all" approach, i.e., they indiscriminately assume and optimize
a single preference model, thus not being robust to unique characteristics and needs
of the various groups. To address this limitation, we propose a novel Group Robust
Preference Optimization (GRPO) method to align LLMs to individual groups’
preferences robustly. Our approach builds upon reward-free direct preference optimization methods, but unlike previous approaches, it seeks a robust policy which
maximizes the worst-case group performance. To achieve this, GRPO adaptively
and sequentially weights the importance of different groups, prioritizing groups
with worse cumulative loss. We theoretically study the feasibility of GRPO and
analyze its convergence for the log-linear policy class. By fine-tuning LLMs with
GRPO using diverse group-based global opinion data, we significantly improved
performance for the worst-performing groups, reduced loss imbalances across
groups, and improved probability accuracies compared to non-robust baselines.

1

Introduction

As the usage of large language models (LLMs) has grown in recent years, the question of their
alignment has come to the forefront. Their remarkable capability to address a wide range of tasks
(Radford et al. [36]) stems from pre-training on a self-supervised objective over internet-scale
text. This vast internet-scale content, however, carries a higher risk of biases, inaccuracies, and
controversial content than smaller, curated datasets. Thus, ensuring that the model’s responses and
behaviors correspond to human intentions and values is crucial.
Typical approaches to alignment [11, 34, 37] involve gathering preference feedback from human
labelers to train models that reflect their desires. Such approaches often treat individual preferences
as samples from a broader preference distribution. However, this perspective often oversimplifies the
complex reality that human societies consist of numerous distinct groups (e.g., different demographics,
ethnicities, company teams, etc.), each with their own set of preferences that can significantly
1

Corresponding author: shyam.ramesh.22@ucl.ac.uk.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

