Towards Croppable Implicit Neural Representations

Maor Ashkenazi
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
maorash@post.bgu.ac.il

Eran Treister
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
erant@cs.bgu.ac.il

Abstract
Implicit Neural Representations (INRs) have peaked interest in recent years due to
their ability to encode natural signals using neural networks. While INRs allow for
useful applications such as interpolating new coordinates and signal compression,
their black-box nature makes it difficult to modify them post-training. In this
paper we explore the idea of editable INRs, and specifically focus on the widely
used cropping operation. To this end, we present Local-Global SIRENs – a novel
INR architecture that supports cropping by design. Local-Global SIRENs are
based on combining local and global feature extraction for signal encoding. What
makes their design unique is the ability to effortlessly remove specific portions
of an encoded signal, with a proportional weight decrease. This is achieved by
eliminating the corresponding weights from the network, without the need for
retraining. We further show how this architecture can be used to support the
straightforward extension of previously encoded signals. Beyond signal editing, we
examine how the Local-Global approach can accelerate training, enhance encoding
of various signals, improve downstream performance, and be applied to modern
INRs such as INCODE, highlighting its potential and flexibility. Code is available
at https://github.com/maorash/Local-Global-INRs.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have proven to be an effective tool for learning representations of various natural
signals. This advancement offers a paradigm of representing a signal without explicitly defining it.
The general idea behind an implicit neural representation (INR) is to model the signal as a prediction
task from some coordinate system to the signal values at that coordinate system. This is usually
performed using a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), composed of fully connected layers. Once trained,
the signal has been implicitly encoded in the weights of the network. These implicit representations
have been shown to be useful in various scenarios from interpolating values at new coordinates [29],
through signal compression [14] and can be treated as embeddings for downstream tasks [13].
Although INRs exhibit flexibility within their input space and are well-suited for tasks involving highdimensional data, their black-box nature makes the encoded signal difficult to modify post-training.
A trivial strategy involves editing the original signal, followed by training a new INR to encode the
modified signal. Another option is fine-tuning the existing INR to encode the modified signal, but it
requires preserving the INR size and architecture, which may not be ideal. Other methods attempted
to apply direct transformations on the weight space to modify the encoded signal [42, 30].
In this paper, our primary focus is on the fundamental signal editing operation of cropping. We
wish to be able to remove parts of the encoded signal, with a proportional decrease of INR weights.
Although not possible in previous approaches, in principle this should be obtained without any
additional fine-tuning, since it conceptually does not require encoding additional information. As a
secondary task, we wish to extend an encoded signal effectively. This is not trivial in a simple setting,
since encoding additional information may require increased capacity in terms of parameters, and
altering the number of parameters makes it difficult to leverage previously encoded information.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

