Accelerating ERM for data-driven algorithm design
using output-sensitive techniques

Maria-Florina Balcan∗

Christopher Seiler†

Dravyansh Sharma‡

Abstract
Data-driven algorithm design is a promising, learning-based approach for beyond worst-case analysis of algorithms with tunable parameters. An important
open problem is the design of computationally efficient data-driven algorithms
for combinatorial algorithm families with multiple parameters. As one fixes the
problem instance and varies the parameters, the “dual” loss function typically has
a piecewise-decomposable structure, i.e. is well-behaved except at certain sharp
transition boundaries. Motivated by prior empirical work, we initiate the study of
techniques to develop efficient ERM learning algorithms for data-driven algorithm
design by enumerating the pieces of the sum dual loss functions for a collection
of problem instances. The running time of our approach scales with the actual
number of pieces that appear as opposed to worst case upper bounds on the number
of pieces. Our approach involves two novel ingredients – an output-sensitive algorithm for enumerating polytopes induced by a set of hyperplanes using tools from
computational geometry, and an execution graph which compactly represents all
the states the algorithm could attain for all possible parameter values. We illustrate
our techniques by giving algorithms for pricing problems, linkage-based clustering
and dynamic-programming based sequence alignment.

1

Introduction

The data-driven algorithm design paradigm captures a widely occuring scenario of solving multiple
related problem instances and allows the design and analysis of algorithms that use machine learning
to learn how to solve the instances which come from the same domain [GR16, Bal20]. Typically
there are large (often infinite) parameterized algorithm families to choose from, and data-driven
algorithm design approaches provide techniques to select algorithm parameters that provably perform
well for instances from the same domain. Data-driven algorithms have been proposed and analyzed
for a variety of combinatorial problems, including clustering, computational biology and mechanism
design [BDL20, BDD+ 21, BPS20]. But most of the prior work has focused on sample efficiency of
learning good algorithms i.e. the number of problem instances needed to learn algorithm parameters
that perform well on a typical problem from the domain. A major open question for this line of
research is to design computationally efficient learning algorithms [GR20, BDS21].
The parameterized family may occur naturally in well-known algorithms used in practice, or one
could potentially design new families interpolating known heuristics. For the problem of aligning
pairs of genomic sequences, one typically obtains the best alignment using a dynamic program
with some costs or weights assigned to edits of different kinds, such as insertions, substitutions,
or reduplications [Wat89]. These costs are the natural parameters for the alignment algorithm.
The quality of the alignment can strongly depend on the parameters, and the best parameters vary
depending on the application (e.g. aligning DNAs or RNAs), the pair of species being compared, or
∗

Carnegie Mellon University, ninamf@cs.cmu.edu.
Work done by Christopher Seiler while he was at CMU.
‡
Corresponding author: dravy@ttic.edu. Work done by Dravyansh Sharma while he was at CMU.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

