Looks Too Good To Be True:
An Information-Theoretic Analysis of Hallucinations
in Generative Restoration Models
Regev Cohen

Idan Kligvasser

Ehud Rivlin

Daniel Freedman

Verily AI (Google Life Sciences), Israel
regevcohen@google.com

Abstract
The pursuit of high perceptual quality in image restoration has driven the development of revolutionary generative models, capable of producing results often
visually indistinguishable from real data. However, as their perceptual quality
continues to improve, these models also exhibit a growing tendency to generate
hallucinations – realistic-looking details that do not exist in the ground truth images. Hallucinations in these models create uncertainty about their reliability,
raising major concerns about their practical application. This paper investigates
this phenomenon through the lens of information theory, revealing a fundamental
tradeoff between uncertainty and perception. We rigorously analyze the relationship between these two factors, proving that the global minimal uncertainty in
generative models grows in tandem with perception. In particular, we define the
inherent uncertainty of the restoration problem and show that attaining perfect
perceptual quality entails at least twice this uncertainty. Additionally, we establish a relation between distortion, uncertainty and perception, through which we
prove the aforementioned uncertainly-perception tradeoff induces the well-known
perception-distortion tradeoff. We demonstrate our theoretical findings through
experiments with super-resolution and inpainting algorithms. This work uncovers
fundamental limitations of generative models in achieving both high perceptual
quality and reliable predictions for image restoration. Thus, we aim to raise awareness among practitioners about this inherent tradeoff, empowering them to make
informed decisions and potentially prioritize safety over perceptual performance.

( Better)

Uncertainty Lower Bound

2Uinherent

Uinherent

Impossible Region
( Better) Perception

Figure 1: Illustration of Theorem 3. In restoration tasks, the minimal attainable uncertainty is lower
bounded by a function that begins at the inherent uncertainty UInherent of the problem (Definition 2)
and graudally increases up to twice this value as the recovery approaches perfect perceptual quality.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

