Automating Data Annotation under Strategic Human
Agents: Risks and Potential Solutions

Tian Xie
Computer Science and Engineering
the Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
xie.1379@osu.edu

Xueru Zhang
Computer Science and Engineering
the Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
zhang.12807@osu.edu

Abstract
As machine learning (ML) models are increasingly used in social domains to make
consequential decisions about humans, they often have the power to reshape data
distributions. Humans, as strategic agents, continuously adapt their behaviors in
response to the learning system. As populations change dynamically, ML systems
may need frequent updates to ensure high performance. However, acquiring highquality human-annotated samples can be highly challenging and even infeasible
in social domains. A common practice to address this issue is using the model
itself to annotate unlabeled data samples. This paper investigates the long-term
impacts when ML models are retrained with model-annotated samples when they
incorporate human strategic responses. We first formalize the interactions between
strategic agents and the model and then analyze how they evolve under such
dynamic interactions. We find that agents are increasingly likely to receive positive
decisions as the model gets retrained, whereas the proportion of agents with positive
labels may decrease over time. We thus propose a refined retraining process to
stabilize the dynamics. Last, we examine how algorithmic fairness can be affected
by these retraining processes and find that enforcing common fairness constraints at
every round may not benefit the disadvantaged group in the long run. Experiments
on (semi-)synthetic and real data validate the theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

As machine learning (ML) is increasingly used to automate human-related decisions (e.g., in lending, hiring, college admission), there is a growing concern that these deTrain
Training data at
Model Annotation
Human Annotation
cisions are vulnerable to human strategic behaviors. With
the knowledge of decision policy, humans may adapt their
behavior strategically in response to ML models, e.g., by
changing their features at costs to receive favorable outBest respond
comes. A line of research called Strategic Classification
studies such problems by formulating mathematical modStrategic agents arriving at
els to characterize strategic interactions and developing
Training data at
algorithms robust to strategic behavior [1, 2]. Among
existing works, most studies focus on one-time model de- Figure 1: Illustration of updating the
ployment where an ML model is trained and applied to a training data from t to t+1 during the retraining process with strategic feedback
fixed population of strategic agents once.
However, practical ML systems often need to be retrained periodically to ensure high performance
on the current population. As the ML model gets updated, human behaviors also change accordingly.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

