Learning Human-like Representations to Enable
Learning Human Values

Andrea H. Wynn∗
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08542
awynn13@jhu.edu

Ilia Sucholutsky†
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08542
is3060@nyu.edu

Thomas L. Griffiths
Department of Psychology
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08542
tomg@princeton.edu

Abstract
How can we build AI systems that can learn any set of individual human values
both quickly and safely, avoiding causing harm or violating societal standards
for acceptable behavior during the learning process? We explore the effects of
representational alignment between humans and AI agents on learning human
values. Making AI systems learn human-like representations of the world has
many known benefits, including improving generalization, robustness to domain
shifts, and few-shot learning performance. We demonstrate that this kind of
representational alignment can also support safely learning and exploring human
values in the context of personalization. We begin with a theoretical prediction,
show that it applies to learning human morality judgments, then show that our
results generalize to ten different aspects of human values – including ethics,
honesty, and fairness – training AI agents on each set of values in a multi-armed
bandit setting, where rewards reflect human value judgments over the chosen action.
Using a set of textual action descriptions, we collect value judgments from humans,
as well as similarity judgments from both humans and multiple language models,
and demonstrate that representational alignment enables both safe exploration and
improved generalization when learning human values.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models are becoming more powerful and operating in increasingly open environments. This makes it important to ensure that they learn to achieve an explicit objective without
causing harm or violating human standards for acceptable behavior. This problem has motivated a
growing interest in research on value alignment [13, 21], which aims to ensure that models trained
with few explicit restrictions still learn solutions that humans consider acceptable.
∗

Andrea Wynn is currently affiliated with the Department of Computer Science at Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD.
†
Ilia Sucholutsky is currently affiliated with the New York University Center for Data Science, New York,
NY.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

