Langevin Unlearning: A New Perspective of Noisy
Gradient Descent for Machine Unlearning

Eli Chien
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Georgia, U.S.A.
ichien6@gatech.edu
Haoyu Wang
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Georgia, U.S.A.
haoyu.wang@gatech.edu

Ziang Chen
Department of Mathematics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Massachusetts, U.S.A.
ziang@mit.edu

Pan Li
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Georgia, U.S.A.
panli@gatech.edu

Abstract
Machine unlearning has raised significant interest with the adoption of laws ensuring the “right to be forgotten”. Researchers have provided a probabilistic notion
of approximate unlearning under a similar definition of Differential Privacy (DP),
where privacy is defined as statistical indistinguishability to retraining from scratch.
We propose Langevin unlearning, an unlearning framework based on noisy gradient
descent with privacy guarantees for approximate unlearning problems. Langevin
unlearning unifies the DP learning process and the privacy-certified unlearning
process with many algorithmic benefits. These include approximate certified
unlearning for non-convex problems, complexity saving compared to retraining,
sequential and batch unlearning for multiple unlearning requests.

1

Introduction

With recent demands for increased data privacy, owners of these machine learning models are responsible for fulfilling data removal requests from users. Certain laws are already in place guaranteeing
the users’ “Right to be Forgotten”, including the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA), and the Canadian Consumer Privacy
Protection Act (CPPA) [1]. Merely removing user data from the training data set is insufficient, as
machine learning models are known to memorize training data information [2]. It is critical to also
remove the information of user data subject to removal requests from the machine learning models.
This consideration gave rise to an important research direction, referred to as machine unlearning [3].
Naively, one may retrain the model from scratch after every data removal request to ensure a “perfect”
privacy guarantee. However, it is prohibitively expensive in practice when accommodating frequent
removal requests. To avoid complete retraining, various machine unlearning methods have been
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

