ControlSynth Neural ODEs: Modeling Dynamical
Systems with Guaranteed Convergence

Wenjie Mei∗†

Dongzhe Zheng∗†

Shihua Li†

Abstract
Neural ODEs (NODEs) are continuous-time neural networks (NNs) that can process data without the limitation of time intervals. They have advantages in learning
and understanding the evolution of complex real dynamics. Many previous works
have focused on NODEs in concise forms, while numerous physical systems taking
straightforward forms, in fact, belong to their more complex quasi-classes, thus
appealing to a class of general NODEs with high scalability and flexibility to model
those systems. This, however, may result in intricate nonlinear properties. In this
paper, we introduce ControlSynth Neural ODEs (CSODEs). We show that despite
their highly nonlinear nature, convergence can be guaranteed via tractable linear
inequalities. In the composition of CSODEs, we introduce an extra control term for
learning the potential simultaneous capture of dynamics at different scales, which
could be particularly useful for partial differential equation-formulated systems. Finally, we compare several representative NNs with CSODEs on important physical
dynamics under the inductive biases of CSODEs, and illustrate that CSODEs have
better learning and predictive abilities in these settings.

1

Introduction

Neural ODEs (NODEs) [4] were developed from the limiting cases of continuous recurrent networks
and residual networks and exhibit non-negligible advantages in data incorporation and modeling
unknown dynamics of complex systems, for instance. Their continuous nature makes them particularly
beneficial to learning and predicting the dynamical behavior of complex physical systems, which are
often difficult to realize due to sophisticated internal and external factors for the systems.
Starting from the introduction of NODEs, many types of variants of NODEs have been studied (see,
e.g., [6, 19, 17, 15]). Nevertheless, there are rare studies concerning highly scalable and flexible
dynamics that also present complex nonlinear natures, bringing difficulties in their modeling and
analyses. No in-detail research attention has been paid to the scalability of depth and structure
in NODEs despite numerous physical systems in the real world having inscrutable dynamics and
compositions. To fill in this gap, we propose ControlSynth Neural ODEs (CSODEs), in whose
structure another sub-network is also incorporated for enlarging the dexterity of the composition and
controlling the evolution of the state. Different from most of the existing methods and experiments, we
focus on widely investigated physical models, with known state evolution under necessary conditions.
Subsequently, we will show that the proposed NODEs are effective in learning and understanding
those models.
Our contributions are mainly composed of the novel structure of CSODEs, their convergence guarantees, and the comparative experiments among CSODEs, several representative NODEs, and their
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to wenjie.mei@seu.edu.cn and lsh@seu.edu.cn
Wenjie Mei and Shihua Li are with the School of Automation and the Key Laboratory of MCCSE of
the Ministry of Education, Southeast University, Nanjing, China. Dongzhe Zheng is with the Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

