LibMOON: A Gradient-based MultiObjective
OptimizatioN Library in PyTorch

Xiaoyuan Zhang♣ , Liang Zhao♣ , Yingying Yu♣ , Xi Lin♣ , Yifan Chen♠ ,
Han Zhao♡ , Qingfu Zhang♣∗
♣
CityUHK, ♠ HKBU, ♡ UIUC.

Abstract
Multiobjective optimization problems (MOPs) are prevalent in machine learning,
with applications in multi-task learning, fairness, robustness, and more. Unlike
single-objective optimization, which aggregates objectives into a scalar through
weighted sums, MOPs focus on generating specific or diverse Pareto solutions
and learning the entire Pareto set directly. Existing MOP benchmarks primarily
focus on evolutionary algorithms, which are zeroth-order or meta-heuristic methods
that fail to leverage higher-order objective information and cannot scale to large
models. To address these challenges, we introduce LibMOON, the first multiobjective
optimization library supporting state-of-the-art gradient-based methods, offering a
fair and comprehensive benchmark, and open-sourced for the community.

1

Introduction

Multiobjective Optimization Problems (MOPs) are ubiquitous in machine learning. For instance,
trustworthy machine learning (e.g., algorithmic fairness) problems balancing the fairness level and
the accuracy level [1, 2]; in robotics, it is necessary to balance several objectives (e.g., forward speed
and energy consumption) [3, 4]; similarly, recommendation systems face potentially conflicting
objectives, such as novelty, accuracy, and diversity [5, 6, 7]. For all the applications above, the
underlying optimization problem involves an MOP with m objectives and can be (informally) defined
as:
min L(θ) = (L1 (θ), . . . , Lm (θ)),
(1)
θ

where L1 (θ), . . . , Lm (θ) denote m (potentially) conflicting objectives and we denote the size of
the model parameter as n := |θ|. Note that as informally defined above, Equation (1) is a vector
optimization problem that does not necessarily admit a total ordering. For a non-trivial MOP, no
single solution can attain the minimum of all objectives simultaneously. To compare two solutions
for an MOP, we introduce the concepts of dominance and Pareto optimality [8]. We say that solution
θ (a) dominates θ (b) when θ (a) satisfies Li (θ (a) ) ≤ Li (θ (b) ) for all 1 ≤ i ≤ m, with at least one
strict inequality. A solution is Pareto optimal if no other solution in the feasible region dominates it.
The set of all Pareto optimal solutions is called the Pareto set (PS), and its image set is called the
Pareto front (PF).
Over the last few decades, multiobjective evolutionary algorithms (MOEAs) emerged as a widely
used methodology for addressing MOPs due to their ability to find diverse and approximate PS.
Several popular MOEA libraries have emerged, including PlatEMO (Matlab) [9], Pagmo (C++) [10],
and Pymoo (Python) [11]. Compared to MOEAs, gradient-based multiobjective optimization (MOO)
methods are particularly suitable for large-scale machine learning tasks involving thousands to
millions of neural network parameters. In contrast, gradient-based MOO methods can only find
∗

Corresponding to Prof. Qingfu Zhang. Contact: {xzhang2523-c@my.,qingfu.zhang@}cityu.edu.hk.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

