KVQuant: Towards 10 Million Context Length LLM
Inference with KV Cache Quantization

Coleman Hooper1 Sehoon Kim1 Hiva Mohammadzadeh1
Michael W. Mahoney1,2,3 Yakun Sophia Shao1 Kurt Keutzer1 Amir Gholami1,2
1

University of California, Berkeley

2

ICSI

3

LBNL

{chooper, sehoonkim, hiva, mahoneymw, ysshao, keutzer, amirgh}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
LLMs are seeing growing use for applications which require large context windows,
and with these large context windows KV cache activations surface as the dominant
contributor to memory consumption during inference. Quantization is a promising
approach for compressing KV cache activations; however, existing solutions fail to
represent activations accurately in sub-4-bit precision. Our work, KVQuant, facilitates low precision KV cache quantization by incorporating several novel methods:
(i) Per-Channel Key Quantization, where we adjust the dimension along which we
quantize the Key activations to better match the distribution; (ii) Pre-RoPE Key
Quantization, where we quantize Key activations before the rotary positional embedding to mitigate its impact on quantization; (iii) Non-Uniform KV Cache Quantization, where we derive per-layer sensitivity-weighted non-uniform datatypes that
better represent the distributions; and (iv) Per-Vector Dense-and-Sparse Quantization, where we isolate outliers separately for each vector to minimize skews in
quantization ranges. By applying our method to the LLaMA, Llama-2, Llama-3,
and Mistral models, we achieve < 0.1 perplexity degradation with 3-bit quantization on both Wikitext-2 and C4, outperforming existing approaches. Our method
enables serving LLaMA-7B with a context length of up to 1 million on a single
A100-80GB GPU and up to 10 million on an 8-GPU system. We develop custom
CUDA kernels for KVQuant, showing that we can achieve up to ∼1.7× speedups,
compared to baseline fp16 matrix-vector multiplications, for the LLaMA-7B model.
Code is available at https://github.com/SqueezeAILab/KVQuant.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have revolutionized many natural language processing (NLP) tasks. In
order to improve the capabilities of LLMs, there is significant interest in increasing the context lengths
of LLMs. Longer context lengths enable new applications, including long document summarization,
retrieval for answering questions about long documents, extended multi-turn applications [6], and
code analysis. To support this pull from applications, there have been significant recent advances in
long-context length models in industry [2, 30], as well as in academia [6, 22].
Given the importance of LLM workloads, there is strong motivation to improve their inference
efficiency. LLM inference with large context lengths can be incredibly resource-intensive; serving
LLMs requires high-end GPUs, and the largest LLMs require costly multi-GPU inference setups.
When analyzing the computational nature of generative inference with LLMs, it becomes quickly
apparent that, for relatively small batch sizes, the computation is memory bound [17]. With the
growing divergence between computational speeds and memory speeds, this problem is only going
to get worse over time [12]. This makes reducing the memory bottleneck preeminently important.
Further analysis shows that the memory bottleneck is strongly related to context size. For short
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

