Challenges of Generating Structurally Diverse Graphs

Fedor Velikonivtsev
HSE University, Yandex Research
fvelikon@yandex-team.ru

Mikhail Mironov
Yandex Research
mironov.m.k@gmail.com

Liudmila Prokhorenkova
Yandex Research
ostroumova-la@yandex-team.ru

Abstract
For many graph-related problems, it can be essential to have a set of structurally
diverse graphs. For instance, such graphs can be used for testing graph algorithms
or their neural approximations. However, to the best of our knowledge, the problem
of generating structurally diverse graphs has not been explored in the literature.
In this paper, we fill this gap. First, we discuss how to define diversity for a set
of graphs, why this task is non-trivial, and how one can choose a proper diversity
measure. Then, for a given diversity measure, we propose and compare several
algorithms optimizing it: we consider approaches based on standard random graph
models, local graph optimization, genetic algorithms, and neural generative models.
We show that it is possible to significantly improve diversity over basic random
graph generators. Additionally, our analysis of generated graphs allows us to better
understand the properties of graph distances: depending on which diversity measure
is used for optimization, the obtained graphs may possess very different structural
properties which gives a better understanding of the graph distance underlying the
diversity measure.

1

Introduction

Figure 1: A sample of generated graphs
Many real-world objects can be naturally represented as graphs: biological and chemical entities
(atoms, molecules, proteins, metabolic maps), interaction networks (social and citation networks,
financial transactions), road maps, epidemic spreads, and so on. That is why the analysis of graphstructured data is an important and rapidly developing research area.
To generate realistic graph structures, many random graph models have been proposed in the literature (Boccaletti et al., 2006). Such models aim to imitate properties typically observed in natural
structures: power-law degree distribution, small diameter, community structure, and others. Each
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

