Mixture of Nested Experts: Adaptive Processing of
Visual Tokens
Gagan Jain◇⋆ Nidhi Hegde◇ Aditya Kusupati◇†
Arsha Nagrani◇ Shyamal Buch◇ Prateek Jain◇ Anurag Arnab◇ Sujoy Paul◇⋆
◇
Google DeepMind † University of Washington
{jaingagan,sujoyp}@google.com

Abstract
The visual medium (images and videos) naturally contains a large amount of information redundancy, thereby providing a great opportunity for leveraging efficiency
in processing. While Vision Transformer (ViT) based models scale effectively to
large data regimes, they fail to capitalize on this inherent redundancy, leading to
higher computational costs. Mixture of Experts (MoE) networks demonstrate scalability while maintaining same inference-time costs, but they come with a larger
parameter footprint. We present Mixture of Nested Experts (MoNE), which utilizes
a nested structure for experts, wherein individual experts fall on an increasing
compute-accuracy curve. Given a compute budget, MoNE learns to dynamically
choose tokens in a priority order, and thus redundant tokens are processed through
cheaper nested experts. Using this framework, we achieve equivalent performance
as the baseline models, while reducing inference time compute by over two-fold.
We validate our approach on standard image and video datasets - ImageNet-21K,
Kinetics400, and Something-Something-v2. We further highlight MoNE’s adaptability by showcasing its ability to maintain strong performance across different
inference-time compute budgets on videos, using only a single trained model.

1

Introduction

Visual tokens, the fundamental building blocks of image and video representations, often exhibit
strong inter-dependencies, spatially in images and spatio-temporally in videos. This offers a potential
avenue for optimization in visual processing, as processing every token with equal emphasis may
not be necessary for achieving optimal results. Traditional Vision Transformer (ViT) [20] and Video
Vision Transformer (ViViT) [2] based models, however, process all tokens with equal emphasis,
disregarding this inherent codependency and leading to unnecessary computational burden. This becomes a major bottleneck when deploying these models in real-world scenarios, where computational
resources may be limited and real-time processing is required.
To this end, conditional computation has become a promising line of research to increase the capacity
of a network, while only conditionally activating a part of it during inference. Sparse Mixture of
Experts (MoEs) was initially popularized for Natural Language Processing (NLP) [42, 22],but it has
been gaining attention for furthering conditional computation ideas in vision [39, 1, 35, 50] as well.
While MoEs bring in improved performance at a given inference cost, they also increase the overall
parameter count, leading to increased storage requirements. Moreover, these works rely on experts
that have the same parameter count and compute, limiting their ability to reduce computational costs
without resorting to skipping tokens entirely.
⋆

equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

