Coherent 3D Scene Diffusion
From a Single RGB Image

Manuel Dahnert1
1

Angela Dai1

Norman Müller2

Technical University of Munich, Germany

2

Matthias Nießner1

Meta Reality Labs Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
We present a novel diffusion-based approach for coherent 3D scene reconstruction
from a single RGB image. Our method utilizes an image-conditioned 3D scene
diffusion model to simultaneously denoise the 3D poses and geometries of all
objects within the scene. Motivated by the ill-posed nature of the task and to
obtain consistent scene reconstruction results, we learn a generative scene prior by
conditioning on all scene objects simultaneously to capture the scene context and
by allowing the model to learn inter-object relationships throughout the diffusion
process. We further propose an efficient surface alignment loss to facilitate training
even in the absence of full ground-truth annotation, which is common in publicly
available datasets. This loss leverages an expressive shape representation, which
enables direct point sampling from intermediate shape predictions. By framing
the task of single RGB image 3D scene reconstruction as a conditional diffusion
process, our approach surpasses current state-of-the-art methods, achieving a
12.04% improvement in AP3D on SUN RGB-D and a 13.43% increase in F-Score
on Pix3D.

1

Introduction

Figure 1: Given a single RGB image of an indoor scene, our model reconstructs the 3D scene
by jointly estimating object arrangements and shapes in a globally consistent manner. Our novel
diffusion-based 3D scene reconstruction approach achieves highly accurate predictions by utilizing
a novel generative scene prior that captures scene context and inter-object relationships, and by
employing an efficient surface alignment loss formulation for joint pose- and shape-synthesis.
Holistic 3D scene understanding is crucial for various fields and lays the foundation for many
downstream tasks in robotics, 3D content creation, and mixed reality. It bridges the gap between
2D perception and 3D understanding. Despite impressive advancements in 2D perception and 3D
reconstruction of individual objects [56, 5, 12, 38], 3D scene reconstruction from a single RGB
observation remains a challenging problem due to its ill-posed nature, heavy occlusions, and the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

