cPAPERS: A Dataset of Situated and Multimodal
Interactive Conversations in Scientific Papers

Anirudh Sundar∗

Jin Xu∗

William Gay∗ Christopher Richardson∗
AI Virtual Assistant Lab
Georgia Institute of Technology
∗
Equal Contribution

Larry Heck

{asundar34, jxu81, wgay7, crichardson8, larryheck}@gatech.edu

Abstract
An emerging area of research in situated and multimodal interactive conversations
(SIMMC) includes interactions in scientific papers. Since scientific papers are
primarily composed of text, equations, figures, and tables, SIMMC methods must
be developed specifically for each component to support the depth of inquiry and
interactions required by research scientists. This work introduces C ONVERSA TIONAL PAPERS (cPAPERS), a dataset of conversational question-answer pairs
from reviews of academic papers grounded in these paper components and their
associated references from scientific documents available on arXiv. We present a
data collection strategy to collect these question-answer pairs from OpenReview
and associate them with contextual information from LATEX source files. Additionally, we present a series of baseline approaches utilizing Large Language Models
(LLMs) in both zero-shot and fine-tuned configurations to address the cPAPERS
dataset.

1

Introduction

Developing conversational assistants capable of situated and multimodal interactive conversations
(SIMMC) over structured knowledge sources remains an open problem [33, 47, 27].
An emerging area of research within this domain is conversational interactions over scientific documents [41]. The number of scientific articles has grown dramatically over the past decade [1], making
it difficult for scientists to find, read, understand, and connect advancements published by their fellow
researchers. Scientists in the field of biomedicine, for example, publish over 1 million articles per
year or a new article every 2 minutes on average [28]. Developing methods to understand scientific
documents and assist researchers is an important problem, especially for the Natural Language Processing (NLP) community. Scientific documents present an interesting challenge in SIMMC-based
methods since the content is frequently multimodal [6].
Besides textual paragraphs, researchers rely on various modalities to describe research methods. Figures convey information about concepts developed throughout the paper. Generally, figures represent
many different types of information including most commonly graphical and image information.
For example, figures explain model architectures and pipelines, summarize experimental results in
graphical plots, and represent complex information such as gradient learning surfaces and feature
maps. In addition, figures can be used to show various stages of image processing in computer vision
and image generation papers.
Equations are crucial for grasping mathematical concepts in scientific texts but can be challenging
to interpret. Equations frequently rely on notation introduced elsewhere in the document, often
requiring readers to draw from the entire paper to understand the formulation. In addition, equations
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

