Shapes analysis for time series

Thibaut Germain1∗
Centre Borelli, ENS Paris-Saclay
4 av. des sciences, 91190

Samuel Gruffaz1
Centre Borelli, ENS Paris-Saclay
4 av. des sciences, 91190

Charles Truong1
Centre Borelli, ENS Paris-Saclay
4 av. des sciences, 91190

Laurent Oudre1
Centre Borelli, ENS Paris-Saclay
4 av. des sciences, 91190

Alain Durmus
CMAP, CNRS, Ecole polytechnique
Institut Polytechnique de Paris
91120 Palaiseau, France

Abstract
Analyzing inter-individual variability of physiological functions is particularly appealing in medical and biological contexts to describe or quantify health conditions.
Such analysis can be done by comparing individuals to a reference one with time
series as biomedical data. This paper introduces an unsupervised representation
learning (URL) algorithm for time series tailored to inter-individual studies. The
idea is to represent time series as deformations of a reference time series. The
deformations are diffeomorphisms parameterized and learned by our method called
TS-LDDMM. Once the deformations and the reference time series are learned, the
vector representations of individual time series are given by the parametrization of
their corresponding deformation. At the crossroads between URL for time series
and shape analysis, the proposed algorithm handles irregularly sampled multivariate time series of variable lengths and provides shape-based representations of
temporal data. In this work, we establish a representation theorem for the graph of a
time series and derive its consequences on the LDDMM framework. We showcase
the advantages of our representation compared to existing methods using synthetic
data and real-world examples motivated by biomedical applications.

1

Introduction

Our goal is to analyze the inter-individual variability within a time series dataset, an approach of
significant interest in physiological contexts [25, 58, 4, 21]. Specifically, we aim to develop an
unsupervised feature representation method that encodes the specificities of individual time series in
comparison to a reference time series. In physiology, examining the various "shapes" in a time series
related to biological phenomena and their variations due to individual differences or pathological
conditions is common. However, the term "shape" lacks a precise definition and is more intuitively
understood as the silhouette of a pattern in a time series. In this paper, we refer to the shape of a time
series as the graph of this signal.
1
Complete affiliation: Université Paris Saclay, Université Paris Cité, ENS Paris Saclay, CNRS, SSA,
INSERM, Centre Borelli, F-91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
∗
Corresponding author. Contact at thibaut.germain@ens-paris-saclay.fr

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

