Real-Time Recurrent Learning using
Trace Units in Reinforcement Learning

Esraa Elelimy, Adam White∗ , Michael Bowling∗ , Martha White∗
University of Alberta, Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii)
∗
Canada CIFAR AI Chair
elelimy,amw8,mbowling,whitem@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are used to learn representations in partially
observable environments. For agents that learn online and continually interact with
the environment, it is desirable to train RNNs with real-time recurrent learning
(RTRL); unfortunately, RTRL is prohibitively expensive for standard RNNs. A
promising direction is to use linear recurrent architectures (LRUs), where dense
recurrent weights are replaced with a complex-valued diagonal, making RTRL
efficient. In this work, we build on these insights to provide a lightweight but
effective approach for training RNNs in online RL. We introduce Recurrent Trace
Units (RTUs), a small modification on LRUs that we nonetheless find to have
significant performance benefits over LRUs when trained with RTRL. We find
RTUs significantly outperform other recurrent architectures across several partially
observable environments while using significantly less computation.1

1

Introduction

Agents, animals, and people perceive their surrounding environment through imperfect sensory
observations. When the state of the environment is partially observable, agents construct and maintain
their own state from the stream of observations. The constructed agent state summarizes past
environment-agent interactions in a form that is useful to predict and control future interactions [41].
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) provide a flexible architecture for constructing agent state
[19, 21, 13, 6, 10].
While standard RNN architectures have been mainly supplanted by Transformers [44], in online
reinforcement learning settings where the agent learns while interacting with the environment, RNNs
remain a promising direction to pursue [17, 11]. There are two main issues that limit the use of selfattention mechanisms from Transformers in online learning. First, calculating the similarity between
each pair of points results in a computational complexity that is a function of k 2 , where k is the
sequence length. Moreover, calculating the similarity between all pairs ignores the temporal order of
the data points, which limits the usefulness of self-attention when the data is temporally correlated [47].
Second, we need access to the whole sequence of observations before taking an action or updating the
learnable parameters, which is impractical in continual learning. While recent works have reduced
the complexity of transformers from quadratic in the sequence length to linear [15, 16, 37], the
entire sequence length is still needed to train such architectures. Gated Transformer-XL attempts to
overcome this issue by keeping a moving window of previous observations [35]. A window of past
observations does not scale well to long sequences—the computation is quadratic in the sequence
length—and a window is one particular fixed function of history. The simpler recursive form in
RNNs, on the other hand, can learn a great variety of functions of history from the data and is well
1

Code available at https://github.com/esraaelelimy/rtus

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

