SemFlow: Binding Semantic Segmentation and Image
Synthesis via Rectified Flow

Chaoyang Wang1 Xiangtai Li1 Lu Qi2 Henghui Ding3
Yunhai Tong1 Ming-Hsuan Yang2
1
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
UC, Merced 3 Institute of Big Data, Fudan University
Project page: https://wang-chaoyang.github.io/project/semflow
cywang@stu.pku.edu.cn, qqlu1992@gmail.com, xiangtai94@gmail.com

Abstract
Semantic segmentation and semantic image synthesis are two representative tasks
in visual perception and generation. While existing methods consider them as
two distinct tasks, we propose a unified framework (SemFlow) and model them
as a pair of reverse problems. Specifically, motivated by rectified flow theory, we
train an ordinary differential equation (ODE) model to transport between the distributions of real images and semantic masks. As the training object is symmetric,
samples belonging to the two distributions, images and semantic masks, can be
effortlessly transferred reversibly. For semantic segmentation, our approach solves
the contradiction between the randomness of diffusion outputs and the uniqueness
of segmentation results. For image synthesis, we propose a finite perturbation
approach to enhance the diversity of generated results without changing the semantic categories. Experiments show that our SemFlow achieves competitive
results on semantic segmentation and semantic image synthesis tasks. We hope
this simple framework will motivate people to rethink the unification of low-level
and high-level vision.

1

Introduction

Understanding semantic content and creating images from semantic conditions are fundamental
research topics in computer vision. Semantic segmentation [45; 7; 59; 85; 11; 10] and image
synthesis [8; 32; 28; 72; 90] are two representative dense prediction tasks and inspires various
downstream applications, including autonomous driving [5] and medical image analysis [89]. The
former aims to assign a category label to each pixel in the image, while the latter aims to generate
realistic images given semantic layouts.
Although semantic segmentation and image synthesis constitute a pair of reverse problems, existing
works typically solve them using two distinct methodologies. On the one hand, segmentation models
mostly follow the spirit of discriminative models. Specifically, a pre-trained backbone is employed to
extract multi-scale features, and then task-specific decoders are used for dense prediction. On the other
hand, semantic image synthesis frameworks are mainly built upon generative adversarial networks
(GAN) [19; 52; 57; 62] or diffusion models (DM) [63; 64; 25]. GAN-based methods [90; 72; 28]
typically take semantic layouts as inputs and adopt a discriminator for adversarial training. Meanwhile,
DM-based methods [36] generate from noise with semantic layouts functioning as control signals.
An intuitive solution is to represent the segmentation mask as a colormap and model it as a conditional
image generation task [56]. However, there are several implementation challenges. Overall, most of
Corresponding author: Lu Qi and Xiangtai Li.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

