Towards Understanding How Transformers Learn
In-context Through a Representation Learning Lens

Ruifeng Ren
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence
Renmin University of China
Beijing, China
renruifeng920@ruc.edu.cn

Yong Liu∗
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence
Renmin University of China
Beijing, China
liuyonggsai@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Pre-trained large language models based on Transformers have demonstrated
remarkable in-context learning (ICL) abilities. With just a few demonstration
examples, the models can implement new tasks without any parameter updates.
However, it is still an open question to understand the mechanism of ICL. In
this paper, we attempt to explore the ICL process in Transformers through a lens
of representation learning. Initially, leveraging kernel methods, we figure out a
dual model for one softmax attention layer. The ICL inference process of the
attention layer aligns with the training procedure of its dual model, generating
token representation predictions that are equivalent to the dual model’s test outputs.
We delve into the training process of this dual model from a representation learning
standpoint and further derive a generalization error bound related to the quantity of
demonstration tokens. Subsequently, we extend our theoretical conclusions to more
complicated scenarios, including one Transformer layer and multiple attention
layers. Furthermore, drawing inspiration from existing representation learning
methods especially contrastive learning, we propose potential modifications for the
attention layer. Finally, experiments are designed to support our findings.

1

Introduction

Recently, large language models (LLMs) based on the Transformer architectures [Vaswani et al.,
2017] has shown surprising in-context learning (ICL) capabilities [Brown et al., 2020, Wei et al., 2022,
Dong et al., 2022, Liu et al., 2023]. By prepending several training examples before query inputs
without labels, the models can make predictions for the queries and achieve excellent performance
without any parameter updates. This excellent capability enables pre-trained LLMs such as GPT
models to be used in general downstream tasks conveniently. Despite the good performance of the
ICL capabilities, the mechanism of ICL still remains an open question.
In order to better understand the ICL capabilities, many works began to give explanations from
different aspects. Xie et al. [2021] propose a Bayesian inference framework to explain how ICL
occurs between pretraining and test time, where the LLMs infers a shared latent concept among
the demonstration examples. Garg et al. [2022] demonstrate through experiments that pre-trained
Transformer-based models can learn new functions from in-context examples, including (sparse)
linear functions, two-layer neural networks, and decision trees. Zhang et al. [2023b] adopt a
Bayesian perspective and show that ICL implicitly performs the Bayesian model averaging algorithm,
which is approximated by the attention mechanism. Li et al. [2023] define ICL as an algorithm
learning problem where a transformer model implicitly builds a hypothesis function at inferencetime and derive generalization bounds for ICL. Han et al. [2023] suggest that LLMs can emulate
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

