Low-Rank Optimal Transport through Factor
Relaxation with Latent Coupling
Peter Halmos1,* , Xinhao Liu1,* , Julian Gold2,* , and Benjamin J. Raphael1
2

1
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
Center for Statistics and Machine Learning, Princeton University

Abstract
Optimal transport (OT) is a general framework for finding a minimum-cost transport
plan, or coupling, between probability distributions, and has many applications
in machine learning. A key challenge in applying OT to massive datasets is the
quadratic scaling of the coupling matrix with the size of the dataset. Forrow et al.
(2019) introduced a factored coupling for the k-Wasserstein barycenter problem,
which Scetbon et al. (2021) adapted to solve the primal low-rank OT problem. We
derive an alternative parameterization of the low-rank problem based on the latent
coupling (LC) factorization previously introduced by Lin et al. (2021) generalizing
Forrow et al. (2019). The LC factorization has multiple advantages for low-rank
OT including decoupling the problem into three OT problems and greater flexibility
and interpretability. We leverage these advantages to derive a new algorithm
Factor Relaxation with Latent Coupling (FRLC), which uses coordinate mirror
descent to compute the LC factorization. FRLC handles multiple OT objectives
(Wasserstein, Gromov-Wasserstein, Fused Gromov-Wasserstein), and marginal
constraints (balanced, unbalanced, and semi-relaxed) with linear space complexity.
We provide theoretical results on FRLC, and demonstrate superior performance
on diverse applications – including graph clustering and spatial transcriptomics –
while demonstrating its interpretability.

1

Introduction

Optimal transport (OT) is a powerful geometric framework for comparing probability distributions.
OT problems seek a transport plan P efficiently transforming one distribution (a) into another (b),
subject to a ground cost C. The minimum cost yields a distance between a and b, while the optimal
transport plan reveals key structural similarities between the distributions. Owing to its versatility –
different ground costs result in different ways to compare data – OT has found many applications in
machine learning and beyond: from self-attention Tay et al. (2020); Sander et al. (2022); Geshkovski
et al. (2023) and domain adaptation Courty et al. (2014); Solomon et al. (2015) to computational
biology Schiebinger et al. (2019); Yang et al. (2020); Bunne et al. (2023); Liu et al. (2023).
This versatility is compounded by several variants using different forms of the objective function
and/or constraints on the transport plan P . Wasserstein (W) OT Kantorovich (1942) compares
distributions over the same space through the expected work of P , while Gromov-Wasserstein (GW)
OT Mémoli (2011) compares distributions supported on distinct geometries through the expected
metric distortion of P . Fused Gromov-Wasserstein (FGW) Vayer et al. (2020) OT is suited to
structured data, taking a convex combination of the former two objectives. Independently, one can
relax constraints on the marginals of P : in computational applications, P is a matrix whose row-sum
P 1m and column-sum P T 1n are called its left and right marginals. Balanced OT requires P 1m = a
and P T 1n = b. Unbalanced OT Frogner et al. (2015) replaces these constraints with penalties in the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

