Image Understanding Makes for A Good Tokenizer
for Image Generation

Luting Wang∗†

Yang Zhao1†

Zijian Zhang1 Jiashi Feng1
1
ByteDance

Si Liu‡

Bingyi Kang1‡§

Abstract
Modern image generation (IG) models have been shown to capture rich semantics
valuable for image understanding (IU) tasks. However, the potential of IU models to improve IG performance remains uncharted. We address this issue using
a token-based IG framework, which relies on effective tokenizers to map images
into token sequences. Currently, pixel reconstruction (e.g., VQGAN) dominates
the training objective for tokenizers. In contrast, our approach adopts the feature reconstruction objective, where tokenizers are trained by distilling knowledge
from pretrained IU encoders. Comprehensive comparisons indicate that tokenizers with strong IU capabilities achieve superior IG performance across a variety
of metrics, datasets, tasks, and proposal networks. Notably, VQ-KDCLIP achieves
4.10 FID on ImageNet-1k. Visualization suggests that the superiority of VQ-KD
can be partly attributed to the rich semantics within the VQ-KD codebook. We
further introduce a straightforward pipeline to directly transform IU encoders into
tokenizers, demonstrating exceptional effectiveness for IG tasks. These discoveries may energize further exploration into image tokenizer research and inspire the
community to reassess the relationship between IU and IG. The code is released
at https://github.com/magic-research/vector_quantization.

1

Introduction

Image understanding (IU) and image generation (IG) have been the core pursuits of computer vision
research for a long time. Thanks to the progress in generative models [15,35–37,48] and network architectures [9,43], IG has witnessed remarkable advancements in recent years. These advancements
spurred extensive research on leveraging powerful IG models for IU tasks (Fig. 1). Studies have
shown that IG models can benefit IU tasks in various ways, including data augmentation through
synthetic data generation [45, 46, 51], improved representation learning [16, 28, 52], and utilizing
intermediate features from IG models for solving perception tasks [26, 53]. However, the reciprocal
question remains largely uncharted: how might IU models aid IG tasks?
The primary focus of this paper lies in the AutoRegressive (AR) IG framework, which is gaining
considerable attention for its excellence in generating high-quality images and videos [20, 48, 50].
This framework operates in a two-stage process. The first stage learns a tokenizer to map images
into sequences of discrete tokens. Subsequently, the second stage trains a proposal network to
model the token sequences. As underlined by prior research [4, 49], the quality of the tokenizers
significantly influences overall IG performance. Meanwhile, tokenizers and IU encoders adhere
to a similar structure as they both aim to map images into latent representations, either discrete
or continuous. As a result, the token-based IG framework provides an optimal environment for
investigating the relationship between IU and IG. Through comprehensive studies, we demonstrate
* Work done during an internship at ByteDance. Email: wangluting@buaa.edu.cn.
‡
†

Corresponding authors. Email: liusi@buaa.edu.cn, bingyikang@bytedance.com.
§
Equal contribution.
Project lead.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

