Local Superior Soups: A Catalyst for Model Merging
in Cross-Silo Federated Learning

Minghui Chen12 Meirui Jiang3 Xin Zhang4
University of British Columbia 2 Vector Institute

1

Qi Dou3 Zehua Wang1 Xiaoxiao Li12∗
Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Meta

3

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is a learning paradigm that enables collaborative training of
models using decentralized data. Recently, the utilization of pre-trained weight initialization in FL has been demonstrated to effectively improve model performance.
However, the evolving complexity of current pre-trained models, characterized by
a substantial increase in parameters, markedly intensifies the challenges associated
with communication rounds required for their adaptation to FL. To address these
communication cost issues and increase the performance of pre-trained model
adaptation in FL, we propose an innovative model interpolation-based local training technique called “Local Superior Soups.” Our method enhances local training
across different clients, encouraging the exploration of a connected low-loss basin
within a few communication rounds through regularized model interpolation. This
approach acts as a catalyst for the seamless adaptation of pre-trained models in in
FL. We demonstrated its effectiveness and efficiency across diverse widely-used FL
datasets. Our code is available at https://github.com/ubc-tea/Local-Superior-Soups.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) [35] has emerged as a promising methodology for leveraging the power
of private data without the need for centralized data governance. However, data heterogeneity in
FL poses significant challenges to the design of efficient training for global convergence. With
the emergence of the pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm in various applications [15, 19], recent
studies [37, 2] have attempted to address the problem of FL under data heterogeneity with pre-trained
initialization. Although pre-trained federated learning can speed up convergence compared to random
initialization, it still requires a significant number of communication rounds between the server and
clients, often amounting to hundreds of rounds [37]. Existing pre-trained models [41, 47] often
have an enormous parameter scale, and following the neural scaling law [24], there is a continuous
trend toward increasing model parameters. Deploying models with such a large parameter size
in FL introduces significant communication overhead. This greatly hampers the flexibility and
scalability of model updates. Reducing FL communication overhead can be approached by reducing
the scale of model parameters involved in distributed training [59] or reducing communication
rounds [35]. Comparing with reducing model parameters, reducing communication rounds typically
leads to a more efficient reduction of network congestion [17], decreased energy consumption on
client devices [33], and a lower risk of privacy breaches [61]. In this paper, we focus on reducing
communication rounds in FL with pre-trained model as initialization.
Typically, increasing the number of local training steps can effectively reduce communication
rounds. However, there is an upper limit to the extent of local training step increments. This
limitation arises due to the presence of data heterogeneity, where the consistency of optimization
among different clients deteriorates with the increasing number of local steps [35]. This optimization inconsistency leads to a discrepancy between local and global models and decelerates the
∗

Correspondence to xiaoxiao.li@ece.ubc.ca

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

