Active Perception for Grasp Detection via Neural
Graspness Field

Haoxiang Ma1 Modi Shi1 Boyang Gao2 Di Huang1∗
State Key Laboratory of Complex and Critical Software Environment,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Geometry Robotics
{mahaoxiang822,modishi,dhuang}@buaa.edu.cn, boyang.gao@geometryrobot.com
1

Abstract
This paper tackles the challenge of active perception for robotic grasp detection in
cluttered environments. Incomplete 3D geometry information can negatively affect
the performance of learning-based grasp detection methods, and scanning the scene
from multiple views introduces significant time costs. To achieve reliable grasping
performance with efficient camera movement, we propose an active grasp detection
framework based on the Neural Graspness Field (NGF), which models the scene
incrementally and facilitates next-best-view planning. Constructed in real-time as
the camera moves, the NGF effectively models the grasp distribution in 3D space
by rendering graspness predictions from each view. For next-best-view planning,
we aim to reduce the uncertainty of the NGF through a graspness inconsistencyguided policy, selecting views based on discrepancies between NGF outputs and
a pre-trained graspness network. Additionally, we present a neural graspness
sampling method that decodes graspness values from the NGF to improve grasp
pose detection results. Extensive experiments on the GraspNet-1Billion benchmark
demonstrate significant performance improvements compared to previous works.
Real-world experiments show that our method achieves a superior trade-off between
grasping performance and time costs. Code is available at https://github.com/
mahaoxiang822/ActiveNGF.

1

Introduction

Learning-based robotic grasp synthesis [24] has been explored to enable the manipulation of various
objects across different grippers, sensors, and scenarios. The completeness and accuracy of the scene
representation significantly influence the performance of these methods, as the geometric ambiguity
can confuse the synthesis of grasp poses. To address this issue, previous works [4, 8, 20] have
employed multi-view information to reconstruct different 3D representations. However, as the robot
needs to move when observing from different views, scanning the entire scene to achieve complete
coverage incurs a substantial time cost and is challenging to apply in real-world environments.
To enhance the efficiency of multi-view perception for robotic grasping, previous works have introduced active perception methods to select the Next-Best-View (NBV). Part of the methods [13, 7, 5]
apply active 3D reconstruction techniques, treating grasp detection as a secondary task. However,
active reconstruction tends to select viewpoints that cover more unobserved space, which may not be
optimal for grasp detection, as different regions have varying relevance to grasping. Consequently,
active perception strategies based on 3D reconstruction have limited performance in grasp detection
tasks. Recently, ACE-NBV [32] combines grasp detection and NBV planning by specially designing
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

