Going Beyond Heuristics by Imposing Policy
Improvement as a Constraint

Chi-Chang Lee1∗, Zhang-Wei Hong2∗ , Pulkit Agrawal2
Improbable AI Lab
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Abstract
In many reinforcement learning (RL) applications, incorporating heuristic rewards
alongside the task reward is crucial for achieving desirable performance. Heuristics
encode prior human knowledge about how a task should be done, providing valuable hints for RL algorithms. However, such hints may not be optimal, limiting the
performance of learned policies. The currently established way of using heuristics
is to modify the heuristic reward in a manner that ensures that the optimal policy
learned with it remains the same as the optimal policy for the task reward (i.e.,
optimal policy invariance). However, these methods often fail in practical scenarios
with limited training data. We found that while optimal policy invariance ensures
convergence to the best policy based on task rewards, it doesn’t guarantee better
performance than policies trained with biased heuristics under a finite data regime,
which is impractical. In this paper, we introduce a new principle tailored for finite
data settings. Instead of enforcing optimal policy invariance, we train a policy that
combines task and heuristic rewards and ensures it outperforms the heuristic-trained
policy. As such, we prevent policies from merely exploiting heuristic rewards without improving the task reward. Our experiments on robotic locomotion, helicopter
control, and manipulation tasks demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms the heuristic policy, regardless of the heuristic rewards’ quality. Code is
available at https://github.com/Improbable-AI/hepo.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [1] is a powerful framework for learning policies that can surpass
human performance in complex tasks. However, training RL policies with sparse or delayed rewards
is often ineffective. Instead of relying solely on sparse task rewards that indicate an agent’s success
or failure, it is common to augment the sparse reward with heuristic reward terms that provide denser
reward supervision to speed up and improve the performance of RL policies [2, 3]. Shining examples
of the success and necessity of heuristic reward terms are complex robotic object manipulation [4]
and locomotion [5–8] tasks. However, heuristics impose human assumptions that may limit the RL
algorithm. For example, a heuristic reward function may encourage a robot to walk like a human, yet
there could be faster walking policies that don’t resemble human gait.
The key question is how to learn a policy π that outperforms one trained solely on heuristics (i.e.,
heuristic policy πH ). Practitioners tackle this problem by tuning the balance between the task
objective J(π) and the heuristic objective H(π) in the augmented training objective J(π) + λH(π),
where λ controls the balance between the two objectives for a policy π. However, it requires careful
tuning of λ to make the policy π outperform the heuristic policy; otherwise, the algorithm might
prioritize heuristic rewards while neglecting the task objective.
∗

indicates equal contribution. 1 National Taiwan University, Taiwan. 2 Improbable AI Lab, MIT, Cambridge,
USA.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

