The ALCHEmist: Automated Labeling 500x CHEaper
Than LLM Data Annotators
Tzu-Heng Huang, Catherine Cao, Vaishnavi Bhargava, Frederic Sala
University of Wisconsin-Madison
{thuang273, ccao35, vbhargava3}@wisc.edu,
fredsala@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Large pretrained models can be used as annotators, helping replace or augment
crowdworkers and enabling distilling generalist models into smaller specialist
models. Unfortunately, this comes at a cost: employing top-of-the-line models
often requires paying thousands of dollars for API calls, while the resulting datasets
are static and challenging to audit. To address these challenges, we propose a simple
alternative: rather than directly querying labels from pretrained models, we task
models to generate programs that can produce labels. These programs can be
stored and applied locally, re-used and extended, and cost orders of magnitude less.
Our system, Alchemist, obtains comparable to or better performance than large
language model-based annotation in a range of tasks for a fraction of the cost: on
average, improvements amount to a 12.9% enhancement while the total labeling
costs across all datasets are reduced by a factor of approximately 500×. We release
our code here: https://github.com/SprocketLab/Alchemist.

1

Introduction

One of the most exciting developments in machine learning is the use of large pretrained models to act
as annotators or labelers [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. This includes the use of large language models (LLMs)
like GPT-4 [9] and Claude 3 [10]. This process offers multiple benefits. First, pretrained models
are an efficient way to annotate and have the potential to partially or fully replace expensive human
crowdworkers [2, 6, 11, 12]. Second, this approach allows for distilling large models into smaller,
task-specific models that can be deployed locally at lower cost [3, 13, 7, 8]. This is additionally
important in settings like healthcare and finance where privacy laws require the use of local models.
Despite this promise, pretrained model-based annotation has several drawbacks that stymie its
adoption. These drawbacks include
• High Cost: Labeling a dataset can be expensive. This is particularly so in cases where each data
point consists of many tokens. For example, we find that labeling a moderately-sized dataset [14]
with 7,569 data points using GPT-4 costs over $1,200.
• Lack of Extensibility: Making even small changes to specifications necessitates re-running the
entire pipeline to obtain new labels. This inflexibility means the resulting labels are static.
• Inability to Audit: API access to pretrained models does not permit inspecting most aspects of the
model. Users must simply accept the provided labels with only minimal additional information.
Techniques that ask the model for explanations for its decisions may not be reliable [15, 16, 17].
We address these obstacles through a simple but surprisingly powerful notion. Rather than having
pretrained models label data, we task language models to generate programs that can output labels.
These synthesized programs serve as annotators, capturing the underlying logic used by the models
when annotating. In other words, instead of distilling a powerful model to label a dataset (and
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

