Streaming Long Video Understanding with
Large Language Models

Rui Qian1∗ Xiaoyi Dong1,2† Pan Zhang2 Yuhang Zang2 Shuangrui Ding1
Dahua Lin1,2,3 Jiaqi Wang2†
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
HKGAI under InnoHK

Abstract
This paper presents VideoStreaming, an advanced vision-language large model
(VLLM) for video understanding, that capably understands arbitrary-length video
with a constant number of video tokens streamingly encoded and adaptively selected. The challenge of video understanding in the vision language area mainly
lies in the significant computational burden caused by the great number of tokens
extracted from long videos. Previous works rely on sparse sampling or frame
compression to reduce tokens. However, such approaches either disregard temporal
information in a long time span or sacrifice spatial details, resulting in flawed compression. To address these limitations, our VideoStreaming has two core designs:
Memory-Propagated Streaming Encoding and Adaptive Memory Selection. The
Memory-Propagated Streaming Encoding architecture segments long videos
into short clips and sequentially encodes each clip with a propagated memory. In
each iteration, we utilize the encoded results of the preceding clip as historical
memory, which is integrated with the current clip to distill a condensed representation that encapsulates the video content up to the current timestamp. This
method not only incorporates long-term temporal dynamics into the streaming
encoding process but also yields a fixed-length memory as a global representation
for arbitrarily long videos. After the encoding process, the Adaptive Memory
Selection strategy selects a constant number of question-related memories from
all the historical memories, and feeds them into the LLM to generate informative
responses. The question-related selection reduces redundancy within the memories,
enabling efficient and precise video understanding. Meanwhile, the disentangled
video extraction and reasoning design allows the LLM to answer different questions
about a video by directly selecting corresponding memories, without the need to encode the whole video for each question. Through extensive experiments, our model
achieves superior performance and higher efficiency on long video benchmarks,
showcasing precise temporal comprehension for detailed question answering.

1

Introduction

The evolution of Large Language Models (LLMs) has significantly advanced artificial intelligence,
encompassing text generation and reasoning in complex language environments [9, 74, 14, 61, 16,
69, 2, 70]. Later, the community extends LLMs to multi-modal domains, demonstrating promising
results in captioning and question-answering tasks that integrate diverse visual signals [46, 40, 15, 59].
Yet, within the domain of video understanding, long video sequences pose a formidable challenge.
∗
†

Work done during an internship in Shanghai AI Laboratory.
Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

