xRAG: Extreme Context Compression for
Retrieval-augmented Generation with One Token

Xin Cheng1∗ Xun Wang2 Xingxing Zhang2 Tao Ge2
Si-Qing Chen2 Furu Wei2 Huishuai Zhang1,3 Dongyan Zhao1,3
1

3

Peking University 2 Microsoft
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence
chengxin1998@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper introduces xRAG, a novel context compression method designed specifically for retrieval-augmented generation. xRAG redefines the use of document
embeddings in dense retrieval—traditionally limited to retrieval purposes—by
integrating them as features from the retrieval modality. Through a modality
fusion approach, xRAG effectively merges these embeddings into the language
model’s representation space, eliminating the need for their textual counterparts and
achieving an extreme compression rate. In xRAG, the modality bridge is the only
trainable component, while the retriever and language model remain frozen. This
design choice allows for the reuse of offline-constructed document embeddings and
preserves the plug-and-play nature of retrieval augmentation. Experimental results
demonstrate that xRAG achieves an average improvement of over 10% across six
knowledge-intensive tasks, compatible with various language model backbones,
ranging from a dense 7B model to an 8x7B Mixture of Experts configuration.
xRAG not only significantly outperforms previous context compression methods
but also matches the performance of uncompressed models on several benchmarks,
while reducing overall FLOPs by a factor of 3.53. This work pioneers new avenues
in retrieval-augmented generation through multimodal fusion, potentially setting a
groundwork for future developments in efficient and scalable retrieval systems.

1

Introduction

Retrieval-Augmented Language Models (RALMs) [42, 22, 9, 14, 70] have shown exceptional performance in a variety of knowledge-intensive tasks. By retrieving domain-specific, long-tailed, and
up-to-date knowledge from a non-parametric datastore, RALMs significantly extend the boundaries
of parametric Large Language Models (LLMs). However, the integration of entire documents into
prompts can significantly increase inference costs and may surpass the context limit of LLMs [29, 79].
As illustrated in Figure 1, while the inclusion of a relevant document enables the LLM to generate
accurate responses, it does so at the expense of processing documents that expand the original query
by more than tenfold.
How might we mitigate the costs associated with extended context while maintaining the benefits of
retrieval augmentation? Recent research interest has converged on a promising direction: Context
Compression. This concept is pursued through two primary strategies: soft-prompting methods,
such as Gist [59], AutoCompressor [15], and ICAE [20], which compress the context into dense
memory slots, and hard-prompting methods, such as LLMLingua [29] and RECOMP [79], where
∗

Work done during internship at Microsoft, corresponding to Xun Wang, Huishuai Zhang and Dongyan Zhao

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

