Multi-Object Hallucination in Vision Language Models

Xuweiyi Chen1,2∗
Ziqiao Ma1∗
Xuejun Zhang1∗
1
1
Sihan Xu
Shengyi Qian
Jianing Yang
David F. Fouhey3
Joyce Chai1
1
University of Michigan 2 University of Virginia 3 New York University
https://multi-object-hallucination.github.io/
1

Abstract
Large vision language models (LVLMs) often suffer from object hallucination,
producing objects not present in the given images. While current benchmarks for
object hallucination primarily concentrate on the presence of a single object class
rather than individual entities, this work systematically investigates multi-object hallucination, examining how models misperceive (e.g., invent nonexistent objects or
become distracted) when tasked with focusing on multiple objects simultaneously.
We introduce Recognition-based Object Probing Evaluation (ROPE), an automated
evaluation protocol that considers the distribution of object classes within a single
image during testing and uses visual referring prompts to eliminate ambiguity.
With comprehensive empirical studies and analysis of potential factors leading to
multi-object hallucination, we found that (1) LVLMs suffer more hallucinations
when focusing on multiple objects compared to a single object. (2) The tested
object class distribution affects hallucination behaviors, indicating that LVLMs
may follow shortcuts and spurious correlations. (3) Hallucinatory behaviors are
influenced by data-specific factors, salience and frequency, and model intrinsic
behaviors. We hope to enable LVLMs to recognize and reason about multiple
objects that often occur in realistic visual scenes, provide insights, and quantify
our progress towards mitigating the issues.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have motivated increasing efforts in adapting
them for understanding visual semantics, giving rise to a surge of large vision language models (LVLMs) [1, 37, 43]. These models, whether explicitly trained with grounding data [71] or
without [31], demonstrate an impressive grounded understanding of visual entities. This motivates a new prompting paradigm based on user-provided visual cues, referred to as visual prompting [45, 60, 27, 58, 58]. Despite their promising performances on various downstream applications [36], LVLMs often suffer from object hallucination [44, 10, 26], where they produce objects
not present in a given image.
Although object hallucination was initially observed in image captioning describing multiple objects [44], current benchmarks for object hallucination primarily concentrate on the presence of a
single object class rather than individual entities. These benchmarks either verify if an object class
mentioned in the caption can ground to an object in the image [44, 19], or probe the model about the
existence of an object class, sometimes with additional attributes or relations to other objects [26, 32].
There are, however, two key limitations with these setups as shown by a case study in Figure 1.
First, grounding is not simply one-to-one between objects and classes, but a many-to-many mapping
between objects and phrases [20, 34]. For instance, “apples” could potentially correspond to multiple
referents in Figure 1, and the model doesn’t necessarily need to recognize all of them to provide such
a response. Therefore, being able to produce an object that exists in an image does not necessarily
∗

Authors contributed equally to this work, alphabetized by last names.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

