Measuring Per-Unit Interpretability at Scale Without
Humans
Roland S. Zimmermann
MPI-IS, Tübingen AI Center

David Klindt
Stanford

Wieland Brendel
MPI-IS, Tübingen AI Center

Abstract
In today’s era, whatever we can measure at scale, we can optimize. So far, measuring the interpretability of units in deep neural networks (DNNs) for computer
vision still requires direct human evaluation and is not scalable. As a result, the
inner workings of DNNs remain a mystery despite the remarkable progress we
have seen in their applications. In this work, we introduce the first scalable method
to measure the per-unit interpretability in vision DNNs. This method does not require any human evaluations, yet its prediction correlates well with existing human
interpretability measurements. We validate its predictive power through an interventional human psychophysics study. We demonstrate the usefulness of this measure
by performing previously infeasible experiments: (1) A large-scale interpretability
analysis across more than 70 million units from 835 computer vision models, and
(2) an extensive analysis of how units transform during training. We find an anticorrelation between a model’s downstream classification performance and per-unit
interpretability, which is also observable during model training. Furthermore, we
see that a layer’s location and width influence its interpretability. Online version,
code and interactive visualizations available at brendel-group.github.io/mis.

1

Introduction

With the arrival of the first non-trivial neural networks, researchers got interested in understanding
their inner workings [24, 26]. For one, this can be motivated by scientific curiosity; for another,
a better understanding might lead to building more reliable, efficient, or fairer models. While the
performance of machine learning models has seen a remarkable improvement over the last few years,
our understanding of information processing has progressed more slowly. Nevertheless, understanding
how complex models — e.g., language models [7] or vision models [34, 50] — work is still an active
and growing field of research, coined mechanistic interpretability [33]. A common approach in this
field is to divide a network into atomic units, hoping they are easier to comprehend. Here, atomic
units might refer to individual neurons or channels of (convolutional) layers [34], or general vectors in
feature space [12, 23]. Besides this approach, mechanistic interpretability also includes the detection
of neural circuits [8, 12] or analysis of global network properties [29].
The goal of understanding the inner workings of a neural network is inherently human-centric:
Irrespective of what tools have been used, in the end, humans should have a better comprehension
of the network. However, measuring interpretability through human evaluations is time-consuming
and costly due to their reliance on human labor [50]. This results in slower research progress, as
validating novel hypotheses takes longer. Removing the need for human labor by automating the
interpretability measure can open up multiple high-impact research directions: First, it enables the
creation of more interpretable networks by explicitly optimizing for interpretability — after all, what
we can measure at scale, we can optimize. Second, it allows more efficient research on explanation
methods and might increase our understanding of neural networks. Due to the lack of a reliable
automated measure, previous work resorted to limited time-consuming human evaluations, partially
producing inconclusive results [e.g., 7, 39], highlighting the urgency of finding an automated measure.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

