Improved Regret of Linear Ensemble Sampling

Min-hwan Oh
Seoul National University
Seoul, South Korea
minoh@snu.ac.kr

Harin Lee
Seoul National University
Seoul, South Korea
harinboy@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
In this work, we close the fundamental gap of theory and practice by providing
an improved regret bound for linear ensemble sampling. We prove that with an
ensemble size logarithmic in
√ T , linear ensemble sampling can achieve a frequene 3/2 T ), matching state-of-the-art results for randomized
tist regret bound of O(d
linear bandit algorithms, where d and T are the dimension of the parameter and
the time horizon respectively. Our approach introduces a general regret analysis framework for linear bandit algorithms. Additionally, we reveal a significant
relationship between linear ensemble sampling and Linear Perturbed-History Exploration (LinPHE), showing that LinPHE is a special case of linear ensemble
sampling when the ensemble
size equals T . This insight allows us to derive a new
√
regret bound of e
O(d3/2 T ) for LinPHE, independent of the number of arms. Our
contributions advance the theoretical foundation of ensemble sampling, bringing its
regret bounds in line with the best known bounds for other randomized exploration
algorithms.

1

Introduction

Ensemble sampling [16] has emerged as an empirically effective randomized exploration technique
in various online decision-making problems, such as online recommendation [17, 27, 26] and deep
reinforcement learning [18–20]. Despite its popularity, the theoretical understanding of ensemble
sampling has lagged behind, even for the linear bandit problem, with previous results revealing suboptimal outcomes.
For instance, a prior work [21] demonstrated that linear ensemble sampling could
√
achieve O( T ) Bayesian regret with an ensemble size growing at least linearly with T . However,
the requirement for the ensemble size to be linear in T is highly unfavorable and prohibitive in many
practical settings. A recent work [10] showed that a symmetrized version of linear ensemble sampling
could provide an improvement
in dependence on ensemble size of Θ(d log T ) and show a frequentist
√
e 5/2 T ). However, this regret bound clearly falls short of the existing frequentist
regret bound of O(d
regret achieved by standard randomized algorithms such as Thompson Sampling (TS) [4, 2] and
Perturbed-History Exploration (PHE) [11–13].1
In this work, we close this fundamental gap by providing an improved regret bound for linear
ensemble sampling. We prove that linear ensemble sampling
√ with an ensemble size logarithmic
in T can still attain a frequentist regret bound of e
O(d3/2 T ), marking the first time that linear
ensemble sampling achieves a state-of-the-art result for randomized linear bandit algorithms. Our
√

√
√
e min(d3/2 T , d T log K) , and LinPHE [12] has regret of e
LinTS [4, 2] has regret of O
O(d T log K).
√
√
For exchanges between factors of O( d) and O( log K), we refer to the analysis of Agrawal and Goyal [4].
Therefore, the existing result for linear ensemble sampling [10] has a gap of at least O(d) compared to LinTS
and LinPHE. Besides this gap in regret bounds, there appears to be rather counter-intuitive dependence on
ensemble size in Janz et al. [10] (see Remark 2 in Section 4).
1

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

