Offline Reinforcement Learning with OOD State
Correction and OOD Action Suppression

Yixiu Mao1 , Qi Wang1 , Chen Chen1 , Yun Qu1 , Xiangyang Ji1
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
myx21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In offline reinforcement learning (RL), addressing the out-of-distribution (OOD)
action issue has been a focus, but we argue that there exists an OOD state issue
that also impairs performance yet has been underexplored. Such an issue describes
the scenario when the agent encounters states out of the offline dataset during
the test phase, leading to uncontrolled behavior and performance degradation. To
this end, we propose SCAS, a simple yet effective approach that unifies OOD
state correction and OOD action suppression in offline RL. Technically, SCAS
achieves value-aware OOD state correction, capable of correcting the agent from
OOD states to high-value in-distribution states. Theoretical and empirical results
show that SCAS also exhibits the effect of suppressing OOD actions. On standard
offline RL benchmarks, SCAS achieves excellent performance without additional
hyperparameter tuning. Moreover, benefiting from its OOD state correction feature,
SCAS demonstrates enhanced robustness against environmental perturbations.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) shows promise in solving sequential decision-making problems,
gaining increasing interest for real-world applications [42, 57, 63, 53, 7]. However, deploying RL
algorithms in extensive scenarios poses persistent challenges, such as risk-sensitive exploration [13]
and time-consuming episode collection [27]. Recent advances view offline RL as a hopeful solution
to these challenges [34]. Offline RL aims to learn a policy from a fixed dataset without further
interactions [32]. It can tap into existing large-scale datasets for safe and efficient learning [23, 37, 50].
In offline RL research, a well-known concern is the out-of-distribution (OOD) action issue: the
evaluation of OOD actions causes extrapolation error [12], which can be exacerbated by bootstrapping
and result in severe value overestimation [34]. To address this issue, a large body of work has emerged
to directly or indirectly suppress OOD actions during training, employing various techniques such as
policy constraint [12, 30, 10], value penalization [31, 2, 6], and in-sample learning [29, 14, 71].
Distinguished from most previous works, this paper argues that, apart from the OOD action issue,
there exists an OOD state issue that also impairs performance yet has received limited attention in
the field. Such an issue refers to the agent encountering states out of the offline dataset during the
policy deployment phase (i.e., test phase). The occurrence of OOD states can be attributed to OOD
actions, stochastic environments, and real-world perturbations. Since typical offline RL algorithms
do not involve policy training in OOD states, the agent tends to behave in an uncontrolled manner
once entering OOD states in the test phase. This can further exacerbate the state deviation from the
offline dataset and lead to severe degradation in performance [34, 75].
In mitigating this OOD state issue, existing limited work attempts to train the policy to correct the
agent from OOD states to in-distribution (ID) states [75, 22]. Technically, Zhang et al. [75] construct
a dynamics model and a state transition model and align them to guide the agent to ID regions, while
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

