Robust Sparse Regression with Non-Isotropic Designs

Chih-Hung Liu
Department of Electrical Engineering
National Taiwan University
chliu@ntu.edtw
Gleb Novikov
Lucerne School of Computer Science and Information Technology
gleb.novikov@hslu.ch

Abstract
We develop a technique to design efficiently computable estimators for sparse linear
regression in the simultaneous presence of two adversaries: oblivious and adaptive.
Consider the model 𝑦 ∗ = 𝑋 ∗ 𝛽 ∗ + 𝜂 where 𝑋 ∗ is an 𝑛 × 𝑑 random design matrix,
𝛽 ∗ ∈ R𝑑 is a 𝑘-sparse vector, and the noise 𝜂 is independent of 𝑋 ∗ and chosen by the
oblivious adversary. Apart from the independence of 𝑋 ∗ , we only require a small
fraction entries of 𝜂 to have magnitude at most 1. The adaptive adversary is allowed
to arbitrarily corrupt an 𝜀-fraction of the samples (𝑋1∗ , 𝑦1∗ ), . . . , (𝑋𝑛∗ , 𝑦𝑛∗ ). Given the
𝜀-corrupted samples (𝑋1 , 𝑦1 ), . . . , (𝑋𝑛 , 𝑦𝑛 ), the goal is to estimate 𝛽 ∗ . We assume
that the rows of 𝑋 ∗ are iid samples from some 𝑑-dimensional distribution 𝒟 with
zero mean and (unknown) covariance matrix Σ with bounded condition number.
We design several robust algorithms that outperform the state of the art even
in the special case of Gaussian noise 𝜂 ∼ 𝑁(0, 1)𝑛 . In particular, we provide
a polynomial-time algorithm that with high probability recovers 𝛽 ∗ up to error
√
˜ 2 /𝜀), only assuming some bounds on the third and
𝑂( 𝜀) as long as 𝑛 ⩾ 𝑂(𝑘
the fourth moments of 𝒟. In addition, prior to this work, even in the special case
of Gaussian design 𝒟 = 𝑁(0, Σ) and √noise 𝜂 ∼ 𝑁(0, 1), no polynomial time
algorithm was known to achieve error 𝑜( 𝜀) in the sparse setting 𝑛 < 𝑑2 . We show
that under some assumptions on the fourth and the eighth
moments of 𝒟, there is
√
a polynomial-time algorithm that achieves error 𝑜( 𝜀) as long as 𝑛 ⩾ ˜
𝑂(𝑘 4 /𝜀3 ).
For Gaussian distribution 𝒟 = 𝑁(0, Σ), √
this algorithm achieves error 𝑂(𝜀3/4 ).
Moreover, our algorithm achieves error 𝑜( 𝜀) for all log-concave distributions if
𝜀 ⩽ 1/polylog(d).
Our algorithms are based on the filtering of the covariates that uses sum-of-squares
relaxations, and weighted Huber loss minimization with ℓ 1 regularizer. We provide
a novel analysis of weighted penalized Huber loss that is suitable for heavy-tailed
designs in the presence of two adversaries. Furthermore, we complement our
algorithmic results with Statistical Query lower bounds, providing evidence that
our estimators are likely to have nearly optimal sample complexity.

1

Introduction

Linear regression is the fundamental task in statistics, with many applications in data science and
machine learning. In ordinary (non-sparse) linear regression, we are given observations 𝑦1∗ , . . . , 𝑦𝑛∗ and
𝑋1∗ , . . . , 𝑋𝑛∗ ∈ R𝑑 such that 𝑦 𝑖∗ = 𝑋𝑖∗ , 𝛽∗ +𝜂 𝑖 for some 𝛽 ∗ ∈ R𝑑 and some noise 𝜂 ∈ R𝑛 , and the goal
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

