Delta-CoMe: Training-Free Delta-Compression with
Mixed-Precision for Large Language Models

Bowen Ping1∗ Shuo Wang2∗ Hanqing Wang3 Xu Han2,4,5 Yuzhuang Xu2 Yukun Yan2
Yun Chen3 Baobao Chang1 Zhiyuan Liu2,4,5† Maosong Sun2,4,5†
1
Peking University 2 Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
4
Institute for AI, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
5
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology

Abstract
Fine-tuning is a crucial process for adapting large language models (LLMs) to
diverse applications. In certain scenarios, such as multi-tenant serving, deploying
multiple LLMs becomes necessary to meet complex demands. Recent studies
suggest decomposing a fine-tuned LLM into a base model and corresponding
delta weights, which are then compressed using low-rank or low-bit approaches
to reduce costs. In this work, we observe that existing low-rank and low-bit
compression methods can significantly harm the model performance for taskspecific fine-tuned LLMs (e.g., WizardMath for math problems). Motivated by the
long-tail distribution of singular values in the delta weights, we propose a delta
quantization approach using mixed-precision. This method employs higher-bit
representation for singular vectors corresponding to larger singular values. We
evaluate our approach on various fine-tuned LLMs, including math LLMs, code
LLMs, chat LLMs, and even VLMs. Experimental results demonstrate that our
approach performs comparably to full fine-tuned LLMs, surpassing both low-rank
and low-bit baselines by a considerable margin. Additionally, we show that our
method is compatible with various backbone LLMs, such as Llama-2, Llama-3,
and Mistral, highlighting its generalizability. 3

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) (Touvron et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2023) are increasingly becoming
the standard for a wide range of downstream tasks (Luo et al., 2023a; Yu et al., 2023; Wei et al.,
2023; Luo et al., 2023b; Liu et al., 2024a; Wang et al., 2023), significantly surpassing conventional
small models. To meet the demands of various application domains and scenarios, many researchers
direct their attention to developing advanced alignment or adaptation algorithms together with diverse
training data to learn aligned LLMs based on generally pre-trained models. For instance, Luo
et al. (2023a) propose a reinforcement learning from evol-instruct feedback (RLEIF) method to
construct LLMs with strong mathematical reasoning abilities. Similarly, Yu et al. (2023) employ a
bootstrapping method to diversify mathematical questions and then fine-tune open-source LLMs to
build mathematical models. For code generation, Luo et al. (2023b) adapt the evol-instruct method
to the coding domain, resulting in the W IZARD C ODER model, which demonstrates superior coding
abilities compared to generally trained LLMs. Additionally, Wei et al. (2023) enhance the capabilities
of open-source code LLMs by using automatically generated high-quality instruction data based on
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.
3
Code will be publicly available at https://github.com/thunlp/Delta-CoMe.

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

