Log-concave Sampling from a Convex Body with a
Barrier: a Robust and Unified Dikin Walk
Yuzhou Gu
New York University
yuzhougu@nyu.edu

Nikki Lijing Kuang
University of California, San Diego
l1kuang@ucsd.edu

Yi-An Ma
University of California, San Diego
yianma@ucsd.edu
Zhao Song
Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing, UC Berkeley
magic.linuxkde@gmail.com

Lichen Zhang
MIT CSAIL
lichenz@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of sampling from a d-dimensional log-concave distribution π(θ) ∝ exp(−f (θ)) for L-Lipschitz f , constrained to a convex body with
an efficiently computable self-concordant barrier function, contained in a ball of
radius R with a w-warm start.
We propose a robust sampling framework that computes spectral approximations to
the Hessian of the barrier functions in each iteration. We prove that for polytopes
that are described by n hyperplanes, sampling with the Lee-Sidford barrier function
mixes within e
O((d2 + dL2 R2 ) log(w/δ)) steps with a per step cost of e
O(ndω−1 ),
where ω ≈ 2.37 is the fast matrix multiplication exponent. Compared to the prior
work of Mangoubi and Vishnoi, our approach gives faster mixing time as we are
able to design a generalized soft-threshold Dikin walk beyond log-barrier.
We further extend our result to show how to sample from a d-dimensional spectrahedron, the constrained set of a semidefinite program, specified by the set
Pd
{x ∈ Rd :
i=1 xi Ai ⪰ C} where A1 , . . . , Ad , C are n × n real symmete
ric matrices. We design a walk that mixes in O((nd
+ dL2 R2 ) log(w/δ)) steps
ω
2
3ω−5
with a per iteration cost of e
O(n + n d
). We improve the mixing time
bound of prior best Dikin walk due to Narayanan and Rakhlin that mixes in
e
O((n2 d3 + n2 dL2 R2 ) log(w/δ)) steps.

1

Introduction

Given a convex body, generate samples from the body according to structured densities is a fundamental problem in computer science and machine learning. It has extensive applications in constrained
convex optimization [Lovász and Vempala, 2006, Narayanan, 2016], differentially private learning [Wang et al., 2015, Lin et al., 2024] and online optimization [Narayanan and Rakhlin, 2017]. A
central theme in the theory of sampling is to leverage stochasticity and reduce per iteration costs
without having to proportionally increase the number of iterations. This theme has played out in
continuous optimization for both first and second order methods. For the first order methods, focus is
on reducing the variance of the gradient estimators [Johnson and Zhang, 2013, Shalev-Shwartz and
Zhang, 2013, Defazio et al., 2014]. For the second order methods, matrix sketching is often used to
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

