Pedestrian Trajectory Prediction with Missing Data:
Datasets, Imputation, and Benchmarking

Pranav Singh Chib1 Pravendra Singh1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology
Roorkee, India
{pranavs_chib,pravendra.singh}@cs.iitr.ac.in
1

Abstract
Pedestrian trajectory prediction is crucial for several applications such as robotics
and self-driving vehicles. Significant progress has been made in the past decade
thanks to the availability of pedestrian trajectory datasets, which enable trajectory prediction methods to learn from pedestrians’ past movements and predict
future trajectories. However, these datasets and methods typically assume that
the observed trajectory sequence is complete, ignoring real-world issues such as
sensor failure, occlusion, and limited fields of view that can result in missing
values in observed trajectories. To address this challenge, we present TrajImpute,
a pedestrian trajectory prediction dataset that simulates missing coordinates in
the observed trajectory, enhancing real-world applicability. TrajImpute maintains
a uniform distribution of missing data within the observed trajectories. In this
work, we comprehensively examine several imputation methods to reconstruct
the missing coordinates and benchmark them for imputing pedestrian trajectories. Furthermore, we provide a thorough analysis of recent trajectory prediction
methods and evaluate the performance of these models on the imputed trajectories. Our experimental evaluation of the imputation and trajectory prediction
methods offers several valuable insights. Our dataset provides a foundational
resource for future research on imputation-aware pedestrian trajectory prediction,
potentially accelerating the deployment of these methods in real-world applications. Publicly accessible links to the datasets and code files are available at
https://github.com/Pranav-chib/TrajImpute.

1

Introduction

Pedestrian trajectory prediction [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] has various essential applications, such as selfdriving automobiles, robot navigation, human behavior understanding, and more. These systems
forecast the future trajectory of pedestrians based on their previously observed paths. Research in
pedestrian trajectory prediction has significantly advanced in recent times due to the development
of data-driven solutions and datasets. However, a predominant assumption in most current research
is that the past observed coordinates of pedestrians are complete. This assumption does not hold
in real-world scenarios [8] where sensor failures, limited field of view, and occlusion can lead to
missing observations at any specific time instances, resulting in incomplete trajectories. This creates
challenges for trajectory prediction tasks in real-world scenarios. To improve the effectiveness
of trajectory prediction methods in real-world scenarios, they must anticipate and handle missing
observed coordinates.
In multivariate time series, several imputation methods [9, 10, 11, 12] have emerged that address
the issue of missing features by imputing them (filling of missing values). These methods [13, 14,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

