Causal Temporal Representation Learning with
Nonstationary Sparse Transition

Xiangchen Song1 Zijian Li2 Guangyi Chen1,2 Yujia Zheng1
Yewen Fan1 Xinshuai Dong1 Kun Zhang1,2
1
Carnegie Mellon University
2
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
{xiangchensong,kunz1}@cmu.edu

Abstract
Causal Temporal Representation Learning (Ctrl) methods aim to identify the temporal causal dynamics of complex nonstationary temporal sequences. Despite
the success of existing Ctrl methods, they require either directly observing the
domain variables or assuming a Markov prior on them. Such requirements limit
the application of these methods in real-world scenarios when we do not have such
prior knowledge of the domain variables. To address this problem, this work adopts
a sparse transition assumption, aligned with intuitive human understanding, and
presents identifiability results from a theoretical perspective. In particular, we explore under what conditions on the significance of the variability of the transitions
we can build a model to identify the distribution shifts. Based on the theoretical
result, we introduce a novel framework, Causal Temporal Representation Learning
with Nonstationary Sparse Transition (CtrlNS), designed to leverage the constraints on transition sparsity and conditional independence to reliably identify both
distribution shifts and latent factors. Our experimental evaluations on synthetic and
real-world datasets demonstrate significant improvements over existing baselines,
highlighting the effectiveness of our approach.

1

Introduction

Causal learning from sequential data remains a fundamental yet challenging task [1–3]. Discovering
temporal causal relations among observed variables has been extensively studied in the literature [4–
6]. However, in many real-world scenarios such as video understanding [7], observed data are
generated by causally related latent temporal processes or confounders rather than direct causal
edges. This leads to the task of causal temporal representation learning (Ctrl), which aims to build
compact representations that concisely capture the data generation processes by inverting the mixing
function that transforms latent factors into observations and identifying the transitions that govern the
underlying latent causal dynamics. This learning problem is known to be challenging without specific
assumptions [8, 9]. The task becomes significantly more complex with nonstationary transitions,
which are often characterized by multiple distribution shifts across different domains, particularly
when these domains or shifts are also unobserved.
Recent advances in unsupervised representation learning, particularly through nonlinear Independent Component Analysis (ICA), have shown promising results in identifying latent variables by
incorporating side information such as class labels and domain indices [10–19]. For time-series data,
historical information is widely utilized to enhance the identifiability of latent temporal causal processes [20–23]. However, existing studies primarily derive results under stationary conditions [11, 21]
or nonstationary conditions with observed domain indices [13, 22, 23]. These methods are limited in
application as general time series data are typically nonstationary and domain information is difficult
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

