Towards Next-Generation Logic Synthesis:
A Scalable Neural Circuit Generation Framework
Zhihai Wang1∗

Jie Wang1†

Jianye Hao2,3

Mingxuan Yuan2

1

Qingyue Yang1
Bin Li1

Yinqi Bai1

Xing Li2

Yongdong Zhang1

Lei Chen2
Feng Wu1

MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies
3
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University

Abstract
Logic Synthesis (LS) aims to generate an optimized logic circuit satisfying a given
functionality, which generally consists of circuit translation and optimization. It is
a challenging and fundamental combinatorial optimization problem in integrated
circuit design. Traditional LS approaches rely on manually designed heuristics to
tackle the LS task, while machine learning recently offers a promising approach towards next-generation logic synthesis by neural circuit generation and optimization.
In this paper, we first revisit the application of differentiable neural architecture
search (DNAS) methods to circuit generation and found from extensive experiments that existing DNAS methods struggle to exactly generate circuits, scale
poorly to large circuits, and exhibit high sensitivity to hyper-parameters. Then
we provide three major insights for these challenges from extensive empirical
analysis: 1) DNAS tends to overfit to too many skip-connections, consequently
wasting a significant portion of the network’s expressive capabilities; 2) DNAS
suffers from the structure bias between the network architecture and the circuit
inherent structure, leading to inefficient search; 3) the learning difficulty of different
input-output examples varies significantly, leading to severely imbalanced learning.
To address these challenges in a systematic way, we propose a novel regularized
triangle-shaped circuit network generation framework, which leverages our key
insights for completely accurate and scalable circuit generation. Furthermore,
we propose an evolutionary algorithm assisted by reinforcement learning agent
restarting technique for efficient and effective neural circuit optimization. Extensive
experiments on four different circuit benchmarks demonstrate that our method can
precisely generate circuits with up to 1200 nodes. Moreover, our synthesized circuits significantly outperform the state-of-the-art results from several competitive
winners in IWLS 2022 and 2023 competitions.

1

Introduction

Complex integrated circuits (ICs) can have billions of transistors, making purely human-based
design impossible [1]. To tackle this problem, the IC industry relies on electronic design automation
(EDA) tools [2] that progressively transform a high-level hardware design into a layout ready for IC
fabrication. Logic synthesis (LS) is a fundamental step in EDA which aims to transform a behaviorallevel description of a design into an optimized gate-level circuit to minimize its delay and area. As
∗
†

This work was done when Zhihai Wang was an intern at Huawei.
Corresponding author. Email: jiewangx@ustc.edu.cn.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

