SymILO: A Symmetry-Aware Learning Framework
for Integer Linear Optimization
Qian Chen1,2 , Tianjian Zhang1,2 , Linxin Yang2,3 , Qingyu Han2 , Akang Wang2,3,* , Ruoyu Sun3,4 ,
Xiaodong Luo2,3 , and Tsung-Hui Chang1,2
1

School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
2
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, China
3
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
4
Shenzhen International Center For Industrial And Applied Mathematics, Shenzhen Research
Institute of Big Data, China

Abstract
Integer linear programs (ILPs) are commonly employed to model diverse practical
problems such as scheduling and planning. Recently, machine learning techniques
have been utilized to solve ILPs. A straightforward idea is to train a model via
supervised learning, with an ILP as the input and an optimal solution as the
label. An ILP is symmetric if its variables can be permuted without changing
the problem structure, resulting in numerous equivalent and optimal solutions.
Randomly selecting an optimal solution as the label can introduce variability in the
training data, which may hinder the model from learning stable patterns. In this
work, we incorporate the intrinsic symmetry of ILPs and propose a novel training
framework called SymILO. Specifically, we modify the learning task by introducing
solution permutation along with neural network weights as learnable parameters
and then design an alternating algorithm to jointly optimize the loss function. We
conduct extensive experiments on ILPs involving different symmetries and the
computational results demonstrate that our symmetry-aware approach significantly
outperforms three existing methods—-achieving 50.3%, 66.5%, and 45.4% average
improvements, respectively.

1

Introduction

Integer linear programs (ILPs) are optimization problems with integer variables and a linear objective,
and have a wide range of practical uses in various fields, such as production planning (Pochet &
Wolsey, 2006; Chen, 2010), resource allocation (Liu & Fan, 2018; Watson & Woodruff, 2011), and
transportation management (Luathep et al., 2011; Schöbel, 2001). An important property that often
arises in ILPs is symmetry (Margot, 2003), which refers to a situation where permuting variables does
not change the structure of an ILP.
Recently, there emerges many approaches equipping machine learning methods, supervised learning
in particular, to help efficient solution identification for ILPs (Zhang et al., 2023). Among these
approaches, an important category derived from the idea of predicting the optimal solution has
demonstrated significant improvements (Han et al., 2023; Ding et al., 2020; Khalil et al., 2022;
Nair et al., 2020). In this paper, we consider a classic supervised learning task that aims to train
an ML model to predict an optimal solution for an ILP. Specifically, given a training dataset D =
{(si , yi )}N
i=1 with yi denoting an optimal solution to instance si , we hope to train a neural network
*

Corresponding author: Akang Wang <wangakang@sribd.cn>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

