Conformal Prediction for Class-wise Coverage
via Augmented Label Rank Calibration

Yuanjie Shi
Washington State University

Subhankar Ghosh
Washington State University

Janardhan Rao Doppa
Washington State University

Taha Belkhouja
Washington State University

Yan Yan
Washington State University

Abstract
Conformal prediction (CP) is an emerging uncertainty quantification framework
that allows us to construct a prediction set to cover the true label with a pre-specified
marginal or conditional probability. Although the valid coverage guarantee has
been extensively studied for classification problems, CP often produces large prediction sets which may not be practically useful. This issue is exacerbated for
the setting of class-conditional coverage on classification tasks with many and/or
imbalanced classes. This paper proposes the Rank Calibrated Class-conditional CP
(RC3P) algorithm to reduce the prediction set sizes to achieve class-conditional
coverage, where the valid coverage holds for each class. In contrast to the standard class-conditional CP (CCP) method that uniformly thresholds the class-wise
conformity score for each class, the augmented label rank calibration step allows
RC3P to selectively iterate this class-wise thresholding subroutine only for a subset
of classes whose class-wise top-k error is small. We prove that agnostic to the classifier and data distribution, RC3P achieves class-wise coverage. We also show that
RC3P reduces the size of prediction sets compared to the CCP method. Comprehensive experiments on multiple real-world datasets demonstrate that RC3P achieves
class-wise coverage and 26.25% ↓ reduction in prediction set sizes on average.

1

Introduction

Safe deployment of machine learning (ML) models in high stakes applications such as medical
diagnosis requires theoretically-sound uncertainty estimates. Conformal prediction (CP) [60] is an
emerging uncertainty quantification framework that constructs a prediction set of candidate output
values such that the true output is present with a pre-specified level (e.g., ≥ 90%) of the marginal or
conditional probability [65, 19].
A promising property of CP is the model-agnostic and distribution-free coverage validity under
certain notions [20]. For example, marginal coverage is the commonly studied validity notion
[47, 1, 65], while conditional coverage is a stronger notion. There is a general taxonomy to group
data (i.e., input-output pairs) into categories and to study the valid coverage for each group (i.e., the
group-wise validity) [61, 60]. This paper focuses on the specific notion of class-conditional coverage
that guarantees coverage for each class individually, which is important for classification tasks with
many and/or imbalanced classes (e.g., medical applications) [39, 56, 38].
In addition to the coverage validity, predictive efficiency is another important criterion for CP [20, 59],
which refers to the size of the prediction sets. Both coverage validity and predictive efficiency are used
together to measure the performance of CP methods [1, 45, 47, 15, 22, 18]. Since the two measures
are competing [1], our goal is to guarantee the coverage validity with high predictive efficiency,
i.e., small prediction sets [20, 47, 18]. Some studies improved the predictive efficiency under the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

