Safety through feedback in Constrained RL

Shashank Reddy Chirra∗1 , Pradeep Varakantham1 , Praveen Paruchuri2
1
Singapore Management University, 2 IIIT Hyderabad
{shashankc,pradeepv}@smu.edu.sg, praveen.p@iiit.ac.in

Abstract
In safety-critical RL settings, the inclusion of an additional cost function is often
favoured over the arduous task of modifying the reward function to ensure the
agent’s safe behaviour. However, designing or evaluating such a cost function can
be prohibitively expensive. For instance, in the domain of self-driving, designing
a cost function that encompasses all unsafe behaviours (e.g., aggressive lane
changes, risky overtakes) is inherently complex, it must also consider all the actors
present in the scene making it expensive to evaluate. In such scenarios, the cost
function can be learned from feedback collected offline in between training rounds.
This feedback can be system generated or elicited from a human observing the
training process. Previous approaches have not been able to scale to complex
environments and are constrained to receiving feedback at the state level which
can be expensive to collect. To this end, we introduce an approach that scales to
more complex domains and extends beyond state-level feedback, thus, reducing
the burden on the evaluator. Inferring the cost function in such settings poses
challenges, particularly in assigning credit to individual states based on trajectorylevel feedback. To address this, we propose a surrogate objective that transforms
the problem into a state-level supervised classification task with noisy labels, which
can be solved efficiently. Additionally, it is often infeasible to collect feedback
for every trajectory generated by the agent, hence, two fundamental questions
arise: (1) Which trajectories should be presented to the human? and (2) How
many trajectories are necessary for effective learning? To address these questions,
we introduce a novelty-based sampling mechanism that selectively involves the
evaluator only when the the agent encounters a novel trajectory, and discontinues
querying once the trajectories are no longer novel. We showcase the efficiency of
our method through experimentation on several benchmark Safety Gymnasium
environments and realistic self-driving scenarios. Our method demonstrates nearoptimal performance, comparable to when the cost function is known, by relying
solely on trajectory-level feedback across multiple domains. This highlights both
the effectiveness and scalability of our approach. The code to replicate these results
can be found at https://github.com/shshnkreddy/RLSF

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) is known to suffer from the problem of reward design, especially in
safety-related settings [4]. In such a case, constrained RL settings have emerged as a promising
alternative to generate safe policies[3, 16, 34]. This framework introduces an additional cost function
to split the task related information (rewards) from the safety related information (costs). In this
paper, we address a scenario where the reward function is well-defined, while the cost function
remains unknown a priori and requires inference from feedback. This arises in cases where the cost
function is expensive to design or evaluate. For instance, consider the development of an autonomous
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

