Almost-Linear RNNs Yield Highly Interpretable
Symbolic Codes in Dynamical Systems Reconstruction

Manuel Brenner1,2∗, Christoph Jürgen Hemmer1,3∗, Zahra Monfared2 , Daniel Durstewitz1,2,3
1
Dept. of Theoretical Neuroscience, Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty,
Heidelberg University, Germany
2
Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing (IWR), Heidelberg University, Germany
3
Faculty of Physics and Astronomy, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany

Abstract
Dynamical systems (DS) theory is fundamental for many areas of science and
engineering. It can provide deep insights into the behavior of systems evolving
in time, as typically described by differential or recursive equations. A common
approach to facilitate mathematical tractability and interpretability of DS models
involves decomposing nonlinear DS into multiple linear DS separated by switching
manifolds, i.e. piecewise linear (PWL) systems. PWL models are popular in
engineering and a frequent choice in mathematics for analyzing the topological
properties of DS. However, hand-crafting such models is tedious and only possible
for very low-dimensional scenarios, while inferring them from data usually gives
rise to unnecessarily complex representations with very many linear subregions.
Here we introduce Almost-Linear Recurrent Neural Networks (AL-RNNs) which
automatically and robustly produce most parsimonious PWL representations of DS
from time series data, using as few PWL nonlinearities as possible. AL-RNNs can
be efficiently trained with any SOTA algorithm for dynamical systems reconstruction (DSR), and naturally give rise to a symbolic encoding of the underlying DS that
provably preserves important topological properties. We show that for the Lorenz
and Rössler systems, AL-RNNs discover, in a purely data-driven way, the known
topologically minimal PWL representations of the corresponding chaotic attractors. We further illustrate on two challenging empirical datasets that interpretable
symbolic encodings of the dynamics can be achieved, tremendously facilitating
mathematical and computational analysis of the underlying systems.

1

Introduction

Dynamical systems (DS) underlie many real-world phenomena of scientific and practical relevance.
Complex chaotic DS are believed to govern market dynamics [65], the rhythms of the brain [16],
climate systems [100], or ecosystems [71]. A by now rapidly growing field in scientific ML is
dynamical systems reconstruction (DSR), where the goal is to learn a DS model directly from data
that constitutes a generative surrogate model of the data-generating DS. DSR increasingly relies
on deep learning, especially in contexts where dynamics are too complex to be captured by simple
equations or where the underlying processes are not fully understood.
One way of making DSR models mathematically accessible is piecewise linear (PWL) designs, popular among engineers for decades [8, 17, 43, 81, 91]. In the mathematical theory of DS, PWL models
also play a special role and simplify many types of analysis [3, 54], such as the characterization of
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding authors: {manuel.brenner, christoph.hemmer, daniel.durstewitz}@zi-mannheim.de

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

