A Topology-aware Graph Coarsening Framework for
Continual Graph Learning

Xiaoxue Han
Stevens Institute of Technology
xhan26@stevens.edu

Zhuo Feng
Stevens Institute of Technology
zfeng12@stevens.edu

Yue Ning
Stevens Institute of Technology
yue.ning@stevens.edu

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) experience "catastrophic forgetting" in continual learning setups, where they tend to lose previously acquired knowledge and
perform poorly on old tasks. Rehearsal-based methods, which consolidate old
knowledge with a replay memory buffer, are a de facto solution due to their
straightforward workflow. However, these methods often fail to adequately capture topological information, leading to incorrect input-label mappings in replay
samples. To address this, we propose TACO, a topology-aware graph coarsening
and continual learning framework that stores information from previous tasks
as a reduced graph. Throughout each learning period, this reduced graph expands by integrating with a new graph and aligning shared nodes, followed by
a "zoom-out" reduction process to maintain a stable size. We have developed
a graph coarsening algorithm based on node representation proximities to efficiently reduce a graph while preserving essential topological information. We
empirically demonstrate that the learning process on the reduced graph can closely
approximate that on the original graph. We compare TACO with a wide range of
state-of-the-art baselines, proving its superiority and the necessity of preserving
high-quality topological information for effective replaying. Our code is available
at: https://github.com/hanxiaoxue114/TACO.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) are oblivious: they fail to consider pre-existing knowledge or
context outside of the information they were trained on. In offline settings, this problem can be
mitigated by making multiple passes through the dataset with batch training. However, in a continual
learning (also known as incremental learning or lifelong learning) setup, [43, 20, 40, 39], the
model learns a sequence of tasks incrementally, where each task is defined as a learning session
on a subgraph. This problem becomes more intractable as the model has no access to previous
data, resulting in drastic degradation of model performance on old tasks. To tackle the issue of
“catastrophic forgetting” in GNNs, several approaches have been proposed. Among them, rehearsalbased methods [18, 57, 48, 55] are the most common due to their straightforward workflow and
efficacy in consolidating old knowledge with affordable additional memory. When performing
node classification tasks, these methods utilize memory buffers to save node samples during the
rehearsal process of online graph training. However, they often fail to adequately capture topological
information which is important in downstream tasks. As demonstrated by Zügner et al. [58], even
small changes in edges can alter the expected node labels, causing the model to learn incorrect input
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

