Value Imprint: A Technique for Auditing the
Human Values Embedded in RLHF Datasets
Ike Obi
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana

Rohan Pant
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana

Maham Ghazanfar
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana

Srishti Shekhar Agrawal
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana

Aaron Basiletti
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana

Abstract
LLMs are increasingly fine-tuned using RLHF datasets to align them with human
preferences and values. However, very limited research has investigated which
specific human values are operationalized through these datasets. In this paper, we
introduce Value Imprint, a framework for auditing and classifying the human values
embedded within RLHF datasets. To investigate the viability of this framework, we
conducted three case study experiments by auditing the Anthropic/hh-rlhf, OpenAI
WebGPT Comparisons, and Alpaca GPT-4-LLM datasets to examine the human
values embedded within them. Our analysis involved a two-phase process. During
the first phase, we developed a taxonomy of human values through an integrated
review of prior works from philosophy, axiology, and ethics. Then, we applied
this taxonomy to annotate 6,501 RLHF preferences. During the second phase,
we employed the labels generated from the annotation as ground truth data for
training a transformer-based machine learning model to audit and classify the three
RLHF datasets. Through this approach, we discovered that information-utility
values, including Wisdom/Knowledge and Information Seeking, were the most
dominant human values within all three RLHF datasets. In contrast, prosocial and
democratic values, including Well-being, Justice, and Human/Animal Rights, were
the least represented human values. These findings have significant implications
for developing language models that align with societal values and norms. We
contribute our datasets to support further research in this area. https://github.
com/hv-rsrch/valueimprint

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning From Human Feedback (RLHF) has emerged as a potent way of shaping the
behavior of AI models to ensure they produce positive responses and experiences that correspond
with user preferences and societal norms [1–3]. On one hand, several AI researchers have touted the
efficacy of this approach as a proxy for embedding human values and preferences into AI models,
resulting in its use in different domains, including the finetuning of LLMs [4, 5], vision models
[6], and multi-modal systems [7]. Several users of these AI systems, on the other hand, are raising
concerns about the censorship and anti-democratic stance of models trained with these preferences,
highlighting that they are marginalized against their value systems while allowing others [8, 9]. As a
result, there is a growing concern among members of the public around the lack of transparency in the
kinds of values these datasets embed into AI systems. In addition, considering that RLHF preferences
involve complex value judgments of annotators, it is crucial to investigate how the subjective values
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

