Membership Inference on Text-to-image Diffusion
Models via Conditional Likelihood Discrepancy

Shengfang Zhai1,2 , Huanran Chen3,6 , Yinpeng Dong3,6∗, Jiajun Li1,2 ,
Qingni Shen1,2∗, Yansong Gao4 , Hang Su3,5 , Yang Liu7
1
School of Software and Microelectronics, Peking University
2
PKU-OCTA Laboratory for Blockchain and Privacy Computing, Peking University
3
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University
4
The University of Western Australia 5 Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
6
RealAI 7 Nanyang Technological University
{zhaisf, jiajun.lee}@stu.pku.edu.cn huanran.chen@outlook.com
{dongyinpeng, suhangss}@tsinghua.edu.cn
qingnishen@ss.pku.edu.cn garrison.gao@uwa.edu.au
yangliu@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion models have achieved tremendous success in the field of
controllable image generation, while also coming along with issues of privacy
leakage and data copyrights. Membership inference arises in these contexts as a potential auditing method for detecting unauthorized data usage. While some efforts
have been made on diffusion models, they are not applicable to text-to-image diffusion models due to the high computation overhead and enhanced generalization
capabilities. In this paper, we first identify a conditional overfitting phenomenon
in text-to-image diffusion models, indicating that these models tend to overfit
the conditional distribution of images given the corresponding text rather than
the marginal distribution of images only. Based on this observation, we derive
an analytical indicator, namely Conditional Likelihood Discrepancy (CLiD), to
perform membership inference, which reduces the stochasticity in estimating memorization of individual samples. Experimental results demonstrate that our method
significantly outperforms previous methods across various data distributions and
dataset scales. Additionally, our method shows superior resistance to overfitting
mitigation strategies, such as early stopping and data augmentation.

1

Introduction

Text-to-image diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in the guided generation of diverse,
high-quality images based on text prompts, such as Stable Diffusion [42, 46], DALLE-2 [43],
Imagen [49], and DeepFloyd-IF [31]. These models are increasingly adopted by users to create
photorealistic images that align with desired semantics. Moreover, they can generate images of
specific concepts [32] or styles [61] when fine-tuned on relevant datasets. However, the impressive
generative capabilities of these models depend heavily on high-quality image-text datasets, which
involve collecting image-text data from the web. This practice raises significant privacy and copyright
concerns in the community [5, 18]. The pretraining and fine-tuning processes of text-to-image
diffusion models can cause copyright infringement, as they utilize unauthorized datasets published by
human artists or stock-image websites [2, 10, 44, 45, 58].
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

