Functional Gradient Flows for Constrained Sampling

Shiyue Zhang∗
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
zhangshiyue@stu.pku.edu.cn

Longlin Yu∗
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
llyu@pku.edu.cn

Ziheng Cheng∗
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research
University of California, Berkeley
ziheng_cheng@berkeley.edu
Cheng Zhang†
School of Mathematical Sciences and Center for Statistical Science
Peking University
chengzhang@math.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, through a unified gradient flow perspective of Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) and variational inference (VI), particle-based variational inference
methods (ParVIs) have been proposed that tend to combine the best of both worlds.
While typical ParVIs such as Stein Variational Gradient Descent (SVGD) approximate the gradient flow within a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), many
attempts have been made recently to replace RKHS with more expressive function
spaces, such as neural networks. While successful, these methods are mainly designed for sampling from unconstrained domains. In this paper, we offer a general
solution to constrained sampling by introducing a boundary condition for the gradient flow which would confine the particles within the specific domain. This allows
us to propose a new functional gradient ParVI method for constrained sampling,
called constrained functional gradient flow (CFG), with provable continuous-time
convergence in total variation (TV). We also present novel numerical strategies to
handle the boundary integral term arising from the domain constraints. Our theory
and experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework.

1

Introduction

Efficiently approximating and sampling from unnormalized distributions is a fundamental and
challenging task in probabilistic machine learning, especially in Bayesian inference. Various methods,
including Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) and Variational Inference (VI), have been developed
to address the intractability of the target distribution. In VI, the inference problem is reformulated
as an optimization task that aims to find an approximation within a specific distribution family that
minimizes the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence to the posterior (Jordan et al., 1999; Wainwright
& Jordan, 2008; Blei et al., 2016). Leveraging efficient optimization algorithms, VI is often fast
during training and more scalable to large datasets. However, its approximation power may be limited
depending on the chosen family of variational distributions. In contrast, MCMC methods generate
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

