A Simple and Optimal Approach for
Universal Online Learning with Gradient Variations

Yu-Hu Yan, Peng Zhao, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{yanyh, zhaop, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
We investigate the problem of universal online learning with gradient-variation
regret. Universal online learning aims to achieve regret guarantees without the
prior knowledge of the curvature of the online functions. Moreover, we study the
problem-dependent gradient-variation regret as it plays a crucial role in bridging
stochastic and adversarial optimization as well as game theory. In this work, we
design a universal approach with the optimal gradient-variation regret simultaneously for strongly convex, exp-concave, and convex functions, thus addressing an
open problem highlighted by Yan et al. [2023]. Our approach is simple since it is
algorithmically efficient-to-implement with a two-layer online ensemble structure
and only 1 gradient query per round, and theoretically easy-to-analyze with a
novel and alternative analysis to the gradient-variation regret. Concretely, previous
works on gradient variations require controlling the algorithmic stability, which
is challenging and leads to sub-optimal regret and less efficient algorithm design.
Our analysis overcomes this issue by using a Bregman divergence negative term
from linearization and a useful smoothness property.

1

Introduction

Online convex optimization (OCO) models a sequential T -round game between an online learner
and the environments [Hazan, 2016, Orabona, 2019]. In each round t ∈ [T ], the learner selects a
decision xt from a convex compact set X ⊆ Rd . Simultaneously, the environments adversarially
choose a convex loss function ft : X 7→ R. Subsequently, the learner suffers a loss of ft (xt ),
receives feedback on the function ft (·), and updates her decision to xt+1 . In OCO, the learner aims
to optimize the game-theoretical performance measure known as regret [Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi,
2006], which is formally defined as
R EGT ≜

T
X
t=1

ft (xt ) − min
x∈X

T
X

ft (x).

(1.1)

t=1

It represents the learner’s excess cumulative loss compared with the best fixed comparator in hindsight.
In OCO, function curvatures play an important role in the best attainable regret bounds. Traditional
studies examine three types of curvatures: convexity, exp-concavity,√and strong convexity. Specifically,
for convex functions, online gradient descent (OGD) achieves O( T ) regret [Zinkevich, 2003]; for
α-exp-concave functions, online Newton step assuming α is known obtains O( αd log T ) regret [Hazan
et al., 2007]; and for λ-strongly convex functions, OGD with known λ attains O( λ1 log T ) [Hazan
et al., 2007]. These results are shown to be minimax optimal [Ordentlich and Cover, 1998, Abernethy
et al., 2008]. Recent studies further strengthen them by introducing two levels of adaptivity.
∗

Correspondence: Peng Zhao <zhaop@lamda.nju.edu.cn>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

