Soft-Label Integration for Robust Toxicity
Classification
Zelei Cheng
Northwestern University
Evanston, USA
zelei.cheng@northwestern.edu

Xian Wu
Northwestern University
Evanston, USA
xianwu2024@u.northwestern.edu

Jiahao Yu
Northwestern University
Evanston, USA
jiahao.yu@northwestern.edu

Shuo Han
Northwestern University
Evanston, USA
shuo.han.1@u.northwestern.edu

Xin-Qiang Cai
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
xinqiang.cai@riken.jp

Xinyu Xing
Northwestern University
Evanston, USA
xinyu.xing@northwestern.edu

Abstract
Disclaimer. This paper contains uncensored toxic content that might be offensive.

Toxicity classification in textual content remains a significant problem. Data with
labels from a single annotator fall short of capturing the diversity of human perspectives. Therefore, there is a growing need to incorporate crowdsourced annotations
for training an effective toxicity classifier. Additionally, the standard approach to
training a classifier using empirical risk minimization (ERM) may fail to address
the potential shifts between the training set and testing set due to exploiting spurious correlations. This work introduces a novel bi-level optimization framework that
integrates crowdsourced annotations with the soft-labeling technique and optimizes
the soft-label weights by Group Distributionally Robust Optimization (GroupDRO)
to enhance the robustness against out-of-distribution (OOD) risk. We theoretically prove the convergence of our bi-level optimization algorithm. Experimental
results demonstrate that our approach outperforms existing baseline methods in
terms of both average and worst-group accuracy, confirming its effectiveness in
leveraging crowdsourced annotations to achieve more effective and robust toxicity
classification.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are rapidly being adopted in applications such as conversations [1, 2],
AI-assisted programming [3], and education [4]. However, despite impressive capabilities, the
interaction between humans and LLMs can generate harmful, biased, or factually incorrect content [5,
6]. For example, users may ask LLMs to generate toxic content, such as hate speech, misinformation,
or violent threats, which can have severe consequences for individuals and communities. Recent
studies on jailbreaking LLMs also show that adversarial prompts can elicit toxic responses from
models [7, 6, 8, 9]. Therefore, there is a pressing need to develop a robust toxicity classification
model that can effectively identify and mitigate harmful content generated by LLMs.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

