Chain of Thoughtlessness?
An Analysis of CoT in Planning

Kaya Stechly∗
SCAI, Arizona State University
kstechl@asu.edu

Karthik Valmeekam∗
SCAI, Arizona State University
kvalmeek@asu.edu

Subbarao Kambhampati
SCAI, Arizona State University
rao@asu.edu

Abstract
Large language model (LLM) performance on reasoning problems typically does
not generalize out of distribution. Previous work has claimed that this can be
mitigated with chain of thought prompting–a method of demonstrating solution
procedures–with the intuition that it is possible to in-context teach an LLM an
algorithm for solving the problem. This paper presents a case study of chain
of thought on problems from Blocksworld, a classical planning domain, and
examines the performance of two state-of-the-art LLMs across two axes: generality
of examples given in prompt, and complexity of problems queried with each
prompt. While our problems are very simple, we only find meaningful performance
improvements from chain of thought prompts when those prompts are exceedingly
specific to their problem class, and that those improvements quickly deteriorate as
the size n of the query-specified stack grows past the size of stacks shown in the
examples. We also create scalable variants of three domains commonly studied in
previous CoT papers and demonstrate the existence of similar failure modes. Our
results hint that, contrary to previous claims in the literature, CoT’s performance
improvements do not stem from the model learning general algorithmic procedures
via demonstrations but depend on carefully engineering highly problem specific
prompts. This spotlights drawbacks of chain of thought, especially the sharp
tradeoff between possible performance gains and the amount of human labor
necessary to generate examples with correct reasoning traces.†

1

Introduction

While originally designed for text completion, Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown promise
on a diverse set of unrelated tasks. While initial anecdotal results were unexpectedly impressive [8],
followup systematic studies showed that–outside of limited, non-generalizable classes of problems–
these models generally perform poorly on basic, multi-hop reasoning tasks [17] ranging from
arithmetic [35] and logic puzzles [14] to constraint satisfaction [42, 2] and classical planning [47].
At the same time, the subfield of prompt engineering [36] has grown rapidly, promising improvements
in performance without retraining. A core tenet of this subfield is that LLMs are capable of powerful
∗

equal contribution
Resources and source code for planning experiments can be found at https://github.
com/karthikv792/cot-planning and for other domains at https://github.com/kstechly/
cot-scheduling
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

