Contextual Bilevel Reinforcement Learning for
Incentive Alignment

Vinzenz Thoma ∗
ETH AI Center
vinzenz.thoma@ai.ethz.ch

Barna Pasztor ∗
ETH AI Center
barna.pasztor@ai.ethz.ch

Giorgia Ramponi
University of Zurich
giorgia.ramponi@uzh.ch

Andreas Krause
ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

Yifan Hu
EPFL & ETH Zurich
yifan.hu@epfl.ch

Abstract
The optimal policy in various real-world strategic decision-making problems depends both on the environmental configuration and exogenous events. For these
settings, we introduce Contextual Bilevel Reinforcement Learning (CB-RL), a
stochastic bilevel decision-making model, where the lower level consists of solving
a contextual Markov Decision Process (CMDP). CB-RL can be viewed as a Stackelberg Game where the leader and a random context beyond the leader’s control
together decide the setup of many MDPs that potentially multiple followers best
respond to. This framework extends beyond traditional bilevel optimization and
finds relevance in diverse fields such as RLHF, tax design, reward shaping, contract
theory and mechanism design. We propose a stochastic Hyper Policy Gradient
Descent (HPGD) algorithm to solve CB-RL, and demonstrate its convergence. Notably, HPGD uses stochastic hypergradient estimates, based on observations of the
followers’ trajectories. Therefore, it allows followers to use any training procedure
and the leader to be agnostic of the specific algorithm, which aligns with various
real-world scenarios. We further consider the setting when the leader can influence
the training of followers and propose an accelerated algorithm. We empirically
demonstrate the performance of our algorithm for reward shaping and tax design.

1

Introduction

In Reinforcement Learning (RL), Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) [53] provide a versatile
framework for capturing sequential decision-making problems across various domains such as health
care [76], energy systems [52], economics [14], and finance [33]. A considerable amount of work
has been devoted to solving standard MDPs [2, 62, 67]. However, in many applications, MDPs can
be configured on purpose or affected by exogenous events, both of which can significantly impact
the corresponding optimal policies. For example, in a simplified economic framework, the optimal
decision of an individual household depends both on public policies and economic uncertainties
[19, 34]. The policy maker in turn has to make decisions, anticipating the best response of differentlyminded individual agents to its policies and exogenous events outside the policy maker’s control.
To study such problems, we introduce Contextual Bilevel Reinforcement Learning (CB-RL), a
hierarchical decision-making framework where followers solve a contextual Markov decision
∗

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

