Thompson Sampling For Combinatorial Bandits:
Polynomial Regret and Mismatched Sampling Paradox

Raymond Zhang
Laboratoire des signaux et systèmes
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, CentraleSupélec,
91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
Raymond.zhang@centralesupelec.fr
Richard Combes
Laboratoire des signaux et systèmes
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, CentraleSupélec,
91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
Richard.combes@centralesupelec.fr

Abstract
We consider Thompson Sampling (TS) for linear combinatorial semi-bandits and
subgaussian rewards. We propose the first known TS whose finite-time regret does
not scale exponentially with the dimension of the problem. We further show the
mismatched sampling paradox: A learner who knows the rewards distributions
and samples from the correct posterior distribution can perform exponentially
worse than a learner who does not know the rewards and simply samples from
a well-chosen Gaussian posterior. The code used to generate the experiments is
available at https://github.com/RaymZhang/CTS-Mismatched-Paradox

1

Introduction and Setting

We consider the linear combinatorial bandit problem with semi-bandit feedback: At time t P rT s :“
t1, ..., T u a learner selects an action Aptq P A where the set of available actions A Ă t0, 1ud is a
known combinatorial set, i.e., a set of binary vectors. Then the environment draws a random vector
Xptq P Rd , and the learner then observes Y ptq “ Aptq d Xptq, where d denotes the Hadamard
(element-wise) product, and the learner obtains a reward of AptqJ Xptq. We assume that the vectors
pXptqqtě1 are drawn i.i.d. from some distribution with expectation EpXptqq “ µ‹ and that the
entries of Xptq are independent. The vector µ‹ lies in some Θ Ă Rd and is initially unknown to the
learner. The learner wants to minimize the regret:
»
fi
»
fi
!
)
ÿ
ÿ
RpT, µ‹ q :“ T max AJ µ‹ ´ E –
AptqJ µ‹ fl “ E –
∆Aptq fl .
APA

tPrT s

tPrT s

Where A‹ P arg maxAPA tAJ µ‹ u is the optimal action and ∆A :“ A‹ J µ‹ ´ AJ µ‹ is the reward
gap between action A and optimal action A‹ . The regret is the expected difference between the sum
of rewards obtained by an oracle who knows µ‹ and always selects the optimal decision and that
obtained by the learner. We assume that the optimal decision is unique. To state regret bounds, we
use the following notation. We denote by ∆min :“ minAPA:∆A ą0 ∆A the minimal reward gap and
∆max :“ maxAPA ∆A the maximal reward gap, ∆ptq :“ ∆Aptq the reward gap of the action selected
at time t, m :“ maxAPA }A}1 the maximal size of an action.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

