Adaptive Domain Learning for Cross-domain Image
Denoising

Zian Qian1

Chenyang Qi1 Ka Lung Law2 Hao Fu2 Chenyang Lei3†
1
HKUST 2 SenseTime 3 CAIR, HKISI-CAS
{zqianaa, cqiaa, cqf}@ust.hk
{luojialong, fuhao1}@sensetime.com
leichenyang7@gmail.com

Qifeng Chen1†

Abstract
Different camera sensors have different noise patterns, and thus an image denoising
model trained on one sensor often does not generalize well to a different sensor.
One plausible solution is to collect a large dataset for each sensor for training or
fine-tuning, which is inevitably time-consuming. To address this cross-domain
challenge, we present a novel adaptive domain learning (ADL) scheme for crossdomain RAW image denoising by utilizing existing data from different sensors
(source domain) plus a small amount of data from the new sensor (target domain).
The ADL training scheme automatically removes the data in the source domain that
are harmful to fine-tuning a model for the target domain (some data are harmful
as adding them during training lowers the performance due to domain gaps).
Also, we introduce a modulation module to adopt sensor-specific information
(sensor type and ISO) to understand input data for image denoising. We conduct
extensive experiments on public datasets with various smartphone and DSLR
cameras, which show our proposed model outperforms prior work on cross-domain
image denoising, given a small amount of image data from the target domain
sensor.

1

Introduction

Noise generated by electronic sensors in a RAW image is inevitable. Over the past few years, learningbased methods have made significant progress in RAW image denoising [5, 22, 25, 42]. However,
building a large-scale real-world dataset with noise-clean pairs for training a denoising model is
time-consuming and labor-intensive. It is hard to collect ground truth that is noise-free and has no
misalignment with the input noisy data. Moreover, due to the different noise distributions of different
sensors (such as read noise and shot noise), the collected data from a particular sensor usually cannot
be used to train the denoising model of other sensors, which causes a waste of resources. Therefore,
it is important to develop a method to solve this problem.
Existing solutions to data scarcity in RAW image denoising can be divided into two categories,
noise calibration [42, 47, 27] and self-supervise denoising [22, 18, 25, 41, 20]. Noise synthesis and
calibration methods first build a noise model, optimize for noise parameters according to a particular
camera, and then synthesize training pairs from the noise model to train a network. Self-supervised
denoising is designed based on the blindspots schemes. When the input noisy image masks out some
pixels and forms a similar but different image from the input, the network learns to denoise instead of
identity mapping. Therefore, the network can learn to denoise without pairwise noise-clean data.
†

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

