A Simple Framework for Generalization in Visual RL
under Dynamic Scene Perturbations

Wonil Song
Yonsei University
Seoul, South Korea
swonil92@yonsei.ac.kr

Hyesong Choi
Ewha Womans University
Seoul, South Korea
hyesongchoi2010@gmail.com

Kwanghoon Sohn
Yonsei University
Seoul, South Korea
khsohn@yonsei.ac.kr

Dongbo Min∗
Ewha Womans University
Seoul, South Korea
dbmin@ewha.ac.kr

Abstract
In the rapidly evolving domain of vision-based deep reinforcement learning (RL), a
pivotal challenge is to achieve generalization capability to dynamic environmental
changes reflected in visual observations. Our work delves into the intricacies of
this problem, identifying two key issues that appear in previous approaches for
visual RL generalization: (i) imbalanced saliency and (ii) observational overfitting.
Imbalanced saliency is a phenomenon where an RL agent disproportionately identifies salient features across consecutive frames in a frame stack. Observational
overfitting occurs when the agent focuses on certain background regions rather
than task-relevant objects. To address these challenges, we present a simple yet effective framework for generalization in visual RL (SimGRL) under dynamic scene
perturbations. First, to mitigate the imbalanced saliency problem, we introduce
an architectural modification to the image encoder to stack frames at the feature
level rather than the image level. Simultaneously, to alleviate the observational
overfitting problem, we propose a novel technique called shifted random overlay
augmentation, which is specifically designed to learn robust representations capable
of effectively handling dynamic visual scenes. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the superior generalization capability of SimGRL, achieving state-of-the-art performance in benchmarks including the DeepMind Control Suite. 1

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) utilizing visual observations has achieved remarkable success
across diverse domains, including robotic manipulation [21], video games [25, 1, 38], and autonomous
navigation [24, 48]. However, acquiring generalizable RL policies across diverse environments
remains challenging, mainly due to overfitting [44] in the high-dimensional observation space [32].
To obtain robust policies invariant to visual perturbations, a variety of approaches based on domain
randomization [36, 28] and data augmentation [31, 19, 40, 29, 13, 12] have been widely proposed.
These approaches operate under the assumption that exposing an agent to various augmentations
during the training phase enhances its adaptability to unseen domains. Despite the encouraging results,
performance still falls behind in challenging environments with dynamically changing backgrounds.
∗
1

Corresponding Author
Website and code are available at: https://w-song11.github.io/SimGRL.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

