Regret Minimization in Stackelberg
Games with Side Information
Keegan Harris
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
keeganh@cs.cmu.edu

Zhiwei Steven Wu
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
zhiweiw@cs.cmu.edu

Maria-Florina Balcan
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
ninamf@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Algorithms for playing in Stackelberg games have been deployed in real-world domains including airport security, anti-poaching efforts, and cyber-crime prevention.
However, these algorithms often fail to take into consideration the additional information available to each player (e.g. traffic patterns, weather conditions, network
congestion), which may significantly affect both players’ optimal strategies. We formalize such settings as Stackelberg games with side information, in which both players observe an external context before playing. The leader commits to a (contextdependent) strategy, and the follower best-responds to both the leader’s strategy and
the context. We focus on the online setting in which a sequence of followers arrive
over time, and the context may change from round-to-round. In sharp contrast to the
non-contextual version, we show that it is impossible for the leader to achieve noregret in the full adversarial setting. Motivated by this result, we show that no-regret
learning is possible in two natural relaxations: the setting in which the sequence
of followers is chosen stochastically and the sequence of contexts is adversarial,
and the setting in which contexts are stochastic and follower types are adversarial.

1

Introduction

A Stackelberg game [30, 31] is a strategic interaction between two utility-maximizing players in
which one player (the leader) is able to commit to a (possibly mixed) strategy before the other
player (the follower) takes an action. While Stackelberg’s original formulation was used to model
economic competition between firms, Stackelberg games have been used to study a wide range of
topics in computing ranging from incentives in algorithmic decision-making [15] to radio spectrum
utilization [32]. Perhaps the most successful application of Stackelberg games to solve real-world
problems is in the field of security, where the analysis of Stackelberg security games has led to
new methods in domains such as passenger screening at airports [8], wildlife protection efforts in
conservation areas [10], the deployment of Federal Air Marshals on board commercial flights [18],
and patrol boat schedules for the United States Coast Guard [1].1
However in many real-world settings which are typically modeled as Stackelberg games, the payoffs
of the players often depend on additional contextual information which is not captured by the
Stackelberg game framework. For example, in airport security the severity of an attack (as well as the
“benefit” of a successful attack to the attacker) depends on factors such as the arrival and departure
city of a flight, the whether there are VIP passengers on board, and the amount of valuable cargo on
the aircraft. Additionally, there may be information in the time leading up to the attack attempt which
may help the security service determine the type of attack which is coming [17]. For instance, in
wildlife protection settings factors such as the weather and time of year may make certain species of
1

See [27, 19, 2] for an overview of other application domains for Stackelberg security games.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

