Clustering then Propagation: Select Better Anchors
for Knowledge Graph Embedding

Ke Liang1

Yue Liu1 Hao Li1 Lingyuan Meng1 Suyuan Liu1
Siwei Wang2 Sihang Zhou1 Xinwang Liu1∗
1
National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
2
Academy of Military Sciences, Beijing, China

Abstract
Traditional knowledge graph embedding (KGE) models map entities and relations
to unique embedding vectors in a shallow lookup manner. As the scale of data
becomes larger, this manner will raise unaffordable computational costs. Anchorbased strategies have been treated as effective ways to alleviate such efficiency
problems by propagation on representative entities instead of the whole graph.
However, most existing anchor-based KGE models select the anchors in a primitive
manner, which limits their performance. To this end, we propose a novel anchorbased strategy for KGE, i.e., a relational clustering-based anchor selection strategy
(RecPiece), where two characteristics are leveraged, i.e., (1) representative ability of
the cluster centroids and (2) descriptive ability of relation types in KGs. Specifically,
we first perform clustering over features of factual triplets instead of entities, where
cluster number is naturally set as number of relation types since each fact can
be characterized by its relation in KGs. Then, representative triplets are selected
around the clustering centroids and further mapped into corresponding anchor
entities. Extensive experiments on six datasets show that RecPiece achieves higher
performances but comparable or even fewer parameters compared to previous
anchor-based KGE models, indicating that our model can select better anchors in a
more scalable way.

1

Introduction

Knowledge graphs (KGs) [35], such as Freebase [5], Wikidata [69], consist of a large number
of relational facts, such as Freebase [5], Wikidata [69], YAGO [51] and NELL [8], consist of a
large number of relational facts, which are generally in the format of triplets, i.e., (head entity,
relation, tail entity). Each triplet in KGs reveals a specific connection between entities. To leverage
such informative knowledge to enhance the capacity of models in different fields [75, 24, 84] and
applications [40, 43, 38], multiple knowledge graph embedding (KGE) models [59, 60, 48, 42, 82,
32, 31, 15, 14, 34, 35, 36, 81, 80] have been proposed these years.
However, traditional KGE models usually encode the entities, relations, and factual triplets in KGs
shallowly. Assuming the dimension as d, traditional KGE models, such as RotatE [61], will map these
elements in KGs into subspace RN ×d , where N is the number of the target objects. Such a shallow
lookup manner in these traditional KGE models results in a linear growth of memory consumption
for storing the embedding matrix and incurs high computational costs [13]. Thus, as the scale of data
becomes larger and larger, top-level GPU or CPU clusters with more memory space are required for
these traditional KGE models. For example, about 78M × 200d entity feature matrix and 58.1 GB
GPU RAM [20] are needed for the best-performing model on PyTorch-BigGraph dataset [29].
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

