Q UEST: Quality-Aware Metropolis-Hastings Sampling
for Machine Translation
Gonçalo R. A. Faria1∗, Sweta Agrawal2 , António Farinhas2,3 ,
Ricardo Rei4 , José G. C. de Souza4 , André F.T. Martins2,3,4,5
1
University of Washington, 2 Instituto de Telecomunicações,
3
Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, 4 Unbabel, 5 ELLIS Unit Lisbon
gfaria@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
An important challenge in machine translation is to generate high-quality and
diverse translations. Prior work has shown that the estimated likelihood from the
MT model correlates poorly with translation quality. In contrast, quality evaluation
metrics (such as COMET or BLEURT) exhibit high correlations with human
judgments, which has motivated their use as rerankers (such as quality-aware and
minimum Bayes risk decoding). However, relying on a single translation with high
estimated quality increases the chances of “gaming the metric”. In this paper, we
address the problem of sampling a set of high-quality and diverse translations. We
provide a simple and effective way to avoid over-reliance on noisy quality estimates
by using them as the energy function of a Gibbs distribution. Instead of looking for
a mode in the distribution, we generate multiple samples from high-density areas
through the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm, a simple Markov chain Monte Carlo
approach. The results show that our proposed method leads to high-quality and
diverse outputs across multiple language pairs (E NGLISH↔{G ERMAN , RUSSIAN})
with two strong decoder-only LLMs (A LMA -7 B , T OWER -7 B).

1

Introduction

Machine translation (MT) is becoming increasingly more accurate and powerful, as it benefits from
the many capabilities and acquired knowledge of large language models (LLMs) (Freitag et al.,
2023b; Hendy et al., 2023). However, for many domains and languages the quality of translation is
still not satisfactory—for example, hallucinations or critical errors are a serious issue when translating
high-risk content, as in medical and legal domains (Khoong et al., 2019; Taira et al., 2021; Shen
et al., 2023; Guerreiro et al., 2023b; Sanz-Valdivieso and López-Arroyo, 2023; Grimm et al., 2024).
Developing procedures for sampling higher-quality translations is therefore in high demand.
It is known that the output quality of the translations generated by maximizing the model likelihood
is limited because of the inadequacy of the mode—models tend to produce distributions over outputs
that are highly peaked, favoring a single hypothesis (Eikema and Aziz, 2020; Peters and Martins,
2021; Eikema, 2024); and improving search often makes things worse (Koehn and Knowles, 2017;
Stahlberg and Byrne, 2019). In general, maximizing model likelihood tends to overlook hypotheses
that could be equally valid and more appropriate in certain contexts. To address this limitation, a
string of work has been initiated towards “quality-aware decoding”, which leverages powerful quality
estimation (QE) and evaluation metrics, such as COMET (Rei et al., 2022) or BLEURT (Yan et al.,
2023), to explore and rerank a broader range of candidate hypotheses generated via sampling from
the model’s distribution, selecting the best-1 (Freitag et al., 2022a; Fernandes et al., 2022b; Farinhas
et al., 2023) or the best-k (Jinnai et al., 2024; Singhal et al., 2023) according to these learned metrics.
∗

Work done while at Instituto de Telecomunicações.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

