Should We Really Edit Language Models?
On the Evaluation of Edited Language Models

Qi Li♥∗ , Xiang Liu♥∗ , Zhenheng Tang♣ , Peijie Dong♥ ,
Zeyu Li♥ , Xinglin Pan♥ , Xiaowen Chu♥†
♥ The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
♣ Hong Kong Baptist University
lqinfdim@163.com xliu886@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn
{pdong212, zli755, xpan413}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn
zhtang@comp.hkbu.edu.hk xwchu@hkust-gz.edu.cn

Abstract
Model editing has become an increasingly popular method for efficiently updating knowledge within language models. Current approaches primarily focus on
reliability, generalization, and locality, with many excelling across these criteria.
Some recent studies have highlighted the potential pitfalls of these editing methods,
such as knowledge distortion and conflicts. However, the general capabilities of
post-edited language models remain largely unexplored. In this paper, we conduct
a comprehensive evaluation of various editing methods across different language
models, and have the following findings. (1) Existing editing methods inevitably
lead to performance deterioration on general benchmarks, indicating that these
methods can maintain the general capabilities of the model only within a limited
number of edits. When the number of edits increases, the model’s intrinsic knowledge structure may be disrupted or even completely destroyed. (2) Instruction-tuned
models exhibit greater robustness to editing, showing less performance drop on
general knowledge after editing. (3) Language models with larger scale are more
resistant to editing compared to smaller models. (4) The safety of the edited models
is significantly compromised, even for models that were originally safety-aligned.
Our findings indicate that current editing methods are only suitable for small-scale
knowledge updates within language models, which motivates further research on
more practical and reliable editing methods. The details of code and reproduction
can be found in Appendix F.

1

Introduction

Recently, large language model (LLM) like ChatGPT [1], Claude [2], and Llama [3; 4] have revolutionized the deep learning and demonstrated remarkable performance across various knowledge-intensive
tasks [5; 6; 7]. However, the learned vast amount of knowledge in LLMs may be erroneous, harmful,
or outdated [8]. While directly fine-tuning an LLM on calibrated knowledge can help mitigate this
problem, which is prohibitive due to hardware constraints and resource budget [9; 10; 11]. To this end,
model editing [12; 13; 14] has been proposed to efficiently update knowledge within LLM. Current
studies in editing [15; 16; 17; 18] target at enabling efficient yet precise model behavior alterations
on specific knowledge samples in the form of triplet within LLMs like modifying the wrong tuple
(Tim Cook, is the CEO of, Google) to the correct one (Tim Cook, is the CEO of, Apple) persistently.
*
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

