Towards Open Respiratory Acoustic Foundation
Models: Pretraining and Benchmarking
Yuwei Zhang†1 , Tong Xia†1 , Jing Han1 , Yu Yvonne Wu1 , Georgios Rizos1 , Yang Liu1 ,
Mohammed Mosuily2 , Jagmohan Chauhan2 , Cecilia Mascolo1
1
University of Cambridge, 2 University of Southampton, UK
† joint first authors, equal contribution
{yz798, tx229}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Respiratory audio, such as coughing and breathing sounds, has predictive power
for a wide range of healthcare applications, yet is currently under-explored. The
main problem for those applications arises from the difficulty in collecting large labeled task-specific data for model development. Generalizable respiratory acoustic
foundation models pretrained with unlabeled data would offer appealing advantages and possibly unlock this impasse. However, given the safety-critical nature
of healthcare applications, it is pivotal to also ensure openness and replicability
for any proposed foundation model solution. To this end, we introduce OPERA,
an OPEn Respiratory Acoustic foundation model pretraining and benchmarking
system, as the first approach answering this need. We curate large-scale respiratory
audio datasets (∼136K samples, over 400 hours), pretrain three pioneering generalizable acoustic models, and build a benchmark consisting of 19 downstream
respiratory health tasks for evaluation. Our pretrained models demonstrate superior
performance (against existing acoustic models pretrained with general audio on
16 out of 19 tasks) and generalizability (to unseen datasets and new respiratory
audio modalities). This highlights the great promise of respiratory acoustic foundation models and encourages more studies using OPERA as an open resource to
accelerate research on respiratory audio for health.
The OPERA website can be found at opera-benchmark.github.io
Our codebase is open-sourced at github.com/evelyn0414/OPERA

1

Introduction

Respiratory audio, such as coughing and breathing sounds generated by the respiratory system’s
airflow, contains multiple physiological characteristics of individuals and therefore its modeling could
be instrumental in health monitoring and disease detection applications [50, 60]. For instance, audio
recordings can be used to estimate respiratory rate and lung function [14, 54, 72], detect snoring and
apnea events during sleep [37, 27, 53], assess the effect of smoking on health [44, 43] and diagnose
diseases like flu and asthma [39, 36, 28, 51].
To enable the widespread adoption of these applications, high-performing algorithms are needed.
Related studies rely on traditional signal processing methods [14, 54, 37, 27, 44, 39, 36], which
require domain knowledge and often exhibit limited performance. Supervised deep acoustic models
have been proposed [72, 28, 61] but their performance heavily depends on the volume and quality
of available labels, which might be difficult and expensive to collect. Hence, foundation models
pretrained with large unlabeled respiratory audio data have a high potential to improve performance
through transfer learning and supervised fine-tuning [13, 69]. However, in contrast with other health
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

