Revisiting the Integration of Convolution and
Attention for Vision Backbone
Lei Zhu
City University of Hong Kong
ray.leizhu@outlook.com

Xinjiang Wang
Sensetime Research
wangxinjiang@sensetime.com

Wayne Zhang
Sensetime Research
wayne.zhang@sensetime.com

Rynson Lau†
City University of Hong Kong
Rynson.Lau@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Convolutions (Convs) and multi-head self-attentions (MHSAs) are typically considered alternatives to each other for building vision backbones. Although some
works try to integrate both, they apply the two operators simultaneously at the
finest pixel granularity. With Convs responsible for per-pixel feature extraction
already, the question is whether we still need to include the heavy MHSAs at such
a fine-grained level. In fact, this is the root cause of the scalability issue w.r.t. the
input resolution for vision transformers. To address this important problem, we
propose in this work to use MSHAs and Convs in parallel at different granularity
levels instead. Specifically, in each layer, we use two different ways to represent
an image: a fine-grained regular grid and a coarse-grained set of semantic slots.
We apply different operations to these two representations: Convs to the grid
for local features, and MHSAs to the slots for global features. A pair of fully
differentiable soft clustering and dispatching modules is introduced to bridge the
grid and set representations, thus enabling local-global fusion. Through extensive
experiments on various vision tasks, we empirically verify the potential of the
proposed integration scheme, named GLMix: by offloading the burden of finegrained features to light-weight Convs, it is sufficient to use MHSAs in a few (e.g.,
64) semantic slots to match the performance of recent state-of-the-art backbones,
while being more efficient. Our visualization results also demonstrate that the soft
clustering module produces a meaningful semantic grouping effect with only IN1k
classification supervision, which may induce better interpretability and inspire new
weakly-supervised semantic segmentation approaches. Code will be available at
https://github.com/rayleizhu/GLMix.

1

Introduction

Since the renaissance of deep learning over a decade ago, CNNs had dominated image analysis, until
recently when transformers become popular in vision tasks. CNNs and transformers differ in how
they model spatial feature interactions: CNNs use convolutions (Convs), while transformers use
multi-head self-attentions (MHSAs). Both have their own advantages and limitations. For example,
Convs have an inductive bias of translation equivariance, which matches the image property and
enables decent performances with less data. They also have a linear complexity w.r.t. pixel number,
making them scalable to high-resolution input. However, they have a limited receptive field, which
cannot be remedied simply by stacking more layers together [39]. In contrast, MHSAs can model
†

Rynson Lau is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

