MagR: Weight Magnitude Reduction for Enhancing
Post-Training Quantization

Aozhong Zhang1 Naigang Wang2 Yanxia Deng1 Xin Li1 Zi Yang1 Penghang Yin1
1
University at Albany, SUNY 2 IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
{azhang3, ydeng5, xli48, zyang8, pyin}@albany.edu
nwang@us.ibm.com

Abstract
In this paper, we present a simple optimization-based preprocessing technique
called Weight Magnitude Reduction (MagR) to improve the performance of posttraining quantization. For each linear layer, we adjust the pre-trained floating-point
weights by solving a channel-wise ℓ∞ -regularized optimization problem. This
process greatly diminishes the maximum magnitude of the weights and smooths
out outliers, while preserving the layer’s output. The preprocessed weights exhibit
reduced range, which facilitates the subsequent quantization process. To implement
MagR, we address the ℓ∞ -regularization by employing an efficient proximal gradient descent algorithm. Unlike existing preprocessing methods that involve linear
transformations and subsequent post-processing steps, which can introduce significant overhead at inference time, MagR functions as a non-linear transformation,
eliminating the need for any additional post-processing. This ensures that MagR
introduces no overhead whatsoever during inference. Our experiments demonstrate
that MagR achieves state-of-the-art performance on the Llama family of models.
For example, we achieve a Wikitext2 perplexity of 5.95 on the LLaMA2-70B
model for per-channel INT2 weight quantization without incurring any inference
overhead. The code is available at https://github.com/AozhongZhang/MagR

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have achieved outstanding performance across a broad range of
applications, demonstrating remarkable success. However, their unprecedented model size has led to
many computation operations and substantial memory footprints, becoming significant barriers to their
practical deployment and adoption in production environments. Accordingly, it is highly desirable to
develop efficient model compression techniques for LLMs so they can be more widely deployed in
resource-limited scenarios. Among the various techniques to compress and accelerate deep neural
networks (DNNs), low-precision quantization has proven to be highly effective across numerous
application domains and is widely adopted for accelerating DNNs. For LLMs, the inference runtime
is dominated by the token generation process, where output tokens are produced sequentially, one at
a time. This process is known to be memory bandwidth bound [3, 19]. As a result, the quantization
of LLMs has primarily focused on reducing the bit-width of model weights, with the dual goals of
lowering the model’s footprint to enable deployment on resource-constrained devices and decreasing
the memory bandwidth requirements to improve computational efficiency and accelerate inference.
The enormous computational demands for pre-training and fine-tuning Large Language Models
(LLMs) have led to the emergence of Post-Training Quantization (PTQ) [4, 15, 22, 24, 27, 31,
41, 51, 52, 53, 43, 40], as a promising solution for quantizing these models. Unlike Quantization
Aware Training (QAT) [7, 9, 12, 18, 21, 23, 46, 47, 48, 49], which is designed to minimize a global
training loss for quantization parameters, PTQ directly applies low-precision calibration to a pre38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

