Sample Complexity of Algorithm Selection Using
Neural Networks and Its Applications to
Branch-and-Cut
Hongyu Cheng
Dept. of Applied Mathematics & Statistics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
hongyucheng@jhu.edu

Sammy Khalife
Dept. of Applied Mathematics & Statistics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
khalife.sammy@jhu.edu

Barbara Fiedorowicz
Dept. of Applied Mathematics & Statistics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
bfiedor1@jhu.edu

Amitabh Basu
Dept. of Applied Mathematics & Statistics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
basu.amitabh@jhu.edu

Abstract
Data-driven algorithm design is a paradigm that uses statistical and machine learning techniques to select from a class of algorithms for a computational problem an
algorithm that has the best expected performance with respect to some (unknown)
distribution on the instances of the problem. We build upon recent work in this line
of research by considering the setup where, instead of selecting a single algorithm
that has the best performance, we allow the possibility of selecting an algorithm
based on the instance to be solved, using neural networks. In particular, given a
representative sample of instances, we learn a neural network that maps an instance
of the problem to the most appropriate algorithm for that instance. We formalize
this idea and derive rigorous sample complexity bounds for this learning problem,
in the spirit of recent work in data-driven algorithm design. We then apply this
approach to the problem of making good decisions in the branch-and-cut framework for mixed-integer optimization (e.g., which cut to add?). In other words,
the neural network will take as input a mixed-integer optimization instance and
output a decision that will result in a small branch-and-cut tree for that instance.
Our computational results provide evidence that our particular way of using neural
networks for cut selection can make a significant impact in reducing branch-and-cut
tree sizes, compared to previous data-driven approaches.

1

Background and motivation

Often there are several competing algorithms for a computational problem and no single algorithm
dominates all the others. The choice of an algorithm in such cases is often dictated by the “typical”
instance one expects to see, which may differ from one application context to another. Data-driven
algorithm design has emerged in recent years as a way to formalize this question of algorithm
selection and draws upon statistical and machine learning techniques; see Balcan [2020] for a
survey and references therein. More formally, suppose one has a class I of instances of some
computational problem with some unknown distribution, and a class of algorithms that can solve
this problem parameterized by some “tunable parameters”. Suppose that for each setting of the
parameters, the corresponding algorithm can be evaluated by a score function that tells us how
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

