Rethinking Deep Thinking: Stable Learning of
Algorithms using Lipschitz Constraints

Jay Bear
Adam Prügel-Bennett
Jonathon Hare
The University of Southampton, Southampton, UK
{jdh1g19,abp1,jsh2}@soton.ac.uk

Abstract
Iterative algorithms solve problems by taking steps until a solution is reached.
Models in the form of Deep Thinking (DT) networks have been demonstrated to
learn iterative algorithms in a way that can scale to different sized problems at
inference time using recurrent computation and convolutions. However, they are
often unstable during training, and have no guarantees of convergence/termination
at the solution. This paper addresses the problem of instability by analyzing the
growth in intermediate representations, allowing us to build models (referred to as
Deep Thinking with Lipschitz Constraints (DT-L)) with many fewer parameters
and providing more reliable solutions. Additionally our DT-L formulation provides
guarantees of convergence of the learned iterative procedure to a unique solution at
inference time. We demonstrate DT-L is capable of robustly learning algorithms
which extrapolate to harder problems than in the training set. We benchmark on the
traveling salesperson problem to evaluate the capabilities of the modified system in
an NP-hard problem where DT fails to learn.

1

Introduction

Iteration is a key ingredient in a vast number of important algorithms. Incremental progress towards
a solution is demonstrated in many of these. Well-known examples include insertion sort, gradient
descent, and the simplex method. This paper explores models that learn iterative algorithms. We
ask questions including: Can deep learning models be used to learn the complex steps of algorithms
similar to these? Is there a way to guarantee a solution or approximation is reached? Can we
learn algorithms that extrapolate to larger or harder instances than we train on? In addressing these
questions we propose a model called Deep Thinking with Lipschitz Constraints (DT-L).

F
x

ϕ(m+1)

ϕ(0)
ϕ(m)
G

ϕ(M)

H

y

Figure 1: Recurrent-based model architectures for learning algorithms with input x and output y.
F, G and H are convolutional networks that work on any size input. A scratchpad ϕ serves as the
working memory during computation. As described in Section 2 the original DT model didn’t include
recall, denoted by the dotted line. The improved DT-R and our DT-L model include this connection.
Some work towards answering the above questions has occurred in recent years. A key approach
has been to utilize various forms of a learned recurrent function to implement a ‘step’ in an iterative
algorithm that computes a solution to a problem. Typically these recurrent functions are combined
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

