ShiftAddLLM: Accelerating Pretrained LLMs via
Post-Training Multiplication-Less Reparameterization
Haoran You† , Yipin Guo† , Yichao Fu† , Wei Zhou† , Huihong Shi† , Xiaofan Zhang∗
Souvik Kundu⋄ , Amir Yazdanbakhsh‡ , Yingyan (Celine) Lin†
†

Georgia Institute of Technology ⋄ Intel Labs ∗ Google ‡ Google DeepMind
†
{haoran.you, celine.lin}@gatech.edu, eic-lab@groups.gatech.edu
⋄
souvikk.kundu@intel.com, ∗‡ {xiaofanz, ayazdan}@google.com

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have shown impressive performance on language
tasks but face challenges when deployed on resource-constrained devices due to
their extensive parameters and reliance on dense multiplications, resulting in high
memory demands and latency bottlenecks. Shift-and-add reparameterization offers
a promising solution by replacing costly multiplications with hardware-friendly
primitives in both the attention and multi-layer perceptron (MLP) layers of an LLM.
However, current reparameterization techniques require training from scratch or
full parameter fine-tuning to restore accuracy, which is resource-intensive for LLMs.
To address this, we propose accelerating pretrained LLMs through post-training
shift-and-add reparameterization, creating efficient multiplication-free models,
dubbed ShiftAddLLM. Specifically, we quantize each weight matrix into binary
matrices paired with group-wise scaling factors. The associated multiplications
are reparameterized into (1) shifts between activations and scaling factors and (2)
queries and adds according to the binary matrices. To reduce accuracy loss, we
present a multi-objective optimization method to minimize both weight and output
activation reparameterization errors. Additionally, based on varying sensitivity
across layers to reparameterization, we develop an automated bit allocation strategy
to further reduce memory usage and latency. Experiments on five LLM families
and eight tasks consistently validate the effectiveness of ShiftAddLLM, achieving
average perplexity reductions of 5.6 and 22.7 points at comparable or lower latency
compared to the most competitive quantized LLMs at 3- and 2-bit precision,
respectively, and more than 80% memory and energy reductions over the original
LLMs. Codes and models are available at https://github.com/GATECH-EIC/
ShiftAddLLM.

1

Introduction

Pretrained LLMs have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in language understanding and
generation tasks [46, 47, 59, 3, 74, 57, 58, 2]. However, deploying these LLMs incurs significant
hardware demands, including high latency, memory, and energy consumption, especially on edge or
cloud GPU devices. The primary bottlenecks are their immense parameter sizes and the associated
multiplication operations. For instance, GPT-3, with 175 billion parameters, requires 350GB of
memory in FP16 format [38] and performs 1015 floating-point operations (FLOPs) for a single forward
pass [19]. Previous efforts to improve LLM efficiency have focused on pruning [40, 55, 20, 24, 44],
quantization [63, 38, 18, 48], and attention optimization [12, 71, 67]. However, these methods still
rely on costly multiplication operations in both the attention and MLP layers.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

