ANT: Adaptive Noise Schedule for Time Series
Diffusion Models
Seunghan Lee, Kibok Lee∗, Taeyoung Park∗
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yonsei University
{seunghan9613,kibok,tpark}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Advances in diffusion models for generative artificial intelligence have recently
propagated to the time series (TS) domain, demonstrating state-of-the-art performance on various tasks. However, prior works on TS diffusion models often borrow
the framework of existing works proposed in other domains without considering
the characteristics of TS data, leading to suboptimal performance. In this work, we
propose Adaptive Noise schedule for Time series diffusion models (ANT), which
automatically predetermines proper noise schedules for given TS datasets based
on their statistics representing non-stationarity. Our intuition is that an optimal
noise schedule should satisfy the following desiderata: 1) It linearly reduces the
non-stationarity of TS data so that all diffusion steps are equally meaningful, 2) the
data is corrupted to the random noise at the final step, and 3) the number of steps
is sufficiently large. The proposed method is practical for use in that it eliminates
the necessity of finding the optimal noise schedule with a small additional cost to
compute the statistics for given datasets, which can be done offline before training.
We validate the effectiveness of our method across various tasks, including TS
forecasting, refinement, and generation, on datasets from diverse domains. Code is
available at this repository: https://github.com/seunghan96/ANT.

1

Introduction

∗

Equal advising.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

TSDiff

TFT

CSDI

Transformer

DeepState

Diffusion models have demonstrated outstanding performance in generative tasks across diverse
domains, and various methods have been proposed in the time series (TS) domain to address a range
of tasks, including forecasting, imputation, and generation [26, 34, 38, 18, 30, 1]. However, recent
works primarily focus on determining which architecture to use for a diffusion model, overlooking
the useful information from the domain knowledge for other components, e.g., noise schedule.
Noise schedules control the noise added to the data across the
diffusion process, with the choice of schedule being crucial
for performance [4]. Several works have explored the design
of noise schedules [24, 21]; however, they do not consider the
+ANT
(Ours)
characteristics of data, resulting in suboptimal performance,
especially in the TS domain. Figure 1 shows the forecasting
performance of various models including our method applied
to TSDiff [15] on the M4 dataset [23]. Among the various
schedules, our method chooses a cosine schedule for the M4
dataset, yielding a 27.8% gain compared to a linear schedule Figure 1: Performance gain by ANT.
of TSDiff, which is a common schedule across TS datasets.
This highlights the importance of selecting an appropriate schedule for each dataset.
In this work, we propose Adaptive Noise schedule for Time series diffusion models (ANT), a method
for choosing an adaptive noise schedule based on the statistics representing non-stationarity of the
TS dataset. These statistics measure the patterns appeared in the TS, with TS from the real world
exhibiting high non-stationarity while white noise TS exhibiting low non-stationarity. We argue that
a desirable schedule should gradually transform non-stationary TS into stationary ones, in line with

