Optimal and Approximate
Adaptive Stochastic Quantization

Ran Ben Basat
UCL

Yaniv Ben-Itzhak
VMware Research

Michael Mitzenmacher
Harvard University

Shay Vargaftik
VMware Research

Abstract
Quantization is a fundamental optimization for many machine learning (ML) use
cases, including compressing gradients, model weights and activations, and datasets.
The most accurate form of quantization is adaptive, where the error is minimized
with respect to a given input rather than optimizing for the worst case. However,
optimal adaptive quantization methods are considered infeasible in terms of both
their runtime and memory requirements.
We revisit the Adaptive Stochastic Quantization (ASQ) problem and present algorithms that find optimal solutions with asymptotically improved time and space
complexities. Our experiments indicate that our algorithms may open the door
to using ASQ more extensively in a variety of ML applications. We also present
an even faster approximation algorithm for quantizing large inputs on the fly.

1

Introduction

Quantization is central to optimizing a large range of machine learning (ML) applications. It is often
used for compressing gradients to reduce network requirements in distributed and federated learning
(e.g., [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]); for quantization of datasets for faster training and inference (e.g., [7]); and
for reducing the memory footprint while accelerating the computation for large models’ inference
via post-training quantization (e.g., [8, 9]) and quantization-aware training (e.g., [10, 11]) of model
weights, activations and key-value (KV) caches [12].
A fundamental quantization method is stochastic quantization, where one quantizes an input vector
b ∈ Qd using a set Q ⊂ R of |Q| = s quantization values so that each entry is
X ∈ Rd to X
unbiased [13]. That is, each x ∈ X is (randomly) quantized to a value x
b ∈ Q such that E [b
x] = x.
Previous unbiased quantization works considered different approaches. Some are distributionagnostic, i.e., design the quantization without optimizing it for the specific input. For example, [1, 14,
15] set quantization values with respect to global properties such as the vector’s norm, or minimum
and maximum values.
Other works, e.g., [1, 3, 4, 16, 17, 18, 19], optimize for the worst case X by applying a reversible
transformation (e.g., the randomized Hadamard transform) before quantization that converts
√ it into
a vector X ′ with a controlled distribution (e.g., with max(X ′ ) − min(X ′ ) = Õ(∥X∥2 / d)). The
decoder then applies the inverse transformation on the quantized X ′ to obtain an estimate of X.
In contrast, some solutions use the fact that, in many cases, the inputs to be quantized have a significant
structure that can be leveraged to reduce the quantization error. For example, DNN gradients (which
are often compressed in distributed and federated learning applications to reduce bandwidth [20, 21])
were observed to follow LogNormal-like [22] or Normal-like [23, 24] distributions. As another
example, the distribution of deep activation layers appears to follow a sub-Weibull distribution [25].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

