In-Context Learning with Transformers: Softmax
Attention Adapts to Function Lipschitzness

Liam Collins∗
Chandra Family Department of ECE
The University of Texas at Austin
liamc@utexas.edu

Advait Parulekar∗
Chandra Family Department of ECE
The University of Texas at Austin
advaitp@utexas.edu

Aryan Mokhtari
Chandra Family Department of ECE
The University of Texas at Austin
mokhtari@austin.utexas.edu

Sujay Sanghavi
Chandra Family Department of ECE
The University of Texas at Austin
sanghavi@mail.utexas.edu

Sanjay Shakkottai
Chandra Family Department of ECE
The University of Texas at Austin
sanjay.shakkottai@utexas.edu

Abstract
A striking property of transformers is their ability to perform in-context learning
(ICL), a machine learning framework in which the learner is presented with a novel
context during inference implicitly through some data, and tasked with making a
prediction in that context. As such, that learner must adapt to the context without
additional training. We explore the role of softmax attention in an ICL setting
where each context encodes a regression task. We show that an attention unit
learns a window that it uses to implement a nearest-neighbors predictor adapted
to the landscape of the pretraining tasks. Specifically, we show that this window
widens with decreasing Lipschitzness and increasing label noise in the pretraining
tasks. We also show that on low-rank, linear problems, the attention unit learns to
project onto the appropriate subspace before inference. Further, we show that this
adaptivity relies crucially on the softmax activation and thus cannot be replicated
by the linear activation often studied in prior theoretical analyses.

1

Introduction

One of the most compelling behaviors of pretrained transformers is their ability to perform in-context
learning (ICL) [1]: determining how to solve an unseen task simply by making a forward pass
on input context tokens. Arguably the most critical innovation enabling ICL is the self-attention
mechanism [2], which maps each token in an input sequence to a new token using information from
all other tokens. A key design choice in this self-attention architecture is of the activation function
that controls how much “attention" a token pays to other tokens. Softmax-activated self-attention (i.e.
softmax attention) is most commonly, and successfully, used in practice [1, 3–6].
A natural approach to explain ICL adopted by the literature is to equate it with classical machine
learning algorithms, primarily variants of gradient descent (GD). Several works have shown that
∗

Co-first authors, listed in alphabetical order.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

