Learning symmetries via weight-sharing with doubly
stochastic tensors
Putri A. van der Linden1,∗
Alejandro García-Castellanos1
Sharvaree Vadgama1
2,3
1
Thijs P. Kuipers
Erik J. Bekkers
1
Amsterdam Machine Learning Lab, University of Amsterdam
2
Department of Biomedical Engineering and Physics, Amsterdam UMC, the Netherlands
3
Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Amsterdam UMC, the Netherlands

Abstract
Group equivariance has emerged as a valuable inductive bias in deep learning,
enhancing generalization, data efficiency, and robustness. Classically, group equivariant methods require the groups of interest to be known beforehand, which may
not be realistic for real-world data. Additionally, baking in fixed group equivariance
may impose overly restrictive constraints on model architecture. This highlights
the need for methods that can dynamically discover and apply symmetries as soft
constraints. For neural network architectures, equivariance is commonly achieved
through group transformations of a canonical weight tensor, resulting in weight
sharing over a given group G. In this work, we propose to learn such a weightsharing scheme by defining a collection of learnable doubly stochastic matrices
that act as soft permutation matrices on canonical weight tensors, which can take
regular group representations as a special case. This yields learnable kernel transformations that are jointly optimized with downstream tasks. We show that when
the dataset exhibits strong symmetries, the permutation matrices will converge to
regular group representations and our weight-sharing networks effectively become
regular group convolutions. Additionally, the flexibility of the method enables it to
effectively pick up on partial symmetries.

1

Introduction

Equivariance has emerged as a beneficial inductive bias in deep learning, enhancing performance
across a variety of tasks. By constraining the function space to adhere to specific symmetries, models
not only generalize better but also achieve greater parameter efficiency [8, 9]. For instance, integrating
group symmetry principles into generative models has enhanced sample generation and efficient
learning of data distributions, particularly benefiting areas such as vision and molecular generation
[12, 5].
The most well-known and transformative models in equivariant deep learning are convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) [18], which achieve translation equivariance by translating learnable kernels to
every position in the input. This design ensures that the weights defining the kernels are shared across
all translations, so that if the input is translated, the output features are correspondingly translated;
in other words, equivariance is achieved through weight sharing. In the seminal work by Cohen
and Welling [9], this concept was extended to generalize weight-sharing under any discrete group of
symmetries, resulting in the group-equivariant CNN (G-CNN). G-CNNs enable G-equivariance to a
broader range of symmetries, such as rotation, reflection, and scale [9, 4, 35, 29], thereby expanding
the applicability of CNNs to more complex data transformations.
∗

Corresponding author: <p.a.vanderlinden@uva.nl>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

