MotionTTT: 2D Test-Time-Training Motion
Estimation for 3D Motion Corrected MRI

1

Tobit Klug1,∗
Kun Wang1,∗
Stefan Ruschke2
Reinhard Heckel1,†
School of Computation, Information and Technology, Technical University of Munich
2
Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Klinikum rechts der Isar,
School of Medicine and Health, Technical University of Munich

Abstract
A major challenge of the long measurement times in magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), an important medical imaging technology, is that patients may move during
data acquisition. This leads to severe motion artifacts in the reconstructed images
and volumes. In this paper, we propose MotionTTT a deep learning-based testtime-training (TTT) method for accurate motion estimation. The key idea is that a
neural network trained for motion-free reconstruction has a small loss if there is no
motion, thus optimizing over motion parameters passed through the reconstruction
network enables accurate estimation of motion. The estimated motion parameters
enable to correct for the motion and to reconstruct accurate motion-corrected
images. Our method uses 2D reconstruction networks to estimate rigid motion
in 3D, and constitutes the first deep learning based method for 3D rigid motion
estimation towards 3D-motion-corrected MRI. We show that our method can
provably reconstruct motion parameters for a simple signal and neural network
model. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method for both retrospectively
simulated motion and prospectively collected real motion-corrupted data. Code is
available at https://github.com/MLI-lab/MRI_MotionTTT.

1

Introduction

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is one of the most important medical imaging technologies
due to its non-invasiveness and ability to foster diagnosis of a wide range of diseases. However, its
inherently long scan times make MRI susceptible to motion artifacts caused by patient movement
during the scan. Repeating scans corrupted by motion artifacts causes additional costs and reduces
patient through-put, and unnoticed artifacts can lead to misdiagnosis [2, 36].
We consider the problem of imaging under motion and propose an algorithmic solution to correct for
the motion based only on the measurements acquired during the scan, without requiring additional
hardware or changing the measurement process, or interrupting the clinical workflow.
A traditional approach to algorithmic motion reconstruction is to jointly estimate the motion parameters and motion-corrected reconstruction [7, 6, 15], but those methods are slow and can be inaccurate
in particular for severe motion.
Deep learning based approaches have been proposed to accelerate reconstruction and potentially
allow to account for more severe motion. However, most existing data driven methods correct for
in-plane motion within 2D MRI (see the review Spieker et al. [38]), as 3D data for training 3D models
is only scarcely available and computationally expensive to handle [18]. In practice, however, motion
occurs in 3D and not in-plane. Moreover, the duration of a scan in 3D is significantly longer than in
2D making motion more likely and thus motion reconstruction more important. Finally, data-driven
∗

Shared first authors in alphabetic order. † Corresponding author: reinhard.heckel@tum.de

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

