Few-Shot Diffusion Models Escape the Curse of
Dimensionality

Ruofeng Yang1 , Bo Jiang1 , Cheng Chen2 , Ruinan Jin34 ,
Baoxiang Wang34 , Shuai Li∗ 1
1
John Hopcroft Center for Computer Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
East China Normal University
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 4 Vector Institute
{wanshuiyin, bjiang, shuaili8}@sjtu.edu.cn,
chchen@sei.ecnu.edu.cn, {jinruinan,bxiangwang}@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
While diffusion models have demonstrated impressive performance, there is a
growing need for generating samples tailored to specific user-defined concepts.
The customized requirements promote the development of few-shot diffusion
models, which use limited nta target samples to fine-tune a pre-trained diffusion
model trained on ns source samples. Despite the empirical success, no theoretical
work specifically analyzes few-shot diffusion models. Moreover, the existing
results for diffusion models without a fine-tuning phase can not explain why fewshot models generate great samples due to the curse of dimensionality. In this
work, we analyze few-shot diffusion models under a linear structure distribution
with a latent dimension d. From the approximation perspective, we prove that
−1/2
e −2/d
few-shot models have a O(n
+ nta ) bound to approximate the target score
s
−2/d
function, which is better than nta results. From the optimization perspective, we
consider a latent Gaussian special case and prove that the optimization problem
has a closed-form minimizer. This means few-shot models can directly obtain an
approximated minimizer without a complex optimization process. Furthermore,
√
e
we also provide the accuracy bound O(1/n
ta + 1/ ns ) for the empirical solution,
which still has better dependence on nta compared to ns . The results of the realworld experiments also show that the models obtained by only fine-tuning the
encoder and decoder specific to the target distribution can produce novel images
with the target feature, which supports our theoretical results.

1

Introduction

In recent years, diffusion models have shown an excellent ability to generate diverse, high-quality
samples and show state-of-the-art performance in many areas with large-scale, standard datasets
(Rombach et al., 2022; Ho et al., 2022; Li et al., 2024a; Blattmann et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023b;
Liu et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024b). However, users often desire to generate samples that resemble
the ones they provide, such as images related to their families, daily lives, or specific items. These
user-provided samples are typically limited in number and do not appear frequently in large-scale
datasets. Consequently, training a diffusion model from scratch using such limited, personalized
samples often results in poor performance. To cater the customized requirements of users, few-shot
diffusion models attract much attention. Few-shot diffusion models aim to fine-tune a pre-trained
diffusion model using a limited amount of data (5 ∼ 10 samples), and they have recently delivered
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

