L-TTA: Lightweight Test-Time Adaptation Using a
Versatile Stem Layer

Jin Shin, Hyun Kim∗
Department of Electrical and Information Engineering and RCEIT
Seoul National University of Science and Technology
Seoul, Korea
{shinjin0103, hyunkim}@seoultech.ac.kr

Abstract
Test-time adaptation (TTA) is the most realistic methodology for adapting deep
learning models to the real world using only unlabeled data from the target domain. Numerous TTA studies in deep learning have aimed at minimizing entropy.
However, this necessitates forward/backward processes across the entire model
and is limited by the incapability to fully leverage data based solely on entropy.
This study presents a groundbreaking TTA solution that involves a departure from
the conventional focus on minimizing entropy. Our innovative approach uniquely
remodels the stem layer (i.e., the first layer) to emphasize minimizing a new learning criterion, namely, uncertainty. This method requires minimal involvement of
the model’s backbone, with only the stem layer participating in the TTA process.
This approach significantly reduces the memory required for training and enables
rapid adaptation to the target domain with minimal parameter updates. Moreover,
to maximize data leveraging, the stem layer applies a discrete wavelet transform to
the input features. It extracts multi-frequency domains and focuses on minimizing
their individual uncertainties. The proposed method integrated into ResNet-26
and ResNet-50 models demonstrates its robustness by achieving outstanding TTA
performance while using the least amount of memory compared to existing studies
on CIFAR-10-C, ImageNet-C, and Cityscapes-C benchmark datasets. The code is
available at https://github.com/janus103/L_TTA.

1

Introduction

From the inception of deep learning research, the problem of overfitting, where a model’s performance
becomes biased towards its training dataset, has been a persistent issue. Various solutions such as
normalization and regularization have been proposed to address these issues [26, 56, 30]. Additionally,
the need for trained models to adapt to the diversity of data distributions in the real world has also
emerged recently. This phenomenon, known as domain shift, has resulted in the proposal of various
scenarios and practical studies [63]. Scenarios for addressing model domain shifts are generally
introduced with the key themes of domain adaptation (DA) or domain generalization (DG). These are
differentiated by their capability to access the data in the target domain. To clarify, DA can access
all domains but can only use unlabeled data in the target domain [16, 64, 58, 2], whereas DG can
only train in the source domain [66, 34, 49, 35]. Recent source-free DA has indicated that accessing
source domain data is generally infeasible. It has proposed a scenario where the target domain adapts
using a teacher model that generates pseudo labels [48, 31, 12]. However, this approach involves the
significant cost of maintaining the large memory required for the teacher model.
∗

Corresponding author: Hyun Kim, email: hyunkim@seoultech.ac.kr

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

