Interactive Deep Clustering via Value Mining

Honglin Liu1 , Peng Hu1 , Changqing Zhang2,3 , Yunfan Li1∗, Xi Peng1,4∗
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
2
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
3
Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, Tianjin, China
4
State Key Laboratory of Hydraulics and Mountain River Engineering,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, China
{tristanliuhl, penghu.ml, yunfanli.gm, pengx.gm}@gmail.com,
zhangchangqing@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
In the absence of class priors, recent deep clustering methods resort to data augmentation and pseudo-labeling strategies to generate supervision signals. Though
achieved remarkable success, existing works struggle to discriminate hard samples
at cluster boundaries, mining which is particularly challenging due to their unreliable cluster assignments. To break such a performance bottleneck, we propose
incorporating user interaction to facilitate clustering instead of exhaustively mining
semantics from the data itself. To be exact, we present Interactive Deep Clustering
(IDC), a plug-and-play method designed to boost the performance of pre-trained
clustering models with minimal interaction overhead. More specifically, IDC first
quantitatively evaluates sample values based on hardness, representativeness, and
diversity, where the representativeness avoids selecting outliers and the diversity
prevents the selected samples from collapsing into a small number of clusters.
IDC then queries the cluster affiliations of high-value samples in a user-friendly
manner. Finally, it utilizes the user feedback to finetune the pre-trained clustering
model. Extensive experiments demonstrate that IDC could remarkably improve the
performance of various pre-trained clustering models, at the expense of low user
interaction costs. The code could be accessed at pengxi.me.

1

Introduction

Clustering aims at partitioning samples into semantically distinct groups. In recent years, deep
clustering methods [5, 30, 15, 41, 13], powered by the feature extraction ability of neural networks,
have excelled in handling large-scale and high-dimensional data across various domains, including
image segmentation [7], anomaly detection [25], medical analysis [1], bioinformatics [20], and so on.
To discover the semantical data partitions, the core of deep clustering lies in designing supervision
signals to extract discriminative information from data. To this end, early efforts reformulate the
self-representation property [31], hierarchical structure [43], or assignment distribution prior [42]
into differentiable objectives for model optimization. Recently, inspired by the success of contrastive
learning [6, 11], the community has shifted towards constructing self-supervision signals via data
augmentations, thus promoting the contrastive clustering paradigm [18, 46, 14]. The latest research
indicates that pseudo-labels could further enhance the clustering performance [38, 21, 29, 22].
Despite these merits, almost all deep clustering methods suffer from the performance ceiling due to
the limited information inherent in the data [19]. Particularly, this limitation is reflected in the poor
discrimination of hard boundary samples as shown in Fig. 1a. Consequently, it has a great chance to
∗

Corresponding Authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

