VidMan: Exploiting Implicit Dynamics from Video
Diffusion Model for Effective Robot Manipulation

Youpeng Wen1∗ , Junfan Lin2∗ , Yi Zhu3 , Jianhua Han3 ,
Hang Xu3 , Shen Zhao1† , Xiaodan Liang12†
1
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-Sen University,
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
Recent advancements utilizing large-scale video data for learning video generation
models demonstrate significant potential in understanding complex physical dynamics. It suggests the feasibility of leveraging diverse robot trajectory data to develop
a unified, dynamics-aware model to enhance robot manipulation. However, given
the relatively small amount of available robot data, directly fitting data without
considering the relationship between visual observations and actions could lead
to suboptimal data utilization. To this end, we propose VidMan (Video Diffusion
for Robot Manipulation), a novel framework that employs a two-stage training
mechanism inspired by dual-process theory from neuroscience to enhance stability
and improve data utilization efficiency. Specifically, in the first stage, VidMan is
pre-trained on the Open X-Embodiment dataset (OXE) for predicting future visual
trajectories in a video denoising diffusion manner, enabling the model to develop a
long horizontal awareness of the environment’s dynamics. In the second stage, a
flexible yet effective layer-wise self-attention adapter is introduced to transform
VidMan into an efficient inverse dynamics model that predicts action modulated by
the implicit dynamics knowledge via parameter sharing. Our VidMan framework
outperforms state-of-the-art baseline model GR-1 on the CALVIN benchmark,
achieving a 11.7% relative improvement, and demonstrates over 9% precision
gains on the OXE small-scale dataset. These results provide compelling evidence
that world models can significantly enhance the precision of robot action prediction.
Codes and models will be public.

1

Introduction

In the rapidly advancing field of robotics, accurately predicting and executing precise actions based
on sensory inputs is crucial. While traditional approaches [1–5] for robot manipulation often rely on
labor-intensive hand-engineered features and models prone to errors, data-driven methods [6–8] offer
promising solutions. However, the challenge lies in the difficulty and cost of acquiring high-quality
robotic data. Recent advancements [9–12], particularly those utilizing large-scale online video
data for learning a video generator, demonstrate significant potential in comprehending complex
physical dynamics of the real world. These models, trained on diverse datasets [13, 8], possess a
nuanced understanding of the world, suggesting the feasibility of amalgamating and leveraging varied
robot visual trajectory data [14–16] to develop a unified dynamics-aware model for enhanced robot
manipulation. Yet, achieving this unification poses challenges; merely fitting data without considering
the relationship between visual observations and actions could lead to suboptimal utilization of the
data. Hence, there is a pressing need to develop efficient training mechanism and model architecture
∗

Equal contribution, † Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

