K G YM : A Platform and Dataset to Benchmark Large

Language Models on Linux Kernel Crash Resolution

Alex Mathai 1∗, Chenxi Huang 2∗ , Petros Maniatis 3
Aleksandr Nogikh 4 , Franjo Ivančić 4 , Junfeng Yang 1 and Baishakhi Ray 1
1

Columbia University, 2 University of Minnesota, 3 Google Deepmind, 4 Google
{alexmathai, junfeng, rayb}@cs.columbia.edu
{maniatis, nogikh, ivancic}@google.com
{huan2677}@umn.edu

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) are consistently improving at increasingly realistic software engineering (SE) tasks. In real-world software stacks, significant
SE effort is spent developing foundational system software like the Linux kernel.
Unlike application-level software, a systems codebase like Linux is multilingual
(low-level C/Assembly/Bash/Rust); gigantic (>20 million lines); critical (impacting billions of devices worldwide), and highly concurrent (involving complex
multi-threading). To evaluate if machine learning (ML) models are useful while developing such large-scale systems-level software, we introduce K G YM (a platform)
and K B ENCH S YZ (a dataset). The K G YM2 platform provides a SE environment
for large-scale experiments on the Linux kernel, including compiling and running
kernels in parallel across several virtual machines, detecting operations and crashes,
inspecting logs, and querying and patching the code base. We use K G YM to facilitate evaluation on K B ENCH S YZ, a crash resolution benchmark drawn from
real-world Linux kernel bugs. An example bug in K B ENCH S YZ contains crashing
stack traces, a bug-reproducer file, a developer-written fix, and other associated
data. To understand current performance, we conduct baseline experiments by
prompting LLMs to resolve Linux kernel crashes. Our initial evaluations reveal
that the best performing LLM achieves 0.72% and 5.38% in the unassisted and
assisted (i.e., buggy files disclosed to the model) settings, respectively. These
results highlight the need for further research to enhance model performance in
SE tasks. Improving performance on K B ENCH S YZ requires models to master new
learning skills, including understanding the cause of crashes and repairing faults,
writing memory-safe and hardware-aware code, and understanding concurrency.
As a result, this work opens up multiple avenues of research at the intersection of
machine learning and systems software.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been significant progress in using code LLMs (like CodeWhisperer [Amazon,
2023] and CoPilot [GitHub, 2021]) in all stages of the software cycle, including development,
debugging, and testing. Despite being trained on large and complex open-source projects, LLMs are
∗
2

Denotes equal contribution
https://github.com/Alex-Mathai-98/kGym-Kernel-Playground

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

