DDR: Exploiting Deep Degradation Response as
Flexible Image Descriptor

Juncheng Wu1,3 , Zhangkai Ni1∗ , Hanli Wang1 , Wenhan Yang2 , Yuyin Zhou3 , Shiqi Wang4
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, Santa Cruz, USA
4
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
jwu418@ucsc.edu, {zkni, hanliwang}@tongji.edu.cn
yangwh@pcl.ac.cn, yzhou284@ucsc.edu, shiqwang@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Image deep features extracted by pre-trained networks are known to contain rich
and informative representations. In this paper, we present Deep Degradation Response (DDR), a method to quantify changes in image deep features under varying
degradation conditions. Specifically, our approach facilitates flexible and adaptive degradation, enabling the controlled synthesis of image degradation through
text-driven prompts. Extensive evaluations demonstrate the versatility of DDR as
an image descriptor, with strong correlations observed with key image attributes
such as complexity, colorfulness, sharpness, and overall quality. Moreover, we
demonstrate the efficacy of DDR across a spectrum of applications. It excels as
a blind image quality assessment metric, outperforming existing methodologies
across multiple datasets. Additionally, DDR serves as an effective unsupervised
learning objective in image restoration tasks, yielding notable advancements in
image deblurring and single-image super-resolution. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/eezkni/DDR

1

Introduction

Deep features extracted by pre-trained neural networks are well-known for their capacity to encode
rich and informative representations [1–4]. Extensive research efforts have aimed to quantify the
information encoded within these deep features for use as image descriptors. For example, the
distance between deep features has been employed as a metric for image quality assessment (IQA)
in various studies [3, 5, 6]. Additionally, researchers have studied differences between images by
comparing the distributions [2, 7] or frequency components [8, 9] of their deep features. Moreover,
the statistical properties of deep features have been found to correlate with the style and texture of
images in prior works [6, 10]. Recent research has also highlighted that the internal dissimilarity
between deep features at different image scales can serve as a potent visual fingerprint [11].
This paper delves into an intriguing and unexplored property of image deep features: their response to
degradation. Specifically, when subjecting images with diverse content and textures to various types
of degradation, such as blur, noise, or JPEG compression, the deep features of these images exhibit
varying degrees of change. This phenomenon is illustrated in Fig. 1, where Gaussian Blur is applied
to images. The degrees of changes in feature space reflect the deep feature response to specific
degradation. As shown in Tab. 1, a strong correlation exists between this response and the quality
scores of blurred images. We validate that the response of deep features to degradation effectively
∗

Corresponding author: Zhangkai Ni (zkni@tongji.edu.cn)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

