Graph Coarsening with Message-Passing Guarantees

Antonin Joly
IRISA, Rennes, France
antonin.joly@inria.fr

Nicolas Keriven
CNRS, IRISA, Rennes, France
nicolas.keriven@cnrs.fr

Abstract
Graph coarsening aims to reduce the size of a large graph while preserving some
of its key properties, which has been used in many applications to reduce computational load and memory footprint. For instance, in graph machine learning,
training Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) on coarsened graphs leads to drastic
savings in time and memory. However, GNNs rely on the Message-Passing (MP)
paradigm, and classical spectral preservation guarantees for graph coarsening do
not directly lead to theoretical guarantees when performing naive message-passing
on the coarsened graph.
In this work, we propose a new message-passing operation specific to coarsened
graphs, which exhibit theoretical guarantees on the preservation of the propagated
signal. Interestingly, and in a sharp departure from previous proposals, this operation on coarsened graphs is often oriented, even when the original graph is
undirected. We conduct node classification tasks on synthetic and real data and
observe improved results compared to performing naive message-passing on the
coarsened graph.

1

Introduction

In recent years, several applications in data science and machine learning have produced large-scale
graph data [20, 5]. For instance, online social networks [13] or recommender systems [40] routinely
produce graphs with millions of nodes or more. To handle such massive graphs, researchers have
developed general-purpose graph reduction methods [4], such as graph coarsening [32, 7]. It
consists in producing a small graph from a large graph while retaining some of its key properties, and
starts to play an increasingly prominent role in machine learning applications [7].
Graph Neural Networks. Machine Learning on graphs is now largely done by Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs) [37, 27, 5]. GNNs are deep architectures on graph that rely on the MessagePassing paradigm [16]: at each layer, the representation Hil ∈ Rdl of each node 1 ≤ i ≤ N , is
updated by aggregating and transforming the representations of its neighbours at the previous layer
{Hjl−1 }j∈N (i) , where N (i) is the neighborhood of i. In most examples, this aggregation can be
represented as a multiplication of the node representation matrix H l−1 ∈ RN ×dl−1 by a propagation
matrix S ∈ RN ×N related to the graph structure, followed by a fully connected transformation. That
is, starting with initial node features H 0 , the GNN Φθ outputs after k layers:

H l = σ SH l−1 θl , Φθ (H 0 , S) = H k ,
(1)
where σ is an activation function applied element-wise (often ReLU), θl ∈ Rdl−1 ×dl are learned
parameters and θ = {θ1 , . . . , θk }. We emphasize here the dependency of the GNN on the propagation
matrix S. Classical choices include mean aggregation S = D−1 A or the normalized adjacency
1
1
S = D− 2 AD− 2 , with A the adjacency matrix of the graph and D the diagonal matrix of degrees.
When adding self-loops to A, the latter corresponds for instance to the classical GCNconv layer [27].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

