Wasserstein Gradient Boosting: A Framework for
Distribution-Valued Supervised Learning

Takuo Matsubara
The University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, EH9 3JZ
takuo.matsubara@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Gradient boosting is a sequential ensemble method that fits a new weaker learner
to pseudo residuals at each iteration. We propose Wasserstein gradient boosting, a
novel extension of gradient boosting, which fits a new weak learner to alternative
pseudo residuals that are Wasserstein gradients of loss functionals of probability
distributions assigned at each input. It solves distribution-valued supervised learning, where the output values of the training dataset are probability distributions.
In classification and regression, a model typically returns, for each input, a point
estimate of a parameter of a noise distribution specified for a response variable,
such as the class probability parameter of a categorical distribution specified for a
response label. A main application of Wasserstein gradient boosting in this paper
is tree-based evidential learning, which returns a distributional estimate of the
response parameter for each input. We empirically demonstrate the competitive
performance of the probabilistic prediction by Wasserstein gradient boosting in
comparison with existing uncertainty quantification methods.

1

Introduction

Gradient boosting is a celebrated machine learning algorithm that has achieved considerable success
with tabular data [1]. Gradient boosting has been extensively used for point forecasts and probabilistic
classification, yet a relatively small number of studies have been concerned with the predictive
uncertainty of gradient boosting. Predictive uncertainty of machine learning models plays a growing
role in today’s real-world production systems [2]. It is vital for safety-critical systems, such as
medical diagnoses [3] and autonomous driving [4], to assess the potential risk of their actions that
partially or entirely rely on predictions from their models. Gradient boosting has already been applied
in a diverse range of real-world applications, including click prediction [5], ranking systems [6],
scientific discovery [7], and data competition [8]. There is a pressing need for methodology to harness
the power of gradient boosting to predictive uncertainty quantification.
In classification and regression, we typically specify a noise distribution p(y | θ) of a response
variable y and use a model to return a point estimate θ(x) of the response parameter for each input x.
In recent years, the importance of capturing uncertainty in the model output θ(x) has increasingly
been emphasised [2]. A variety of approaches have been proposed to obtain a distributional estimate
p(θ | x) of the response parameter for each input x [e.g. 9, 10, 11]. For example, Bayesian neural
networks (BNNs) quantify uncertainty in network weights and propagate it to the space of network
outputs. Marginalising the predictive distribution p(y | θ) over the distributional estimate p(θ | x)
has been demonstrated to confer enhanced predictive accuracy and robustness against adversarial
attacks [11]. Furthermore, the dispersion of the distributional estimate has been used as a powerful
indicator for out-of-distribution (OOD) detection [12].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

