Learning Distinguishable Trajectory Representation
with Contrastive Loss
Tianxu Li1,2
1

Kun Zhu1,2,∗ Juan Li1

Yang Zhang1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
China
2
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization
{tianxuli, zhukun, yangzhang, juanli}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Policy network parameter sharing is a commonly used technique in advanced deep
multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) algorithms to improve learning efficiency by reducing the number of policy parameters and sharing experiences among
agents. Nevertheless, agents that share the policy parameters tend to learn similar
behaviors. To encourage multi-agent diversity, prior works typically maximize
the mutual information between trajectories and agent identities using variational
inference. However, this category of methods easily leads to inefficient exploration
due to limited trajectory visitations. To resolve this limitation, inspired by the
learning of pre-trained models, in this paper, we propose a novel Contrastive Trajectory Representation (CTR) method based on learning distinguishable trajectory
representations to encourage multi-agent diversity. Specifically, CTR maps the
trajectory of an agent into a latent trajectory representation space by an encoder
and an autoregressive model. To achieve the distinguishability among trajectory
representations of different agents, we introduce contrastive learning to maximize
the mutual information between the trajectory representations and learnable identity
representations of different agents. We implement CTR on top of QMIX and evaluate its performance in various cooperative multi-agent tasks. The empirical results
demonstrate that our proposed CTR yields significant performance improvement
over the state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) can provide effective collaboration among
agents and has shown promise for solving real-world multi-agent tasks, such as robot swarms
[Hüttenrauch et al., 2017], autonomous driving [Bhalla et al., 2020, Dinneweth et al., 2022], and
wireless communications [Li et al., 2022b]. However, effective collaboration in complex multi-agent
tasks still remains a challenge for MARL. One of the key issues is that the joint action-observation
space grows exponentially in size with the number of agents, which highlights an urgent demand for
the scalability of MARL algorithms.
To address the scalability issue, learning decentralized policies for agents has been widely adopted.
This allows agents to make action decisions based on their partial observations. However, learning a
private decentralized policy network for each agent in MARL may require training a large amount of
policy network parameters, resulting in inefficient learning. To enhance learning efficiency, many
advanced MARL algorithms adopt the parameter sharing technique, including policy gradients [Lowe
et al., 2017, Ma et al., 2021, Wang et al., 2020d, Ndousse et al., 2021, Zhang et al., 2021] and
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

