Graph Classification via Reference Distribution
Learning: Theory and Practice

Zixiao Wang
Jicong Fan∗
School of Data Science
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
zixiaowang@link.cuhk.edu.cn
fanjicong@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph classification is a challenging problem owing to the difficulty in quantifying the similarity between graphs or representing graphs as vectors, though there
have been a few methods using graph kernels or graph neural networks (GNNs).
Graph kernels often suffer from computational costs and manual feature engineering, while GNNs commonly utilize global pooling operations, risking the loss of
structural or semantic information. This work introduces Graph Reference Distribution Learning (GRDL), an efficient and accurate graph classification method.
GRDL treats each graph’s latent node embeddings given by GNN layers as a
discrete distribution, enabling direct classification without global pooling, based
on maximum mean discrepancy to adaptively learned reference distributions. To
fully understand this new model (the existing theories do not apply) and guide
its configuration (e.g., network architecture, references’ sizes, number, and regularization) for practical use, we derive generalization error bounds for GRDL
and verify them numerically. More importantly, our theoretical and numerical
results both show that GRDL has a stronger generalization ability than GNNs
with global pooling operations. Experiments on moderate-scale and large-scale
graph datasets show the superiority of GRDL over the state-of-the-art, emphasizing
its remarkable efficiency, being at least 10 times faster than leading competitors
in both training and inference stages. The source code of GRDL is available at
https://github.com/jicongfan/GRDL-Graph-Classification.

1

Introduction

Graphs serve as versatile models across diverse domains, such as social networks [Wang et al., 2018],
biological compounds [Jumper et al., 2021], and the brain [Ktena et al., 2017]. There has been
considerable interest in developing learning algorithms for graphs, such as graph kernels [Gärtner
et al., 2003, Shervashidze et al., 2011, Chen et al., 2022b] and graph neural networks (GNNs) [Kipf
and Welling, 2016, Defferrard et al., 2016, Gilmer et al., 2017]. GNNs have emerged as powerful
tools, showcasing state-of-the-art performance in various graph prediction tasks [Veličković et al.,
2017, Gilmer et al., 2017, Hamilton et al., 2017, Xu et al., 2018, Sun et al., 2019, You et al., 2021,
Ying et al., 2021, Liu et al., 2022b, Chen et al., 2022a, Xiao et al., 2022, Sun et al., 2023, Sun and Fan,
2024, Sun et al., 2024]. Despite the evident success of GNNs in numerous graph-related applications,
their potential remains underutilized, particularly in the domain of graph-level classification.
Current GNNs designed for graph classification commonly consist of two components: the embedding
of node features through message passing [Gilmer et al., 2017] and subsequent aggregation by
some permutation invariant global pooling (also called readout) operations [Xu et al., 2018]. The
primary purpose of pooling is to transform a graph’s node embeddings, a matrix, into a single vector.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

