Exclusively Penalized Q-learning for Offline
Reinforcement Learning

Junghyuk Yeom∗

Yonghyeon Jo∗ Jungmo Kim Sanghyeon Lee Seungyul Han†
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence
UNIST
Ulsan, South Korea 44919
{junghyukyum,yonghyeonjo,jmkim22,sanghyeon,syhan}@unist.ac.kr

Abstract
Constraint-based offline reinforcement learning (RL) involves policy constraints or
imposing penalties on the value function to mitigate overestimation errors caused
by distributional shift. This paper focuses on a limitation in existing offline RL
methods with penalized value function, indicating the potential for underestimation
bias due to unnecessary bias introduced in the value function. To address this
concern, we propose Exclusively Penalized Q-learning (EPQ), which reduces
estimation bias in the value function by selectively penalizing states that are prone
to inducing estimation errors. Numerical results show that our method significantly
reduces underestimation bias and improves performance in various offline control
tasks compared to other offline RL methods.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is gaining significant attention for solving complex Markov decision
process (MDP) tasks. Traditionally, online RL develops advanced decision-making strategies through
continuous interaction with environments [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. However, in real-world scenarios,
interacting with the environment can be costly, particularly in high-risk environments like disaster
situations, where obtaining sufficient data for learning is challenging [7, 8]. In such setups, the need
for exploration [9, 10, 11, 12] to discover optimal strategies often incurs additional costs, as agents
must try various actions, some of which may be inefficient or risky [13, 14]. This highlights the
significance of research on offline setups, where policies are learned using pre-collected data without
any direct interaction with the environment [15, 16]. In offline setups, policy actions not present in
the data may introduce extrapolation errors, disrupting accurate value estimation by causing a large
overestimation error in the value function, known as the distributional shift problem [17].
To address the distributional shift problem, Fujimoto et al. [17] proposes batch-constrained Q-learning
(BCQ), assuming that policy actions are selected from the dataset only. Ensuring optimal convergence
of both the policy and value function under batch-constrained RL setups [17], BCQ demonstrates
stable learning in offline setups and outperforms behavior cloning (BC) techniques [18], which simply
mimic actions from the dataset. However, the policy constraint of BCQ strongly limits the policy
space, prompting further research to find improved policies by relaxing constraints based on the
support of the policy using metrics like maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) [19] or Kullback–Leibler
(KL) divergence [20]. While these methods moderately relax policy restrictions, the issue of limited
policies persists. Thus, instead of constraining the policy space directly, alternative offline RL
methods have been proposed to reduce overestimation bias based on penalized Q-functions [21, 22].
Conservative Q-learning (CQL) [21], a representative offline RL algorithm using Q-penalty, penalizes
∗ indicates equal contribution and † indicates the corresponding author: Seungyul Han.
Special thanks to Whiyoung Jung from LG AI Research for providing experimental data used in this work.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

