Gorilla: Large Language Model Connected with
Massive APIs
Shishir G. Patil1∗

Tianjun Zhang1∗
1

UC Berkeley

2

Xin Wang2

Joseph E. Gonzalez1

Microsoft Research

shishirpatil@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have seen an impressive wave of advances, with
models now excelling in a variety of tasks, such as mathematical reasoning and
program synthesis. However, their potential to effectively use tools via API calls
remains unfulfilled. This is a challenging task even for today’s state-of-the-art
LLMs such as GPT-4 largely due to their unawareness of what APIs are available
and how to use them in a frequently updated tool set. We develop Gorilla, a
finetuned LLaMA model that surpasses the performance of GPT-4 on writing API
calls. Trained with the novel Retriever Aware Training (RAT), when combined
with a document retriever, Gorilla demonstrates a strong capability to adapt to
test-time document changes, allowing flexible user updates or version changes.
It also substantially mitigates the issue of hallucination, commonly encountered
when prompting LLMs directly. To evaluate the model’s ability, we introduce
APIBench, a comprehensive dataset consisting of HuggingFace, TorchHub, and
TensorHub APIs. The successful integration of the retrieval system with Gorilla
demonstrates the potential for LLMs to use tools more accurately, keep up with
frequently updated documentation, and consequently increase the reliability and
applicability of their outputs. Gorilla’s code, model, data, and demo are available
at: https://gorilla.cs.berkeley.edu

1

Introduction

The use of APIs and Large Language Models [10, 5, 31, 6, 27, 28] has changed what it means to
program. Previously, building complex machine learning software and systems required extensive
time and specialized skills. Now with tools like the HuggingFace API, an engineer can set up a
deep learning pipeline with a few lines of code. Instead of searching through StackOverflow and
documentation, developers can ask models like GPT for solutions and receive immediate, actionable
code with docstrings. However, using off-the-shelf LLMs to generate API calls remains unsolved
because there are millions of available APIs which are frequently updated.
We connect LLM’s and massive API’s with Gorilla, a system which takes an instruction, for example
“build me a classifier for medical images”, and provides the corresponding API call and relevant
packages, along with a step-by-step explanation of the pipeline. Gorilla uses self-instruct, fine-tuning,
and retrieval to enable LLMs to accurately select from a large, overlapping, and changing set tools
expressed using their APIs and API documentation. Further, our novel retriever-aware training (RAT)
enables the model to adapt to test-time changes of APIs such as evolution in versions and arguments.
With the development of API generation methods comes a question of how to evaluate, as many APIs
will have overlapping functionality with nuanced limitations and constraints. Thus, we construct
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

