A Unifying Normative Framework of Decision
Confidence
Amelia M. Johnson
Department of Computer Science
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
ameliamj@uw.edu

Micheal A. Buice
Allen Institute
Seattle, WA 98109
michaelbu@alleninstitute.org

Koosha Khalvati
Allen Institute
Seattle, WA 98109
koosha.khalvati@alleninstitute.org

Abstract
Self-assessment of one’s choices, i.e., confidence, is the topic of many decision
neuroscience studies. Computational models of confidence, however, are limited to
specific scenarios such as between choices with the same value. Here we present
a normative framework for modeling decision confidence that is generalizable to
various tasks and experimental setups. We further drive the implications of our
model from both theoretical and experimental points of view. Specifically, we show
that our model maps to the planning as an inference framework where the objective
function is maximizing the gained reward and information entropy of the policy.
Moreover, we validate our model on two different psychophysics experiments
and show its superiority over other approaches in explaining subjects’ confidence
reports 1 .

1

Introduction

Self-assessment of one’s choices, i.e., decision confidence, plays a key role in long-term decisionmaking and learning [1]. This assessment helps the decision maker improve their model of the
outside world and consequently gain higher utility in the future [2, 3]. Due to this critical role,
confidence has been the topic of many theoretical and experimental decision neuroscience studies.
However, primarily focused on in perceptual decision-making experiments, confidence is mainly
mathematically defined only for scenarios where different choices have the same potential reward. In
these situations, based on some perceptual cues, the goal is to pick the “correct” choice instead of all
other equally “incorrect” ones. Consequently, confidence is defined as the probability of choosing
the correct option [1, 4]. In these setups, perception confidence, i.e., “what is the probability that my
observation was correct?” and decision confidence, “what is the probability that I made the correct
decision?” are inseparable because the choices do not differ in value.
In the real world, though, different actions lead to various potential rewards, and this variation in
reward could influence confidence in decisions, differentiating it from perception confidence. A
rustling sound is more likely to be because of the wind rather than a predator approaching. Still,
everyone becomes more vigilant when hearing that sound as one of the possibilities is potentially
life-threatening despite being unlikely. Moreover, everyone would be confident about the rationality
1

The majority of this research was done while the first author was an intern at the Allen Institute.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

