GACL: Exemplar-Free Generalized Analytic
Continual Learning

Huiping Zhuang1∗ Yizhu Chen1∗ Di Fang1 Run He1 Kai Tong1
Hongxin Wei2 Ziqian Zeng1† Cen Chen1,3,4†
1
South China University of Technology, China
2
Southern University of Science and Technology, China
3
Shenzhen Institute, Hunan University, China
4
Pazhou Lab, China

Abstract
Class incremental learning (CIL) trains a network on sequential tasks with separated categories in each task but suffers from catastrophic forgetting, where models
quickly lose previously learned knowledge when acquiring new tasks. The generalized CIL (GCIL) aims to address the CIL problem in a more real-world scenario,
where incoming data have mixed data categories and unknown sample size distribution. Existing attempts for the GCIL either have poor performance or invade
data privacy by saving exemplars. In this paper, we propose a new exemplarfree GCIL technique named generalized analytic continual learning (GACL). The
GACL adopts analytic learning (a gradient-free training technique) and delivers an
analytical (i.e., closed-form) solution to the GCIL scenario. This solution is derived
via decomposing the incoming data into exposed and unexposed classes, thereby
attaining a weight-invariant property, a rare yet valuable property supporting an
equivalence between incremental learning and its joint training. Such an equivalence is crucial in GCIL settings as data distributions among different tasks no
longer pose challenges to adopting our GACL. Theoretically, this equivalence property is validated through matrix analysis tools. Empirically, we conduct extensive
experiments where, compared with existing GCIL methods, our GACL exhibits a
consistently leading performance across various datasets and GCIL settings. Source
code is available at https://github.com/CHEN-YIZHU/GACL.

1

Introduction

Class incremental learning (CIL) [1], an important form of continual learning, aims to effectively
tune an off-the-shelf network on incoming new datasets, with data excluding various categories from
its previous states. The CIL has gained significant traction due to its ability to refine learned models
for new and unfamiliar data classes, eliminating the need to start the training process from scratch.
This elimination of retraining saves valuable computational resources, which is especially important
in the era of pre-trained models that have absorbed a massive amount of data.
One significant challenge in CIL is catastrophic forgetting [2, 3], which causes trained models
to lose existing knowledge when gaining new information quickly. This can be attributed to the
fundamental property of gradient-based iterative algorithms that impose a task-recency bias, i.e.,
predictions favor recently updated categories [4]. To the authors’ knowledge, no solutions exist for
these gradient-trained CIL models to fully tackle catastrophic forgetting.
∗
†

These authors contribute equally.
Corresponding authors: Ziqian Zeng (zqzeng@scut.edu.cn) and Cen Chen (chencen@scut.edu.cn).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

