Divide-and-Conquer Meets Consensus:
Unleashing the Power of Functions in Code Generation

Jingchang Chen∗

Hongxuan Tang∗

Zheng Chu

Harbin Institute of Technology

Harbin Institute of Technology

Harbin Institute of Technology

jcchen@ir.hit.edu.cn

jeffswt@outlook.com

zchu@ir.hit.edu.cn

Qianglong Chen†

Zekun Wang

Zhejiang University

Harbin Institute of Technology

chenqianglong.ai@gmail.com

zkwang@ir.hit.edu.cn

Ming Liu†

Bing Qin

Harbin Institute of Technology

Harbin Institute of Technology

mliu@ir.hit.edu.cn

qbin@ir.hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite recent progress made by large language models in code generation, they
still struggle with programs that meet complex requirements. Recent work utilizes plan-and-solve decomposition to decrease the complexity and leverage selftests to refine the generated program. Yet, planning deep-inside requirements
in advance can be challenging, and the tests need to be accurate to accomplish
self-improvement. To this end, we propose F UN C ODER, a code generation framework incorporating the divide-and-conquer strategy with functional consensus.
Specifically, F UN C ODER recursively branches off sub-functions as smaller goals
during code generation, represented by a tree hierarchy. These sub-functions are
then composited to attain more complex objectives. Additionally, we designate
functions via a consensus formed by identifying similarities in program behavior,
mitigating error propagation. F UN C ODER outperforms state-of-the-art methods by
+9.8% on average in HumanEval, MBPP, xCodeEval and MATH with GPT-3.5 and
GPT-4. Moreover, our method demonstrates superiority on smaller models: With
F UN C ODER, StableCode3b surpasses GPT-3.5 by +18.6% and achieves 97.7% of
GPT-4’s performance on HumanEval. Further analysis reveals that our proposed
dynamic function decomposition is capable of handling complex requirements, and
the functional consensus prevails over self-testing in correctness evaluation.

1

Introduction

Over the past few years, large language models have been observed to attain significant advancements
in coding capabilities (OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023). Meanwhile, models designed specifically
for coding tasks have also been introduced (Rozière et al., 2023; Lozhkov et al., 2024; Pinnaparaju
et al., 2024). Although LLMs can proficiently generate simple code snippets, they suffer from a
decline in performance as code requirements become complicated.
Numerous efforts have been made to tackle this complexity. The two-stage methods (Jiang et al.,
2023; Zelikman et al., 2023) employ the plan-and-solve strategy, which first generates a draft outline
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding Authors: Ming Liu, Qianglong Chen.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

