AUCSeg: AUC-oriented Pixel-level Long-tail
Semantic Segmentation
Boyu Han1,2
Qianqian Xu1,3∗
Zhiyong Yang2
Shilong Bao2
1,2
2
Peisong Wen
Yangbangyan Jiang
Qingming Huang2,1,4∗
1

Key Lab. of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
2
School of Computer Science and Tech., University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
4
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, CAS
{hanboyu23z,xuqianqian,wenpeisong20z}@ict.ac.cn,
{yangzhiyong21,baoshilong,jiangyangbangyan,qmhuang}@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
The Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) is a well-known metric for evaluating
instance-level long-tail learning problems. In the past two decades, many AUC
optimization methods have been proposed to improve model performance under
long-tail distributions. In this paper, we explore AUC optimization methods in the
context of pixel-level long-tail semantic segmentation, a much more complicated
scenario. This task introduces two major challenges for AUC optimization techniques. On one hand, AUC optimization in a pixel-level task involves complex
coupling across loss terms, with structured inner-image and pairwise inter-image
dependencies, complicating theoretical analysis. On the other hand, we find that
mini-batch estimation of AUC loss in this case requires a larger batch size, resulting in an unaffordable space complexity. To address these issues, we develop
a pixel-level AUC loss function and conduct a dependency-graph-based theoretical analysis of the algorithm’s generalization ability. Additionally, we design a
Tail-Classes Memory Bank (T-Memory Bank) to manage the significant memory
demand. Finally, comprehensive experiments across various benchmarks confirm the effectiveness of our proposed AUCSeg method. The code is available at
https://github.com/boyuh/AUCSeg.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation aims to categorize each pixel within an image into a specific class, which
is a fundamental task in image processing and computer vision [33, 51, 75]. Over the past decades,
substantial efforts [58, 23, 43, 96] have advanced the field of semantic segmentation. The mainstream
paradigm is to develop innovative network architectures that encode more discriminative features
for dense pixel-level classifications. Typical backbones include CNN-based [58, 14, 80] and newly
emerging Transformer-based methods [108, 83, 65, 15, 32], which have achieved the state-of-the-art
(SOTA) performance. Beyond this direction, researchers [24, 66, 48, 41] have recently realized
the Pixel-level Long-tail issue in Semantic Segmentation (PLSS), as shown at the top of Figure 1.
Similar to the flaws of traditional long-tail problems, the major classes will dominate the model
learning process, causing the model to overlook the segmentation of minority classes in an image.
Several remedies have been proposed to alleviate this [49, 61, 10, 56, 104, 92, 78]. For example,
[77] introduces a category-wise variation technique inversely proportional to distribution to achieve
balanced segmentation; [66] introduces a sequence-based generative adversarial network for imbalanced medical image segmentation, and [41] develops a re-weighting scheme for semi-supervised
segmentation.
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

