Activating Self-Attention
for Multi-Scene Absolute Pose Regression

Miso Lee
Sungkyunkwan University
dlalth557@skku.edu

Jihwan Kim
Sungkyunkwan University
damien@skku.edu

Jae-Pil Heo†
Sungkyunkwan University
jaepilheo@skku.edu

Abstract
Multi-scene absolute pose regression addresses the demand for fast and memoryefficient camera pose estimation across various real-world environments. Nowadays, transformer-based model has been devised to regress the camera pose directly
in multi-scenes. Despite its potential, transformer encoders are underutilized due
to the collapsed self-attention map, having low representation capacity. This work
highlights the problem and investigates it from a new perspective: distortion of
query-key embedding space. Based on the statistical analysis, we reveal that queries
and keys are mapped in completely different spaces while only a few keys are
blended into the query region. This leads to the collapse of the self-attention map
as all queries are considered similar to those few keys. Therefore, we propose
simple but effective solutions to activate self-attention. Concretely, we present an
auxiliary loss that aligns queries and keys, preventing the distortion of query-key
space and encouraging the model to find global relations by self-attention. In
addition, the fixed sinusoidal positional encoding is adopted instead of undertrained
learnable one to reflect appropriate positional clues into the inputs of self-attention.
As a result, our approach resolves the aforementioned problem effectively, thus
outperforming existing methods in both outdoor and indoor scenes.

1

Introduction

Camera pose estimation is a fundamental and essential computer vision task, adopted in numerous
applications such as augmented reality and autonomous driving. Geometric pipelines [1–6] with 2D
and 3D data have been a mainstream with high accuracy. After extracting features and matching
2D-3D correspondences, camera pose is approximated via Perspective-n-Points (PnP) algorithm and
RANSAC [7]. However, there still remains several challenges for real-world applications, including
high computational cost and a huge amount of 3D point cloud.
Absolute Pose Regression (APR) tackles these issues by directly estimating the 6-DoF pose from a
single RGB image in an end-to-end manner. First introduced by Kendall et al. [8], subsequent APR
methods [9–18] have been devised based on convolutional neural networks (CNN). However, they
still demand multiple models and individual optimization to be applied in real-world multi-scene
scenarios. In this regard, Multi-Scene Absolute Pose Regression (MS-APR) has emerged to satisfy
the needs of speed and memory efficiency across multiple scenes [19]. MSTransformer [20] pioneers
a streamlined one-stage MS-APR approach with transformer architecture. It leverages the transformer
decoder not only to improve memory efficiency but also to enhance accuracy significantly.
However, we point out that the learning capacity of transformer encoders is underutilized. As shown
in Tab. 1, MSTransformer’s encoder self-attention modules do not significantly improve or even
degrade performance. Although we discovered low-rank, collapsed attention maps, which are known
†

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

