Small coresets via negative dependence:
DPPs, linear statistics, and concentration
Rémi Bardenet ∗
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille,
UMR 9189 – CRIStAL,
F-59000 Lille, France
remi.bardenet@cnrs.fr
Hugo Simon-Onfroy ∗
Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, Irfu
Département de Physique des Particules
91191, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
hugo.simon@cea.fr

Subhroshekhar Ghosh ∗
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
10 Lower Kent Ridge Road, 119076, Singapore
subhrowork@gmail.com
Hoang Son Tran ∗ †
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
10 Lower Kent Ridge Road, 119076, Singapore
hoangson.tran@u.nus.edu

Abstract
Determinantal point processes (DPPs) are random configurations of points with
tunable negative dependence. Because sampling is tractable, DPPs are natural candidates for subsampling tasks, such as minibatch selection or coreset construction.
A coreset is a subset of a (large) training set, such that minimizing an empirical
loss averaged over the coreset is a controlled replacement for the intractable minimization of the original empirical loss. Typically, the control takes the form of
a guarantee that the average loss over the coreset approximates the total loss uniformly across the parameter space. Recent work has provided significant empirical
support in favor of using DPPs to build randomized coresets, coupled with interesting theoretical results that are suggestive but leave some key questions unanswered.
In particular, the central question of whether the cardinality of a DPP-based coreset
is fundamentally smaller than one based on independent sampling remained open.
In this paper, we answer this question in the affirmative, demonstrating that DPPs
can provably outperform independently drawn coresets. In this vein, we contribute
a conceptual understanding of coreset loss as a linear statistic of the (random)
coreset. We leverage this structural observation to connect the coresets problem to
a more general problem of concentration phenomena for linear statistics of DPPs,
wherein we obtain effective concentration inequalities that extend well-beyond
the state-of-the-art, encompassing general non-projection, even non-symmetric
kernels. The latter have been recently shown to be of interest in machine learning
beyond coresets, but come with a limited theoretical toolbox, to the extension
of which our result contributes. Finally, we are also able to address the coresets
problem for vector-valued objective functions, a novelty in the coresets literature.

1

Introduction

Let X = {xi | i ∈ J1, nK} be a set of n points in a Euclidean space, called the data set. Let F be a
set of nonnegative functions on X , called queries. Many classical learning problems, supervised or
∗
†

The authors are listed in alphabetical order by their surnames
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

