CycleNet: Enhancing Time Series Forecasting through
Modeling Periodic Patterns

Shengsheng Lin1 , Weiwei Lin1,2,∗, Xinyi Hu3 , Wentai Wu4 , Ruichao Mo1 , Haocheng Zhong1
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
College of Information Science and Technology, Jinan University, China
cslinshengsheng@mail.scut.edu.cn, linww@scut.edu.cn, xyhu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk,
wentaiwu@jnu.edu.cn, {cs_moruichao, cshczhong}@mail.scut.edu.cn

Abstract
The stable periodic patterns present in time series data serve as the foundation
for conducting long-horizon forecasts. In this paper, we pioneer the exploration
of explicitly modeling this periodicity to enhance the performance of models
in long-term time series forecasting (LTSF) tasks. Specifically, we introduce
the Residual Cycle Forecasting (RCF) technique, which utilizes learnable recurrent cycles to model the inherent periodic patterns within sequences, and then
performs predictions on the residual components of the modeled cycles. Combining RCF with a Linear layer or a shallow MLP forms the simple yet powerful
method proposed in this paper, called CycleNet. CycleNet achieves state-of-theart prediction accuracy in multiple domains including electricity, weather, and
energy, while offering significant efficiency advantages by reducing over 90%
of the required parameter quantity. Furthermore, as a novel plug-and-play technique, the RCF can also significantly improve the prediction accuracy of existing
models, including PatchTST and iTransformer. The source code is available at:
https://github.com/ACAT-SCUT/CycleNet.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting (TSF) plays a crucial role in various domains such as weather forecasting,
transportation, and energy management, providing insights for early warnings and facilitating proactive planning. Particularly, accurate predictions over long horizons (e.g., spanning several days
or months) offer increased convenience, referred to as Long-term Time Series Forecasting (LTSF)
[59, 56, 17, 42, 6]. However, the principle enabling long-horizon prediction lies in understanding
the inherent periodicity within the data [32]. Unlike short-term forecasting, long-term predictions
cannot rely solely on recent temporal information (including means, trends, etc.). For instance, a
user’s electricity consumption thirty days ahead not only correlates with their consumption patterns
in the past few days.
In such cases, long-term dependencies, or in other words, underlying stable periodicity within the
data, serve as the practical foundation for conducting long-term predictions [32]. This is why existing
models emphasize their capability to extract features with long-term dependencies. Models like
Informer [59], Autoformer [51], and PatchTST [40] utilize the Transformer’s ability for long-distance
modeling to address LTSF tasks. ModernTCN [38] employs large convolutional kernels to enhance
TCNs’ ability to capture long-range dependencies, and SegRNN [31] uses segment-wise iterations to
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

