Sequential Harmful Shift Detection Without Labels

Salim I. Amoukou ∗ Tom Bewley Saumitra Mishra
Freddy Lecue Daniele Magazzeni Manuela Veloso
J.P. Morgan AI Research

Abstract
We introduce a novel approach for detecting distribution shifts that negatively
impact the performance of machine learning models in continuous production
environments, which requires no access to ground truth data labels. It builds upon
the work of Podkopaev and Ramdas [2022], who address scenarios where labels are
available for tracking model errors over time. Our solution extends this framework
to work in the absence of labels, by employing a proxy for the true error. This proxy
is derived using the predictions of a trained error estimator. Experiments show that
our method has high power and false alarm control under various distribution shifts,
including covariate and label shifts and natural shifts over geography and time.

1

Introduction

When deploying a machine learning model in production, it is common to encounter changes in
the data distribution, such as shifts in covariates [Shimodaira, 2000], labels [Saerens et al., 2002,
Lipton et al., 2018] or concepts [Gonçalves Jr et al., 2014]. Many methods exist for detecting such
distribution shifts. However, a distinct but equally important challenge is assessing whether a shift has
a harmful impact on the prediction error of a given model, which may necessitate interventions such
as ceasing production or retraining the model. Not all distribution shifts are harmful, but traditional
methods for shift detection are unable to distinguish harmful and benign shifts.
While some approaches address the specific issue of performance shift, most require access to ground
truth data labels in the production environment [Gama et al., 2013, 2014, Bayram et al., 2022]. In
scenarios where predictions concern future outcomes, such as medical diagnosis or credit scoring,
immediate access to labels in production is not feasible. This work focuses on the challenge of
detecting harmful distribution shifts — those that increase model error in production — without
requiring access to labels. As Trivedi et al. [2023] note, current methods for harmful shift detection
without labels rely on disparate heuristics, often lacking a solid theoretical foundation. Such methods
include proxies based on aggregate dataset-level statistics [Deng and Zheng, 2021], optimal transport
mappings between training and production distributions [Koebler et al., 2023], and model-specific
metrics such as input margins [Mouton et al., 2023], perturbation-sensitivity [Ng et al., 2023],
disagreement-metrics [Chen et al., 2023, Ginsberg et al., 2022], and prediction confidence [Guillory
et al., 2021, Garg et al., 2022]. While such methods may be practically effective in certain contexts,
they rely on assumptions and correlations that do not hold universally, so can provide no guarantees.
Furthermore, conventional methods rely on two-sample or batch testing, which involves comparing
the statistical properties of a production dataset with those of a control sample. These methods have
inherent limitations, as the sample size is prespecified. This is a problem because the necessary
amount of data to detect any given shift is unknown beforehand. Furthermore, in real-world scenarios,
data typically arrive sequentially over time and shifts may occur either suddenly or gradually. In such
scenarios, it may be desirable to detect harmful shifts as early as possible. Batch testing is ill-suited to
the sequential context [Maharaj et al., 2023], as it does not accommodate the collection of additional
data for retesting without adjusting for multiple testing, leading to diminished power.
∗

Correspondence to: Salim I. Amoukou <salim.ibrahimamoukou@jpmorgan.com>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

