Localized Adaptive Risk Control

Matteo Zecchin Osvaldo Simeone
Centre for Intelligent Information Processing Systems
Department of Engineering
King’s College London
London, United Kingdom
{matteo.1.zecchin,osvaldo.simeone}@kcl.ac.uk

Abstract
Adaptive Risk Control (ARC) is an online calibration strategy based on set prediction that offers worst-case deterministic long-term risk control, as well as statistical
marginal coverage guarantees. ARC adjusts the size of the prediction set by varying a single scalar threshold based on feedback from past decisions. In this work,
we introduce Localized Adaptive Risk Control (L-ARC), an online calibration
scheme that targets statistical localized risk guarantees ranging from conditional
risk to marginal risk, while preserving the worst-case performance of ARC. L-ARC
updates a threshold function within a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS),
with the kernel determining the level of localization of the statistical risk guarantee.
The theoretical results highlight a trade-off between localization of the statistical
risk and convergence speed to the long-term risk target. Thanks to localization,
L-ARC is demonstrated via experiments to produce prediction sets with risk guarantees across different data subpopulations, significantly improving the fairness of
the calibrated model for tasks such as image segmentation and beam selection in
wireless networks.

1

Introduction

Adaptive risk control (ARC), also known as online risk control, is a powerful tool for reliable
decision-making in online settings where feedback is obtained after each decision [Gibbs and Candes,
2021, Feldman et al., 2022]. ARC finds applications in domains, such as finance, robotics, and
health, in which it is important to ensure reliability in forecasting, optimization, or control of
complex systems [Wisniewski et al., 2020, Lekeufack et al., 2023, Zhang et al., 2023, Zecchin et al.,
2024]. While providing worst-case deterministic guarantees of reliability, ARC may distribute such
guarantees unevenly in the input space, favoring a subpopulation of inputs at the detriment of another
subpopulation.
As an example, consider the tumor segmentation task illustrated in Figure 1. In this setting, the
objective is to calibrate a pre-trained segmentation model to generate masks that accurately identify
tumor areas according to a user-defined reliability level [Yu et al., 2016]. The calibration process
typically involves combining data from various datasets, such as those collected from different
hospitals. For an online setting, as visualized in the figure, ARC achieves the desired long-term
reliability in terms of false negative ratio. However, it does so by prioritizing certain datasets, resulting
in unsatisfactory performance on other data sources. Such behavior is particularly dangerous, as it
may result in some subpopulations being poorly diagnosed. This paper addresses this shortcoming of
ARC by proposing a novel localized variant of ARC.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

