Graph-enhanced Optimizers for Structure-aware
Recommendation Embedding Evolution

†

Cong Xu† Jun Wang† Jianyong Wang § Wei Zhang†∗
†
East China Normal University § Tsinghua University

{congxueric, wongjun, zhangwei.thu2011}@gmail.com

§

jianyong@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Embedding plays a key role in modern recommender systems because they are
virtual representations of real-world entities and the foundation for subsequent
decision-making models. In this paper, we propose a novel embedding update
mechanism, Structure-aware Embedding Evolution (SEvo for short), to encourage related nodes to evolve similarly at each step. Unlike GNN (Graph Neural
Network) that typically serves as an intermediate module, SEvo is able to directly inject graph structural information into embedding with minimal computational overhead during training. The convergence properties of SEvo along with
its potential variants are theoretically analyzed to justify the validity of the designs. Moreover, SEvo can be seamlessly integrated into existing optimizers for
state-of-the-art performance. Particularly SEvo-enhanced AdamW with moment
estimate correction demonstrates consistent improvements across a spectrum of
models and datasets, suggesting a novel technical route to effectively utilize graph
structural information beyond explicit GNN modules. Our code is available at
https://github.com/MTandHJ/SEvo.

1

Introduction

Surfing Internet leaves footprints such as clicks [15], browsing [5], and shopping histories [58].
For a modern recommender system [6, 12], the entities involved (e.g., goods, movies) are typically embedded into a latent space based on these interaction data. As the embedding takes the
most to construct and is the foundation to subsequent decision-making models, its modeling quality directly determines the final performance of the entire system. According to the homophily
assumption [31, 59], it is natural to expect that related entities have closer representations in the
latent space. Note that the similarity between two entities refers specifically to those extracted from
interaction data [47] or prior knowledge [37]. For example, goods selected consecutively by the
same user or movies of the same genre are often perceived as more relevant. Graph neural networks
(GNNs) [2, 10, 14] are a widely adopted technique to exploit such structural information, in concert
with a weighted adjacency matrix wherein each entry characterizes how closely two nodes are related. Rather than directly injecting structural information into embedding, GNN typically serves as
an intermediate module in the recommender system. However, designing a versatile GNN module
suitable for various recommendation scenarios is challenging. This is especially true for sequential
recommendation [8, 51], which needs to take into account both structural and sequential information at the same time. Moreover, the post-processing fashion inevitably increases the overhead of
training and inference, limiting the scalability for real-time recommendation.
In this work, we aim to directly inject graph structural information into embedding through a novel
embedding update mechanism. Figure 1 (a) illustrates a normal embedding evolution process, in
∗

Corresponding author. This work was supported in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No. 92270119 and No. 62072182) and Shanghai Institute of Artificial Intelligence for Education.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

