Empowering Active Learning for 3D Molecular
Graphs with Geometric Graph Isomorphism

Ronast Subedi∗
Florida State University
rs22ce@fsu.edu

Lu Wei∗
Stony Brook University
lu.wei.1@stonybrook.edu

Shayok Chakraborty†
Florida State University
shayok@cs.fsu.edu

Wenhan Gao∗
Stony Brook University
wenhan.gao@stonybrook.edu

Yi Liu†
Stony Brook University
yi.liu.4@stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Molecular learning is pivotal in many real-world applications, such as drug discovery. Supervised learning requires heavy human annotation, which is particularly
challenging for molecular data; e.g., the commonly used density functional theory
(DFT) is highly computationally expensive. Active learning (AL) automatically
queries labels for the most informative samples, thereby remarkably alleviating
the annotation hurdle. In this paper, we present a principled AL paradigm for
molecular learning, where we treat molecules as 3D molecular graphs. Specifically,
we propose a new diversity sampling method to eliminate mutual redundancy
built on distributions of 3D geometries. We first propose a set of new 3D graph
isometries for 3D graph isomorphism analysis. Our method is provably at least
as expressive as the Geometric Weisfeiler-Lehman (GWL) test. The moments
of the distributions of the associated geometries are then extracted for efficient
diversity computing. To ensure our AL paradigm selects samples with maximal
uncertainties, we carefully design a Bayesian geometric graph neural network to
compute uncertainties specifically for 3D molecular graphs. We pose active sampling as a quadratic programming (QP) problem using the proposed components.
Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our AL paradigm, as well as
the proposed diversity and uncertainty methods. The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/sronast/al_3dgraph.

1

Introduction

Molecular representation learning is essential for various real-world applications, such as molecular
design, drug discovery, material design, etc.. In recent studies, molecules have been formulated as
3D graphs, based on the evidence that 3D spatial information is crucial to determine the properties
of molecules [Liu et al., 2019, Townshend et al., 2019, Axelrod and Gomez-Bombarelli, 2020].
Generally, in a 3D graph, atoms are represented as nodes, each associated with Cartesian coordinates
in 3D space. A predefined cut-off distance can be used as a threshold to determine if there is an edge
between two nodes in the 3D graph. With the advance of deep learning, 3D graph neural networks
(GNNs) have been developed to learn from 3D molecular graph data [Thomas et al., 2018, Schütt
et al., 2017, Satorras et al., 2021, Gasteiger et al., 2020c, Liu et al., 2021, 2022, Wang et al., 2022,
Liao and Smidt, 2022, Zhou et al., 2022, Yan et al., 2022, Wang et al., 2023, Lin et al., 2023, Zhang
et al., 2023]. These models are data-hungry and necessitate a large amount of annotated training data
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

