FreeSplat: Generalizable 3D Gaussian Splatting
Towards Free-View Synthesis of Indoor Scenes

Our Depth Pred.

…

3D Gaussians

Interpolated Novel View Rendering

FreeSplat

MVSplat

pixelSplat

Ref.

…

Yunsong Wang
Tianxin Huang
Hanlin Chen
Gim Hee Lee
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
yunsong@comp.nus.edu.sg gimhee.lee@nus.edu.sg
https://github.com/wangys16/FreeSplat

Figure 1: Comparison between FreeSplat and previous methods. pixelSplat [1] and MVSplat [2]
fail to reconstruct geometrically consistent global 3D Gaussians, while our FreeSplat is proposed to
accurately localize 3D Gaussians from long sequence input and support free view synthesis.

Abstract
Empowering 3D Gaussian Splatting with generalization ability is appealing. However, existing generalizable 3D Gaussian Splatting methods are largely confined to
narrow-range interpolation between stereo images due to their heavy backbones,
thus lacking the ability to accurately localize 3D Gaussian and support free-view
synthesis across wide view range. In this paper, we present a novel framework
FreeSplat that is capable of reconstructing geometrically consistent 3D scenes
from long sequence input towards free-view synthesis. Specifically, we firstly
introduce Low-cost Cross-View Aggregation achieved by constructing adaptive
cost volumes among nearby views and aggregating features using a multi-scale
structure. Subsequently, we present the Pixel-wise Triplet Fusion to eliminate
redundancy of 3D Gaussians in overlapping view regions and to aggregate features
observed across multiple views. Additionally, we propose a simple but effective
free-view training strategy that ensures robust view synthesis across broader view
range regardless of the number of views. Our empirical results demonstrate stateof-the-art novel view synthesis peformances in both novel view rendered color
maps quality and depth maps accuracy across different numbers of input views. We
also show that FreeSplat performs inference more efficiently and can effectively
reduce redundant Gaussians, offering the possibility of feed-forward large scene
reconstruction without depth priors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

