EgoChoir: Capturing 3D Human-Object Interaction
Regions from Egocentric Views

Yuhang Yang1 , Wei Zhai1† , Chengfeng Wang1 , Chengjun Yu1 , Yang Cao1,2 , Zheng-Jun Zha1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
https://yyvhang.github.io/EgoChoir
Visualized
Human Motion

Human
Contact

Egocentric Video
Head Motion

X

3D Object

Capturing 3D
Interaction Regions

t

Object
Affordance

Z
Y

Figure 1: EgoChoir takes egocentric frames and head motion from head-mounted devices, along with
the 3D object, to capture 3D interaction regions, including human contact and object affordance. The
human motion is just visualized for intuitive observation of contact, yet it is not utilized by EgoChoir.

Abstract
Understanding egocentric human-object interaction (HOI) is a fundamental aspect
of human-centric perception, facilitating applications like AR/VR and embodied AI.
For the egocentric HOI, in addition to perceiving semantics e.g., “what” interaction
is occurring, capturing “where” the interaction specifically manifests in 3D space is
also crucial, which links the perception and operation. Existing methods primarily
leverage observations of HOI to capture interaction regions from an exocentric
view. However, incomplete observations of interacting parties in the egocentric
view introduce ambiguity between visual observations and interaction contents,
impairing their efficacy. From the egocentric view, humans integrate the visual
cortex, cerebellum, and brain to internalize their intentions and interaction concepts
of objects, allowing for the pre-formulation of interactions and making behaviors
even when interaction regions are out of sight. In light of this, we propose harmonizing the visual appearance, head motion, and 3D object to excavate the object
interaction concept and subject intention, jointly inferring 3D human contact and
object affordance from egocentric videos. To achieve this, we present EgoChoir,
which links object structures with interaction contexts inherent in appearance and
head motion to reveal object affordance, further utilizing it to model human contact.
Additionally, a gradient modulation is employed to adopt appropriate clues for
capturing interaction regions across various egocentric scenarios. Moreover, 3D
contact and affordance are annotated for egocentric videos collected from EgoExo4D and GIMO to support the task. Extensive experiments on them demonstrate
the effectiveness and superiority of EgoChoir.
† Corresponding author.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

