Learning to Embed Distributions via Maximum
Kernel Entropy

Oleksii Kachaiev
Dipartimento di Matematica, Università degli Studi di Genova, Genoa, Italy
oleksii.kachaiev@gmail.com
Stefano Recanatesi
Technion Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
Allen Institute for Neural Dynamics, Seattle, USA
stefano.recanatesi@gmail.com

Abstract
Empirical data can often be considered as samples from a set of probability distributions. Kernel methods have emerged as a natural approach for learning to
classify these distributions. Although numerous kernels between distributions have
been proposed, applying kernel methods to distribution regression tasks remains
challenging, primarily because selecting a suitable kernel is not straightforward.
Surprisingly, the question of learning a data-dependent distribution kernel has
received little attention. In this paper, we propose a novel objective for the unsupervised learning of data-dependent distribution kernel, based on the principle
of entropy maximization in the space of probability measure embeddings. We
examine the theoretical properties of the latent embedding space induced by our
objective, demonstrating that its geometric structure is well-suited for solving
downstream discriminative tasks. Finally, we demonstrate the performance of the
learned kernel across different modalities.

1

Introduction

Most discriminative learning methods conventionally assume that each data point is represented as a
real-valued vector. In practical scenarios, however, data points often manifest as a ’set’ of features
or a ’group’ of objects. A quintessential example is the task of predicting a health indicator based
on multiple blood measurements. In this case, the single data point of a patient has multiple, or a
distribution of, measurements. One approach to accommodate such cases involves representing each
input point as a probability distribution. Beyond mere convenience, it is more appropriate to model
input points as distributions when dealing with missing data or measurement uncertainty, as often
encountered when facing the abundance of data, which commonly presents a challenge for data-rich
fields such as genetics, neuroscience, meteorology, astrophysics, or economics.
The task of regressing a mapping of probability distributions to a real-valued response is known
as distribution regression. Distribution regression has been successfully applied in various fields,
such as voting behavior prediction [13], dark matter halo mass learning [43], human cancer cells
detection [44], brain-age prediction [6], among others [38, 33, 68]. The versatility and effectiveness
of this framework underscore its power in solving complex problems [69, 29]. Kernel methods
have become a widely used approach for solving distribution regression tasks by exploiting a kernel
between distributions referred to as a distribution kernel. Despite the multitude of proposed kernels,
the practical application of kernel methods remains challenging due to the nontrivial choice of the
appropriate kernel. While some efforts focus on identifying kernels with broad applicability and
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

