Dynamic Neural Regeneration: Enhancing Deep
Learning Generalization on Small Datasets

Vijaya Raghavan T Ramkumar1, , Elahe Arani1,2,∗, & Bahram Zonooz1,*
1
Eindhoven University of Technology 2 Wayve
raghavijay95@gmail.com, e.arani@tue.nl, b.zonooz@tue.nl

Abstract
The efficacy of deep learning techniques is contingent upon access to large volumes
of data (labeled or unlabeled). However, in practical domains such as medical
applications, data availability is often limited. This presents a significant challenge:
How can we effectively train deep neural networks on relatively small datasets
while improving generalization? Recent works have explored evolutionary or
iterative training paradigms, which reinitialize a subset of parameters to enhance
generalization performance for small datasets. However, these methods typically
rely on randomly selected parameter subsets and maintain fixed masks throughout
training, potentially leading to suboptimal outcomes. Inspired by neurogenesis in
the brain, we propose a novel iterative training framework, Dynamic Neural Regeneration (DNR), that employs a data-aware dynamic masking scheme to eliminate
redundant connections by estimating their significance. This approach increases
the model’s capacity for further learning through random weight reinitialization.
Experimental results demonstrate that our approach outperforms existing methods
in accuracy and robustness, highlighting its potential for real-world applications
where data collection is challenging. 2

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have become essential for solving complex problems in various
fields, such as image and speech recognition, natural language processing, and robotics (1). With
the increasing availability of data, DNNs have achieved unprecedented performance, surpassing
human-level performance in some applications (2). However, the success of DNNs is limited when
dealing with small datasets, where the model tends to overfit and fails to generalize to new data.
For example, it is often difficult to obtain a large amount of data in medical diagnosis due to the
complexity and high cost of the procedures involved. In such cases, lack of generalization can be
dangerous, which can lead to incorrect diagnosis and treatment.
Recently, several studies based on weight reinitialization methods (3; 4) have been proposed in the
literature to improve generalization by iteratively refining the learned solution through partial weight
reinitialization. These methods select and retain a subset of parameters while randomly reinitializing
the rest of the network during iterative/evolutionary training schemes. For example, a state-of-the-art
method named Knowledge Evolution (KE) (5) improves generalization by randomly splitting the
network into fit and reset subnetworks and constantly reinitializing the reset subnetwork after each
iteration. However, the KE approach is limited by its reliance on a predetermined mask creation,
where a random subset of parameters is selected and kept constant throughout the iterative training
process. This constraint may impede the model’s ability to learn effectively from small datasets,
ultimately limiting its generalization capabilities. These limitations raise two important questions:
∗
2

Equal contribution.
Code is available at https://github.com/NeurAI-Lab/Dynamic-Neural-Regeneration

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

