Bandits with Preference Feedback:
A Stackelberg Game Perspective

Barna Pásztor⋆,1,2 Parnian Kassraie⋆,1 Andreas Krause1,2
1
ETH Zurich 2 ETH AI Center
{bpasztor, pkassraie, krausea}@ethz.ch

Abstract
Bandits with preference feedback present a powerful tool for optimizing unknown
target functions when only pairwise comparisons are allowed instead of direct
value queries. This model allows for incorporating human feedback into online
inference and optimization and has been employed in systems for fine-tuning large
language models. The problem is well understood in simplified settings with linear
target functions or over finite small domains that limit practical interest. Taking
the next step, we consider infinite domains and nonlinear (kernelized) rewards. In
this setting, selecting a pair of actions is quite challenging and requires balancing
exploration and exploitation at two levels: within the pair, and along the iterations
of the algorithm. We propose M AX M IN LCB, which emulates this trade-off as a
zero-sum Stackelberg game, and chooses action pairs that are informative and yield
favorable rewards. M AX M IN LCB consistently outperforms existing algorithms
and satisfies an anytime-valid rate-optimal regret guarantee. This is due to our
novel preference-based confidence sequences for kernelized logistic estimators.

1

Introduction

In standard bandit optimization, a learner repeatedly interacts with an unknown environment that gives
numerical feedback on the chosen actions according to a utility function f . However, in applications
such as fine-tuning large language models, drug testing, or search engine optimization, the quantitative
value of design choices or test outcomes are either not directly observable, or are known to be
inaccurate, or systematically biased, e.g., if they are provided by human feedback [Casper et al., 2023].
A solution is to optimize for the target based on comparative feedback provided for a pair of queries,
which is proven to be more robust to certain biases and uncertainties in the queries [Ji et al., 2023].
Bandits with preference feedback, or dueling bandits, address this problem and propose strategies
for choosing query/action pairs that yield a high utility over the horizon of interactions. At the core
of such algorithms is uncertainty quantification and inference for f in regions of interest, which
is closely tied to exploration and exploitation dilemma over a course of queries. Observing only
comparative feedback poses an additional challenge, as we now need to balance this trade-off jointly
over two actions. This challenge is further exacerbated when optimizing over vast or infinite action
domains. As a remedy, prior work often grounds one of the actions by choosing it either randomly
or greedily, and tries to balance exploration-exploitation for the second action as a reaction to the
first [Ailon et al., 2014, Zoghi et al., 2014a, Kirschner and Krause, 2021, Mehta et al., 2023b]. This
approach works well for simple utility functions over low-dimensional domains, however does not
scale to more complex problems.
Aiming to solve this problem, we focus on continuous domains in the Euclidean vector space and
complex utility functions that belong to the Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) of a potentially non-smooth kernel. We propose M AX M IN LCB, a sample-efficient algorithm that at every step
chooses the actions jointly, by playing a zero-sum Stackelberg (a.k.a Leader-Follower) game. We
choose the Lower Confidence Bound (LCB) of f as the objective of this game which the Leader aims
⋆

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

