Random Function Descent
Felix Benning
University of Mannheim
felix.benning@uni-mannheim.de

Leif Döring
University of Mannheim
leif.doering@uni-mannheim.de

Abstract
Classical worst-case optimization theory neither explains the success of optimization in machine learning, nor does it help with step size selection. In this paper we
demonstrate the viability and advantages of replacing the classical ‘convex function’
framework with a ‘random function’ framework. With complexity O(n3 d3 ), where
n is the number of steps and d the number of dimensions, Bayesian optimization
with gradients has not been viable in large dimension so far. By bridging the gap
between Bayesian optimization (i.e. random function optimization theory) and
classical optimization we establish viability. Specifically, we use a ‘stochastic
Taylor approximation’ to rediscover gradient descent, which is scalable in high
dimension due to O(nd) complexity. This rediscovery yields a specific step size
schedule we call Random Function Descent (RFD). The advantage of this random
function framework is that RFD is scale invariant and that it provides a theoretical
foundation for common step size heuristics such as gradient clipping and gradual
learning rate warmup.

1

Introduction

Cost function minimization is one of the most fundamental mathematical problems in machine
learning. Gradient-based methods, popular for this task, require a step size, typically chosen using
established heuristics. This article aims to deepen the theoretical understanding of these heuristics
and proposes a new algorithm based on this insight.
Classical optimization theory uses L-smoothness, which limits the rate of change of the gradient by
L, to provide some convergence guarantees for learning rates smaller than 1/L [e.g. 38]. As this
theory is based on an upper bound (the worst case), the learning rate 1/L is naturally much more
conservative than necessary on average. Even if L was known, this learning rate would therefore be
impractical. Since line search algorithms typically require access to full cost function evaluations, the
field of machine learning (ML) therefore relies heavily on step size heuristics [e.g. 48, 49, 42, 20]. To
investigate these heuristics, we introduce new ideas based on a ‘random function’ perspective.
While automatic step size selection in the convex function framework is possible [11], convexity
is generally only satisfied asymptotically and locally. So the understanding of the initial stages of
optimization, which includes the warmup heuristic [20], greatly benefits from a framework which
also admits non-convex functions. This objective is achieved by the ‘random function’ framework we
investigate.
Many successful algorithms in computer science are significantly slower in the worst case than in the
average case based on a probabilistic framework (e.g. Quicksort [23] or the simplex algorithm [e.g.
6]). On random quadratic functions the average case behavior of first order optimizers is already being
investigated by the ML community [e.g. 58, 43, 33, 12, 9, 40, 41]. Interested in the landscape of high
dimensional random functions as a model for ‘spin glasses‘, the physics community independently
started studying the average case of optimization as well [e.g. 4, 15, 37, 51, 24], albeit not geared for
ML algorithms.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

