Noisy Label Learning with Instance-Dependent
Outliers: Identifiability via Crowd Wisdom

Tri Nguyen∗
School of EECS
Oregon State University
Corvallis, Oregon, USA
nguyetr9@oregonstate.edu

Shahana Ibrahim∗
Department of ECE
University of Central Florida
Orlando, Florida, USA
shahana.ibrahim@ucf.edu

Xiao Fu
School of EECS
Oregon State University
Corvallis, Oregon, USA
xiao.fu@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
The generation of label noise is often modeled as a process involving a probability
transition matrix (also interpreted as the annotator confusion matrix) imposed onto
the label distribution. Under this model, learning the “ground-truth classifier”—
i.e., the classifier that can be learned if no noise was present—and the confusion
matrix boils down to a model identification problem. Prior works along this line
demonstrated appealing empirical performance, yet identifiability of the model was
mostly established by assuming an instance-invariant confusion matrix. Having
an (occasionally) instance-dependent confusion matrix across data samples is
apparently more realistic, but inevitably introduces outliers to the model. Our
interest lies in confusion matrix-based noisy label learning with such outliers taken
into consideration. We begin with pointing out that under the model of interest,
using labels produced by only one annotator is fundamentally insufficient to detect
the outliers or identify the ground-truth classifier. Then, we prove that by employing
a crowdsourcing strategy involving multiple annotators, a carefully designed loss
function can establish the desired model identifiability under reasonable conditions.
Our development builds upon a link between the noisy label model and a columncorrupted matrix factorization mode—based on which we show that crowdsourced
annotations distinguish nominal data and instance-dependent outliers using a lowdimensional subspace. Experiments show that our learning scheme substantially
improves outlier detection and the classifier’s testing accuracy.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks can easily overfit to noisy labels due to its excessive expressiveness [1,2]. Many
strategies have been proposed to avoid negative impacts of label noise when training neural classifiers;
see, e.g., noisy label filtering [3–8], robust loss design [9–13], and noise generation modeling (or loss
correction) [14–22]. In the last genre, a noisy class label is modeled as a realization of a categorical
distribution, which is the ground-truth label distribution being distorted by a probability transition
matrix. The transition matrix is interpreted as the “confusion matrix” [9, 14, 18] that can effectively
* Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

