Physics-Informed Variational State-Space
Gaussian Processes
Oliver Hamelijnck
University of Warwick
oliver.hamelijnck@warwick.ac.uk
Arno Solin
Aalto University
arno.solin@aalto.fi

Theodoros Damoulas
University of Warwick
t.damoulas@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
Differential equations are important mechanistic models that are integral to many
scientific and engineering applications. With the abundance of available data there
has been a growing interest in data-driven physics-informed models. Gaussian
processes (GPs) are particularly suited to this task as they can model complex, nonlinear phenomena whilst incorporating prior knowledge and quantifying uncertainty.
Current approaches have found some success but are limited as they either achieve
poor computational scalings or focus only on the temporal setting. This work
addresses these issues by introducing a variational spatio-temporal state-space GP
that handles linear and non-linear physical constraints while achieving efficient
linear-in-time computation costs. We demonstrate our methods in a range of
synthetic and real-world settings and outperform the current state-of-the-art in both
predictive and computational performance.

1

Introduction
Naïve vs. Physics-Informed State-Space GP
(PHYSS - GP)

Input, x

Physical modelling is integral in modern science and engineering
with applications from climate modelling [62] to options pricing
[6]. Here, the key formalism to inject mechanistic physical knowl∂f
edge are differential equations (DEs), which given initial and/or
∂t − Nθ f = 0
boundary values, are typically solved numerically [8]. In contrast
machine learning is data-driven, and aims to learn latent functions
from observations. However the increasing availability of data has
vs.
spurred interest in combining these traditional mechanistic models with data-driven methods through physics-informed machine
learning. These hybrids approaches aim to improve predictive
Time, t
accuracy, computational efficiency by leveraging both physical
inductive biases with observations [30, 44].
Figure 1: The state-space formalA principled way to incorporate prior physical knowledge is ism allows for linear-time inferthrough Gaussian processes (GPs). GPs are stochastic processes ence in the temporal dimension.
and are a data-centric approach that facilitates the quantification of uncertainty. Recently AUTOIP
was proposed in order to integrate non-linear physics into GPs [40], where solutions to ordinary and
partial differential equations (ODEs, PDEs) are observed at a finite set of collocation points. This is
an extension of the probabilistic meshless method (PMM, [12]) to the variational setting such that
non linear equations can be incorporated. Similarly, [4] introduced HELMHOLTZ - GP, that constructs
GP priors that adhere to curl and divergence-free constraints. Such properties are required for the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

