On the Expressivity and Sample Complexity of
Node-Individualized Graph Neural Networks

Paolo Pellizzoni
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Martinsried, Germany
pellizzoni@biochem.mpg.de

Till Hendrik Schulz
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Martinsried, Germany
tschulz@biochem.mpg.de

Dexiong Chen †
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Martinsried, Germany
dchen@biochem.mpg.de

Karsten Borgwardt †
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Martinsried, Germany
borgwardt@biochem.mpg.de

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) employing message passing for graph classification
are inherently limited by the expressive power of the Weisfeiler-Leman (WL) test
for graph isomorphism. Node individualization schemes, which assign unique identifiers to nodes (e.g., by adding random noise to features), are a common approach
for achieving universal expressiveness. However, the ability of GNNs endowed
with individualization schemes to generalize beyond the training data is still an
open question. To address this question, this paper presents a theoretical analysis
of the sample complexity of such GNNs from a statistical learning perspective, employing Vapnik–Chervonenkis (VC) dimension and covering number bounds. We
demonstrate that node individualization schemes that are permutation-equivariant
result in lower sample complexity, and design novel individualization schemes that
exploit these results. As an application of this analysis, we also develop a novel architecture that can perform substructure identification (i.e., subgraph isomorphism)
while having a lower VC dimension compared to competing methods. Finally, our
theoretical findings are validated experimentally on both synthetic and real-world
datasets.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have become a dominant approach in graph learning, leveraging the
inherent structural information of graphs through multiple iterations of message passing. This iterative
exchange of information between nodes allows GNNs to learn rich representations for both nodes
and entire graphs. However, the expressivity of these models in the context of graph classification,
i.e., their ability to distinguish non-isomorphic graphs, is intrinsically limited by the capabilities of
the Weisfeiler-Leman (1-WL) algorithm [63], a heuristic used for the graph isomorphism problem
[41, 64]. 1-WL is known to fail to distinguish certain classes of graphs, such as regular graphs [4].
Notably, GNNs are in general unable to solve the substructure identification task [12], which is
concerned with identifying subgraph patterns in the data at hand.
To address these expressivity limitations, higher-order GNNs [41, 26] have been proposed. These
models consider interactions among larger subgraphs or sets of nodes but often suffer from high
†

These authors jointly supervised this work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

