Not All Diffusion Model Activations
Have Been Evaluated as Discriminative Features
Benyuan Meng1,2 Qianqian Xu3,4∗ Zitai Wang3
Xiaochun Cao5 Qingming Huang6,3,7∗

1
Institute of Information Engineering, CAS
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Key Lab. of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory
5
School of Cyber Science and Tech., Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
6
School of Computer Science and Tech., University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
7
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, CAS
mengbenyuan@iie.ac.cn {xuqianqian,wangzitai}@ict.ac.cn
caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Diffusion models are initially designed for image generation. Recent research
shows that the internal signals within their backbones, named activations, can
also serve as dense features for various discriminative tasks such as semantic
segmentation. Given numerous activations, selecting a small yet effective subset
poses a fundamental problem. To this end, the early study of this field performs a
large-scale quantitative comparison of the discriminative ability of the activations.
However, we find that many potential activations have not been evaluated, such as
the queries and keys used to compute attention scores. Moreover, recent advancements in diffusion architectures bring many new activations, such as those within
embedded ViT modules. Both combined, activation selection remains unresolved
but overlooked. To tackle this issue, this paper takes a further step with a much
broader range of activations evaluated. Considering the significant increase in
activations, a full-scale quantitative comparison is no longer operational. Instead,
we seek to understand the properties of these activations, such that the activations that are clearly inferior can be filtered out in advance via simple qualitative
evaluation. After careful analysis, we discover three properties universal among
diffusion models, enabling this study to go beyond specific models. On top of
this, we present effective feature selection solutions for several popular diffusion
models. Finally, the experiments across multiple discriminative tasks validate the
superiority of our method over the SOTA competitors. Our code is available at this
url.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [21, 10, 37, 36] are powerful generative models that progressively reconstruct
images from Gaussian noises through a series of denoising steps. Typically, a U-Net [38] is trained
as the noise predictor backbone to perform denoising. Recently, the impressive generative capability
inspires the application to discriminative tasks such as semantic segmentation [52, 58] or semantic
correspondence [29, 56]. In this direction, diffusion feature is one simple yet effective approach,
where the intermediate signals, named activations, are extracted from the pre-trained diffusion U-Net
as dense features [2, 58, 56, 29, 53, 13, 14].
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

