Unified Insights: Harnessing Multi-modal Data for
Phenotype Imputation via View Decoupling

Qiannan Zhang, Weishen Pan, Zilong Bai, Chang Su, Fei Wang∗
Weill Cornell Medicine, Cornell University
{qiz4005,wep4001,zib4001,chs4001,few2001}@med.cornell.edu

Abstract
Phenotype imputation plays a crucial role in improving comprehensive and accurate medical evaluation, which in turn can optimize patient treatment and bolster
the reliability of clinical research. Despite the adoption of various techniques,
multi-modal biological data, which can provide crucial insights into a patient’s
overall health, is often overlooked. With multi-modal biological data, patient
characterization can be enriched from two distinct views: the biological view and
the phenotype view. However, the heterogeneity and imprecise nature of the multimodal data still pose challenges in developing an effective method to model from
two views. In this paper, we propose a novel framework to incorporate multi-modal
biological data via view decoupling. Specifically, we segregate the modeling of
biological data from phenotype data in a graph-based learning framework. From
the biological view, the latent factors in biological data are discovered to model
patient correlation. From the phenotype view, phenotype co-occurrence can be
modeled to reveal patterns across patients. Hence, patients are encoded from these
two distinct views. To mitigate the influence of noise and irrelevant information
in biological data, we devise the cross-view contrastive knowledge distillation
that distills insights from the biological view to enhance phenotype imputation.
Phenotype imputation with the proposed model demonstrates superior performance
over state-of-the-art models on the real-world biomedical database.

1

Introduction

Clinical records, serving as a critical resource for understanding disease patterns and patient outcomes,
are valuable for observational studies. However, its collection can be biased or incomplete due to the
limits on infrastructures and expertise, the inconsistency in data types across healthcare systems, and
the variability in patient cohorts, etc [3, 15]. For instance, it is recognized that patients with dementia
and its related conditions can have under-documented phenotypes [36], probably resulting from a
lack of clear symptoms early on or ignorance of related diseases. The issue of missing or incomplete
phenotypic data is pervasive and can lead to biased results in medical research and suboptimal patient
care [21]. In light of this, phenotype imputation is essential to ensure a more holistic and precise
medical evaluation, thereby optimizing patient care and enhancing the validity of clinical studies.
Traditional imputation methods [11, 2] rely on informative statistical characteristics of the clinical
data to infer the missing phenotypes, yet often neglect the broad, interconnected nature of clinical
data with multi-modal biological information such as proteomics and metabolomics, while the
latter might provide deeper insights into the patient’s health status. The growing development of
extensive biobanks [4, 33], collecting various biological and lifestyle data alongside traditional
clinical records, unlocks a potential to address incomplete phenotypic data in clinical records. By
leveraging multi-modal biological data as external information, as shown in Figure 1, the associations
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

