LLM Processes: Numerical Predictive Distributions
Conditioned on Natural Language

James Requeima∗
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
requeima@cs.toronto.edu

John Bronskill∗
University of Cambridge
jfb54@cam.ac.uk

Richard E. Turner
University of Cambridge
The Alan Turing Institute
ret26@cam.ac.uk

Dami Choi
University of Toronto
choidami@cs.toronto.edu

David Duvenaud
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
duvenaud@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Machine learning practitioners often face significant challenges in formally integrating their prior knowledge and beliefs into predictive models, limiting the
potential for nuanced and context-aware analyses. Moreover, the expertise needed
to integrate this prior knowledge into probabilistic modeling typically limits the
application of these models to specialists. Our goal is to build a regression model
that can process numerical data and make probabilistic predictions at arbitrary
locations, guided by natural language text which describes a user’s prior knowledge. Large Language Models (LLMs) provide a useful starting point for designing
such a tool since they 1) provide an interface where users can incorporate expert
insights in natural language and 2) provide an opportunity for leveraging latent
problem-relevant knowledge encoded in LLMs that users may not have themselves.
We start by exploring strategies for eliciting explicit, coherent numerical predictive distributions from LLMs. We examine these joint predictive distributions,
which we call LLM Processes, over arbitrarily-many quantities in settings such
as forecasting, multi-dimensional regression, black-box optimization, and image
modeling. We investigate the practical details of prompting to elicit coherent
predictive distributions, and demonstrate their effectiveness at regression. Finally,
we demonstrate the ability to usefully incorporate text into numerical predictions,
improving predictive performance and giving quantitative structure that reflects
qualitative descriptions. This lets us begin to explore the rich, grounded hypothesis
space that LLMs implicitly encode.

1

Introduction

Incorporating prior knowledge into predictive models is highly challenging which can restrict the
scope for detailed, context-sensitive analysis. In addition, the skill required to incorporate this prior
knowledge into probabilistic modelling can restrict the use of these models to experts. In this work,
our objective is to develop a probabilistic prediction model that facilitates user interaction through
straightforward, natural language. For this purpose, we explore strategies for eliciting explicit,
coherent numerical predictive distributions from LLMs.
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

