CoSy: Evaluating Textual Explanations of Neurons

Laura Kopf1,2

Philine Lou Bommer1,3 Anna Hedström1,3,4 Sebastian Lapuschkin4
Marina M.-C. Höhne3,5 Kirill Bykov1,2,3
1
TU Berlin, Germany 2 BIFOLD, Germany 3 UMI Lab, ATB Potsdam, Germany

4

Fraunhofer Heinrich-Hertz-Institute, Germany

5

University of Potsdam, Germany

kopf@tu-berlin.de
{pbommer,ahedstroem,mhoehne,kbykov}@atb-potsdam.de
sebastian.lapuschkin@hhi.fraunhofer.de

Abstract
A crucial aspect of understanding the complex nature of Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) is the ability to explain learned concepts within their latent representations.
While methods exist to connect neurons to human-understandable textual descriptions, evaluating the quality of these explanations is challenging due to the lack
of a unified quantitative approach. We introduce C O S Y (Concept Synthesis), a
novel, architecture-agnostic framework for evaluating textual explanations of latent
neurons. Given textual explanations, our proposed framework uses a generative
model conditioned on textual input to create data points representing the explanations. By comparing the neuron’s response to these generated data points and
control data points, we can estimate the quality of the explanation. We validate
our framework through sanity checks and benchmark various neuron description
methods for Computer Vision tasks, revealing significant differences in quality. We
provide an open-source implementation on GitHub1 .

1

Introduction

One of the key obstacles to the wider adoption of Machine Learning methods across various fields
is the inherent opacity of modern Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)—in essence, we often lack an
understanding of why these models make certain predictions. To address this problem, various
explainability methods [1, 2] have been developed to make the decision-making processes of DNNs
more understandable to humans. Explainability methods have broadened their focus from interpreting
the decision-making of DNNs locally—for instance, interpreting specific inputs using saliency
maps [3, 4, 5, 6]—to understanding the global behavior of models by analyzing individual model
components and their functional purpose [7]. Following the latter global explainability approach,
often referred to as mechanistic interpretability [8, 9, 10], some methods aim to describe the specific
concepts neurons have learned to detect [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16], enabling analysis of how these
high-level concepts influence network predictions.
A popular approach for explaining the functionality of latent representations of a network is to
describe neurons using human-understandable textual concepts. A textual description is assigned to a
neuron based on the concepts that the neuron has learned to detect or is significantly activated by. Over
time, these methods have evolved from providing label-specific descriptions [11] to more complex
compositional [12, 16] and open-vocabulary explanations [13, 15]. However, a significant challenge
remains: the lack of a universally accepted quantitative evaluation measure for open-vocabulary
neuron descriptions. As a consequence, different methods devised their own evaluation criteria,
making it difficult to perform general-purpose, comprehensive cross-comparisons.
1

https://github.com/lkopf/cosy

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

