Poisson Variational Autoencoder
Hadi Vafaii1
vafaii@berkeley.edu

Dekel Galor1
galor@berkeley.edu
1

Jacob L. Yates1
yates@berkeley.edu

UC Berkeley

Abstract
Variational autoencoders (VAEs) employ Bayesian inference to interpret sensory
inputs, mirroring processes that occur in primate vision across both ventral [1] and
dorsal [2] pathways. Despite their success, traditional VAEs rely on continuous latent variables, which deviates sharply from the discrete nature of biological neurons.
Here, we developed the Poisson VAE (P-VAE), a novel architecture that combines
principles of predictive coding with a VAE that encodes inputs into discrete spike
counts. Combining Poisson-distributed latent variables with predictive coding introduces a metabolic cost term in the model loss function, suggesting a relationship
with sparse coding which we verify empirically. Additionally, we analyze the
geometry of learned representations, contrasting the P-VAE to alternative VAE
models. We find that the P-VAE encodes its inputs in relatively higher dimensions,
facilitating linear separability of categories in a downstream classification task
with a much better (5×) sample efficiency. Our work provides an interpretable
computational framework to study brain-like sensory processing and paves the way
for a deeper understanding of perception as an inferential process.
Perception as

Inference

Rate Coding

Predictive Coding

Alhazen, ~1000 AD
Helmholtz, 1860s
Barlow, 2001
Lee & Mumford, 2003
Knill & Pouget, 2004
Yuille & Kersten, 2006
Friston, 2010

Adrian & Zotterman,
1926

Neisser, 1967
Gregory, 1980

Perkel & Bullock,
1968

Srinivasan et al., 1982

Barlow, 1972

Friston, 2005

Zohary et al., 1994

Clark, 2013

Amortized Sparse Coding is a
special case of the Poisson VAE
Linear Poisson VAE = Amortized Sparse Coding

Rao & Ballard, 1999

Poisson Variational Autoencoder
• Encodes inputs into discrete spike counts, significantly
enhancing the model’s bio-realism and interpretability.

Linear Gaussian VAE = Probabilistic PCA

• A metabolic cost term emerges in the model objective
“for free,” suggesting a connection to Sparse Coding.
• Brings major theories in neuroscience closer together,
under the unifying umbrella of Bayesian Inference.

Figure 1: Graphical abstract. Introducing the Poisson Variational Autoencoder (P-VAE), which
draws on key concepts in neuroscience. When trained on natural image patches, P-VAE with a
linear decoder develops Gabor-like feature selectivity, reminiscent of Sparse Coding [3]. In sharp
contrast, the standard Gaussian VAE learns the principal components [4]. Our code, data, and model
checkpoints are available at this repository: https://github.com/hadivafaii/PoissonVAE

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

