Elo Uncovered: Robustness and Best Practices in
Language Model Evaluation

Meriem Boubdir
Cohere For AI
meri.boubdir@gmail.com

Edward Kim
Cohere
edward@cohere.com

Sara Hooker
Cohere For AI
sarahooker@cohere.com

Beyza Ermis
Cohere For AI
beyza@cohere.com

Marzieh Fadaee
Cohere For AI
marzieh@cohere.com

Abstract
In Natural Language Processing (NLP), the Elo rating system, originally designed
for ranking players in dynamic games such as chess, is increasingly being used to
evaluate Large Language Models (LLMs) through “A vs B” paired comparisons.
However, while popular, the system’s suitability for assessing entities with constant
skill levels, such as LLMs, remains relatively unexplored. We study two fundamental axioms that evaluation methods should adhere to: reliability and transitivity.
We conduct an extensive evaluation of Elo behavior across simulated and real-world
scenarios, demonstrating that individual Elo computations can exhibit significant
volatility. We show that both axioms are not always satisfied, raising questions
about the reliability of current comparative evaluations of LLMs. If the current
use of Elo scores is intended to substitute the costly head-to-head comparison of
LLMs, it is crucial to ensure the ranking is as robust as possible. Guided by the
axioms, our findings offer concrete guidelines for enhancing the reliability of LLM
evaluation methods, suggesting a need for reassessment of existing comparative
approaches.

1

Introduction

In the rapidly evolving field of Natural Language Processing (NLP), the task of accurately and reliably
evaluating LLMs has become increasingly challenging [32, 10, 50, 26, 43]. Human feedback has
emerged as an indispensable tool in this performance assessment process, serving as a qualitative
metric that captures nuances that automated scoring mechanisms often fail to address [2, 3, 4, 50,
13, 12]. These human-centered evaluations, highly valuable to the overall progress of the NLP field,
typically adopt an “A vs B” comparative setup, turning evaluations into a zero-sum game between
language models. Pairwise comparisons, however, are fundamentally difficult to scale for large pools
of models, due to the quadratic growth of comparisons required. Fortunately, this paired feedback
structure [56] naturally lends itself to the Elo rating system, originally designed for ranking chess
players (including those who have never before played each other) for better matchmaking [16].
Under the Elo rating system, players’ skills are indicated by an Elo rating, where higher ratings
indicate higher skill, and all players can be ranked best to worst using this scalar Elo rating. In the
standard formulation (see Section 2), a player rated at 1800 has 10 : 1 odds of winning against a player
rated at 1400. After a match, the winner takes rating points from the loser in a zero-sum fashion
[16]. Thus, with the Elo rating system, we can efficiently integrate subjective human feedback on
paired “A vs B” language model completions into a structured and unified rating system to assess the
performance of language models.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

