A Unified Principle of Pessimism for Offline
Reinforcement Learning under Model Mismatch

Yue Wang
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL, 32816
yue.wang@ucf.edu

Zhongchang Sun
Department of Electrical Engineering
University at Buffalo
Buffalo, NY, 14260
zhongcha@buffalo.edu

Shaofeng Zou
School of Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85287
zou@asu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we address the challenges of offline reinforcement learning (RL)
under model mismatch, where the agent aims to optimize its performance through
an offline dataset that may not accurately represent the deployment environment.
We identify two primary challenges under the setting: inaccurate model estimation
due to limited data and performance degradation caused by the model mismatch
between the dataset-collecting environment and the target deployment one. To
tackle these issues, we propose a unified principle of pessimism using distributionally robust Markov decision processes. We carefully construct a robust MDP
with a single uncertainty set to tackle both data sparsity and model mismatch, and
demonstrate that the optimal robust policy enjoys a near-optimal sub-optimality
gap under the target environment across three widely used uncertainty models:
total variation, χ2 divergence, and KL divergence. Our results improve upon or
match the state-of-the-art performance under the total variation and KL divergence
models, and provide the first result for the χ2 divergence model.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [40] learns a policy to maximize cumulative rewards through online
interactions with the environment. However, in real-world applications such as autonomous vehicles
[16] and health care [61], the trial-and-error nature of interacting with the environment can be both
costly and dangerous, rendering online learning impractical. To circumvent these challenges, the
concept of offline RL has emerged [17, 18], seeking to learn an optimal policy from a pre-collected
dataset, eliminating the need for real-time interaction with the environment.
Despite its potential, offline RL faces two significant challenges that impact its performance. The
first challenge stems from the nature of the offline dataset itself. Offline RL demonstrates impressive
performance only when the dataset is of high quality, as exemplified by [41, 9, 52, 18]. However, in
most RL scenarios, the data collection process can be expensive, constrained, and subject to specific
behavior policies. This often results in a dataset with insufficient samples and limited coverage.
The limited coverage of state-action pairs in the dataset presents a substantial hurdle, making it
challenging to fully learn the environment model and the model learned may be inaccurate, leading
to a poorly performing policy. and hindering the discovery of the optimal policy, particularly when
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

