Molecule Generation with
Fragment Retrieval Augmentation

Seul Lee1∗ Karsten Kreis2 Srimukh Prasad Veccham2 Meng Liu2
Danny Reidenbach2 Saee Paliwal2 Arash Vahdat2† Weili Nie2†
1
KAIST 2 NVIDIA
seul.lee@kaist.ac.kr
{kkreis,sveccham,menliu,dreidenbach,saeep,avahdat,wnie}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Fragment-based drug discovery, in which molecular fragments are assembled into
new molecules with desirable biochemical properties, has achieved great success.
However, many fragment-based molecule generation methods show limited exploration beyond the existing fragments in the database as they only reassemble or
slightly modify the given ones. To tackle this problem, we propose a new fragmentbased molecule generation framework with retrieval augmentation, namely Fragment Retrieval-Augmented Generation (f -RAG). f -RAG is based on a pre-trained
molecular generative model that proposes additional fragments from input fragments to complete and generate a new molecule. Given a fragment vocabulary,
f -RAG retrieves two types of fragments: (1) hard fragments, which serve as building blocks that will be explicitly included in the newly generated molecule, and (2)
soft fragments, which serve as reference to guide the generation of new fragments
through a trainable fragment injection module. To extrapolate beyond the existing
fragments, f -RAG updates the fragment vocabulary with generated fragments via
an iterative refinement process which is further enhanced with post-hoc genetic
fragment modification. f -RAG can achieve an improved exploration-exploitation
trade-off by maintaining a pool of fragments and expanding it with novel and
high-quality fragments through a strong generative prior.

1

Introduction

Optimization
performance

f-RAG (ours)
Genetic GFN
Mol GA
REINVENT

Diversity

Synthesizability

The goal of small molecule drug discovery is to discover
molecules with specific biochemical target properties,
such as synthesizability [9], non-toxicity [40], solubility [31] and binding affinity, in the vast chemical space.
Fragment-based drug discovery (FBDD) has been considered as an effective approach to explore the chemical space
and has resulted in many successful marketed drugs [27].
Contrary to high-throughput screening (HTS) [41] that
searches from a library of drug-like molecules, FBDD conNovelty
structs a library of molecular fragments to synthesize new
molecules beyond the existing molecule library, leading Figure 1: A radar plot of target properties. f -RAG strikes better balance among
to a better chemical coverage [5].
optimization performance, diversity, novelty,

Recently, generative models have been adopted in the field and synthesizability than the state-of-the-art
of FBDD to accelerate the process of searching for drug techniques on the PMO benchmark [10].
∗
†

Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.
Equal advising.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

