Universal Rates for Active Learning

Steve Hanneke
Purdue University
steve.hanneke@gmail.com
Shay Moran
Technion, Google Research
smoran@technion.ac.il

Amin Karbasi
Yale University
amin.karbasi@yale.edu
Grigoris Velegkas
Yale University
grigoris.velegkas@yale.edu

Abstract
In this work we study the problem of actively learning binary classifiers from
a given concept class, i.e., learning by utilizing unlabeled data and submitting
targeted queries about their labels to a domain expert. We evaluate the quality
of our solutions by considering the learning curves they induce, i.e., the rate of
decrease of the misclassification probability as the number of label queries increases.
The majority of the literature on active learning has focused on obtaining uniform
guarantees on the error rate which are only able to explain the upper envelope of the
learning curves over families of different data-generating distributions. We diverge
from this line of work and we focus on the distribution-dependent framework
of universal learning whose goal is to obtain guarantees that hold for any fixed
distribution, but do not apply uniformly over all the distributions. We provide
a complete characterization of the optimal learning rates that are achievable by
algorithms that have to specify the number of unlabeled examples they use ahead
of their execution. Moreover, we identify combinatorial complexity measures that
give rise to each case of our tetrachotomic characterization. This resolves an open
question that was posed by Balcan et al. (2010). As a byproduct of our main result,
we develop an active learning algorithm for partial concept classes that achieves
exponential learning rates in the uniform setting.

1

Introduction

The most prototypical type of learning is that of supervised learning, where an algorithm is given as
input n labeled data points sampled i.i.d. from some unknown distribution and the goal is to output a
function that has low probability of misclassifying new data from the same distribution. One caveat
with this passive model of learning is that it fails to capture the settings in which unlabeled data is
easily accessible, but obtaining their labels is costly. A natural example that fits this description is
that of webpage classification. It is easy for any web crawler to collect information about billions of
different webpages in a very short amount of time, however understanding which category a webpage
belongs to usually requires human feedback. Perhaps the most commonly used way to model this
problem is through the active learning framework in which the learner is given access to a large
stream of unlabeled data and a budget of n queries that it can submit to a domain expert in order
to obtain the label of some datapoint. The learner’s goal is to submit queries for the labels of the
most informative examples, and, as a result, eliminate some redundancy in the information content of
labeled data.
In this paper we study the optimal learning rates that are achievable by an active learning algorithm. In
the passive learning setting, it is common to measure the quality of an algorithm by its learning curve,
i.e., plotting the decay of its error rate as the number of training examples increases. In contrast, in the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

