Transcendence: Generative Models Can Outperform
The Experts That Train Them

Edwin Zhang
OpenAI
Harvard University
Humanity Unleashed
edwin@openai.com

Vincent Zhu
UC Santa Barbara
Humanity Unleashed
vincentzhu@ucsb.edu

Anat Kleiman
Harvard University
Apple
anatkleiman@g.harvard.edu

Naomi Saphra
Harvard University
Kempner Institute
nsaphra@g.harvard.edu

Benjamin L. Edelman
Princeton University
Harvard University
bedelman@g.harvard.edu

Milind Tambe
Harvard University
tambe@g.harvard.edu

Eran Malach
Harvard University
Kempner Institute
emalach@g.harvard.edu

Sham Kakade
Harvard University
Kempner Institute
sham@g.harvard.edu

Abstract
Generative models are trained with the simple objective of imitating the conditional
probability distribution induced by the data they are trained on. Therefore, when
trained on data generated by humans, we may not expect the artificial model to
outperform the humans on their original objectives. In this work, we study the
phenomenon of transcendence: when a generative model achieves capabilities that
surpass the abilities of the experts generating its data. We demonstrate transcendence
by training an autoregressive transformer to play chess from game transcripts, and
show that the trained model can sometimes achieve better performance than all
players in the dataset.1 We theoretically prove that transcendence can be enabled
by low-temperature sampling, and rigorously assess this claim experimentally.
Finally, we discuss other sources of transcendence, laying the groundwork for future
investigation of this phenomenon in a broader setting.

1

Introduction

Generative models (GMs) are typically trained to mimic human behavior. These humans may be
skilled in their various human objectives: answering a question, creating art, singing a song. The
model has only one objective: minimizing the cross-entropy loss with respect to the output distribution,
thereby adjusting it to match the distribution of human labels2 . Therefore, one might assume the model
can, at best, match the performance of an expert on their human objectives. Is it possible for these
models to surpass—to transcend—their expert sources in some domains?
1

To play with our models, code, and data, please see our website at https://transcendence.eddie.win.
Although chatbots are subject to a variety of post-training tuning methods, e.g., RLHF, we restrict our scope
by assuming that the specialized knowledge and capacities are already provided by cross-entropy loss.
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

