ID-to-3D: Expressive ID-guided 3D Heads
via Score Distillation Sampling

Francesca Babiloni, Alexandros Lattas, Jiankang Deng, Stefanos Zafeiriou
Imperial College London, UK
https://idto3d.github.io

Abstract
We propose ID-to-3D, a method to generate identity- and text-guided 3D human
heads with disentangled expressions, starting from even a single casually captured
in-the-wild image of a subject. The foundation of our approach is anchored
in compositionality, alongside the use of task-specific 2D diffusion models as
priors for optimization. First, we extend a foundational model with a lightweight
expression-aware and ID-aware architecture, and create 2D priors for geometry and
texture generation, via fine-tuning only 0.2% of its available training parameters.
Then, we jointly leverage a neural parametric representation for the expressions of
each subject and a multi-stage generation of highly detailed geometry and albedo
texture. This combination of strong face identity embeddings and our neural
representation enables accurate reconstruction of not only facial features but also
accessories and hair and can be meshed to provide render-ready assets for gaming
and telepresence. Our results achieve an unprecedented level of identity-consistent
and high-quality texture and geometry generation, generalizing to a “world” of
unseen 3D identities, without relying on large 3D captured datasets of human
assets.

Figure 1: ID-to-3D leverages identity conditioning and score distillation sampling on large diffusion
models, achieving high-quality 3D human asset generation from “in-the-wild” images, without
training on large scanned datasets. From left to right: a) renderings, b) input images, c) normals.

1

Introduction

The remarkable ability of humans to discern facial characteristics and emotional cues in others makes
the development of high-quality 3D head avatars a challenging yet foundational task for a diverse
array of emerging applications, including digital telepresence, game character generation, and the
creation of virtual and augmented reality experiences. However, the acquisition of such 3D human
assets remains a daunting task, that requires either manual work typically performed by graphic
artists, or expensive and laborious scanning. High-quality 3D facial scanning, achieved initially
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

