Advancing Open-Set Domain Generalization Using
Evidential Bi-Level Hardest Domain Scheduler
Kunyu Peng1 , Di Wen1 , Kailun Yang2∗, Ao Luo3 , Yufan Chen1 , Jia Fu4,5 ,
M. Saquib Sarfraz1,6 , Alina Roitberg7 , Rainer Stiefelhagen1
1
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 2 Hunan University 3 Waseda University
4
KTH Royal Institute of Technology 5 RISE Research Institutes of Sweden
6
Mercedes-Benz Tech Innovation 7 University of Stuttgart

Abstract
In Open-Set Domain Generalization (OSDG), the model is exposed to both new
variations of data appearance (domains) and open-set conditions, where both known
and novel categories are present at test time. The challenges of this task arise from
the dual need to generalize across diverse domains and accurately quantify category
novelty, which is critical for applications in dynamic environments. Recently,
meta-learning techniques have demonstrated superior results in OSDG, effectively
orchestrating the meta-train and -test tasks by employing varied random categories
and predefined domain partition strategies. These approaches prioritize a welldesigned training schedule over traditional methods that focus primarily on data
augmentation and the enhancement of discriminative feature learning. The prevailing meta-learning models in OSDG typically utilize a predefined sequential domain
scheduler to structure data partitions. However, a crucial aspect that remains inadequately explored is the influence brought by strategies of domain schedulers during
training. In this paper, we observe that an adaptive domain scheduler benefits
more in OSDG compared with prefixed sequential and random domain schedulers.
We propose the Evidential Bi-Level Hardest Domain Scheduler (EBiL-HaDS)
to achieve an adaptive domain scheduler. This method strategically sequences
domains by assessing their reliabilities in utilizing a follower network, trained
with confidence scores learned in an evidential manner, regularized by max rebiasing discrepancy, and optimized in a bi-level manner. We verify our approach
on three OSDG benchmarks, i.e., PACS, DigitsDG, and OfficeHome. The results
show that our method substantially improves OSDG performance and achieves
more discriminative embeddings for both the seen and unseen categories, underscoring the advantage of a judicious domain scheduler for the generalizability to
unseen domains and unseen categories. The source code is publicly available at
https://github.com/KPeng9510/EBiL-HaDS.

1

Introduction

Open-Set Domain Generalization (OSDG) is a challenging task where the model is exposed to both:
domain shift and category shift. Recent OSDG works often take a meta-learning approach [54, 46]
which simulates different cross-domain learning tasks during training. These methods conventionally
use a predefined sequential domain scheduler to create meta-train and meta-test domains within each
minibatch. But is fixing the meta-learning domain schedule a priori the best way to go? As a step to
explore this, our work investigates the new idea of adaptive domain scheduler, which dynamically
adjusts the training order based on ongoing model performance and domain difficulty.
∗

Correspondence: kailun.yang@hnu.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

