Heavy-Tailed Class Imbalance and Why Adam
Outperforms Gradient Descent on Language Models
Frederik Kunstner1
kunstner@cs.ubc.ca

Alan Milligan1
alanmil@cs.ubc.ca

Mark Schmidt1,2
schmidtm@cs.ubc.ca
1
University of British Columbia

Robin Yadav1
robiny12@student.ubc.ca

Alberto Bietti3
abietti@flatironinstitute.org
2
3
Canada CIFAR AI Chair
Flatiron Institute

Abstract
Adam has been shown to outperform gradient descent on large language models by
a larger margin than on other tasks, but it is unclear why. We show that a key factor
in this performance gap is the heavy-tailed class imbalance found in language tasks.
When trained with gradient descent, the loss of infrequent words decreases more
slowly than the loss of frequent ones. This leads to a slow decrease on the average
loss as most samples come from infrequent words. On the other hand, Adam and
sign-based methods are less sensitive to this problem. To establish that this behavior
is caused by class imbalance, we show empirically that it can be reproduced across
architectures and data types, on language transformers, vision CNNs, and linear
models. On a linear model with cross-entropy loss, we show that class imbalance
leads to imbalanced, correlated gradients and Hessians that have been hypothesized
to benefit Adam. We also prove that, in continuous time, gradient descent converges
slowly on low-frequency classes while sign descent does not.

1

Introduction

The recent success of large language models such as GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) and its successors
has relied on costly training procedures at unprecedented scale. A key ingredient in their training is
the Adam optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2015), which outperforms stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
on language problems by a large margin. Despite this large performance gap, we have a poor
understanding of why Adam works better and it has been difficult to find new optimizers that
consistently improve over Adam (Schmidt et al., 2021). Not only is it computationally difficult to
validate new optimizers on large models, but we also lack theoretical guidance; we do not know what
“problem” Adam solves to outperform SGD.
The success of Adam on language transformers has been well documented. Multiple works have
found metrics or statistics that correlate with the improved performance of Adam, showing that it
yields uniform updates across parameters despite imbalanced gradients (Liu et al., 2020), gives a
better descent direction than the gradient (Pan and Li, 2023), and takes a path over which a robust
variant of the condition number is smaller (Jiang et al., 2022). But these observations do not provide
a mechanism explaining what property of the problem leads to the improved performance of Adam.
Plausible mechanisms have been put forward, but they do not provide a complete explanation. Zhang
et al. (2020b) show that Adam-like methods are more resilient to heavy-tailed noise, which seems
more prominent in language than in vision tasks. But noise is not the primary cause of the gap, as it
already appears in deterministic training (Kunstner et al., 2023). An alternative hypothesis is that the
magnitude of the gradient and Hessian are correlated, which justifies clipping (Zhang et al., 2020a).
But to justify methods that normalize element-wise, like Adam and sign-like methods, we additionally
need the gradient and Hessian to be correlated across parameters (Crawshaw et al., 2022). While
there is empirical evidence for this behavior in neural networks, we do not have a good understanding
of why this occurs, nor why this would be more pronounced on language rather than vision tasks.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

