Template-free Articulated Gaussian Splatting for
Real-time Reposable Dynamic View Synthesis

Diwen Wan1 Yuxiang Wang1 Ruijie Lu1 Gang Zeng1
1
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of IST, Peking University, China
{wan,yuxiang123}@stu.pku.edu.cn {jason_lu,zeng}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
While novel view synthesis for dynamic scenes has made significant progress,
capturing skeleton models of objects and re-posing them remains a challenging task.
To tackle this problem, in this paper, we propose a novel approach to automatically
discover the associated skeleton model for dynamic objects from videos without
the need for object-specific templates. Our approach utilizes 3D Gaussian Splatting
and superpoints to reconstruct dynamic objects. Treating superpoints as rigid parts,
we can discover the underlying skeleton model through intuitive cues and optimize
it using the kinematic model. Besides, an adaptive control strategy is applied to
avoid the emergence of redundant superpoints. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness and efficiency of our method in obtaining re-posable 3D objects.
Not only can our approach achieve excellent visual fidelity, but it also allows for
the real-time rendering of high-resolution images. Please visit our project page for
more results: https://dnvtmf.github.io/SK_GS/.

1

Introduction

Novel view synthesis for 3D scenes is important for many domains including virtual/augmented/mixed
reality, game or movie productions. In recent years, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [1] have
witnessed significant advances in both static and dynamic scenes. Among them, 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3D-GS) [2] proposed a novel point-based representation, and is capable of real-time
rendering while ensuring the quality of generated images, bringing new insights to more complex
task scenarios.
Although visually compelling results and fast rendering speed have been achieved in reconstructing a
dynamic scene, current methods mainly focus on replaying the motion in the video, which means it
just renders novel view images within the given time range, making it hard to explicitly repose or
control the movement of individual objects in the scene. For some specific categories such as the
human body or human head, one main approach is to leverage the category-specific prior knowledge
such as templates to support the manipulation of reconstructed objects. However, it is hard for these
methods to generalize to large-scale in-the-wild scenes or human-made articulated objects.
Some template-free methods attempt to address these challenges by building reposable models
from videos. Watch-It-Move (WIM) [3] leverages ellipsoids, an explicit representation, to coarsely
model 3D objects, and then estimate the residual by a neural network. The underlying intuition is
that one or more ellipsoids can represent a functional part. By observing the motion of parts from
multi-view videos, WIM can learn both the appearance and structure of articulated objects. However,
the reconstruction results of WIM are of low visual quality and the training and rendering speed is
slow. Apart from WIM, Articulated Point NeRF (AP-NeRF) [4] samples feature point cloud from a
pre-trained dynamic NeRF model (TiNeuVox [5]) and initializes the skeleton tree using the medial
axis transform algorithm. By combining linear blend skinning (LBS) and point-based rendering [6],
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

