Beyond Slow Signs in High-fidelity Model Extraction

Hanna Foerster and Robert Mullins
University of Cambridge

Ilia Shumailov and Jamie Hayes
Google DeepMind

Abstract
Deep neural networks, costly to train and rich in intellectual property value, are
increasingly threatened by model extraction attacks that compromise their confidentiality. Previous attacks have succeeded in reverse-engineering model parameters
up to a precision of float64 for models trained on random data with at most three
hidden layers using cryptanalytical techniques. However, the process was identified
to be very time consuming and not feasible for larger and deeper models trained on
standard benchmarks. Our study evaluates the feasibility of parameter extraction
methods of Carlini et al. [1] further enhanced by Canales-Martínez et al. [2] for
models trained on standard benchmarks. We introduce a unified codebase that
integrates previous methods and reveal that computational tools can significantly
influence performance. We develop further optimisations to the end-to-end attack
and improve the efficiency of extracting weight signs by up to 14.8 times compared to former methods through the identification of easier and harder to extract
neurons. Contrary to prior assumptions, we identify extraction of weights, not
extraction of weight signs, as the critical bottleneck. With our improvements, a
16,721 parameter model with 2 hidden layers trained on MNIST is extracted within
only 98 minutes compared to at least 150 minutes previously. Finally, addressing
methodological deficiencies observed in previous studies, we propose new ways of
robust benchmarking for future model extraction attacks.

1

Introduction

Training machine learning (ML) models requires not only vast datasets and extensive computational
resources but also expert knowledge, making the process costly. This makes models lucrative robbery
targets. The rise of ML-as-a-service further amplifies the challenges associated with balancing public
query accessibility and safeguarding model confidentiality. This shows the emerging risk of model
extraction attacks, where adversaries aim to replicate a model’s predictive capabilities from a black
box setting where only the input and output can be observed. Previous attacks have approached
model extraction either precisely, obtaining a copy of the victim model, or approximately, obtaining
an imprecise copy of the victim model. Components of the model that have been the target of
extraction include training hyperparameters [3], architectures [4] [5] [6], and learned parameters
such as weights and biases in deep neural networks (DNNs) [1] [7].
In this paper, we are interested in precise model extraction and use the most recent advances of
cryptanalytical extraction of DNNs by Carlini et al. [1] and Canales-Martínez et al. [2] as our starting
point. Carlini et al. previously demonstrated that it is feasible to extract model signatures – normalised
weights of neural networks – on relatively small models with up to three hidden layers. For 1 hidden
layer models the parameter count tested was up to 100,480, however, for 2 and 3 hidden layer models,
which are increasingly difficult to extract, the maximum parameter count for models tested was
4,020. While signature extraction was generally determined as straightforward, sign extraction of the
weights was identified as a bottleneck with further work needed. Following this, Canales-Martínez
et al. [2] improved sign extraction speed from exponential to polynomial time, with their Neuron
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

