Normalization and effective learning rates in
reinforcement learning

Clare Lyle†

Zeyu Zheng†

Khimya Khetarpal†

James Martens†

Razvan Pascanu†

Hado van Hasselt†

Will Dabney†

Abstract
Layer normalization has demonstrated remarkable effectiveness at preventing
plasticity loss in continual and reinforcement learning (RL), though the precise
reasons for this effectiveness remain mysterious. In this work, we identify new
mechanisms by which layer normalization can help – and hinder – training in
neural networks, and leverage these insights to improve the robustness of gradientbased optimization algorithms to nonstationarity. Our analysis reveals a surprising
ability of layer normalization to revive dormant ReLU units, along with an underappreciated vulnerability to unconstrained decay of the effective learning rate
(ELR), which can drive loss of plasticity in long-running nonstationary tasks.
Motivated by these findings, we propose Normalize-and-Project (NaP), a simple
protocol designed to provide the numerous benefits of normalization while ensuring
that the effective learning rate remains constant throughout training. To do so, NaP
couples the insertion of normalization layers with weight projection. This technique
mitigates loss of plasticity in two challenging continual learning problems: a
sequential supervised learning task, and a continual variant of the Arcade Learning
Environment. Further, by using NaP to explicitly control the effective learning rate
in deep RL agents, we find that in fact the implicit ELR decay induced by parameter
norm growth in these agents is critical to their ability to achieve competitive
performance, suggesting the common practice of using constant learning rates in
deep RL may be far from optimal.

1

Introduction

Many of the most promising application areas of deep learning, in particular deep reinforcement
learning (RL), require training on a problem which is in some way nonstationary. In order to
perform well on a nonstationary problem, the neural network must maintain its ability to adapt to new
information, i.e. it must remain plastic. Several recent works have shown that loss of plasticity can
present a major barrier to performance improvement in RL and in continual learning [Dohare et al.,
2021, Lyle et al., 2021, Nikishin et al., 2022]. These works have proposed a variety of explanations
for plasticity loss such as the accumulation of saturated ReLU units and increased sharpness of the
loss landscape [Lyle et al., 2023], along with mitigation strategies, such as resetting dead units [Sokar
et al., 2023] and regularizing the parameters towards their initial values [Kumar et al., 2023]. Many
of these explanations and their corresponding mitigation strategies center around reducing drift in the
distribution of pre-activations [Lyle et al., 2024], a problem which has historically been resolved in
the supervised learning setting, and more recently in continual learning and RL [Hussing et al., 2024,
Ball et al., 2023], by incorporating normalization layers into the network architecture.
†

Google DeepMind. Correspondence to clarelyle@google.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

