HairDiffusion: Vivid Multi-Colored
Hair Editing via Latent Diffusion

Yu Zeng1 , Yang Zhang1∗ , Jiachen Liu1 , Linlin Shen1,2,3
Kaijun Deng1 , Weizhao He1 , Jinbao Wang3,4
1
Computer Vision Institute, School of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University
4
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
{cengyu,liujiachen,dengkaijun}2023@email.szu.cn, heweizhao2022@email.szu.edu.cn
{yangzhang,llshen,wangjb}@szu.edu.cn

Figure 1: Our framework supports individual or collaborative editing of hairstyle and color, utilizing
text, reference images, and stroke maps. With exceptional performance, particularly evident in editing
multiple hair colors.

Abstract
Hair editing is a critical image synthesis task that aims to edit hair color and
hairstyle using text descriptions or reference images, while preserving irrelevant
attributes (e.g., identity, background, cloth). Many existing methods are based on
StyleGAN to address this task. However, due to the limited spatial distribution of
StyleGAN, it struggles with multiple hair color editing and facial preservation. Considering the advancements in diffusion models, we utilize Latent Diffusion Models
(LDMs) for hairstyle editing. Our approach introduces Multi-stage Hairstyle Blend
(MHB), effectively separating control of hair color and hairstyle in diffusion latent
space. Additionally, we train a warping module to align the hair color with the
target region. To further enhance multi-color hairstyle editing, we fine-tuned a
CLIP model using a multi-color hairstyle dataset. Our method not only tackles the
complexity of multi-color hairstyles but also addresses the challenge of preserving original colors during diffusion editing. Extensive experiments showcase the
superiority of our method in editing multi-color hairstyles while preserving facial
attributes given textual descriptions and reference images.

1

Introduction

Hair editing is one of the most challenging and interesting facets of semantic face editing. The
essence of this task is to edit hair attributes such as color, and hairstyle from the reference image or
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

