Mechanism design augmented with output advice

George Christodoulou
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
and Archimedes/RC Athena, Greece
gichristo@csd.auth.gr

Alkmini Sgouritsa
Athens University of Economics and Business
and Archimedes/RC Athena, Greece
alkmini@aueb.gr

Ioannis Vlachos
Athens University of Economics and Business
and Archimedes/RC Athena, Greece
ioa.vlahos@aueb.gr

Abstract
Our work revisits the design of mechanisms via the learning-augmented framework. In this model, the algorithm is enhanced with imperfect (machine-learned)
information concerning the input, usually referred to as prediction. The goal is
to design algorithms whose performance degrades gently as a function of the prediction error and, in particular, perform well if the prediction is accurate, but also
provide a worst-case guarantee under any possible error. This framework has been
successfully applied recently to various mechanism design settings, where in most
cases the mechanism is provided with a prediction about the types of the agents.
We adopt a perspective in which the mechanism is provided with an output recommendation. We make no assumptions about the quality of the suggested outcome,
and the goal is to use the recommendation to design mechanisms with low approximation guarantees whenever the recommended outcome is reasonable, but at the
same time to provide worst-case guarantees whenever the recommendation significantly deviates from the optimal one. We propose a generic, universal measure,
which we call quality of recommendation, to evaluate mechanisms across various
information settings. We demonstrate how this new metric can provide refined
analysis in existing results.
This model introduces new challenges, as the mechanism receives limited information comparing to settings that use predictions about the types of the agents.
We study, through this lens, several well-studied mechanism design paradigms,
devising new mechanisms, but also providing refined analysis for existing ones,
using as a metric the quality of recommendation. We complement our positive
results, by exploring the limitations of known classes of strategyproof mechanisms
that can be devised using output recommendation.

1

Introduction

Motivated by the occasionally overly pessimistic perspective of worst-case analysis, a recent trend has
emerged focusing on the design and analysis of algorithms within the so-called learning-augmented
framework (refer to [30] for an overview). Within this framework, algorithms are enhanced with
imperfect information about the input, usually referred to as predictions. These predictions can
stem from machine learning models, often characterized by high accuracy, leading to exceptional
performance. However, their accuracy is not guaranteed, so the predicted input may differ significantly
from the actual input. Blindly relying on these predictions can have significant consequences
compared to employing a worst-case analysis approach.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

