Replicability in Learning: Geometric Partitions and
Sperner-KKM Lemma

Jason Vander Woude
Sandia National Laboratories
jasonvwoude@gmail.com
A. Pavan
Iowa State University
pavan@cs.iastate.edu

Peter Dixon
University of Toronto, Mississauga
tooplark@gmail.com

Jamie Radcliffe
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
jamie.radcliffe@unl.edu

N. V. Vinodchandran
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
vinod@unl.edu

Abstract
This paper studies replicability in machine learning tasks from a geometric viewpoint. Recent works have revealed the role of geometric partitions and Sperner’s
lemma (and its variations) in designing replicable learning algorithms and in establishing impossibility results.
A partition P of Rd is called a (k, ε)-secluded partition if for every p⃗ ∈ Rd , an
ε-radius ball (with respect to the ℓ∞ norm) centered at p⃗ intersects at most k
members of P. In relation to replicable learning, the parameter k is closely related
to the list complexity, and the parameter ε is related to the sample complexity of
the replicable learner. Construction of secluded partitions with better parameters
(small k and large ε) will lead to replicable learning algorithms with small list and
sample complexities.
Motivated by this connection, we undertake a comprehensive study of secluded
partitions and establish near-optimal relationships between k and ε.
1. We show that for any (k, ε)-secluded partition where each member has at
most unit measure, it must be that k ≥ (1 + 2ε)d , and consequently, for the
interesting regime k ∈ [2d ] it must be that ε ≤ log4d(k) .
2. To complement this upper bound on ε, we show that for each d ∈ N and for
each viable k ∈ [2d ], a construction of a (k, ε)-secluded (unit cube) partition
with ε ≥ log4d(k) · 8 log 1(d+1) . This establishes the optimality of ε within a
4
logarithmic factor.
3. Finally, we adapt our proof techniques to obtain a new “neighborhood” variant
of the cubical KKM lemma (or cubical Sperner’s lemma): For any coloring
of [0, 1]d in which no color is used on opposing faces, it holds for each
ε ∈ (0, 12 ] that there is a point where the open ε-radius ℓ∞ -ball intersects at
least (1 + 23 ε)d colors. While the classical Sperner/KKM lemma guarantees
the existence of a point that is "adjacent" to points with (d + 1) distinct colors,
the neighborhood version guarantees the existence of a small neighborhood
with exponentially many points with distinct colors.

1

Introduction

Can we design learning algorithms that are replicable? Typically, learning algorithms observe samples
from an unknown distribution and output a hypothesis. Since different runs of a learning algorithm
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

