MotionGS: Exploring Explicit Motion Guidance for
Deformable 3D Gaussian Splatting

Ruijie Zhu ∗

Yanzhe Liang∗
Hanzhi Chang Jiacheng Deng
Wenfei Yang
Tianzhu Zhang † Yongdong Zhang

Jiahao Lu

University of Science and Technology of China / Deep Space Exploration Lab
{ruijiezhu, yzliang, changhz, dengjc, lujiahao}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
{yangwf, tzzhang, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Dynamic scene reconstruction is a long-term challenge in the field of 3D vision.
Recently, the emergence of 3D Gaussian Splatting has provided new insights into
this problem. Although subsequent efforts rapidly extend static 3D Gaussian to
dynamic scenes, they often lack explicit constraints on object motion, leading
to optimization difficulties and performance degradation. To address the above
issues, we propose a novel deformable 3D Gaussian splatting framework called
MotionGS, which explores explicit motion priors to guide the deformation of 3D
Gaussians. Specifically, we first introduce an optical flow decoupling module
that decouples optical flow into camera flow and motion flow, corresponding to
camera movement and object motion respectively. Then the motion flow can
effectively constrain the deformation of 3D Gaussians, thus simulating the motion
of dynamic objects. Additionally, a camera pose refinement module is proposed
to alternately optimize 3D Gaussians and camera poses, mitigating the impact
of inaccurate camera poses. Extensive experiments in the monocular dynamic
scenes validate that MotionGS surpasses state-of-the-art methods and exhibits
significant superiority in both qualitative and quantitative results. Project page:
https://ruijiezhu94.github.io/MotionGS_page/.

1

Introduction

Dynamic scene reconstruction aims to model the 3D structure and appearance of time-evolving
scenes, enabling novel-view synthesis at arbitrary timestamps. It is a crucial task in the field of 3D
computer vision, attracting widespread attention from the research community and finding important
applications in areas such as virtual/augmented reality and 3D content production. In comparison to
static scene reconstruction, dynamic scene reconstruction remains a longstanding open challenge due
to the difficulties arising from motion complexity and topology changes.
In recent years, a plethora of dynamic scene reconstruction methods [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8] have been
proposed based on Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [9], driving rapid advancements in this field. While
these methods exhibit impressive visual quality, their substantial computational overhead impedes
their applications in real-time scenarios. Recently, a novel approach called 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) [10], has garnered widespread attention in the research community. By introducing explicit
3D Gaussian representation and efficient CUDA-based rasterizer, 3DGS has achieved unprecedented
high-quality novel-view synthesis with real-time rendering. Subsequent methods [11, 12, 13, 14,
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

