Integrating Suboptimal Human Knowledge with
Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning for Large-Scale
Multiagent Systems

Dingbang Liu1,2 , Shohei Kato2 , Wen Gu3 , Fenghui Ren1 , Jun Yan1 , Guoxin Su1
University of Wollongong1 , Nagoya Institute of Technology2 ,
Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology3
dl956@uowmail.edu.au, shohey@nitech.ac.jp, wgu@jaist.ac.jp
fren@uow.edu.au, jyan@uow.edu.au, guoxin@uow.edu.au

Abstract
Due to the exponential growth of agent interactions and the curse of dimensionality,
learning efficient coordination from scratch is inherently challenging in large-scale
multi-agent systems. While agents’ learning is data-driven, sampling from millions
of steps, human learning processes are quite different. Inspired by the concept of
Human-on-the-Loop and the daily human hierarchical control, we propose a novel
knowledge-guided multi-agent reinforcement learning framework (hhk-MARL),
which combines human abstract knowledge with hierarchical reinforcement learning to address the learning difficulties among a large number of agents. In this
work, fuzzy logic is applied to represent human suboptimal knowledge, and agents
are allowed to freely decide how to leverage the proposed prior knowledge. Additionally, a graph-based group controller is built to enhance agent coordination. The
proposed framework is end-to-end and compatible with various existing algorithms.
We conduct experiments in challenging domains of the StarCraft Multi-agent Challenge combined with three famous algorithms: IQL, QMIX, and Qatten. The results
show that our approach can greatly accelerate the training process and improve the
final performance, even based on low-performance human prior knowledge.

1

Introduction

As an essential attribute of multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), scalability deserves more
attention since it contributes to autonomous collective learning behaviors among agents. In many
engineering and scientific disciplines, algorithms must possess sufficient scalability to cooperate
properly [1, 2, 3]. Unfortunately, training a large number of agents presents inherent challenges. The
joint action-state space increases exponentially with the number of agents, resulting in the curse of
dimensionality [4, 5]. Agents, suffering from sparse rewards and sample inefficiency [6, 7], encounter
’start-up’ problems [8] and often get trapped in local optima, to the extent that learning becomes
impossible in the worst cases [9, 10].
To alleviate the exploration burden and overcome the curse of dimensionality, knowledge transfer
methods have attracted significant research interest in dealing with large-scale multi-agent systems
(MAS) [11, 12, 13]. As the most intuitive and common source, transferring prior knowledge from
humans has received considerable attention [14, 15]. An important line of research involves extracting
prior knowledge from expert trajectories through imitation learning to address sequential decisionmaking problems [16, 17]. However, despite the emphasis on Human-on-the-Loop [18], most research
still focuses on step-by-step action demonstrations, which require high-quality and comprehensive
prior knowledge [11, 14, 17]. The deployment of this type of human knowledge becomes increasingly
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

