EDT: An Efficient Diffusion Transformer Framework
Inspired by Human-like Sketching

Xinwang Chen∗1 , Ning Liu∗1 , Yichen Zhu1 , Feifei Feng1 , Jian Tang†2
1
Midea Group, 2 Beijing Innovation Center of Humanoid Robotics
chen_xinwang@xs.ustb.edu.cn, ningliu1220@gmail.com
{zhuyc25, feifei.feng}@midea.com, jian.tang@x-humanoid.com

Abstract
Transformer-based Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPMs) have shown more potential than CNN-based DPMs, yet their extensive computational requirements
hinder widespread practical applications. To reduce the computation budget of
transformer-based DPMs, this work proposes the Efficient Diffusion Transformer
(EDT) framework. The framework includes a lightweight-design diffusion model
architecture, and a training-free Attention Modulation Matrix and its alternation
arrangement in EDT inspired by human-like sketching. Additionally, we propose a
token relation-enhanced masking training strategy tailored explicitly for EDT to
augment its token relation learning capability. Our extensive experiments demonstrate the efficacy of EDT. The EDT framework reduces training and inference
costs and surpasses existing transformer-based diffusion models in image synthesis
performance, thereby achieving a significant overall enhancement. With lower
FID, EDT-S, EDT-B, and EDT-XL attained speed-ups of 3.93x, 2.84x, and 1.92x
respectively in the training phase, and 2.29x, 2.29x, and 2.22x respectively in
inference, compared to the corresponding sizes of MDTv2. Our code is available
at here.

1

Introduction

Figure 1: Illustration of the alternation process of local and global attention during sketching.
Numerous studies [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] and practical applications [6, 7, 8] have validated the effectiveness
of Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPMs), establishing them as a mainstream method in image
generation. In past years, predominant works [1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 10, 11] have advanced diffusion models
by incorporating a convolutional UNet-like [12] architecture as their backbone. On the other hand,
transformers [13] have achieved significant milestones in both natural language processing [14,
∗
†

Joint first authorship. Either author can be cited first.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

