Discovering Preference Optimization Algorithms
with and for Large Language Models

Chris Lu∗
Sakana AI and FLAIR
chrislu@sakana.ai

Samuel Holt∗
University of Cambridge
sih31@cam.ac.uk

Claudio Fanconi∗
University of Cambridge
caf83@cam.ac.uk

Alex J. Chan†
University of Cambridge
ajc340@cam.ac.uk

Jakob Foerster‡
FLAIR, University of Oxford
jakob.foerster@eng.ox.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar‡
University of Cambridge
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Robert Tjarko Lange‡
Sakana AI
robert@sakana.ai

Abstract
Offline preference optimization is a key method for enhancing and controlling the
quality of Large Language Model (LLM) outputs. Typically, preference optimization is approached as an offline supervised learning task using manually crafted
convex loss functions. While these methods are based on theoretical insights,
they are inherently constrained by human creativity, so the large search space of
possible loss functions remains under-explored. We address this by performing
LLM-driven objective discovery to automatically discover new state-of-the-art preference optimization algorithms without (expert) human intervention. Specifically,
we iteratively prompt an LLM to propose and implement new preference optimization loss functions based on previously evaluated performance metrics. This
process leads to the discovery of previously unknown and performant preference
optimization algorithms. The best performing of these we call Discovered Preference Optimization (DiscoPOP)1 , a novel algorithm that adaptively blends logistic
and exponential losses. Experiments demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance
of DiscoPOP and its successful transfer to held-out tasks.

1

Introduction

Training Large Language Models (LLMs) usually involves starting with a model pre-trained on large
text corpora and then fine-tuning it to match human preferences. Pre-trained, and even instruction
fine-tuned LLMs, can generate harmful, dangerous, and unethical completions [Carlini et al., 2021,
Gehman et al., 2020]. To mitigate this and align an LLM with human values, we use human
preference alignment through preference-ranked completion data. This approach has become an
industry standard, popularized by reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF) [Christiano
et al., 2017, RLHF], and more recently, by offline preference optimization algorithms like direct
preference optimization [Rafailov et al., 2023, DPO] and sequence likelihood calibration [Zhao
∗

Equal Contribution.
Work partially done at Spotify.
‡
Equal Advising.
1
Code: https://github.com/luchris429/DiscoPOP.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

