Latent Functional Maps:
a spectral framework for representation alignment

Marco Fumero∗
IST Austria
marco.fumero@ist.ac.at
Valentino Maiorca†
Sapienza, University of Rome
maiorca@di.uniroma1.it

Marco Pegoraro∗
Sapienza, University of Rome
pegoraro@di.uniroma1.it
Francesco Locatello
IST Austria
francesco.locatello@ist.ac.at

Emanuele Rodolà
Sapienza, University of Rome
rodola@di.uniroma1.it

Abstract
Neural models learn data representations that lie on low-dimensional manifolds,
yet modeling the relation between these representational spaces is an ongoing challenge. By integrating spectral geometry principles into neural modeling, we show
that this problem can be better addressed in the functional domain, mitigating complexity, while enhancing interpretability and performances on downstream tasks.
To this end, we introduce a multi-purpose framework to the representation learning
community, which allows to: (i) compare different spaces in an interpretable way
and measure their intrinsic similarity; (ii) find correspondences between them, both
in unsupervised and weakly supervised settings, and (iii) to effectively transfer
representations between distinct spaces. We validate our framework on various
applications, ranging from stitching to retrieval tasks, and on multiple modalities,
demonstrating that Latent Functional Maps can serve as a swiss-army knife for
representation alignment.

1

Introduction

Neural Networks (NNs) learn to represent high-dimensional data as elements of lower-dimensional
latent spaces. While much attention is given to the model’s output for tasks such as classification,
generation, reconstruction, or denoising, understanding the internal representations and their geometry
is equally important. This understanding facilitates reusing representations for downstream tasks
[62, 14] and the comparison between different models [23, 39], thereby broadening the applicability
of NNs, and understanding their structure and properties. Moreover, recent studies have shown
that distinct neural models often develop similar representations when exposed to similar stimuli,
a phenomenon observed in both biological [16, 25, 63] and artificial settings [38, 23, 39]. Notably,
even when neural networks have different architectures, internal representations of distinct models
can often be aligned through a linear transformation [61, 50]. This indicates a level of consistency
in how NNs process information, highlighting the importance of exploring and understanding these
internal representations.
*
†

Equal Contribution
Work done while visiting ISTA

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

