Scaling Retrieval-Based Language Models
with a Trillion-Token Datastore
Rulin Shao1
Jacqueline He1
Akari Asai1
Weijia Shi1
1
1
1
Tim Dettmers
Sewon Min
Luke Zettlemoyer
Pang Wei Koh1,2
1
University of Washington 2 Allen Institute for AI
{rulins,jyyh,akari,swj0419,dettmers,sewon,lsz,pangwei}
@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Scaling laws with respect to the amount of training data and the number of parameters allow us to predict the cost-benefit trade-offs of pretraining language models
(LMs) in different configurations. In this paper, we consider another dimension of
scaling: the amount of data available at inference time. Specifically, we find that
increasing the size of the datastore used by a retrieval-based LM monotonically
improves language modeling and several downstream tasks without obvious saturation, such that a smaller model augmented with a large datastore outperforms a
larger LM-only model on knowledge-intensive tasks. By plotting compute-optimal
scaling curves with varied datastore, model, and pretraining data sizes, we show
that using larger datastores can significantly improve model performance for the
same training compute budget. We carry out our study by constructing a 1.4 trilliontoken datastore named M ASSIVE DS, which is the largest and the most diverse
open-sourced datastore for retrieval-based LMs to date, and designing an efficient
pipeline for studying datastore scaling in a computationally accessible manner.
Finally, we analyze the effect of improving the retriever, datastore quality filtering,
and other design choices on our observed scaling trends. Overall, our results show
that datastore size should be considered as an integral part of LM efficiency and
performance trade-offs. To facilitate future research, we open-source our datastore
and code at https://github.com/RulinShao/retrieval-scaling.
Datastore Scaling
Language Modeling
(RedPajama)

Downstream Task
(MMLU, 5-shot)

Compute-Optimal Scaling
(TriviaQA, 5-shot)
12B

LM-only

Model Size (Pythia)

LM + Datastore

1B

Figure 1: Datastore scaling improves language modeling and downstream task performance.
Left: Datastore scaling performance on language modeling and a downstream task (MMLU) with
L LAMA-2 and L LAMA-3 models. Right: Compute-optimal scaling of retrieval-based language
models vs. LM-only models with P YTHIA models. By considering the size of the datastore as an
additional dimension of scaling, we can improve model performance at lower training cost.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

