Zero-Shot Reinforcement Learning
from Low Quality Data

Scott Jeen
University of Cambridge
srj38@cam.ac.uk

Tom Bewley
University of Bristol
tomdbewley@gmail.com

Jonathan M. Cullen
University of Cambridge
jmc99@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Zero-shot reinforcement learning (RL) promises to provide agents that can perform any task in an environment after an offline, reward-free pre-training phase.
Methods leveraging successor measures and successor features have shown strong
performance in this setting, but require access to large heterogenous datasets
for pre-training which cannot be expected for most real problems. Here, we
explore how the performance of zero-shot RL methods degrades when trained
on small homogeneous datasets, and propose fixes inspired by conservatism, a
well-established feature of performant single-task offline RL algorithms. We
evaluate our proposals across various datasets, domains and tasks, and show
that conservative zero-shot RL algorithms outperform their non-conservative
counterparts on low quality datasets, and perform no worse on high quality
datasets. Somewhat surprisingly, our proposals also outperform baselines that
get to see the task during training. Our code is available via the project page
https://enjeeneer.io/projects/zero-shot-rl/.

1

Introduction

Today’s large pre-trained models generalise impressively to unseen vision [70] and language [9] tasks,
but not to sequential decision-making problems. Zero-shot reinforcement learning (RL) attempts to
correct this, asking, informally: can we pre-train an agent on a dataset of reward-free transitions such
that it can perform any downstream task in an environment? Recently, methods leveraging successor
features [5, 7] and successor measures [6, 82] have emerged as viable zero-shot RL candidates,
returning near-optimal policies for many unseen tasks [83].
These works have assumed access to a large heterogeneous dataset of transitions for pre-training. In
theory, such datasets could be curated by highly-exploratory agents during an upfront data collection
phase [32, 10, 18, 62, 63, 35, 48]. However, in practice, deploying such agents in real systems can be
time-consuming, costly or dangerous. To avoid these downsides, it would be convenient to skip the
data collection phase and pre-train on historical datasets. Whilst these are common in the real world,
they are usually produced by controllers that are not optimising for data heterogeneity [16], making
them smaller and less diverse than current zero-shot RL methods expect.
Can we still perform zero-shot RL using these datasets? This is the primary question this paper seeks
to answer, and one we address in four parts. First, we investigate the performance of existing methods
when trained on such datasets, finding their performance suffers because of out-of-distribution
state-action value overestimation, a well-observed phenomenon in single-task offline RL. Second,
we develop ideas from conservatism in single-task offline RL for use in the zero-shot RL setting,
introducing a straightforward regularizer of OOD values or measures that can be used by any zero-shot
RL algorithm (Figure 1). Third, we conduct experiments across varied domains, tasks and datasets,
showing our conservative zero-shot RL proposals outperform their non-conservative counterparts,
and surpass the performance of methods that get to see the task in advance. Finally, we establish
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

