Metacognitive Capabilities of LLMs: An Exploration
in Mathematical Problem Solving

Aniket Didolkar 1 , Anirudh Goyal 1 , Nan Rosemary Ke 4 , Siyuan Guo 3, 5 ,
Michal Valko 4 , Timothy Lillicrap 4 , Danilo Rezende 4 ,
Yoshua Bengio 1 , Michael Mozer 4 , Sanjeev Arora 2

Abstract
Metacognitive knowledge refers to humans’ intuitive knowledge of their own thinking and reasoning processes. Today’s best LLMs clearly possess some reasoning
processes. The paper gives evidence that they also have metacognitive knowledge,
including ability to name skills and procedures to apply given a task. We explore
this primarily in context of math reasoning, developing a prompt-guided interaction
procedure to get a powerful LLM to assign sensible skill labels to math questions,
followed by having it perform semantic clustering to obtain coarser families of
skill labels. These coarse skill labels look interpretable to humans.
To validate that these skill labels are meaningful and relevant to the LLM’s reasoning processes we perform the following experiments. (a) We ask GPT-4 to assign
skill labels to training questions in math datasets GSM8K and MATH. (b) When
using an LLM to solve the test questions, we present it with the full list of skill
labels and ask it to identify the skill needed. Then it is presented with randomly
selected exemplar solved questions associated with that skill label. This improves
accuracy on GSM8k and MATH for several strong LLMs, including code-assisted
models. The methodology presented is domain-agnostic, even though this article
applies it to math problems.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable advancements in recent years at
natural language inference tasks [1–7], as well as scientific and mathematical problems [8–11],
although their limitations on mathematical problems are also well-documented [12–17].
A core concept in human pedagogy is Metacognition [18], sometimes described as thinking about
thinking. It refers to ability to reason about one’s own cognitive processes as well as about learningrelevant properties of information or data. Metacognitive Knowledge refers to the learner’s accumulated knowledge of this type. Pedagogy research shows that improving learners’ metacognitive
knowledge can improve their capabilities, for example on math [19, 20]. The current paper raises
the question “Do LLMs also have metacognitive knowledge?” And if yes, Can we bootstrap such
knowledge to further improve LLM capabilities?
At first glance, this quest seems difficult. Deciphering LLMs’ inner working from their huge set of
parameters –all results of non-linear optimization— is notoriously hard. Furthermore, scientists lack
parameter access to most leading AI models. But there are still reasons to hope we can understand
metacognition by interacting with LLMs. They display some human tics, such as ability to improve
their math reasoning via Chain of Thought (CoT) [21] and also the “Let’s think step by step”
01

Mila, University of Montreal, 2 Princeton University, 3 The University of Cambridge, 4 Google DeepMind
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Corresponding authors: adidolkar123@gmail.com, anirudhgoyal9119@gmail.com.
5

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

