Transductive Active Learning:
Theory and Applications

Jonas Hübotter∗
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich, Switzerland

Bhavya Sukhija
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich, Switzerland

Lenart Treven
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich, Switzerland

Yarden As
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich, Switzerland

Andreas Krause
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich, Switzerland

Abstract
We study a generalization of classical active learning to real-world settings with
concrete prediction targets where sampling is restricted to an accessible region
of the domain, while prediction targets may lie outside this region. We analyze
a family of decision rules that sample adaptively to minimize uncertainty about
prediction targets. We are the first to show, under general regularity assumptions,
that such decision rules converge uniformly to the smallest possible uncertainty
obtainable from the accessible data. We demonstrate their strong sample efficiency
in two key applications: active fine-tuning of large neural networks and safe
Bayesian optimization, where they achieve state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

Machine learning, at its core, is about designing systems that can extract knowledge or patterns from
data. One part of this challenge is determining not just how to learn given observed data but deciding
what data to obtain next, given the information already available. More formally, given an unknown
and sufficiently regular function f over a domain X : How can we learn f sample-efficiently from
(noisy) observations? This problem is widely studied in active learning and experimental design
(Chaloner & Verdinelli, 1995; Settles, 2009).
Active learning methods commonly aim to learn f globally, i.e., across the entire domain X . However,
in many real-world problems, (i) the domain is so large that learning f globally is hopeless or (ii)
agents have limited information and cannot access the entire domain (e.g., due to restricted access
or to act safely). Thus, global learning is often not desirable or even possible. Instead, intelligent
systems are typically required to act in a more directed manner and extrapolate beyond their limited
information. This work formalizes the above two aspects of active learning, which have remained
largely unaddressed by prior work. We provide a comprehensive overview of related work in Section 6.
“Directed” transductive active learning We consider the generalized problem of transductive
active learning, where given two arbitrary subsets of the domain X ; a target space A ⊆ X , and a
sample space S ⊆ X , we study the question:
How can we learn f within A by actively sampling observations within S?
∗

Correspondence to jonas.huebotter@inf.ethz.ch

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

