Refusal in Language Models
Is Mediated by a Single Direction

Andy Arditi∗
Independent

Oscar Obeso∗
ETH Zürich

Nina Panickssery
Anthropic

Aaquib Syed
University of Maryland
Wes Gurnee
MIT

Daniel Paleka
ETH Zürich
Neel Nanda

Abstract
Conversational large language models are fine-tuned for both instruction-following
and safety, resulting in models that obey benign requests but refuse harmful ones.
While this refusal behavior is widespread across chat models, its underlying
mechanisms remain poorly understood. In this work, we show that refusal is
mediated by a one-dimensional subspace, across 13 popular open-source chat
models up to 72B parameters in size. Specifically, for each model, we find a
single direction such that erasing this direction from the model’s residual stream
activations prevents it from refusing harmful instructions, while adding this
direction elicits refusal on even harmless instructions. Leveraging this insight, we
propose a novel white-box jailbreak method that surgically disables refusal with
minimal effect on other capabilities. Finally, we mechanistically analyze how
adversarial suffixes suppress propagation of the refusal-mediating direction. Our
findings underscore the brittleness of current safety fine-tuning methods. More
broadly, our work showcases how an understanding of model internals can be
leveraged to develop practical methods for controlling model behavior.†

1

Introduction

Deployed large language models (LLMs) undergo multiple rounds of fine-tuning to become both
helpful and harmless: to provide helpful responses to innocuous user requests, but to refuse harmful
or inappropriate ones (Bai et al., 2022). Naturally, large numbers of users and researchers alike have
attempted to circumvent these defenses using a wide array of jailbreak attacks (Chu et al., 2024; Wei
et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024) to uncensor model outputs, including fine-tuning techniques (Lermen
et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023; Zhan et al., 2023). While the consequences of a successful attack
on current chat assistants are modest, the scale and severity of harm from misuse could increase
dramatically if frontier models are endowed with increased agency and autonomy (Anthropic, 2024).
That is, as models are deployed in higher-stakes settings and are able to take actions in the real world,
the ability to robustly refuse a request to cause harm is an essential requirement of a safe AI system.
Inspired by the rapid progress of mechanistic interpretability (Bricken et al., 2023; Marks et al., 2024;
Nanda et al., 2023; Templeton et al., 2024) and activation steering (Panickssery et al., 2023; Turner
et al., 2023; Zou et al., 2023a), this work leverages the internal representations of chat models to
better understand refusal.
* Correspondence to andyrdt@gmail.com, obalcells@student.ethz.ch.

†

Code available at https://github.com/andyrdt/refusal_direction.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

