4D Gaussian Splatting in the Wild
with Uncertainty-Aware Regularization

Mijeong Kim1

Jongwoo Lim2, 3

Bohyung Han1,3

mijeong.kim@snu.ac.kr

jongwoo.lim@snu.ac.kr

bhhan@snu.ac.kr

1

ECE, 2 ME, and 3 IPAI, Seoul National University, South Korea

Abstract
Novel view synthesis of dynamic scenes is becoming important in various applications, including augmented and virtual reality. We propose a novel 4D Gaussian
Splatting (4DGS) algorithm for dynamic scenes from casually recorded monocular
videos. To overcome the overfitting problem of existing work for these real-world
videos, we introduce an uncertainty-aware regularization that identifies uncertain
regions with few observations and selectively imposes additional priors based on
diffusion models and depth smoothness on such regions. This approach improves
both the performance of novel view synthesis and the quality of training image
reconstruction. We also identify the initialization problem of 4DGS in fast-moving
dynamic regions, where the Structure from Motion (SfM) algorithm fails to provide
reliable 3D landmarks. To initialize Gaussian primitives in such regions, we present
a dynamic region densification method using the estimated depth maps and scene
flow. Our experiments show that the proposed method improves the performance
of 4DGS reconstruction from a video captured by a handheld monocular camera
and also exhibits promising results in few-shot static scene reconstruction.

1

Introduction

Dynamic novel View Synthesis (DVS) aims to reconstruct dynamic scenes from captured videos
and generate photorealistic frames for an arbitrary new combination of a viewpoint and a time step.
This task has emerged as a vital research area in the 3D vision community with rapid advancements
in augmented reality and virtual reality. Early DVS research primarily relied on neural radiance
fields [29, 69, 10, 13, 11, 38, 39, 41, 5, 12, 50]. In contrast, more recent methods [61, 18, 31] extend
3D Gaussian Splatting [23] to account for the additional time dimension in dynamic scenes, and these
techniques are referred to as 4D Gaussian Splatting.
Despite the recent success of 4D Gaussian Splatting models [61, 18, 31, 68], their applicability
remains largely limited to controlled and purpose-built environments. Most existing models are
developed and tested with multi-view video setups [29, 41]. While there are several methods tackling
monocular video settings, these setups are still controlled and fall short of in-the-wild scenarios. For
instance, [38, 69] maintain multi-view characteristics, where the camera captures a broad arc around
a slow-moving object. Also, HyperNeRF [39] relies on unrealistic train-test splits, with both sets
sampled from the same video trajectory, which renders the task closer to video interpolation than
genuine novel view synthesis. In this paper, we focus for the first time on more natural, real-world
monocular videos [14], where a single handheld camera moves around fast-moving objects.
In casually recorded monocular videos, which often lack sufficient multi-view information, 4D
Gaussian Splatting algorithms tend to overfit the training frames in real-world scenarios. To address
overfitting, recent regularization techniques [26, 7, 58, 67, 25, 36, 20] can be applied to provide
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

