Benchmarking the Attribution Quality
of Vision Models
Robin Hesse1

Simone Schaub-Meyer1,2

Stefan Roth1,2

1 Department of Computer Science, Technical University of Darmstadt

2 hessian.AI

{robin.hesse, simone.schaub, stefan.roth}@visinf.tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
Attribution maps are one of the most established tools to explain the functioning of
computer vision models. They assign importance scores to input features, indicating
how relevant each feature is for the prediction of a deep neural network. While much
research has gone into proposing new attribution methods, their proper evaluation
remains a difficult challenge. In this work, we propose a novel evaluation protocol
that overcomes two fundamental limitations of the widely used incremental-deletion
protocol, i.e., the out-of-domain issue and lacking inter-model comparisons. This
allows us to evaluate 23 attribution methods and how different design choices of
popular vision backbones affect their attribution quality. We find that intrinsically
explainable models outperform standard models and that raw attribution values
exhibit a higher attribution quality than what is known from previous work. Further,
we show consistent changes in the attribution quality when varying the network
design, indicating that some standard design choices promote attribution quality.1

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have become an integral part of computer vision.
However, their strong performance goes hand in hand with the development of increasingly complex
models, surpassing the boundaries of human understanding. Consequently, DNNs are generally less
trustable than traditional methods of computer vision, rendering their application in safety-critical
domains difficult. To address such issues, methods of explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) aim to
unravel the inner workings of neural architectures. In the context of computer vision, attribution maps
have proven to be particularly important explanation types [60]. They assign an importance score to
each input pixel of a DNN to visualize what parts of the input image have been most relevant for the
final prediction of a classification model. While various attribution methods have been proposed, their
evaluation is challenging and an active research area. As a consequence, interesting questions, such as
how different design choices of DNNs affect their attribution quality, have thus been underexplored.
One of the most important protocols for evaluating attribution maps is the incremental-deletion
protocol [5, 54]. Here, pixels or patches of an input image are incrementally deleted in ascending or
descending order of their corresponding attribution values to measure the effect on the model output
for a specific class. Although widely used in many different flavors, these protocols come with the
following two fundamental limitations: First, deleting pixels or patches introduces domain changes
that can interfere with the evaluation metrics, as output changes can be due to the removal of important
information or due to the change of domain [29]. Second, as model outputs are highly influenced by
the properties of the used model, e.g., its calibration, these protocols do not allow for inter-model
comparisons. As a result, one cannot easily measure the effect of different model design choices on
1

Code available at github.com/visinf/idsds.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

