The Bayesian sampling in a canonical recurrent circuit
with a diversity of inhibitory interneurons

Eryn Sale1,2
eryn.sale@utsouthwestern.edu
1

Wen-Hao Zhang1,2∗
wenhao.zhang@utsouthwestern.edu

Lyda Hill Department of Bioinformatics, UT Southwestern Medical Center
2
O’Donnell Brain Institute, UT Southwestern Medical Center

Abstract
Accumulating evidence suggests stochastic cortical circuits can perform samplingbased Bayesian inference to compute the latent stimulus posterior. Canonical
cortical circuits consist of excitatory (E) neurons and types of inhibitory (I) interneurons. Nevertheless, nearly no sampling neural circuit models consider the
diversity of interneurons, and thus how interneurons contribute to sampling remains poorly understood. To provide theoretical insight, we build a nonlinear
canonical circuit model consisting of recurrently connected E neurons and two
types of I neurons including Parvalbumin (PV) and Somatostatin (SOM) neurons.
The E neurons are modeled as a canonical ring (attractor) model, receiving global
inhibition from PV neurons, and locally tuning-dependent inhibition from SOM
neurons. We theoretically analyze the nonlinear circuit dynamics and analytically
identify the Bayesian sampling algorithm performed by the circuit dynamics. We
found a reduced circuit with only E and PV neurons performs Langevin sampling,
and the inclusion of SOM neurons with tuning-dependent inhibition speeds up
the sampling via upgrading the Langevin into Hamiltonian sampling. Moreover,
the Hamiltonian framework requires SOM neurons to receive no direct feedforward connections, consistent with neuroanatomy. Our work provides overarching
connections between nonlinear circuits with various types of interneurons and
sampling algorithms, deepening our understanding of circuit implementation of
Bayesian inference.

1

Introduction

The brain lives in a world of uncertainty and ambiguity and thus has to infer unobserved world states.
The Bayesian inference is a normative framework to implement inference, and extensive studies
have suggested that the brain’s perception is consistent with the Bayesian inference, forming the
concept of Bayesian brain [1], including, e.g., visual processing [2], multisensory integration [3],
decision-making [4], sensorimotor learning [5], etc. Studying how neural circuits in the brain realize
Bayesian inference has been an active topic in neuroscience [6–8]. Many neural circuit models of
Bayesian inference have been developed with distinct representational and algorithmic mechanisms,
e.g., parametric-based representation [4, 8–11] and sampling-based representation [12–19].
Despite a large body of neural circuit models of Bayesian inference, there are still gaps between
our current Bayesian circuit models and canonical recurrent circuits in the cortex. One obvious
distinction is previous Bayesian circuit models haven’t considered the rich diversity of neuronal
types in the cortex, especially inhibitory interneurons. The canonical cortical microcircuit contains
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

