MMM-RS: A Multi-modal, Multi-GSD, Multi-scene
Remote Sensing Dataset and Benchmark for
Text-to-Image Generation

Jialin Luo1,∗ , Yuanzhi Wang1,∗ , Ziqi Gu1 , Yide Qiu1 , Shuaizhen Yao1 , Fuyun Wang1 ,
Chunyan Xu1 , Wenhua Zhang1 , Dan Wang2 , Zhen Cui1,†
1. PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional
Information of Ministry of Education, School of Computer Science and
Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China.
2. Beijing Institute of Spacecraft System Engineering, Beijing, China.

Abstract
Recently, the diffusion-based generative paradigm has achieved impressive general
image generation capabilities with text prompts due to its accurate distribution
modeling and stable training process. However, generating diverse remote sensing
(RS) images that are tremendously different from general images in terms of scale
and perspective remains a formidable challenge due to the lack of a comprehensive
remote sensing image generation dataset with various modalities, ground sample
distances (GSD), and scenes. In this paper, we propose a Multi-modal, MultiGSD, Multi-scene Remote Sensing (MMM-RS) dataset and benchmark for textto-image generation in diverse remote sensing scenarios. Specifically, we first
collect nine publicly available RS datasets and conduct standardization for all
samples. To bridge RS images to textual semantic information, we utilize a largescale pretrained vision-language model to automatically output text prompts and
perform hand-crafted rectification, resulting in information-rich text-image pairs
(including multi-modal images). In particular, we design some methods to obtain
the images with different GSD and various environments (e.g., low-light, foggy)
in a single sample. With extensive manual screening and refining annotations, we
ultimately obtain a MMM-RS dataset that comprises approximately 2.1 million
text-image pairs. Extensive experimental results verify that our proposed MMMRS dataset allows off-the-shelf diffusion models to generate diverse RS images
across various modalities, scenes, weather conditions, and GSD. The dataset is
available at https://github.com/ljl5261/MMM-RS.

1

Introduction

Remote sensing (RS) image, as a domain-specific image, plays an important role in the applications
of sustainable development for human society, such as disaster response, environmental monitoring,
crop yield estimation, and urban planning [29] [1] [38] [36]. Over the last decade, RS-based deep
learning models have demonstrated substantial success in various computer vision tasks such as
scene classification [8], object detection [41], semantic segmentation [18], and change detection [15],
which can facilitate the above applications of sustainable development. Nevertheless, these models
may suffer from limited performance due to the lack of large-scale high-quality dataset, and obtaining
RS images is often not easy and expensive (i.e., need to launch a RS satellite).
∗
†

Co-first Authors, Equal Contribution: Jialin Luo, Yuanzhi Wang
Corresponding Author: Zhen Cui

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

