Markovian Flow Matching: Accelerating MCMC with
Continuous Normalizing Flows

Alberto Cabezas∗
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Lancaster University, UK
a.cabezasgonzalez@lancaster.ac.uk

Louis Sharrock∗
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Lancaster University, UK
l.sharrock@lancaster.ac.uk

Christopher Nemeth
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Lancaster University, UK
c.nemeth@lancaster.ac.uk

Abstract
Continuous normalizing flows (CNFs) learn the probability path between a reference distribution and a target distribution by modeling the vector field generating
said path using neural networks. Recently, Lipman et al. [45] introduced a simple
and inexpensive method for training CNFs in generative modeling, termed flow
matching (FM). In this paper, we repurpose this method for probabilistic inference
by incorporating Markovian sampling methods in evaluating the FM objective, and
using the learned CNF to improve Monte Carlo sampling. Specifically, we propose
an adaptive Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm, which combines a
local Markov transition kernel with a non-local, flow-informed transition kernel, defined using a CNF. This CNF is adapted on-the-fly using samples from the Markov
chain, which are used to specify the probability path for the FM objective. Our
method also includes an adaptive tempering mechanism that allows the discovery
of multiple modes in the target distribution. Under mild assumptions, we establish
convergence of our method to a local optimum of the FM objective. We then
benchmark our approach on several synthetic and real-world examples, achieving
similar performance to other state-of-the-art methods, but often at a significantly
lower computational cost.

1

Introduction

The task of sampling from a probability distribution known only up to a normalization constant
is a fundamental problem arising in a wide variety of fields, including statistical physics [51],
Bayesian inference [25], and molecular dynamics [43]. In particular, let π(dx) be a target probability
distribution on Rd with density π(x) with respect to the Lebesgue measure of the form1
π̂(x)
,
(1)
Z
where π̂ :R Rd → R+ is a continuously differentiable function which can be evaluated pointwise,
and Z = Rd π̂(x)dx is an unknown normalizing constant. We are interested in generating samples
from the target distribution π in order to approximate integrals of the form π[f ] = Eπ [f (x)], where
f : Rd → R.
π(x) =

∗
1

Equal contribution
In a slight abuse of notation, we use π to denote both the target distribution and its density.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

