Analyzing & Reducing the Need for
Learning Rate Warmup in GPT Training

Atli Kosson

Bettina Messmer
Martin Jaggi
EPFL, Switzerland
firstname.lastname@epfl.ch

Abstract
Learning Rate Warmup is a popular heuristic for training neural networks, especially at larger batch sizes, despite limited understanding of its benefits. Warmup
decreases the update size ∆wt = ηt ut early in training by using lower values for
the learning rate ηt . In this work we argue that warmup benefits training by keeping
the overall size of ∆wt limited, counteracting large initial values of ut . Focusing
on small-scale GPT training with AdamW/Lion, we explore the following question:
Why and by which criteria are early updates ut too large? We analyze different
metrics for the update size including the ℓ2 -norm, resulting directional change,
and impact on the representations of the network, providing a new perspective on
warmup. In particular, we find that warmup helps counteract large angular updates
as well as a limited critical batch size early in training. Finally, we show that
the need for warmup can be significantly reduced or eliminated by modifying the
optimizer to explicitly normalize ut based on the aforementioned metrics.

1

Introduction

Neural networks are typically trained using variations of stochastic gradient descent. The weight
updates ∆w have the form ∆w = ηu, where η denotes the learning rate and u an unscaled update
vector derived from the history of weight gradients. Throughout training, the learning rate is often
adjusted over time t according to a learning rate schedule, η = ηt . This schedule frequently includes
an initial phase known as a learning rate warmup, where the learning rate starts low and is increased
to a target value before being reduced according to a decay schedule. Both the choice of warmup and
decay strategy can significantly affect the final model performance. In this work, we focus on the
linear warmup introduced by Goyal et al. [10] for large batch size ResNet [11] training, which is also
commonly used for transformers [37].
The length of the warmup is a hyperparameter that requires tuning, which is complicated by the
fact that the reasons for its effectiveness are somewhat unclear. Warmup empirically helps stabilize
training and allows the use of larger learning rates throughout the rest of training, which can speed up
the process and provide beneficial regularization [10]. Since the learning rate simply scales the size
of the updates ∆w = ηu, warmup must achieve these effects by decreasing the size of early updates.
However, it is not fully clear why this helps. Are the initial updates too large for some reason? For
example, we might need small ηt values to counteract large u values early in training. How should
we quantify what makes an update ∆w large? Why do large updates adversely affect training?
In this work, we explore warmup from this perspective, focusing on GPT2 [29] training with adaptive
optimizers like AdamW [24] and Lion [3]. We identify three key issues that necessitate warmup:
1. The way Adam handles momentum can lead to artificially large initial updates ∆w.
2. Early updates ∆w are large compared to the initial weight magnitude of w for matrices.
3. The gradients of early samples are highly correlated, limiting effective mini-batch sizes.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

