Scalable Bayesian Optimization via Focalized
Sparse Gaussian Processes

Yunyue Wei1 , Vincent Zhuang2 , Saraswati Soedarmadji1 , Yanan Sui1
1
Tsinghua University
2
Google DeepMind
weiyy20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
vincentzhuang@google.com
chenxuying24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
ysui@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Bayesian optimization is an effective technique for black-box optimization,
but its applicability is typically limited to low-dimensional and small-budget
problems due to the cubic complexity of computing the Gaussian process
(GP) surrogate. While various approximate GP models have been employed
to scale Bayesian optimization to larger sample sizes, most suffer from overlysmooth estimation and focus primarily on problems that allow for large
online samples. In this work, we argue that Bayesian optimization algorithms
with sparse GPs can more efficiently allocate their representational power
to relevant regions of the search space. To achieve this, we propose focalized
GP, which leverages a novel variational loss function to achieve stronger
local prediction, as well as FocalBO, which hierarchically optimizes the
focalized GP acquisition function over progressively smaller search spaces.
Experimental results demonstrate that FocalBO can efficiently leverage large
amounts of offline and online data to achieve state-of-the-art performance on
robot morphology design and to control a 585-dimensional musculoskeletal
system.

1

Introduction

Bayesian Optimization (BO) is a powerful approach for solving black-box optimization problems, demonstrating notable success in hyperparameter tuning[1], reinforcement learning[2, 3],
and scientific discovery[4]. The efficacy of BO is attributed to its ability to model the unknown objective function using a surrogate model and to strategically select the next sample
position by optimizing an acquisition function. Among the surrogate models, Gaussian
Processes (GPs)[5] are usually favored due to their flexibility and robust uncertainty quantification. However, the computation of the posterior GP covariance matrix scales as O(n3 )
with the number of data points n, which can severely restrict the applicability of BO in
handling large datasets. This poses a significant challenge for real-world applications with
high-dimensional and heterogeneous function landscapes such as those in robot control,
which often necessitate a substantial amount of data to adequately explore the vast search
space. To extend the scope of BO to accommodate larger datasets (from long-horizon online
trials and/or pre-collected offline datasets[6]), it is imperative to employ surrogate models
that offer enhanced computational efficiency.
Using sparse GP models is a popular method for reducing the computational cost of BO.
Sparse GPs accomplish this by learning an approximation of the full GP, either by using a
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

