Initializing Variable-sized Vision Transformers
from Learngene with Learnable Transformation

Shiyu Xia, Yuankun Zu, Xu Yang∗, Xin Geng∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its
Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
{shiyu_xia, zyk0418, xuyang_palm, xgeng}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
In practical scenarios, it is necessary to build variable-sized models to accommodate
diverse resource constraints, where weight initialization serves as a crucial step
preceding training. The recently introduced Learngene framework firstly learns
one compact module, termed learngene, from a large well-trained model, and then
transforms learngene to initialize variable-sized models. However, the existing
Learngene methods provide limited guidance on transforming learngene, where
transformation mechanisms are manually designed and generally lack a learnable
component. Moreover, these methods only consider transforming learngene along
depth dimension, thus constraining the flexibility of learngene. Motivated by these
concerns, we propose a novel and effective Learngene approach termed LeTs
(Learnable Transformation), where we transform the learngene module along both
width and depth dimension with a set of learnable matrices for flexible variablesized model initialization. Specifically, we construct an auxiliary model comprising
the compact learngene module and learnable transformation matrices, enabling
both components to be trained. To meet the varying size requirements of target
models, we select specific parameters from well-trained transformation matrices
to adaptively transform the learngene, guided by strategies such as continuous
selection and magnitude-wise selection. Extensive experiments on ImageNet-1K
demonstrate that Des-Nets initialized via LeTs outperform those with 100-epoch
from scratch training after only 1 epoch tuning. When transferring to downstream
image classification tasks, LeTs achieves better results while outperforming from
scratch training after about 10 epochs within a 300-epoch training schedule.

1

Introduction

Vision Transformer (ViT) models have gained widespread attention due to their impressive performance on diverse vision tasks [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. In practice, models of various sizes are often deployed
and trained under diverse resource constraints, ranging from edge devices with limited computational
resources to computing clusters with sufficient resources, which may exhibit considerable diversity.
Obviously, we could train each target model from scratch for specific tasks across different resource
settings. However, such method underestimates the importance of weight initialization, which could
significantly affect the training process and the final model quality [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14].
Moreover, the training and storage costs of such method grow linearly with the number of potential scenarios. Consequently, a fundamental research question arises: how to efficiently initialize
variable-sized models while considering both the model performance and resource constraints.
∗

Co-corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

