Sm: enhanced localization in Multiple Instance
Learning for medical imaging classification

Francisco M. Castro-Macías
CITIC-UGR
Dept. of Comp. Science and A. I.
University of Granada

Pablo Morales-Álvarez
Dept. of Statistics and Operations Research
CITIC-UGR
University of Granada

Yunan Wu
Dept. of Elect. and Comp. Engineering
Northwestern University

Rafael Molina
Dept. of Comp. Science and A. I.
University of Granada

Aggelos K. Katsaggelos
Dept. of Elect. and Comp. Engineering
Northwestern University

Abstract
Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) is widely used in medical imaging classification
to reduce the labeling effort. While only bag labels are available for training,
one typically seeks predictions at both bag and instance levels (classification and
localization tasks, respectively). Early MIL methods treated the instances in a
bag independently. Recent methods account for global and local dependencies
among instances. Although they have yielded excellent results in classification,
their performance in terms of localization is comparatively limited. We argue that
these models have been designed to target the classification task, while implications
at the instance level have not been deeply investigated. Motivated by a simple
observation – that neighboring instances are likely to have the same label – we
propose a novel, principled, and flexible mechanism to model local dependencies. It
can be used alone or combined with any mechanism to model global dependencies
(e.g., transformers). A thorough empirical validation shows that our module leads
to state-of-the-art performance in localization while being competitive or superior
in classification. Our code is at https://github.com/Franblueee/SmMIL.

1

Introduction

Over the last decades, medical imaging classification has benefited from advances in deep learning
[35, 44]. However, the performance of these methods drops when the number of labeled samples
is low, which is common in real-world medical scenarios [1]. To overcome this, Multiple Instance
Learning (MIL) has emerged as a popular weakly supervised approach [14, 8, 12].
In MIL, instances are arranged in bags. At train time, a label is available for the entire bag, while
the instance labels remain unknown. The goal is to train a method that, given a test bag, can predict
both at bag and instance levels (classification and localization tasks, respectively). This paradigm
is well suited to the medical imaging domain [28]. In cancer detection from Whole Slide Images
(WSIs), the WSI represents the bag, and the patches are the instances. In intracranial hemorrhage
detection from Computerized Tomographic (CT) scans, the full scan represents the bag, and the slices
at different heights are the instances. In these scenarios, making accurate predictions of instance
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

