Archaeoscape: Bringing Aerial Laser Scanning
Archaeology to the Deep Learning Era

Yohann Perron∗ 1, 2
yohann.perron@efeo.net

Vladyslav Sydorov∗ 1
vladyslav.sydorov@efeo.net

Adam P. Wijker 1, 3
adam.wijker@efeo.net

Damian Evans † 1

Christophe Pottier 1
christophe.pottier@efeo.net

Loic Landrieu 2
loic.landrieu@enpc.fr

1

École française d’Extrême-Orient (EFEO)
3

2

LIGM, École des Ponts, CNRS, UGE

Université Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne

Abstract
Airborne Laser Scanning (ALS) technology has transformed modern archaeology
by unveiling hidden landscapes beneath dense vegetation. However, the lack
of expert-annotated, open-access resources has hindered the analysis of ALS
data using advanced deep learning techniques. We address this limitation with
Archaeoscape (available at https://archaeoscape.ai/data/2024), a novel
large-scale archaeological ALS dataset spanning 888 km2 in Cambodia with 31,141
annotated archaeological features from the Angkorian period. Archaeoscape is
over four times larger than comparable datasets, and the first ALS archaeology
resource with open-access data, annotations, and models.
We benchmark several recent segmentation models to demonstrate the benefits of
modern vision techniques for this problem and highlight the unique challenges
of discovering subtle human-made structures under dense jungle canopies. By
making Archaeoscape available in open access, we hope to bridge the gap between
traditional archaeology and modern computer vision methods.

1

Introduction

Airborne Laser Scanning (ALS) has been celebrated as a “geospatial revolution” in modern archaeology due to its ability to penetrate vegetation and unveil traces of human activities that may otherwise
be concealed or invisible [1, 2]. Extensive acquisition campaigns conducted in Southeast Asia [3],
Central America [4], and Europe [5, 6] have led to a reevaluation of the historical impact of humans
on “natural” landscapes, especially in tropical regions [7]. However, finding archaeological features
in vast volumes of ALS data presents a significant challenge. Manual analysis is time-consuming and
requires advanced expert knowledge of the studied civilization as well as on-site validation [8].
The emergence of deep learning offers a promising tool to assist researchers in identifying archaeological patterns, simplifying the exploration of these extensive acquisitions. Yet, the development of
specialized models is hampered by the lack of expert-annotated datasets. In response, we introduce
Archaeoscape, the largest open-access ALS dataset for archaeological research published to date.
Spanning 888 km2 , it comprises 31,411 annotated instances of anthropogenic features of archaeological interest. The dataset includes orthophotos and LiDAR-derived normalized Digital Terrain Models
∗

Equal contribution.

†

Posthumous authorship.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

