S-MolSearch: 3D Semi-supervised Contrastive
Learning for Bioactive Molecule Search

Gengmo Zhou1,2∗, Zhen Wang2∗, Feng Yu2 , Guolin Ke2 , Zhewei Wei1†, Zhifeng Gao2†
1
Renmin University of China 2 DP Technology
{zgm2015, zhewei}@ruc.edu.cn, {wangz, yufeng, kegl, gaozf}@dp.tech

Abstract
Virtual Screening is an essential technique in the early phases of drug discovery,
aimed at identifying promising drug candidates from vast molecular libraries.
Recently, ligand-based virtual screening has garnered significant attention due to
its efficacy in conducting extensive database screenings without relying on specific
protein-binding site information. Obtaining binding affinity data for complexes
is highly expensive, resulting in a limited amount of available data that covers a
relatively small chemical space. Moreover, these datasets contain a significant
amount of inconsistent noise. It is challenging to identify an inductive bias that
consistently maintains the integrity of molecular activity during data augmentation.
To tackle these challenges, we propose S-MolSearch, the first framework to our
knowledge, that leverages molecular 3D information and affinity information in
semi-supervised contrastive learning for ligand-based virtual screening. Drawing
on the principles of inverse optimal transport, S-MolSearch efficiently processes
both labeled and unlabeled data, training molecular structural encoders while
generating soft labels for the unlabeled data. This design allows S-MolSearch
to adaptively utilize unlabeled data within the learning process. Empirically,
S-MolSearch demonstrates superior performance on widely-used benchmarks LITPCBA and DUD-E. It surpasses both structure-based and ligand-based virtual
screening methods for AUROC, BEDROC and EF.

1

Introduction

Virtual Screening [1, 2, 3, 4] plays a crucial role in the early stages of drug discovery by identifying potential drug candidates from large molecular libraries. Structure-Based Virtual Screening (SBVS) [5,
6, 7, 8], a widely used virtual screening method, attempts to predict the best interaction between
ligands against a protein target to form a protein-ligand complex. Recently, deep learning methods
have also been explored. Methods trained on affinity labels [9, 10, 11] conduct virtual screening
by modeling binding affinities and ranking based on prediction. Additionally, a method [12] uses
similarities between embedding of pockets and molecules to search for active molecules. However,
these SBVS methods cannot escape the dependency on the structure of protein targets, which is
unavailable for challenging or novel targets, such as disordered proteins like c-Myc, limiting the
applicability of SBVS. Besides, plenty of assays used in Virtual Screening [13] are cell-based rather
than target-specific, introducing noise into the active molecules since their activity is not entirely
dependent on interaction with the protein target.
To remedy this, Ligand-Based Virtual Screening (LBVS) [14, 15, 16, 17, 18] searches similar
molecules via known bioactive molecules and does not depend on the structure of protein targets,
which has attracted increasing attention. Computational LBVS methods [19, 20, 18] rigidly employ
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

