Towards Editing Time Series

Baoyu Jing∗ 2 , Shuqi Gu∗ 1 , Tianyu Chen1 , Zhiyu Yang1 ,
Dongsheng Li3 , Jingrui He2 , Kan Ren† 1
1
ShanghaiTech University, 2 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 3 Microsoft Research

Abstract
Synthesizing time series data is pivotal in modern society, aiding effective decisionmaking and ensuring privacy preservation in various scenarios. Time series are
associated with various attributes, including trends, seasonality, and external information such as location. Recent research has predominantly focused on random
unconditional synthesis or conditional synthesis. Nonetheless, these paradigms
generate time series from scratch and are incapable of manipulating existing time
series samples. This paper introduces a novel task, called Time Series Editing
(TSE), to synthesize time series by manipulating existing time series. The objective is to modify the given time series according to the specified attributes while
preserving other properties unchanged. This task is not trivial due to the inadequacy of data coverage and the intricate relationships between time series and their
attributes. To address these issues, we introduce a novel diffusion model, called
TEdit. The proposed TEdit is trained using a novel bootstrap learning algorithm
that effectively enhances the coverage of the original data. It is also equipped
with an innovative multi-resolution modeling and generation paradigm to capture
the complex relationships between time series and their attributes. Experimental
results demonstrate the efficacy of TEdit for editing specified attributes upon the
existing time series data. The project page is at https://seqml.github.io/tse.

1

Introduction

Time series data analysis plays a crucial role in various modern business sectors, including climate
monitoring [22, 13, 14], healthcare [12, 3, 46], urban management [43, 16, 15], and online service [35]. Time series are derived from diverse sources with inherent characteristics, such as system
configurations, alongside external influential factors like environmental status. These factors are
considered attributes of the time series. In many real-world scenarios, such as healthcare and urban
monitoring, time series data tend to be sparse and privacy-sensitive, particularly concerning specific
attributes that are rarely observed in real-world scenarios.
Synthesizing time series data has emerged as a prominent research area aimed at addressing these
challenges. Existing methods for time series synthesis range from unconditional generation [47, 31]
to conditional generation [39, 27, 4]. Unconditional generation produces outputs based solely on the
underlying distribution of the data. Without relying on any input conditions, the generated results
are highly uncontrollable. Conditional generation controls the outcomes of the generated data based
on the input conditions. However, conditional generation tends to produce samples around the data
mean [40], as demonstrated in our experiments, which could easily overlook detailed characteristics
of the data, such as high-frequency patterns and local structures. Both unconditional and conditional
generation paradigms synthesize time series from scratch, and they are incapable of manipulating
existing samples. As a result, these paradigms are unable to answer “what if” questions in time series
synthesis: given a time series, what would it become if some of its attributes are modified?
* Baoyu Jing and Shuqi Gu share the co-first authorship.
†

Correspondence to Kan Ren: renkan@shanghaitech.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

