OMG-LLaVA
: Bridging Image-level,
Object-level, Pixel-level Reasoning and Understanding

Tao Zhang1 , Xiangtai Li2,4 † , Hao Fei2 , Haobo Yuan3 , Shengqiong Wu2 ,
Shunping Ji1 , Chen Change Loy3 , Shuicheng Yan2
1
Wuhan University 2 Skywork AI 3 S-Lab, NTU 4 Bytedance
Project page: https://lxtgh.github.io/project/omg_llava
Email: xiangtai94@gmail.com and zhang_tao@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Current universal segmentation methods demonstrate strong capabilities in pixellevel image and video understanding. However, they lack reasoning abilities
and cannot be controlled via text instructions. In contrast, large vision-language
multimodal models exhibit powerful vision-based conversation and reasoning
capabilities but lack pixel-level understanding and have difficulty accepting visual
prompts for flexible user interaction. This paper proposes OMG-LLaVA, a new
and elegant framework combining powerful pixel-level vision understanding with
reasoning abilities. It can accept various visual and text prompts for flexible user
interaction. Specifically, we use a universal segmentation method as the visual
encoder, integrating image information, perception priors, and visual prompts into
visual tokens provided to the LLM. The LLM is responsible for understanding the
user’s text instructions and providing text responses and pixel-level segmentation
results based on the visual information. We propose perception prior embedding
to better integrate perception priors with image features. OMG-LLaVA achieves
image-level, object-level, and pixel-level reasoning and understanding in a single
model, matching or surpassing the performance of specialized methods on multiple
benchmarks. Rather than using LLM to connect each specialist, our work aims
at end-to-end training on one encoder, one decoder, and one LLM. The code and
model have been released for further research.

1

Introduction

With the development of transformer models [94; 6; 93; 40; 71; 92; 64; 126; 49; 87; 10; 19; 58],
recent works in both natural language processing (NLP) and computer vision raise one common
trend: adopting one unified model to solve multiple tasks. For example, large language models
(LLMs) [93; 40; 92] adopt scale-up models to solve multiple NLP tasks and achieve better results
than previous expert models. In vision, we have also seen a similar trend [19; 58; 100; 99; 47; 112],
adopting one model to solve multiple tasks or sub-tasks, including detection, segmentation, video
analysis, low-level vision, pose estimations, and more tasks. Different methods adopt different
transformer designs, including visual-in-context learning [99; 100], unified decoder [19; 58], and
unified tokenizer [86; 16; 58]. In summary, benefiting from the scalability and flexibility of the
transformer, adopting one model for all tasks has made a great progress [19; 71; 72; 70; 126; 88; 87].
Work done when Tao Zhang is an intern at Skywork AI. † : Project leader. Corresponding author: Xiangtai
Li and Shunping Ji.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

