Active Learning with LLMs for Partially Observed
and Cost-Aware Scenarios
Nicolás Astorga, Tennison Liu, Nabeel Seedat & Mihaela van der Schaar
DAMTP, University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
nja46@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Conducting experiments and collecting data for machine learning models is a
complex and expensive endeavor, particularly when confronted with limited information. Typically, extensive experiments to obtain features and labels come
with a significant acquisition cost, making it impractical to carry out all of them.
Therefore, it becomes crucial to strategically determine what to acquire to maximize the predictive performance while minimizing costs. To perform this task,
existing data acquisition methods assume the availability of an initial dataset that
is both fully-observed and labeled, crucially overlooking the partial observability
of features characteristic of many real-world scenarios. In response to this challenge, we present Partially Observable Cost-Aware Active-Learning (POCA), a
new learning approach aimed at improving model generalization in data-scarce and
data-costly scenarios through label and/or feature acquisition. Introducing µPOCA
as an instantiation, we maximize the uncertainty reduction in the predictive model
when obtaining labels and features, considering associated costs. µPOCA enhance
traditional Active Learning metrics based solely on the observed features by generating the unobserved features through Generative Surrogate Models, particularly
Large Language Models (LLMs). We empirically validate µPOCA across diverse
tabular datasets, varying data availability, acquisition costs, and LLMs.

1

Introduction

In real-world machine learning (ML) applications, fully-observed, pristine training data is an exception rather than the norm. This challenge is especially evident during the initial stages of model
development when training data is limited and varies in its informativeness across samples [1–3]. At
this stage, obtaining additional data is crucial for improving model generalization but is fraught with
challenges [4–6]. In particular, acquiring new data can be costly, often resulting in only essential features and labels being collected, leading to partially observed features in training data. Therefore, it’s
vital that acquisition is efficient, yet it remains unclear which features and labels from each instance
will ultimately prove essential. Furthermore, data sources themselves can also be partially observed,
with different features available across samples, further complicating the acquisition process. These
challenges emphasize the importance of a new problem we call Partially Observable Cost-Aware
Active-Learning (POCA) illustrated in Figure 1. Before its formalization in Section 2, we provide an
intuitive overview:
“In situations with limited labeled data and partial feature observations, our objective is to
enhance the generalization capabilities of a predictive model by strategically collecting features
and/or labels. This goal should account the cost associated with data collection, as well as the
varying levels of informativeness of labels and features across different instances”

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

