Distributed Least Squares in Small Space via
Sketching and Bias Reduction

Sachin Garg
Computer Science & Engineering
University of Michigan
sachg@umich.edu

Kevin Tan
Department of Statistics
University of Pennsylvania
kevtan@umich.edu

Michał Dereziński
Computer Science & Engineering
University of Michigan
derezin@umich.edu

Abstract
Matrix sketching is a powerful tool for reducing the size of large data matrices. Yet
there are fundamental limitations to this size reduction when we want to recover an
accurate estimator for a task such as least square regression. We show that these
limitations can be circumvented in the distributed setting by designing sketching
methods that minimize the bias of the estimator, rather than its error. In particular,
we give a sparse sketching method running in optimal space and current matrix
multiplication time, which recovers a nearly-unbiased least squares estimator using
two passes over the data. This leads to new communication-efficient distributed
averaging algorithms for least squares and related tasks, which directly improve on
several prior approaches. Our key novelty is a new bias analysis for sketched least
squares, giving a sharp characterization of its dependence on the sketch sparsity.
The techniques include new higher-moment restricted Bai-Silverstein inequalities,
which are of independent interest to the non-asymptotic analysis of deterministic
equivalents for random matrices that arise from sketching.

1

Introduction

Matrix sketching is a powerful collection of randomized techniques for compressing large data
matrices, developed over a long line of works as part of Randomized Numerical Linear Algebra
[RandNLA, e.g., 45, 26, 37, 39, 21]. Sketching can be used to reduce the large dimension n of a data
matrix A ∈ Rn×d by applying a random sketching matrix (operator) S ∈ Rm×n to obtain the sketch
Ã = SA ∈ Rm×d where m ≪ n. For example, sketching can be used to approximate the solution
to the least squares problem, x∗ = argminx L(x) where L(x) = ∥Ax − b∥2 , by using a sketched
estimator x̃ = argminx ∥Ãx − b̃∥2 , where Ã = SA and b̃ = Sb.
Perhaps the simplest form of sketching is subsampling, where the sketching operator S selects a
random sample of the rows of matrix A. However, the real advantage of sketching as a framework
emerges as we consider more complex operators S, such as sub-Gaussian matrices [1], randomized
Hadamard transforms [3], and sparse random matrices [12]. These approaches ensure higher quality
and more robust compression of the data matrix, e.g., leading to provable ϵ-approximation guarantees
for the estimate x̃ in the least squares task, i.e., L(x̃) ≤ (1 + ϵ)L(x∗ ). Nevertheless, there are
fundamental limitations to how far we can compress a data matrix using sketching while ensuring
an ϵ-approximation. These limitations pose a challenge particularly in space-limited computing
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

