Bridge the Points: Graph-based Few-shot
Segment Anything Semantically

Anqi Zhang1 , Guangyu Gao1∗, Jianbo Jiao2 , Chi Harold Liu1 , and Yunchao Wei3
1
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
The MIx group, School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham
3
WEI Lab, Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
andy_zaq@outlook.com

Abstract
The recent advancements in large-scale pre-training techniques have significantly
enhanced the capabilities of vision foundation models, notably the Segment Anything Model (SAM), which can generate precise masks based on point and box
prompts. Recent studies extend SAM to Few-shot Semantic Segmentation (FSS),
focusing on prompt generation for SAM-based automatic semantic segmentation.
However, these methods struggle with selecting suitable prompts, require specific
hyperparameter settings for different scenarios, and experience prolonged one-shot
inference time due to the overuse of SAM, resulting in low efficiency and limited
automation ability. To address these issues, we propose a simple yet effective
approach based on graph analysis. In particular, a Positive-Negative Alignment
module dynamically selects the point prompts for generating masks, especially
uncovering the potential of the background context as the negative reference. Another subsequent Point-Mask Clustering module aligns the granularity of masks
and selected points as a directed graph, based on mask coverage over points. These
points are then aggregated by decomposing the weakly connected components
of the directed graph in an efficient manner, constructing distinct natural clusters.
Finally, the positive and overshooting gating, benefiting from graph-based granularity alignment, aggregate high-confident masks and filter out the false-positive
masks for final prediction, without relying on additional hyperparameters and
redundant mask generation. Extensive experimental analysis across tasks including
the standard FSS, One-shot Part Segmentation, and Cross Domain FSS validate the
effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed approach, surpassing state-of-the-art
generalist models with a mIoU of 58.7% on COCO-20i and 35.2% on LVIS-92i .
The project page of this work is: https://andyzaq.github.io/GF-SAM/.

1

Introduction

Previous semantic segmentation methods [1–8], which rely on the pixel-level classification, often
struggle with generalization and overfitting due to limited labeled data. In addition, recent approaches,
such as MaskFormer [9], have shifted the paradigm to mask-based classification, offering a more
flexible approach to improving the segmentation performance by exploiting the consistency and
completeness of generated class-agnostic masks. The Segment Anything Model (SAM) [10] further
marks a significant advancement by utilizing extensive pre-training on huge-scale dataset SA-1B
to achieve more robust, class-agnostic segmentation capabilities. SAM excels in producing precise
masks across various domains using simple prompts such as points, boxes, and coarse masks.
While the boundaries of these masks can closely align with object boundaries, the lack of semantic
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

