Online Bayesian Persuasion Without a Clue

Francesco Bacchiocchi
Politecnico di Milano
francesco.bacchiocchi@polimi.it

Matteo Bollini
Politecnico di Milano
matteo.bollini@polimi.it

Matteo Castiglioni
Politecnico di Milano
matteo.castiglioni@polimi.it

Alberto Marchesi
Politecnico di Milano
alberto.marchesi@polimi.it

Nicola Gatti
Politecnico di Milano
nicola.gatti@polimi.it

Abstract
We study online Bayesian persuasion problems in which an informed sender
repeatedly faces a receiver with the goal of influencing their behavior through the
provision of payoff-relevant information. Previous works assume that the sender
has knowledge about either the prior distribution over states of nature or receiver’s
utilities, or both. We relax such unrealistic assumptions by considering settings
in which the sender does not know anything about the prior and the receiver. We
design an algorithm that achieves sublinear—in the number of rounds—regret with
respect to an optimal signaling scheme, and we also provide a collection of lower
bounds showing that the guarantees of such an algorithm are tight. Our algorithm
works by searching a suitable space of signaling schemes in order to learn receiver’s
best responses. To do this, we leverage a non-standard representation of signaling
schemes that allows to cleverly overcome the challenge of not knowing anything
about the prior over states of nature and receiver’s utilities. Finally, our results also
allow to derive lower/upper bounds on the sample complexity of learning signaling
schemes in a related Bayesian persuasion PAC-learning problem.

1

Introduction

Bayesian persuasion has been introduced by Kamenica and Gentzkow [2011] to model how strategically disclosing information to decision makers influences their behavior. Over the last years, it has
received a terrific attention in several fields of science, since it is particularly useful for understanding
strategic interactions involving individuals with different levels of information, which are ubiquitous
in the real world. As a consequence, Bayesian persuasion has been applied in several settings,
such as online advertising [Emek et al., 2014, Badanidiyuru et al., 2018, Bacchiocchi et al., 2022,
Agrawal et al., 2023], voting [Alonso and Câmara, 2016, Castiglioni et al., 2020a, Castiglioni and
Gatti, 2021], traffic routing [Vasserman et al., 2015, Bhaskar et al., 2016, Castiglioni et al., 2021a],
recommendation systems [Cohen and Mansour, 2019, Mansour et al., 2022], security [Rabinovich
et al., 2015, Xu et al., 2016], e-commerce [Bro Miltersen and Sheffet, 2012, Castiglioni et al., 2022]
medical research [Kolotilin, 2015], and financial regulation [Goldstein and Leitner, 2018].
In its simplest form, Bayesian persuasion involves a sender observing some information about the
world, called state of nature, and a receiver who has to take an action. Agents’ utilities are misaligned,
but they both depend on the state of nature and receiver’s action. Thus, sender’s goal is to devise a
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

