Mixed Dynamics In Linear Networks:
Unifying the Lazy and Active Regimes

Zhenfeng Tu
Courant Institute
New York University
New York, NY 10012
zt2255@nyu.edu

Santiago Aranguri
Courant Institute
New York University
New York, NY 10012
aranguri@nyu.edu

Arthur Jacot
Courant Institute
New York University
New York, NY 10012
arthur.jacot@nyu.edu

Abstract
The training dynamics of linear networks are well studied in two distinct setups:
the lazy regime and balanced/active regime, depending on the initialization and
width of the network. We provide a surprisingly simple unifying formula for the
evolution of the learned matrix that contains as special cases both lazy and balanced
regimes but also a mixed regime in between the two. In the mixed regime, a part
of the network is lazy while the other is balanced. More precisely the network is
lazy along singular values that are below a certain threshold and balanced along
those that are above the same threshold. At initialization, all singular values are
lazy, allowing for the network to align itself with the task, so that later in time,
when some of the singular value cross the threshold and become active they will
converge rapidly (convergence in the balanced regime is notoriously difficult in the
absence of alignment). The mixed regime is the ‘best of both worlds’: it converges
from any random initialization (in contrast to balanced dynamics which require
special initialization), and has a low rank bias (absent in the lazy dynamics). This
allows us to prove an almost complete phase diagram of training behavior as a
function of the variance at initialization and the width, for a MSE training task.

1

Introduction

Whether in linear networks or nonlinear ones, there has been a lot of interest in the distinction
between the lazy regime [27] and the active regime [16, 43, 15, 52, 13] as the number of neurons
grows towards infinity. In the lazy regime the training dynamics become linear, so that they can
be easily described in terms of the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) [27, 9, 51, 36], while the active
regime exhibits complex nonlinear dynamics. While our understanding of the active regime remains
much more limited, it appears to be characterized by the emergence of feature learning[22, 52],
and of a form of sparsity [3, 11, 2, 1] (the type of sparsity observed depends on the network type
[11, 19, 25, 24], but we will focus on fully-connected linear networks which exhibit a rank sparsity
in the learned linear map [7, 35, 28, 47]) which are both absent in the lazy regime .
Note that even though it is common to talk of the ‘the’ active regime, we do not know yet whether
there is only one or multiple active regimes. Indeed the term active regime is usually used to describe
any regime that differs from the lazy regime and exhibit some form of feature learning. Though we
do not have an complete understanding of where the lazy regimes ends and the active regime(s) start,
we know that the lazy regime requires extreme overparametrization (a large number of neurons in
comparison to the number of datapoints) [5, 20], a ‘large’ initialization of the weights [15], a small
learning rate, and early stopping when using a cross-entropy loss or weight decay . Indeed, active
regimes have been observed by breaking either of these requirements: taking limits with mild or no
overparametrization [10], taking smaller or even vanishingly small initializations [35, 28], using large
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

