Detecting and Measuring Confounding Using Causal
Mechanism Shifts
Abbavaram Gowtham Reddy
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad
cs19resch11002@iith.ac.in

Vineeth N Balasubramanian
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad
vineethnb@iith.ac.in

Abstract
Detecting and measuring confounding effects from data is a key challenge in causal
inference. Existing methods frequently assume causal sufficiency, disregarding
the presence of unobserved confounding variables. Causal sufficiency is both
unrealistic and empirically untestable. Additionally, existing methods make strong
parametric assumptions about the underlying causal generative process to guarantee
the identifiability of confounding variables. Relaxing the causal sufficiency and
parametric assumptions and leveraging recent advancements in causal discovery
and confounding analysis with non-i.i.d. data, we propose a comprehensive approach for detecting and measuring confounding. We consider various definitions
of confounding and introduce tailored methodologies to achieve three objectives:
(i) detecting and measuring confounding among a set of variables, (ii) separating
observed and unobserved confounding effects, and (iii) understanding the relative
strengths of confounding bias between different sets of variables. We present
useful properties of a confounding measure and present measures that satisfy those
properties. Our empirical results support the usefulness of the proposed measures.

1

Introduction

Understanding the underlying causal generative process of a set of variables is crucial in many
scientific studies for applications in treatment and policy designs [44]. While randomized controlled
trials (RCTs) and causal inference through active interventions are ideal choices for understanding
the underlying causal model [19, 12, 13, 55], RCTs and/or active interventions are often impossible/infeasible, and some times unethical [50, 6]. Research efforts in causal inference hence rely
on observational data to study causal relationships [44, 59, 65, 18, 41]. However, recovering the
underlying causal model purely from observational data is challenging without further assumptions;
this challenge is further exacerbated in the presence of unmeasured confounding variables.
A confounding variable is a variable that causes two other variables, resulting in a spurious association
between those two variables. As exemplified with Simpson’s paradox [58] and many other studies [20,
1, 31], the presence of confounding variables is an important quantitative explanation for why
correlation does not imply causation. It is challenging to observe and measure all confounding
variables in a scientific study [60, 44]. Identifying latent or unobserved confounding variables is
even more challenging, and misinterpretation presents various challenges in downstream applications,
such as discovering causal structures from observational data. Numerous methods operate under the
assumption of causal sufficiency [45, 4, 60, 8, 51, 65], implying the non-existence of unobserved
confounding variables. Causal sufficiency presupposes that all pertinent variables required for causal
inference have been observed. However, this may not be a practical or testable assumption.
The study of confounding has various applications, chief among them being causal discovery - identifying the causal relationships among variables [38, 40, 63]. It is also useful for determining whether
a set of observed confounding variables is sufficient to adjust for estimating causal effects [29],
measuring the extent to which statistical correlation between variables can be attributed to confound38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

