∇2DFT: A Universal Quantum Chemistry Dataset of
Drug-Like Molecules and a Benchmark for Neural
Network Potentials
Kuzma Khrabrov1, , Anton Ber1 , Artem Tsypin1 , Konstantin Ushenin1 , Egor Rumiantsev2 ,
Alexander Telepov1 , Dmitry Protasov1 , Ilya Shenbin6 , Anton Alekseev3, 6 , Mikhail Shirokikh3 ,
Sergey Nikolenko4, 6 , Elena Tutubalina1, 4, 5 , and Artur Kadurin1, 4,
1

AIRI, Moscow
EPFL, Lausanne
3
St. Petersburg State University, St. Petersburg
4
ISP RAS Research Center for Trusted Artificial Intelligence, Moscow
5
Sber AI, Moscow
6
St. Petersburg Department of the Steklov Institute of Mathematics, St. Petersburg
{Khrabrov, Kadurin}@airi.net
2

Abstract
Methods of computational quantum chemistry provide accurate approximations of
molecular properties crucial for computer-aided drug discovery and other areas of
chemical science. However, high computational complexity limits the scalability
of their applications. Neural network potentials (NNPs) are a promising alternative
to quantum chemistry methods, but they require large and diverse datasets for
training. This work presents a new dataset and benchmark called ∇2 DFT that is
based on the nablaDFT. It contains twice as much molecular structures, three times
more conformations, new data types and tasks, and state-of-the-art models. The
dataset includes energies, forces, 17 molecular properties, Hamiltonian and overlap
matrices, and a wavefunction object. All calculations were performed at the DFT
level (ωB97X-D/def2-SVP) for each conformation. Moreover, ∇2 DFT is the first
dataset that contains relaxation trajectories for a substantial number of drug-like
molecules. We also introduce a novel benchmark for evaluating NNPs in molecular
property prediction, Hamiltonian prediction, and conformational optimization tasks.
Finally, we propose an extendable framework for training NNPs and implement 10
models within it.

1

Introduction

Solving the many-particle Schrödniger equation (SE) for electrons makes it possible to describe the
electronic structure of matter. This structure determines the equilibrium and transport properties of
matter that are crucial in downstream applications such as computer-aided drug design or material
design [1–8]. However, since an analytic solution to the many-particle SE is unknown, various
approximate solutions are used in practice, leading to a trade-off between accuracy and computational
cost. The most accurate methods, such as Post-Hartree-Fock [9] and quantum Monte Carlo methods
[10] are prohibitively expensive, applicable to systems with at most tens of atoms; for a comprehensive
overview of numerical methods at different levels of accuracy see [11].
Density functional theory (DFT) [12–14] is currently the primary approach for solving the manyparticle SE for electrons. It provides reasonably accurate predictions while being computationally
tractable for systems on a scale of 1000 electrons [15]. However, even a single iteration of this method
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

