Linear Time Approximation Algorithm for Column
Subset Selection with Local Search
Yuanbin Zou1,2 , Ziyun Huang3 , Jinhui Xu4 , Jianxin Wang1,2,5 , Qilong Feng1,2,∗
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University,
Changsha 410083, China
2
Xiangjiang Laboratory, Changsha 410205, China
3
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Penn State Erie,
The Behrend College
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, State University of New York at Buffalo,
NY, USA
5
The Hunan Provincial Key Lab of Bioinformatics, Central South University,
Changsha 410083, China
yuanbinzou@csu.edu.cn, csufeng@mail.csu.edu.cn,
zxh201@psu.edu, jinhui@buffalo.edu, jxwang@mail.csu.edu.cn

Abstract
The Column Subset Selection (CSS) problem has been widely studied in dimensionality reduction and feature selection. The goal of the CSS problem is to output
a submatrix S, consisting of k columns from an n × d input matrix A that minimizes the residual error ∥A − SS † A∥2F , where S † is the Moore-Penrose inverse
matrix of S. Many previous approximation algorithms have non-linear running
times in both n and d, while the existing linear-time algorithms have a relatively
larger approximation ratios. Additionally, the local search algorithms in existing
results for solving the CSS problem are heuristic. To achieve linear running time
while maintaining better approximation using a local search strategy, we propose
a local search-based approximation algorithm for the CSS problem with exactly
k columns selected. A key challenge in achieving linear running time with the
local search strategy is how to avoid exhaustive enumerations of candidate columns
for constructing swap pairs in each local search step. To address this issue, we
propose a two-step mixed sampling method that reduces the number of enumerations for swap pair construction from O(dk) to k in linear time. Although the
two-step mixed sampling method reduces the search space of local search strategy, bounding the residual error after swaps is a non-trivial task. To estimate the
changes in residual error after swaps, we propose a matched swap pair construction
method to bound the approximation loss, ensuring a constant probability of loss
reduction in each local search step. In expectation, these techniques enable us to
obtain the local search algorithm for the CSS problem with theoretical guarantees,
where a 53(k + 1)-approximate solution can be obtained in linear running time
O(ndk 4 log k). Empirical experiments show that our proposed algorithm achieves
better quality and time compared to previous algorithms on both small and large
datasets. Moreover, it is at least 10 times faster than state-of-the-art algorithms
across all large-scale datasets.

∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

