Stability and Generalizability in SDE Diffusion Models
with Measure-Preserving Dynamics

Weitong Zhang1

Chengqi Zang2

Cheng Ouyang1,3

1

Liu Li1

Sarah Cechnicka1

Bernhard Kainz1,4

Imperial College London, UK, 2 University of Tokyo, JP, 3 University of Oxford, UK
4
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg, GER
weitong.zhang20@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Inverse problems describe the process of estimating the causal factors from a
set of measurements or data. Mapping of often incomplete or degraded data to
parameters is ill-posed, thus data-driven iterative solutions are required, for example when reconstructing clean images from poor signals. Diffusion models
have shown promise as potent generative tools for solving inverse problems due to
their superior reconstruction quality and their compatibility with iterative solvers.
However, most existing approaches are limited to linear inverse problems represented as Stochastic Differential Equations (SDEs). This simplification falls short
of addressing the challenging nature of real-world problems, leading to amplified
cumulative errors and biases. We provide an explanation for this gap through
the lens of measure-preserving dynamics of Random Dynamical Systems (RDS)
with which we analyse Temporal Distribution Discrepancy and thus introduce
a theoretical framework based on RDS for SDE diffusion models. We uncover
several strategies that inherently enhance the stability and generalizability of diffusion models for inverse problems and introduce a novel score-based diffusion
framework, the Dynamics-aware SDE Diffusion Generative Model (D3 GM). The
Measure-preserving property can return the degraded measurement to the original
state despite complex degradation with the RDS concept of stability. Our extensive
experimental results corroborate the effectiveness of D3 GM across multiple benchmarks including a prominent application for inverse problems, magnetic resonance
imaging.

1

Introduction

Diffusion probabilistic models [53, 54, 52] have demonstrated impressive performance across various
image generation tasks, primarily by modeling a diffusion process and then learning an associated
reverse process. Among the many commonly used approaches [63], diffusion models that incorporate
the concept of score functions [28, 55] can capture the intrinsic random fluctuations of the forward
diffusion process, positioning them as a good choice for in-depth analysis. Score-based generative
models (SGMs) entail gradually diffusing images towards a noise distribution, and then generating
samples by chaining the score functions at decreasing noise levels with score-based sampling
approaches. One such example of an SGM with a score-based sampling technique, known as score
matching [54], has gained popularity for density estimation [16]. It employs methods such as
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

