Visual Riddles: a Commonsense and World Knowledge
Challenge for Large Vision and Language Models

Nitzan Bitton-Guetta1 Aviv Slobodkin2 Aviya Maimon2 Eliya Habba3
Royi Rassin2 Yonatan Bitton4 Idan Szpektor4 Amir Globerson4,5 Yuval Elovici1
1
Ben Gurion University 2 Bar-Ilan University
3
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem 4 Google Research 5 Tel Aviv University
nitzangu@post.bgu.ac.il; yonatanbitton@google.com
https://visual-riddles.github.io/

Abstract

Visual Riddles Instances

Imagine observing someone scratching their arm; to understand why, additional
context would be necessary. However, spotting a mosquito nearby would immediately offer a likely explanation for the person’s discomfort, thereby alleviating
the need for further information. This example illustrates how subtle visual cues
can challenge our cognitive skills and demonstrates the complexity of interpreting
visual scenarios. To study these skills, we present Visual Riddles, a benchmark
aimed to test vision and language models on visual riddles requiring commonsense
and world knowledge. The benchmark comprises 400 visual riddles, each featuring
a unique image created by a variety of text-to-image models, question, groundtruth answer, textual hint, and attribution. Human evaluation reveals that existing
models lag significantly behind human performance, which is at 82% accuracy,
with Gemini-Pro-1.5 leading with 40% accuracy. Our benchmark comes with
automatic evaluation tasks to make assessment scalable. These findings underscore
the potential of Visual Riddles as a valuable resource for enhancing vision and
language models’ capabilities in interpreting complex visual scenarios.

Question

Why is he doing this?

GroundTruth
Answer

The image depicts a man scratching his arm, in a bedroom and a mosquito on a nightstand
near the bed. Therefore, the man probably scratching his arm due to mosquito bite.

Hint

Look at the nightstand

Prompt

In a cozy bedroom setting, a man is seated on the edge of his bed, his attention fixed on a
small mosquito bite on his arm, which he scratches with vibrant manner. a tiny mosquito on
the nightstand behind the bed. the focus of the image is on the man.

Question

Sara is a resort owner in Krabi, Thailand. could this be her resort?

GroundTruth
Answer

Snow-capped mountains in the background of the Thai resort cabins suggest that this
resort is not in Krabi, Thailand, where the climate is consistently warm and snow is absent.

Hint

Look on the mountains

Attribution https://www.ansovatravel.com/discover/travel-guides/the-destination-highlights-in-thailand/krabi/
Prompt

An outside image of a thai-style house, with big yard. in the yard there is grass and big
pool. on the far background there are Alpine mountains with snow on the tops. there is
visible snow on the mountains tops.

Figure 1: Introducing Visual Riddles, designed to test models on their ability to use commonsense,
world knowledge, hints, attributions, and factuality in interpreting complex visual cues. This resource
aims to enhance models capability to handle nuanced and factual visual scenarios.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

