Learning to Solve Quadratic Unconstrained Binary
Optimization in a Classification Way

Ming Chen1∗, Jie Chun 1∗, Shang Xiang 2 , Luona Wei3 , Yonghao Du1 , Qian Wan4 ,
Yuning Chen1†, Yingwu Chen1
1
College of Systems Engineering, National University of Defense Technology
2
School of Public Administration, Xiangtan University
3
College of Electronics and Information Engineering, South-Central Minzu University
4
National Engineering Research Center of Educational Big Data,
Central China Normal University
{cmself, chunjie0720, xiangshang165, wlnelysion, duyonghao15,
wanq8228}@163.com, cynnudt@hotmail.com, cywnudt@163.com

Abstract
The quadratic unconstrained binary optimization (QUBO) is a well-known NP-hard
problem that takes an n × n matrix Q as input and decides an n-dimensional 0-1
vector x, to optimize a quadratic function. Existing learning-based models that
always formulate the solution process as sequential decisions suffer from high
computational overload. To overcome this issue, we propose a neural solver called
the Value Classification Model (VCM) that formulates the solution process from a
classification perspective. It applies a Depth Value Network (DVN) based on graph
convolution that exploits the symmetry property in Q to auto-grasp value features.
These features are then fed into a Value Classification Network (VCN) which
directly generates classification solutions. Trained by a highly efficient modeltailored Greedy-guided Self Trainer (GST) which does not require any priori
optimal labels, VCM significantly outperforms competitors in both computational
efficiency and solution quality with a remarkable generalization ability. It can
achieve near-optimal solutions in milliseconds with an average optimality gap of
just 0.362% on benchmarks with up to 2500 variables. Notably, a VCM trained
at a specific DVN depth can steadily find better solutions by simply extending the
testing depth, which narrows the gap to 0.034% on benchmarks. To our knowledge,
this is the first learning-based model to reach such a performance.

1

Introduction

Nonlinear integer programming is a highly challenging subject in mathematical programming and
operations research, where the Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimization (QUBO) problem is
one of the most well-known cases. Due to its extensive applicability and computational intricacies,
the QUBO continues to receive widespread attention[1]. The purpose of the QUBO problem is to
optimize an unconstrained quadratic function:
n
X n
X
max / min OF V = f (x) = x> Qx =
qij xi xj
(1)
i=1 j=1

where Q is a symmetric matrix with n × n coefficients, while x is a binary (0-1) n-dimensional
column vector, i.e., xi ∈ {0, 1}, i = 1, ..., n. OF V is short for objective function value.
∗
†

These authors contributed equally.
Correspondence

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

