Amnesia as a Catalyst for Enhancing Black Box Pixel
Attacks in Image Classiﬁcation and Object Detection

Dongsu Song
Department of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Korea Aerospace University
raister2873@gmail.com

Daehwa Ko
Department of Software
Korea Aerospace University
daehwa001210@gmail.com

Jay Hoon Jung∗
Department of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Korea Aerospace University
jhjung@kau.ac.kr

Abstract
It is well known that query-based attacks tend to have relatively higher success
rates in adversarial black-box attacks. While research on black-box attacks is actively being conducted, relatively few studies have focused on pixel attacks that
target only a limited number of pixels. In image classiﬁcation, query-based pixel
attacks often rely on patches, which heavily depend on randomness and neglect
the fact that scattered pixels are more suitable for adversarial attacks. Moreover, to
the best of our knowledge, query-based pixel attacks have not been explored in the
ﬁeld of object detection. To address these issues, we propose a novel pixel-based
black-box attack called Remember and Forget Pixel Attack using Reinforcement
Learning(RFPAR), consisting of two main components: the Remember and Forget processes. RFPAR mitigates randomness and avoids patch dependency by
leveraging rewards generated through a one-step RL algorithm to perturb pixels.
RFPAR effectively creates perturbed images that minimize the conﬁdence scores
while adhering to limited pixel constraints. Furthermore, we advance our proposed attack beyond image classiﬁcation to object detection, where RFPAR reduces the conﬁdence scores of detected objects to avoid detection. Experiments
on the ImageNet-1K dataset for classiﬁcation show that RFPAR outperformed
state-of-the-art query-based pixel attacks. For object detection, using the MSCOCO dataset with YOLOv8 and DDQ, RFPAR demonstrates comparable mAP
reduction to state-of-the-art query-based attack while requiring fewer query. Further experiments on the Argoverse dataset using YOLOv8 conﬁrm that RFPAR
effectively removed objects on a larger scale dataset. Our code is available at
https://github.com/KAU-QuantumAILab/RFPAR.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models are susceptible to adversarial attacks, which involve subtle modiﬁcations of
input data that are imperceptible to humans but lead to incorrect predictions by the model[1]. As
deep learning technologies become commercialized in the real world, the issue of adversarial attacks
has garnered increasing attention.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

