FFAM: Feature Factorization Activation Map for
Explanation of 3D Detectors

Shuai Liu, Boyang Li, Zhiyu Fang, Mingyue Cui, Kai Huang∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
{liush376@mail2, liby83@mail, fangzhy9@mail2, cuimy@mail2, huangk36@mail}.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
LiDAR-based 3D object detection has made impressive progress recently, yet
most existing models are black-box, lacking interpretability. Previous explanation
approaches primarily focus on analyzing image-based models and are not readily
applicable to LiDAR-based 3D detectors. In this paper, we propose a feature
factorization activation map (FFAM) to generate high-quality visual explanations
for 3D detectors. FFAM employs non-negative matrix factorization to generate
concept activation maps and subsequently aggregates these maps to obtain a global
visual explanation. To achieve object-specific visual explanations, we refine the
global visual explanation using the feature gradient of a target object. Additionally,
we introduce a voxel upsampling strategy to align the scale between the activation
map and input point cloud. We qualitatively and quantitatively analyze FFAM
with multiple detectors on several datasets. Experimental results validate the
high-quality visual explanations produced by FFAM. The code is available at
https://github.com/Say2L/FFAM.git.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been rapid development in LiDAR-based 3D object detection [36, 32,
34, 38, 12], making it widely utilized in autonomous driving, industrial automation, and robot
navigation. However, existing detection methods predominantly rely on deep neural networks with
highly nonlinear and complex structures. Essentially, these models can be considered as "black box"
systems. Such opaque modeling techniques hinder users from fully trusting the detection models,
particularly in sensitive and high-risk domains. Consequently, understanding the decision-making
process of these inherently opaque models is urgently needed.
Visual explanation methods [20, 1, 33, 15, 16] have gained widespread adoption for analyzing
models based on deep neural networks. These methods generate saliency maps that highlight the
crucial elements influencing the model’s decision within the input map. Perturbation-based [15, 16],
class activation map (CAM)-based [41, 20, 1], and gradient-based [28, 24, 25] methods are the
three main categories of visual explanation methods. However, these methods primarily focus on
image-based models and are not directly applicable to point cloud-based models. The pioneering
work in analyzing 3D detectors is OccAM [19], which extends D-RISE [16] to perturb point clouds.
As a perturbation-based approach, OccAM first randomly samples numerous sub-point clouds and
measures the change in model predictions. However, the large number of inference calculations
makes OccAM computationally intensive, and the sampling number easily impacts the quality of
generated saliency maps.
Interpreting 3D detectors presents three key challenges. First, point clouds are inherently threedimensional (3D). It is essential to generate corresponding 3D saliency maps for accurate interpreta∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

