Almost Minimax Optimal Best Arm Identification in
Piecewise Stationary Linear Bandits

Yunlong Hou
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
yhou@u.nus.edu

Vincent Y. F. Tan
Department of Mathematics
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
National University of Singapore
vtan@nus.edu.sg

Zixin Zhong
Data Science and Analytics Thrust
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
zixinzhong@hkust-gz.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose a novel piecewise stationary linear bandit (PSLB) model, where the
environment randomly samples a context from an unknown probability distribution
at each changepoint, and the quality of an arm is measured by its return averaged
over all contexts. The contexts and their distribution, as well as the changepoints are
unknown to the agent. We design Piecewise-Stationary ε-Best Arm Identification+
(PSεBAI+ ), an algorithm that is guaranteed to identify an ε-optimal arm with
probability ≥ 1 − δ and with a minimal number of samples. PSεBAI+ consists
of two subroutines, PSεBAI and NAÏVE ε-BAI (NεBAI), which are executed in
parallel. PSεBAI actively detects changepoints and aligns contexts to facilitate
the arm identification process. When PSεBAI and NεBAI are utilized judiciously
in parallel, PSεBAI+ is shown to have a finite expected sample complexity. By
proving a lower bound, we show the expected sample complexity of PSεBAI+ is
optimal up to a logarithmic factor. We compare PSεBAI+ to baseline algorithms
using numerical experiments which demonstrate its efficiency. Both our analytical
and numerical results corroborate that the efficacy of PSεBAI+ is due to the
delicate change detection and context alignment procedures embedded in PSεBAI.

1

Introduction

In stochastic multi-armed bandits (MABs), an agent interacts with the environment at each time step.
The agent pulls an arm and observes the corresponding return provided by the environment. The
classical MAB framework assumes a stationary environment where the expected return of each arm
remains unchanged over time. However, we usually face ever-changing environments in real life. For
instance, in investment option selection and portfolio management, fund managers want to select a
subset of good candidate portfolios. However, the market may be bullish, bearish, or in some other
state. The transition between these states can be well-modelled as being stochastic. We wish to select
portfolios that yield the best long-term option under such a piecewise stationary environment. Further
examples such as one based on agriculture in the face of stochastically changing weather patterns
are discussed in detail in Appendix A. These motivate us to formulate and investigate a piecewise
stationary linear bandit (PSLB) model.
Our PSLB model is equipped with an arm set X , a context set Θ and a deterministic but unknown
sequence of changepoints C. At each changepoint, the environment samples a context θ ∈ Θ from an
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

