Score-Optimal Diffusion Schedules

Christopher Williams
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Andrew Campbell
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Arnaud Doucet
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Saifuddin Syed
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

{williams,campbell,doucet,saifuddin.syed}@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Denoising diffusion models (DDMs) offer a flexible framework for sampling
from high dimensional data distributions. DDMs generate a path of probability
distributions interpolating between a reference Gaussian distribution and a data
distribution by incrementally injecting noise into the data. To numerically simulate
the sampling process, a discretisation schedule from the reference back towards
clean data must be chosen. An appropriate discretisation schedule is crucial to
obtain high quality samples. However, beyond hand crafted heuristics, a general
method for choosing this schedule remains elusive. This paper presents a novel
algorithm for adaptively selecting an optimal discretisation schedule with respect
to a cost that we derive. Our cost measures the work done by the simulation
procedure to transport samples from one point in the diffusion path to the next.
Our method does not require hyperparameter tuning and adapts to the dynamics
and geometry of the diffusion path. Our algorithm only involves the evaluation
of the estimated Stein score, making it scalable to existing pre-trained models
at inference time and online during training. We find that our learned schedule
recovers performant schedules previously only discovered through manual search
and obtains competitive FID scores on image datasets.

1

Introduction

Denoising Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021) or DDMs
are state-of-the-art generative models. They are formulated through considering a forward noising
process that interpolates from the target to a reference Gaussian distribution by gradually introducing
noise into an empirical data distribution. Simulating the time reversal of this process then produces
samples from the data distribution. Specifically, we evolve data distribution p0 through the forward
diffusion process on time interval [0, 1], described by
dXt = f (t)Xt dt + g(t)dWt ,

X0 ∼ p0 ,

(1)

with drift f (t)Xt , diffusion coefficient g(t) and Brownian noise increment dWt . The coefficients
f (t) and g(t) are chosen such that at time t = 1 the distribution of X1 is very close to a reference
Gaussian distribution p1 in distribution. A sample starting at p0 and following Equation (1) until time
t will be distributed according to pt which is a mollified version of the data distribution
R
pt (xt ) = X0 p0 (x0 )pt|0 (xt |x0 )dx0 ,
pt|0 (xt |x0 ) = N (xt ; s(t)x0 , σ 2 (t)I).
(2)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

