Adversarially Trained Weighted Actor-Critic for Safe
Offline Reinforcement Learning

Honghao Wei
Washington State University
honghao.wei@wsu.edu

Xiyue Peng
ShanghaiTech University
pengxy2024@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Arnob Ghosh
New Jersey Institute of Technology
arnob.ghosh@njit.edu

Xin Liu
ShanghaiTech University
liuxin7@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose WSAC (Weighted Safe Actor-Critic), a novel algorithm for Safe Offline
Reinforcement Learning (RL) under functional approximation, which can robustly
optimize policies to improve upon an arbitrary reference policy with limited data
coverage. WSAC is designed as a two-player Stackelberg game to optimize a
refined objective function. The actor optimizes the policy against two adversarially
trained value critics with small importance-weighted Bellman errors, which focus
on scenarios where the actor’s performance is inferior to the reference policy.
In theory, we demonstrate that when the actor employs a no-regret optimization
oracle, WSAC achieves a number of guarantees: (i) For the first time in the safe
offline RL setting, we establish that WSAC can produce a policy that outperforms
any reference policy while maintaining the same level of safety, which is critical
to designing a safe algorithm for
√ offline RL. (ii) WSAC achieves the optimal
statistical convergence rate of 1/ N to the reference policy, where N is the size of
the offline dataset. (iii) We theoretically show that WSAC guarantees a safe policy
improvement across a broad range of hyperparameters that control the degree of
pessimism, indicating its practical robustness. Additionally, we offer a practical
version of WSAC and compare it with existing state-of-the-art safe offline RL
algorithms in several continuous control environments. WSAC outperforms all
baselines across a range of tasks, supporting the theoretical results.

1

Introduction

Online safe reinforcement learning (RL) has found successful applications in various domains, such
as autonomous driving (Isele et al., 2018), recommender systems (Chow et al., 2017), and robotics
(Achiam et al., 2017). It enables the learning of safe policies effectively while satisfying certain safety
constraints, including collision avoidance, budget adherence, and reliability. However, collecting
diverse interaction data can be extremely costly and infeasible in many real-world applications, and
this challenge becomes even more critical in scenarios where risky behavior cannot be tolerated.
Given the inherently risk-sensitive nature of these safety-related tasks, data collection becomes
feasible only when employing behavior policies satisfies all the safety requirements.
To overcome the limitations imposed by interactive data collection, offline RL algorithms are designed
to learn a policy from an available dataset collected from historical experiences by some behavior
policy, which may differ from the policy we aim to learn. A desirable property of an effective offline
algorithm is the assurance of robust policy improvement (RPI), which guarantees that a learned policy
is always at least as good as the baseline behavior policies (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Laroche et al., 2019;
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

