Privacy without Noisy Gradients:
Slicing Mechanism for Generative Model Training

Kristjan Greenewald
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
kristjan.h.greenewald@ibm.com
Hao Wang
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
hao@ibm.com

Yuancheng Yu
UIUC
yyu51@illinois.edu
Kai Xu
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
xuk@ibm.com

Abstract
Training generative models with differential privacy (DP) typically involves injecting noise into gradient updates or adapting the discriminator’s training procedure.
As a result, such approaches often struggle with hyper-parameter tuning and convergence. We consider the slicing privacy mechanism that injects noise into random
low-dimensional projections of the private data, and provide strong privacy guarantees for it. These noisy projections are used for training generative models. To
enable optimizing generative models using this DP approach, we introduce the
smoothed-sliced f -divergence and show it enjoys statistical consistency. Moreover,
we present a kernel-based estimator for this divergence, circumventing the need
for adversarial training. Extensive numerical experiments demonstrate that our
approach can generate synthetic data of higher quality compared with baselines.
Beyond performance improvement, our method, by sidestepping the need for noisy
gradients, offers data scientists the flexibility to adjust generator architecture and
hyper-parameters, run the optimization over any number of epochs, and even restart
the optimization process—all without incurring additional privacy costs.

1

Introduction

Just as oil fueled the industrial revolution, data now propels innovation and progress in today’s
digital life. However, data sharing faces challenges due to privacy risks and regulatory policies
(e.g., GDPR, CCPA, FTC). Synthetic data offers a promising solution as it closely resembles real
data, retains its formats and essential properties, and can be seamlessly integrated into existing
workflows. Nonetheless, modern generative models are vulnerable to privacy attacks that could
expose individuals’ sensitive information in the original data [HMDDC17, CYZF20, SOT22]. Today,
differential privacy (DP) [DR14] stands as the de facto standard for privacy protection and it plays
a crucial role in guiding the design of synthetic data. For example, DP was used in the release of
microdata from Israel’s National Registry of live births in 2014 to protect the privacy of mothers and
newborns [HC24], as well as in the release of global victim-perpetrator data to ensure the privacy of
victims [fM22]. Additionally, a recent publication [NDL+ 23] by the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) recommends the use of DP algorithms in generating synthetic data to provide
robust privacy protection against rapid developments in privacy attacks.
Existing approaches to training generative models often integrate DP by injecting noise into gradient
updates or adapting the discriminator’s training procedure [XLW+ 18, TKP19, CBV+ 21, TTCY21,
BJWW+ 19, JYVDS19, TWB+ 19, BKZ23, NPA23, LJW+ 20, XGJ+ 22, COF20]. They provide
several benefits, such as the ability to generate diverse data types (including continuous data, time38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

