Off-policy estimation with adaptively collected data:
the power of online learning

Jeonghwan Lee
Department of Statistics
The University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
jhlee97@uchicago.edu

Cong Ma
Department of Statistics
The University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
congm@uchicago.edu

Abstract
We consider estimation of a linear functional of the treatment effect from adaptively
collected data. This problem finds a variety of applications including off-policy
evaluation in contextual bandits, and estimation of the average treatment effect in
causal inference. While a certain class of augmented inverse propensity weighting
(AIPW) estimators enjoys desirable asymptotic properties including the semiparametric efficiency, much less is known about their non-asymptotic theory with
adaptively collected data. To fill in the gap, we first present generic upper bounds
on the mean-squared error of the class of AIPW estimators that crucially depends
on a sequentially weighted error between the treatment effect and its estimates. Motivated by this, we propose a general reduction scheme that allows one to produce
a sequence of estimates for the treatment effect via online learning to minimize the
sequentially weighted estimation error. To illustrate this, we provide three concrete
instantiations in (1) the tabular case; (2) the case of linear function approximation;
and (3) the case of general function approximation for the outcome model. We then
provide a local minimax lower bound to show the instance-dependent optimality of
the AIPW estimator using no-regret online learning algorithms.

1

Introduction

Estimating a linear functional of the treatment effect is of great importance in both causal inference
and reinforcement learning (RL). For instance, in causal inference, one is interested in estimating the
average treatment effect (ATE) [20] or their weighted variants, and in the literature of bandits and
RL, one is interested in estimating the expected reward of a target policy [38, 64, 41, 37]. Two main
challenges arise when tackling this problem:
• Off-policy estimation: Oftentimes, one needs to estimate the linear functional based on observational data collected from a behavior policy. This behavior policy may not match the desired
distribution specified by the linear functional [42];
• Adaptive data collection mechanism: It is increasingly common for observational data to be
adaptively collected due to the use of online algorithms (e.g., via contextual bandit algorithms [60,
33, 2, 52, 34]) in experimental design [67].
In this paper, we deal with two challenges simultaneously by investigating the estimation of a linear
functional of the treatment effect from observational data that are collected adaptively. When the
observational data is collected non-adaptively, i.e., in an i.i.d. manner, there is an extensive line of
work [51, 49, 10, 24, 1, 27, 43, 6, 3, 64, 41] investigating the asymptotic and non-asymptotic theory
of various estimators. Most notably are the study [6] that establishes the asymptotic efficiency of a
family of semi-parametric estimators, and a more recent study [42] that undertakes a finite-sample
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

