Conditional Synthesis of 3D Molecules
with Time Correction Sampler

Hojung Jung1∗ Youngrok Park1∗ Laura Schmid1 Jaehyeong Jo1
Dongkyu Lee2 Bongsang Kim2 Se-Young Yun1† Jinwoo Shin1†
KAIST AI1
LG Electronics2
{ghwjd7281, yr-park, yunseyoung, jinwooshin}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Diffusion models have demonstrated remarkable success in various domains, including molecular generation. However, conditional molecular generation remains
a fundamental challenge due to an intrinsic trade-off between targeting specific
chemical properties and generating meaningful samples from the data distribution. In this work, we present Time-Aware Conditional Synthesis (TACS), a novel
approach to conditional generation on diffusion models. It integrates adaptively
controlled plug-and-play "online" guidance into a diffusion model, driving samples toward the desired properties while maintaining validity and stability. A key
component of our algorithm is our new type of diffusion sampler, Time Correction
Sampler (TCS), which is used to control guidance and ensure that the generated
molecules remain on the correct manifold at each reverse step of the diffusion process at the same time. Our proposed method demonstrates significant performance
in conditional 3D molecular generation and offers a promising approach towards
inverse molecular design, potentially facilitating advancements in drug discovery,
materials science, and other related fields.

1

Introduction

Discovering molecules with specific target properties is a fundamental challenge in modern chemistry,
with significant implications for various domains such as drug discovery and materials science [49, 44,
7]. While diffusion models have shown great success in the generation of real-world molecules [55,
31], their primary goal is often simply to generate realistic molecules without considering specific
properties, which can lead to producing molecules with undesirable chemical properties.
Existing works address this issue by leveraging controllable diffusion frameworks to generate
molecules with desired properties [23, 5]. One approach is to use classifier guidance [54], which
utilizes auxiliary trained classifiers to guide the diffusion process [5]. An alternative is to use
classifier-free guidance (CFG) [19], which directly trains the diffusion models on condition-labeled
data. While both approaches can generate stable molecules, they struggle to generate truly desirable
molecules due to the complex structures and the discrete nature of atomic features [24].
On the other hand, recent works [51, 18] have introduced training-free guidance for controllable
generation in a plug-and-play manner, which we hereafter refer to as online guidance (OG). This
approach can directly estimate the conditional score with unconditional diffusion model. However, our
analysis shows that applying online guidance into the molecular generation can result in generating
samples with significantly low molecular stability and validity due to the stepwise enforcement of
specific conditions without considering the original distribution at each timestep.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

