Adaptive Experimentation When You Can’t
Experiment

Yao Zhao
University of Arizona
yaoz@arizona.edu

Kwang-Sung Jun
University of Arizona
kjun@cs.arizona.edu

Tanner Fiez
Amazon
fieztann@amazon.com

Lalit Jain
University of Washington
lalitj@uw.edu

Abstract
This paper introduces the confounded pure exploration transductive linear bandit
(CPET-LB) problem. As a motivating example, often online services cannot directly
assign users to specific control or treatment experiences either for business or practical reasons. In these settings, naively comparing treatment and control groups that
may result from self-selection can lead to biased estimates of underlying treatment
effects. Instead, online services can employ a properly randomized encouragement
that incentivizes users toward a specific treatment. Our methodology provides
online services with an adaptive experimental design approach for learning the
best-performing treatment for such encouragement designs. We consider a more
general underlying model captured by a linear structural equation and formulate
pure exploration linear bandits in this setting. Though pure exploration has been extensively studied in standard adaptive experimental design settings, we believe this
is the first work considering a setting where noise is confounded. Elimination-style
algorithms using experimental design methods in combination with a novel finitetime confidence interval on an instrumental variable style estimator are presented
with sample complexity upper bounds nearly matching a minimax lower bound.
Finally, experiments are conducted that demonstrate the efficacy of our approach.

1

Introduction

In this study, we present a methodology for adaptive experimentation in scenarios characterized
by potential confounding. Online services routinely conduct thousands of A/B tests annually [23].
In most online A/B/N experimentation, meticulous user-level randomization is essential to ensure
unbiased estimates of treatment effects at the population level, commonly known as average treatment
effects (ATE). In this setting, firms are often interested in understanding the treatment with the highest
average outcome if presented to all members of the population. However, in many settings firms
may not be able to randomize, for example if a feature must be rolled out to all users for various
business reasons [30]. In such instances, users may choose to engage with a feature or not based on
potentially unobservable preferences. Thus the resulting measured outcome may be correlated with
the decision to engage in a specific feature. I.e. the underlying characteristics of the user confound
the relationship between the decision to use the feature being evaluated and the effect of the feature.
Thus, naively comparing the average outcome for users who engage with a feature with those who do
not suffers from a (selection) bias. This setting is captured in Figure 1.
A potential solution is for services to employ encouragement designs where users are presented
with incentives that encourage users to engage with a specific feature [4, 7, 12]. As a concrete
example, many online services have introduced membership levels with different offerings and
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

