Instruction Tuning Large Language Models to
Understand Electronic Health Records
Zhenbang Wu1,2,3 , Anant Dadu2,3 , Mike Nalls2,3 , Faraz Faghri2,3* ,
1
UIUC, 2 National Institutes of Health, 3 Data Tecnica
*
Co-corresponding authors

Jimeng Sun1*

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have shown impressive capabilities in solving a
wide range of tasks based on human instructions. However, developing a conversational AI assistant for electronic health record (EHR) data remains challenging
due to (1) the lack of large-scale instruction-following datasets and (2) the limitations of existing model architectures in handling complex and heterogeneous
EHR data. In this paper, we introduce MIMIC-Instr, a dataset comprising over
400K open-ended instruction-following examples derived from the MIMIC-IV
EHR database. This dataset covers various topics and is suitable for instructiontuning general-purpose LLMs for diverse clinical use cases. Additionally, we
propose Llemr, a general framework that enables LLMs to process and interpret
EHRs with complex data structures. Llemr demonstrates competitive performance in answering a wide range of patient-related questions based on EHR data.
Furthermore, our evaluations on clinical predictive modeling benchmarks reveal
that the fine-tuned Llemr achieves performance comparable to state-of-the-art
(SOTA) baselines using curated features. The dataset and code are available at
https://github.com/zzachw/llemr.

1

Introduction

EHRs document a patient’s medical history and care, including demographics, diagnoses, laboratory
test results, medication prescriptions, and clinical notes [Evans, 2018]. Despite the potential benefits
in supporting clinical decision-making and care coordination, EHR systems also lead to physician
burnout due to challenges in navigating the user interface, the large volume of data that needs to be
reviewed for each medical decision, and the extra clerical tasks directed to physicians [Melnick et al.,
2020, Tajirian et al., 2020, DeChant et al., 2019]. Previous studies show that physicians spend an
average of 3.17 hours daily on EHR systems [Overhage and McCallie, 2020]. This not only detracts
from patient care but also reduces the time physicians can spend interacting directly with patients.
Advances in LLMs offer an opportunity to streamline EHR processes and ease the load on healthcare
providers. LLMs have revolutionized natural language processing fields in tasks such as question
answering [Wei et al., 2022a, Touvron et al., 2023], visual understanding [Liu et al., 2023, Li et al.,
2023a, 2022, 2023b], reasoning [Wei et al., 2022b, Brown et al., 2020], and code generation [Black
et al., 2022]. They have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in understanding complex inputs
and following human instructions to solve diverse tasks. Recent works have further shown that
LLMs can achieve expert-level performance on multiple-choice questions from medical licensing
exams [Singhal et al., 2022, 2023]. However, despite these advances, developing a conversational AI
assistant specifically for EHR data remains a significant challenge.
Challenge 1: Lack of large-scale instruction-following data. LLMs are typically fine-tuned on
large-scale instruction-following datasets to understand user instructions and perform a variety of
tasks [Wei et al., 2022a]. These datasets are created using manually defined templates or with
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

