MonoMAE: Enhancing Monocular 3D Detection
through Depth-Aware Masked Autoencoders

Xueying Jiang1 , Sheng Jin1 , Xiaoqin Zhang2 , Ling Shao3 , Shijian Lu1∗
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology, China
3
UCAS-Terminus AI Lab, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China

Abstract
Monocular 3D object detection aims for precise 3D localization and identification
of objects from a single-view image. Despite its recent progress, it often struggles
while handling pervasive object occlusions that tend to complicate and degrade the
prediction of object dimensions, depths, and orientations. We design MonoMAE,
a monocular 3D detector inspired by Masked Autoencoders that addresses the
object occlusion issue by masking and reconstructing objects in the feature space.
MonoMAE consists of two novel designs. The first is depth-aware masking that
selectively masks certain parts of non-occluded object queries in the feature space
for simulating occluded object queries for network training. It masks non-occluded
object queries by balancing the masked and preserved query portions adaptively
according to the depth information. The second is lightweight query completion
that works with the depth-aware masking to learn to reconstruct and complete the
masked object queries. With the proposed feature-space occlusion and completion,
MonoMAE learns enriched 3D representations that achieve superior monocular 3D
detection performance qualitatively and quantitatively for both occluded and nonoccluded objects. Additionally, MonoMAE learns generalizable representations
that can work well in new domains.

1

Introduction

3D object detection has emerged as one key component in various navigation tasks such as autonomous driving, robot patrolling, etc. Compared with prior studies relying on LiDAR [69, 25, 64]
or multi-view images [27, 33, 61], monocular 3D object detection offers a more cost-effective and
accessible alternative which identifies objects and predicts their 3D locations from single-view images.
On the other hand, monocular 3D object detection is much more challenging due to the lack of 3D
information from multi-view images or LiDAR data.
Among various new challenges in monocular 3D detection, object occlusion, which exists widely in
natural images as illustrated in Figure 1 (a), becomes a critical issue while predicting 3D locations
in terms of object depths, object dimensions, and object orientations. Most existing monocular
3D detectors such as MonoDETR[66] and GUPNet [37] neglect the object occlusion issue which
demonstrates clear performance degradation as illustrated in Figure 1 (b). A simple idea is to learn
to reconstruct the occluded object regions whereby occluded objects can be handled similarly as
non-occluded objects. On the other hand, reconstructing occluded object regions in the image space
is complicated due to the super-rich variation of object occlusions in scene images.
Inspired by the Masked Autoencoders (MAE) [15] that randomly occludes image patches and
reconstructs them in representation learning, we treat object occlusions as natural masking and train
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

