Trading off Consistency and Dimensionality of Convex
Surrogates for Multiclass Classification

Enrique Nueve
Department of Computer Science
University of Colorado Boulder
enrique.nueveiv@colorado.edu

Bo Waggoner
Department of Computer Science
University of Colorado Boulder
bwag@colorado.edu

Dhamma Kimpara
Department of Computer Science
University of Colorado Boulder
dhamma.kimpara@colorado.edu

Jessie Finocchiaro∗
Department of Computer Science
Boston College
finocch@bc.edu

Abstract
In multiclass classification over n outcomes, we typically optimize some surrogate
loss L : Rd × Y → R assigning real-valued error to predictions in Rd . In this
paradigm, outcomes must be embedded into the reals with dimension d ≈ n in
order to design a consistent surrogate loss. Consistent losses are well-motivated
theoretically, yet for large n, such as in information retrieval and structured prediction tasks, their optimization may be computationally infeasible. In practice,
outcomes are typically embedded into some Rd for d ≪ n, with little known about
their suitability for multiclass classification. We investigate two approaches for
trading off consistency and dimensionality in multiclass classification while using
a convex surrogate loss. We first formalize partial consistency when the optimized
surrogate has dimension d ≪ n. We then check if partial consistency holds under
a given embedding and low-noise assumption, providing insight into when to use a
particular embedding into Rd . Finally, we present a new method to construct (fully)
consistent losses with d ≪ n out of multiple problem instances. Our practical
approach leverages parallelism to sidestep lower bounds on d.

1

Introduction

Multiclass classification, due to its combinatorial and discontinuous nature, is intractable to optimize
directly, which drives machine learners to optimize some nicer surrogate loss. To ensure these
surrogates properly “correspond” to the discrete classification task, we seek to design consistent
surrogates. If one uses a consistent surrogate loss, in the limit of infinite data and model expressivity,
one ends up with the same classifications as if one had solved the original intractable problem directly
with probability 1.
Surrogate losses form the backbone of gradient-based optimization for classification tasks. Optimizing
a surrogate is easier than direct optimization, but a large dimension d of the surrogate loss L :
Rd × Y → R can make gradient-based optimization intractable. Therefore, previous literature has
operated under the premise that the prediction dimension d should be as low as possible, subject to
consistency for the classification task [Ramaswamy and Agarwal, 2016, Finocchiaro et al., 2024,
2020]. For multi-class classification over n outcomes, the lower bound on d is n − 1 [Ramaswamy
and Agarwal, 2016].
∗

Most of this work was completed while author was at Harvard University CRCS

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

