PANORAMIA: Privacy Auditing of Machine Learning
Models without Retraining

Mishaal Kazmi∗
University of British Columbia

Hadrien Lautraite∗
University du Québec à Montréal

Alireza Akbari∗
Simon Fraser University

Qiaoyue Tang∗
University of British Columbia

Mauricio Soroco
University of British Columbia

Tao Wang
Simon Fraser University

Sébastien Gambs
University du Québec à Montréal

Mathias Lécuyer
University of British Columbia

Abstract
We present PANORAMIA, a privacy leakage measurement framework for machine
learning models that relies on membership inference attacks using generated data as
non-members. By relying on generated non-member data, PANORAMIA eliminates
the common dependency of privacy measurement tools on in-distribution nonmember data. As a result, PANORAMIA does not modify the model, training data,
or training process, and only requires access to a subset of the training data. We
evaluate PANORAMIA on ML models for image and tabular data classification, as
well as on large-scale language models.

1

Introduction

Training Machine Learning (ML) models with Differential Privacy (DP) Dwork et al. (2006), such
as with DP-SGD Abadi et al. (2016), upper-bounds the worst-case privacy loss incurred by the
training data. In contrast, privacy auditing aims to empirically lower-bound the privacy loss of a
target ML model or algorithm. In practice, privacy audits usually rely on the link between DP and
the performance of membership inference attacks (MIA) Wasserman & Zhou (2010); Kairouz et al.
(2015); Dong et al. (2019). At a high level, DP implies an upper-bound on the performance of MIAs,
thus creating a high-performance MIA implies a lower-bound on the privacy loss. Auditing schemes
have proven valuable in many settings, such as to audit DP implementations Nasr et al. (2023), or
to study the tightness of DP algorithms Nasr et al. (2021); Lu et al. (2023); Steinke et al. (2023).
Typical privacy audits rely on retraining the model several times, each time guessing the membership
of one sample Jagielski et al. (2020); Carlini et al. (2022a); Zanella-Béguelin et al. (2022), which
is computationally prohibitive, requires access to the target model (entire) training data as well as
control over the training pipeline.
To circumvent these concerns, Steinke et al. (2023) proposed an auditing recipe (called O(1)) requiring
only one training run (which could be the same as the actual training) by randomly including/excluding
several samples (called auditing examples) into the training dataset of the target model. Later, the
membership of the auditing examples are guessed for privacy audit. However, O(1) faces a few
challenges in certain setups. First, canaries, which are datapoints specially crafted to be easy to
detect when added to the training set Nasr et al. (2023); Lu et al. (2023); Steinke et al. (2023), cannot
be employed as auditing examples when measuring the privacy leakage for data that a contributor
actually puts into the model, and not a worst case data point.
∗

equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

