Pin-Tuning: Parameter-Efficient In-Context Tuning
for Few-Shot Molecular Property Prediction

Qiang Liu1 2 † Shaozhen Liu1 Xin Sun3 Shu Wu1 2 Liang Wang1 2 3
1
New Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS)
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Science and Technology of China
liang.wang@cripac.ia.ac.cn, qiang.liu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, liushaozhen2025@ia.ac.cn
sunxin000@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {shu.wu, wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Liang Wang1 2

Abstract
Molecular property prediction (MPP) is integral to drug discovery and material
science, but often faces the challenge of data scarcity in real-world scenarios. Addressing this, few-shot molecular property prediction (FSMPP) has been developed.
Unlike other few-shot tasks, FSMPP typically employs a pre-trained molecular
encoder and a context-aware classifier, benefiting from molecular pre-training
and molecular context information. Despite these advancements, existing methods
struggle with the ineffective fine-tuning of pre-trained encoders. We attribute this issue to the imbalance between the abundance of tunable parameters and the scarcity
of labeled molecules, and the lack of contextual perceptiveness in the encoders. To
overcome this hurdle, we propose a parameter-efficient in-context tuning method,
named Pin-Tuning. Specifically, we propose a lightweight adapter for pre-trained
message passing layers (MP-Adapter) and Bayesian weight consolidation for pretrained atom/bond embedding layers (Emb-BWC), to achieve parameter-efficient
tuning while preventing over-fitting and catastrophic forgetting. Additionally, we
enhance the MP-Adapters with contextual perceptiveness. This innovation allows
for in-context tuning of the pre-trained encoder, thereby improving its adaptability for specific FSMPP tasks. When evaluated on public datasets, our method
demonstrates superior tuning with fewer trainable parameters, improving few-shot
predictive performance.‡

1

Introduction

In the field of drug discovery and material science, molecular property prediction (MPP) stands as a
pivotal task [5, 9, 63]. MPP involves the prediction of molecular properties like solubility and toxicity,
based on their structural and physicochemical characteristics, which is integral to the development
of new pharmaceuticals and materials. However, a major challenge encountered in real-world MPP
scenarios is data scarcity. Obtaining extensive molecular data with well-characterized properties can
be time-consuming and expensive. To address this, few-shot molecular property prediction (FSMPP)
has emerged as a crucial approach, enabling predictions with limited labeled molecules [1, 41, 4].
The methodology for general MPP typically adheres to an encoder-classifier framework [71, 23, 27,
56], as illustrated in Figure 2(a). In this streamlined framework, the encoder converts molecular
†
‡

Corresponding author
Code is available at: https://github.com/CRIPAC-DIG/Pin-Tuning

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

