Learning Diffusion Priors from Observations
by Expectation Maximization

François Rozet
University of Liège
francois.rozet@uliege.be
François Lanusse
Université Paris-Saclay,
Université Paris Cité, CEA, CNRS, AIM
francois.lanusse@cnrs.fr

Gérôme Andry
University of Liège
gandry@uliege.be
Gilles Louppe
University of Liège
g.louppe@uliege.be

Abstract
Diffusion models recently proved to be remarkable priors for Bayesian inverse problems. However, training these models typically requires access to large amounts of
clean data, which could prove difficult in some settings. In this work, we present a
novel method based on the expectation-maximization algorithm for training diffusion models from incomplete and noisy observations only. Unlike previous works,
our method leads to proper diffusion models, which is crucial for downstream
tasks. As part of our method, we propose and motivate an improved posterior sampling scheme for unconditional diffusion models. We present empirical evidence
supporting the effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

Many scientific applications can be formalized as Bayesian inference in latent variable models, where
the target is the posterior distribution p(x | y) ∝ p(y | x) p(x) given an observation y ∈ RM resulting
from a forward process p(y | x) and a prior distribution p(x) over the latent variable x ∈ RN . Notable
examples include gravitational lensing inversion [1–3], accelerated MRI [4–8], unfolding in particle
physics [9, 10], and data assimilation [11–14]. In all of these examples, the observation y alone is
either too incomplete or too noisy to recover the latent x. Additional knowledge in the form of an
informative prior p(x) is crucial for valuable inference.
Recently, diffusion models [15, 16] proved to be remarkable priors for Bayesian inference, demonstrating both quality and versatility [17–27]. However, to train a diffusion model for the latent x,
one would typically need a large number of latent realizations, which by definition are not or rarely
accessible. This is notably the case in earth and space sciences where the systems of interest can only
be probed superficially.
Empirical Bayes (EB) methods [28–31] offer a solution to the problem of prior specification in latent
variable models when only observations y are available. The objective´ of EB is to find the parameters
θ of a prior model qθ (x) for which the evidence distribution qθ (y) = p(y | x) qθ (x) dx is closest to
the empirical distribution of observations p(y). Many EB methods have been proposed over the years,
but they remain limited to low-dimensional settings [32–37] or simple parametric models [38, 39].
In this work, our goal is to use diffusion models for the prior qθ (x), as they are best-in-class for
modeling high-dimensional distributions and enable many downstream tasks, including Bayesian
inference. This presents challenges for previous empirical Bayes methods which typically rely on
models for which the density qθ (x) or samples x ∼ qθ (x) are differentiable with respect to the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

