Efficient Adversarial Training in LLMs with
Continuous Attacks
Sophie Xhonneux
Mila, Université de Montréal
lpxhonneux@gmail.com

Alessandro Sordoni
Microsoft Research, Mila
alsordon@microsoft.com

Stephan Günnemann
Technical University of Munich,
Munich Data Science Institute
s.guennemann@tum.de

Gauthier Gidel
Mila, Université de Montréal
Canada AI CIFAR Chair
gidelgau@mila.quebec

Leo Schwinn
Technical University of Munich,
Munich Data Science Institute
l.schwinn@tum.de
https://github.com/sophie-xhonneux/Continuous-AdvTrain

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) are vulnerable to adversarial attacks that can bypass
their safety guardrails. In many domains, adversarial training has proven to be
one of the most promising methods to reliably improve robustness against such
attacks. Yet, in the context of LLMs, current methods for adversarial training are
hindered by the high computational costs required to perform discrete adversarial
attacks at each training iteration. We address this problem by instead calculating
adversarial attacks in the continuous embedding space of the LLM, which is orders
of magnitudes more efficient. We propose a fast adversarial training algorithm
(CAT) composed of two losses: the first makes the model robust on continuous
embedding attacks computed on an adversarial behaviour dataset; the second
ensures the usefulness of the final model by fine-tuning on utility data. Moreover,
we introduce CAPO, an adversarial variant of IPO that does not require utility data
for adversarially robust alignment. Our empirical evaluation on five models from
different families (Gemma, Phi3, Mistral, Zephyr, Llama2) and at different scales
(2B, 3.8B, 7B) shows that both algorithms substantially enhance LLM robustness
against discrete attacks (GCG, AutoDAN, PAIR), while maintaining utility. Our
results demonstrate that robustness to continuous perturbations can extrapolate
to discrete threat models. Thereby, we present a path toward scalable adversarial
training algorithms for robustly aligning LLMs.

1

Introduction

As large language models (LLMs) become increasingly integrated into various applications, ensuring
their safety and robustness is crucial. The seminal work of Zou et al. [1] highlighted substantial
vulnerabilities in even the most advanced proprietary models, demonstrating that adversarial attacks
can effectively disable safety mechanisms. More recently, adaptive attacks have been shown to
achieve nearly a 100% success rate on widely used models, underscoring the severity of this issue [2].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

