RegExplainer: Generating Explanations for Graph
Neural Networks in Regression Tasks

1

Jiaxing Zhang1 , Zhuomin Chen2 , Hao Mei3 , Longchao Da3 , Dongsheng Luo2 , Hua Wei3
New Jersey Institute of Technology, 2 Florida International University, 3 Arizona State University
1
jz48@njit.edu, 2 {zchen051, dluo}@fiu.edu, 3 {hmei7, longchao, hua.wei}@asu.edu

Abstract
Graph regression is a fundamental task that has gained significant attention in
various graph learning tasks. However, the inference process is often not easily
interpretable. Current explanation techniques are limited to understanding Graph
Neural Network (GNN) behaviors in classification tasks, leaving an explanation gap
for graph regression models. In this work, we propose a novel explanation method
to interpret the graph regression models (XAIG-R). Our method addresses the
distribution shifting problem and continuously ordered decision boundary issues
that hinder existing methods away from being applied in regression tasks. We
introduce a novel objective based on the graph information bottleneck theory (GIB)
and a new mix-up framework, which can support various GNNs and explainers
in a model-agnostic manner. Additionally, we present a self-supervised learning
strategy to tackle the continuously ordered labels in regression tasks. We evaluate
our proposed method on three benchmark datasets and a real-life dataset introduced
by us, and extensive experiments demonstrate its effectiveness in interpreting GNN
models in regression tasks.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks [1] (GNNs) have become a powerful tool for learning knowledge from graphstructure data and achieved remarkable performance in many areas, including social networks [2, 3],
molecular structures [4, 5], traffic flows [6–9], and recommendation systems [10–12]. Despite the
success, their popularity in sensitive fields such as fraud detection and drug discovery [13, 14]
requires an understanding of their decision-making processes. To address this challenge, some efforts
have been made to explain GNN’s predictions in a post-hoc manner, which aims to find a sub-graph
that preserves the information about the predicted label. On top of the intuitive principle, Graph
Information Bottleneck (GIB) [15, 16] maximizes the mutual information I(G∗ ; Y ) between the
target prediction label Y and the explanation G∗ while constraining the size of the explanation.
However, existing methods focus on the explanation of the classification tasks, leaving another fundamental task, explainable regression, unexplored. Graph regression tasks exist widely in nowadays
applications, such as predicting the molecular property [17] or traffic flow volume [18]. Explaining
the instance-level predictions of graph regression is challenging due to two main obstacles. First, in
the routinely adopted GIB framework, the mutual information between the explanation sub-graph
and label, I(G∗ ; Y ), is estimated with the Cross-Entropy between the predictions f (G∗ ) from GNN
model f and its prediction label Y . However, in the regression task, the regression label is the
continuous value, making the approximation unsuitable. Another challenge is the distribution shifting
problem in the usage of f (G∗ ), where the prediction of the explanation sub-graph made by the GNN
model f is unsafe. Usually, explanation sub-graphs have different topology and feature information
compared to the original graph. As a result, explanation sub-graphs are out-of-distribution of the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

