Efficient Streaming Algorithms for Graphlet Sampling

Yann Bourreau∗
Cispa Helmholtz Center for Information Security
Saarland University
Saarbrücken, Germany
yann.bourreau@cispa.de
T-H. Hubert Chan
Department of Computer Science
The University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong, China
hubert@cs.hku.hk

Marco Bressan
Department of Computer Science
University of Milan
Milan, Italy
marco.bressan@unimi.it
Qipeng Kuang
Department of Computer Science
The University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong, China
kuangqipeng@connect.hku.hk

Mauro Sozio
Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Télécom Paris
Palaiseau, France
sozio@telecom-paris.fr

Abstract
Given a graph G and a positive integer k, the Graphlet Sampling problem asks
to sample a connected induced k-vertex subgraph of G uniformly at random.
Graphlet sampling enhances machine learning applications by transforming graph
structures into feature vectors for tasks such as graph classification and subgraph
identification, boosting neural network performance, and supporting clustered
federated learning by capturing local structures and relationships. A recent work
has shown that the problem admits an algorithm that preprocesses G in time
O(nk 2 log k + m), and draws one sample in expected time k O(k) log n, where
n = |V (G)| and m = |E(G)|. Such an algorithm relies on the assumption that the
input graph fits into main memory and it does not seem to be straightforward to
adapt it to very large graphs. We consider Graphlet Sampling in the semi-streaming
setting, where we have a memory of M = Ω(n log n) words, and G can be only
read through sequential passes over the edge list. We develop a semi-streaming
algorithm that preprocesses G in p = O(log n) passes and samples Θ(M k −O(k) )
independent uniform k-graphlets in O(k) passes. For constant k, both phases run
in time O((n + m) log n). We also show that the tradeoff between memory and
number of passes of our algorithms is near-optimal. Our extensive evaluation on
very large graphs shows the effectiveness of our algorithms.

1

Introduction

Sampling and counting small subgraphs in large graphs is a central problem in graph mining and
machine learning. Let G = (V, E) be a simple graph (where n = |V | and m = |E|) and k > 2
an integer. A k-graphlet of G is a connected, induced subgraph of G on k vertices. It is well
known that the k-graphlet distribution (the relative frequency of k-cliques, k-paths, and so on)
reveals key information about the structure of a graph [MSOI+ 02] and can be transformed into the
∗

Authors appear in alphabetical order.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

