DropBP: Accelerating Fine-Tuning of Large Language
Models by Dropping Backward Propagation

Sunghyeon Woo1∗†
Baesung Park2∗
Byeongwook Kim2
Minjung Jo2
2
1
2
Se Jung Kwon
Dongsuk Jeon
Dongsoo Lee
Seoul National University1
NAVER Cloud2

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have achieved significant success across various
domains. However, training these LLMs typically involves substantial memory
and computational costs during both forward and backward propagation. While
parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) considerably reduces the training memory
associated with parameters, it does not address the significant computational costs
and activation memory. In this paper, we propose Dropping Backward Propagation
(DropBP), a novel approach designed to reduce computational costs and activation
memory while maintaining accuracy. DropBP randomly drops layers during backward propagation, which is essentially equivalent to training shallow submodules
generated by undropped layers and residual connections. Additionally, DropBP
calculates the sensitivity of each layer to assign an appropriate drop rate, thereby
stabilizing the training process. DropBP is not only applicable to full fine-tuning
but can also be orthogonally integrated with all types of PEFT by dropping layers
during backward propagation. Specifically, DropBP can reduce training time by
44% with comparable accuracy to the baseline, accelerate convergence to the same
perplexity by 1.5×, and enable training with a sequence length 6.2× larger on
a single NVIDIA-A100 GPU. Furthermore, our DropBP enabled a throughput
increase of 79% on a NVIDIA A100 GPU and 117% on an Intel Gaudi2 HPU. The
code is available at https://github.com/WooSunghyeon/dropbp.

1

Introduction

Since the advent of the transformer architecture [1], the field of language modelling has experienced
dramatic advancements. Especially, following the scaling laws [2, 3], the development of Large
Language Models (LLMs) [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] continues with the aim of achieving or outperforming
human capabilities. However, tremendously increasing the size of the model results in significant
costs for training from scratch. An alternative approach for developing high-capability LLMs without
the costly pretraining on extensive datasets is instruction tuning [10, 11, 12, 13]. This method
fine-tunes well-trained foundation models on relatively small instruction-following datasets, enabling
the models to better understand and follow prompts.
While fine-tuning Large Language Models (LLMs) on instruction-following datasets is more costeffective than training from scratch, it still requires substantial memory for parameters and activations,
along with significant floating-point operations (FLOPs). In this context, Parameter-Efficient FineTuning (PEFT) techniques [14, 15, 16] effectively reduce the memory required for parameter gradients
and optimizer states by freezing pretrained weights and selectively training newly added modules.
Moreover, when combined with quantization methods [17, 18, 19, 20], these techniques can further
significantly decrease the memory requirements for parameters.
1
2

Equal contribution
Intern at NAVER Cloud

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

