Unsupervised Object Detection
with Theoretical Guarantees
João F. Henriques
Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford
joao@robots.ox.ac.uk

Marian Longa
Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford
mlonga@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Unsupervised object detection using deep neural networks is typically a difficult
problem with few to no guarantees about the learned representation. In this work
we present the first unsupervised object detection method that is theoretically
guaranteed to recover the true object positions up to quantifiable small shifts. We
develop an unsupervised object detection architecture and prove that the learned
variables correspond to the true object positions up to small shifts related to the
encoder and decoder receptive field sizes, the object sizes, and the widths of the
Gaussians used in the rendering process. We perform detailed analysis of how
the error depends on each of these variables and perform synthetic experiments
validating our theoretical predictions up to a precision of individual pixels. We also
perform experiments on CLEVR-based data and show that, unlike current SOTA
object detection methods (SAM, CutLER), our method’s prediction errors always
lie within our theoretical bounds. We hope that this work helps open up an avenue
of research into object detection methods with theoretical guarantees.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised object detection using deep neural networks is a long-standing area of research at
the intersection of machine learning and computer vision. Its aim is to learn to detect objects from
images without the use of training labels. Learning without supervision has multiple advantages,
as obtaining labels for training data is often costly and time consuming, and in some cases may be
impractical or unethical. For example, in medical imaging, unsupervised object detection can help
save specialists’ time by automatically flagging suspicious abnormalities [19], and in autonomous
driving it may help automatically detect pedestrians on a collision course with the vehicle [3]. It is
thus important to understand and develop better unsupervised object detection methods.
While successful, current object detection methods are often empirical and possess few to no
guarantees about their learned representations. In this work we aim to address this gap by designing
the first unsupervised object detection method that we prove is guaranteed to learn the true object
positions up to small shifts, and performing a detailed analysis of how the maximum errors of the
learned object positions depend on the encoder and decoder receptive field sizes, the object sizes, and
the sizes of the Gaussians used for rendering. This is especially important in sensitive domains such
as medicine, where incorrectly detecting an object could be costly. Our method guarantees to detect
any object that moves in a video or that appears at different locations in images, as long as the objects
are distinct and the images are reconstructed correctly.
We base our unsupervised object detection method on an autoencoder with a convolutional neural
network (CNN) encoder and decoder, and modify it to make it exactly translationally equivariant (sec.
3). This allows us to interpret the latent variables as object positions and lets us train the network
without supervision. We then use the equivariance property to formulate and prove a theorem that
relates the maximum position error of the learned latent variables to the size of the encoder and
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

