A Global Depth-Range-Free Multi-View Stereo
Transformer Network with Pose Embedding

Yitong Dong1∗ Yijin Li1∗ Zhaoyang Huang2 Weikang Bian2
Jingbo Liu1 Hujun Bao1 Zhaopeng Cui1 Hongsheng Li2 Guofeng Zhang1†
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University 2 CUHK MMLab

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel multi-view stereo (MVS) framework that gets
rid of the depth range prior. Unlike recent prior-free MVS methods that work in
a pair-wise manner, our method simultaneously considers all the source images.
Specifically, we introduce a Multi-view Disparity Attention (MDA) module to
aggregate long-range context information within and across multi-view images.
Considering the asymmetry of the epipolar disparity flow, the key to our method
lies in accurately modeling multi-view geometric constraints. We integrate pose
embedding to encapsulate information such as multi-view camera poses, providing
implicit geometric constraints for multi-view disparity feature fusion dominated by
attention. Additionally, we construct corresponding hidden states for each source
image due to significant differences in the observation quality of the same pixel
in the reference frame across multiple source frames. We explicitly estimate the
quality of the current pixel corresponding to sampled points on the epipolar line
of the source image and dynamically update hidden states through the uncertainty
estimation module. Extensive results on the DTU dataset and Tanks&Temple
benchmark demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. The code is available at
our project page: https://zju3dv.github.io/GD-PoseMVS/.

1

Introduction

Multi-view stereo matching (MVS) is a crucial technique in 3D reconstruction, which aims to recover
robust and reliable 3D representations from multiple RGB images [1; 2; 3]. Traditional methods
[4; 5; 6] rely on hand-crafted similarity metrics and regularizations to compute dense correspondences
between the input images. These methods are prone to degradation in challenging scenarios, such as
varying illumination, textureless regions, and occlusion regions. Recently, learning-based methods
[7; 8; 9; 10; 11] directly learn discriminative features from the input images through neural networks
such as CNN and Transformers. By sampling some possible depth hypothesis within a given depth
range, they warp the features from the source images to the reference view (i.e., the plane sweep
algorithm [12]) and compute the cost volume, which is then regularized also through the neural
network to obtain the final depth maps. However, obtaining a suitable depth range is non-trivial when
applied in real-world scenarios while these methods are generally sensitive to the depth range, which
limits their application.
To get rid of the dependence on depth range, some methods [13; 14; 15] transform the regression
problem in the given depth space into a matching problem on the epipolar lines. Similar to optical
flow [16] and feature matching [17; 18; 19; 20], these methods also adopt a pair-wise manner. For
example, DispMVS [14] computes the depth map of the source image multiple times through pairs
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

