Codec Avatar Studio: Paired Human Captures
for Complete, Driveable, and Generalizable Avatars

Julieta Martinez1 , Emily Kim2 , Javier Romero1 ,
Timur Bagautdinov , Shunsuke Saito1 , Shoou-I Yu1 , Stuart Anderson1 , Michael Zollhöfer1 ,
Te-Li Wang1 , Shaojie Bai1 , Chenghui Li1 , Shih-En Wei1 , Rohan Joshi1 , Wyatt Borsos1 ,
Tomas Simon1 , Jason Saragih1 , Paul Theodosis1 , Alexander Greene1 , Anjani Josyula1 ,
Silvio Mano Maeta1 , Andrew I. Jewett1 , Simon Venshtain1 , Christopher Heilman1 ,
Yueh-Tung Chen1 , Sidi Fu1 , Mohamed Ezzeldin A. Elshaer1 , Tingfang Du1 , Longhua Wu1 ,
Shen-Chi Chen1 , Kai Kang1 , Michael Wu1 , Youssef Emad1 , Steven Longay1 , Ashley Brewer1 ,
Hitesh Shah1 , James Booth1 , Taylor Koska1 , Kayla Haidle1 , Matt Andromalos1 ,
Joanna Hsu1 , Thomas Dauer1 , Peter Selednik1 , Tim Godisart1 , Scott Ardisson1 ,
Matthew Cipperly1 , Ben Humberston1 , Lon Farr1 , Bob Hansen1 , Peihong Guo1 ,
Dave Braun1 , Steven Krenn1 , He Wen1 , Lucas Evans1 , Natalia Fadeeva1 , Matthew Stewart1 ,
Gabriel Schwartz1 , Divam Gupta1 , Gyeongsik Moon1 , Kaiwen Guo1 , Yuan Dong1 ,
Yichen Xu1 , Takaaki Shiratori1 , Fabian Prada1 , Bernardo R. Pires1 , Bo Peng1 ,
Julia Buffalini1 , Autumn Trimble1 , Kevyn McPhail1 , Melissa Schoeller1 ,
Yaser Sheikh1
1

1

Codec Avatars Team, Meta Reality Labs Research
2
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
To create photorealistic avatars that users can embody, human modeling must
be complete (encompass the full body), driveable (able to reproduce motion
of the user from lightweight sensors), and generalizable (i.e., easily adaptable
to novel identities). Towards these goals, paired captures, that is, captures of
the same subject obtained from systems of diverse quality and availability, are
crucial. However, paired captures are rarely available to researchers outside
of dedicated industrial labs: Codec Avatar Studio is our proposal to close this
gap. Towards generalization and driveability, we introduce a dataset of 256
subjects captured in two modalities: high resolution multi-view scans of their
heads, and video from the internal cameras of a headset. Towards completeness,
we introduce a dataset of 4 subjects captured in eight modalities: high quality
relightable multi-view captures of heads and hands, full body multi-view captures with minimal and regular clothes, and corresponding head, hands and body
phone captures. Together with our data, we also provide code and pre-trained
models for different state-of-the-art human generation models. Our datasets and
code are available at https://github.com/facebookresearch/ava-256 and
https://github.com/facebookresearch/goliath.

1

Introduction

People are deeply social creatures. It is no coincidence that remote communication has frequently been
one of the first applications of new technologies. Letters, telegrams, phone calls, instant messaging,
and video conferencing are well-known examples of peer-to-peer communication technologies that
have helped users stay in touch with the people they care about, and create new social connections.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

