Fast T RAC:
A Parameter-Free Optimizer for
Lifelong Reinforcement Learning

Aneesh Muppidi
Harvard College
aneeshmuppidi@college.harvard.edu

Zhiyu Zhang
Harvard University
zhiyuz@seas.harvard.edu

Heng Yang
Harvard University
hankyang@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
A key challenge in lifelong reinforcement learning (RL) is the loss of plasticity,
where previous learning progress hinders an agent’s adaptation to new tasks. While
regularization and resetting can help, they require precise hyperparameter selection
at the outset and environment-dependent adjustments. Building on the principled
theory of online convex optimization, we present a parameter-free optimizer for
lifelong RL, called T RAC, which requires no tuning or prior knowledge about the
distribution shifts. Extensive experiments on Procgen, Atari, and Gym Control
environments show that T RAC works surprisingly well—mitigating loss of plasticity and rapidly adapting to challenging distribution shifts—despite the underlying
optimization problem being nonconvex and nonstationary. Project website and
code is available here.

Introduction

Spot, the agile robot dog, has been learning to walk
confidently across soft, lush grass. But when Spot
moves from the grassy field to a gravel surface, the
small stones shift beneath her feet, causing her to
stumble. When Spot tries to walk across a sandy
beach or on ice, the challenges multiply, and her
once-steady walk becomes erratic. Spot wants to
adjust quickly to these new terrains, but the patterns
she learned on grass are not suited to gravel, sand,
or ice. Furthermore, she never knows when the
terrain will change again and how different it will
be, therefore must continually plan for the unknown
while avoiding reliance on outdated experiences.

Starpilot
35
30

Mean Episode Rewards

1

25
20
15
10
5
0
0.8

1.0

1.2

1.4

1.6

Timesteps

1.8

2.0

2.2

2.4

1e7

Figure 1: Severe loss of plasticity in Procgen
Spot’s struggle exemplifies a well-known and ex- (Starpilot). There is a steady decline in reward
tensively studied challenge in real-world decision with each distribution shift.
making: lifelong reinforcement learning (lifelong
RL) Abel et al. (2024); Nath et al. (2023); Mendez
et al. (2020); Xie & Finn (2022). In lifelong RL, the learning agent must continually acquire new
knowledge to adapt to the nonstationarity of the environment. At first glance, there appears to be
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

