WorldCoder, a Model-Based LLM Agent:
Building World Models by Writing Code and
Interacting with the Environment

Hao Tang
Cornell University
haotang@cs.cornell.edu

Darren Key
Cornell University
dyk34@cornell.edu

Kevin Ellis
Cornell University
kellis@cornell.edu

Abstract
We give a model-based agent that builds a Python program representing its knowledge of the world based on its interactions with the environment. The world model
tries to explain its interactions, while also being optimistic about what reward it
can achieve. We define this optimism as a logical constraint between a program
and a planner. We study our agent on gridworlds, and on task planning, finding our
approach is more sample-efficient compared to deep RL, more compute-efficient
compared to ReAct-style agents, and that it can transfer its knowledge across
environments by editing its code.

1

Introduction

Consider yourself learning to use a new device or play a new game. Given the right prior knowledge,
together with relatively few interactions, most people can acquire basic knowledge of how many
devices or games work. This knowledge can help achieve novel goals, can be transferred to similar
devices or games, and can be communicated symbolically to other humans. How could an AI system
similarly acquire, transfer, and communicate its knowledge of how things work? We cast this as
learning a world model: a mapping, called the transition function, that predicts the next state of
affairs, given a current state and action [63, 55, 26]. Our proposed solution is an architecture that
synthesizes a Python program to model its past experiences with the world, effectively learning the
transition function, and which takes actions by planning using that world model.
In theory, world models have many advantages: they allow reasoning in radically new situations
by spending more time planning different actions, and accomplishing novel goals by just changing
the reward function. Representing world knowledge as code, and generating it from LLMs, brings
other advantages. It allows prior world knowledge embedded in the LLM to inform code generation,
allows sample-efficient transfer across tasks by reusing pieces of old programs, and allows auditing
the system’s knowledge, because programming languages are designed to be human-interpretable.
But there are also steep engineering challenges. Learning the world model now requires a combinatorial search over programs to find a transition function that explains the agent’s past experiences.
Obtaining those experiences in the first place requires efficient exploration, which is difficult in long
horizon tasks with sparse reward. To address the challenge of efficient exploration, we introduce a
new learning objective that prefers world models which a planner thinks lead to rewarding states,
particularly when the agent is uncertain as to where the rewards are. To address the program search
problem, we show how curriculum learning can allow transfer of knowledge across environments,
making combinatorial program synthesis more tractable by reusing successful pieces of old programs.
Fig. 1 diagrams the resulting architecture, which we cast as model-based reinforcement learning (MB
RL). In Fig. 2 we position this work relative to deep RL as well as LLM agents. In contrast to deep
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

