Online Convex Optimisation:
The Optimal Switching Regret for all Segmentations
Simultaneously

Stephen Pasteris
The Alan Turing Institute
London UK
spasteris@turing.ac.uk

Chris Hicks
The Alan Turing Institute
London UK
c.hicks@turing.ac.uk

Vasilios Mavroudis
The Alan Turing Institute
London UK
vmavroudis@turing.ac.uk

Mark Herbster
University College London
London UK
m.herbster@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
We consider the classic problem of online convex optimisation. Whereas the notion
of static regret is relevant for stationary problems, the notion of switching regret is
more appropriate for non-stationary problems. A switching regret is defined relative
to any segmentation of the trial sequence, and is equal to the sum of the static
regrets of each segment. In this paper we show that, perhaps surprisingly, we can
achieve the asymptotically optimal switching regret on every possible segmentation
simultaneously. Our algorithm for doing so is very efficient: having a space and
per-trial time complexity that is logarithmic in the time-horizon. Our algorithm
also obtains novel bounds on its dynamic regret: being adaptive to variations in the
rate of change of the comparator sequence.

1

Introduction

We consider the classic problem of online convex optimisation: a problem with numerous real-world
applications. In this problem we have an action set which is a bounded convex subset of some
euclidean space. On each trial we select an action from this set and then receive a convex function of
bounded gradient, which associates the action with a loss. The aim is to minimise the cumulative loss.
The static regret is defined as the cumulative loss of the algorithm minus√
that of the best constant
action in retrospect. It has been shown that the minimax static regret is Θ( T ) where T is the time
horizon, and that it is achieved by the classic mirror descent family of algorithms [2]. However,
in dynamic environments a more sensible notion of regret is the switching regret, which is defined
relative to any segmentation of the trial sequence and is equal to the sum of the static regrets over
all P
segments.
Clearly, if the segmentation is known a-priori then the minimax switching regret is
√
Θ( k Λk ) where Λk is the length of the k-th segment, and it is obtained by running mirror descent
independently on each segment. Tracking algorithms, instead, attempt to bound the switching regret
on every possible segmentation of the trial sequence
simultaneously. However, as
pfar as we are aware,
P p
the best such bound until now was O( k Λk ln(T )) which is a factor of O( ln(T )) higher than
the optimal if we knew the segmentation a-priori. In this paper we (quite remarkably)
get rid of
P √
this factor: hence obtaining the asymptotically optimal switching regret of O( k Λk ) for every
possible segmentation simultaneously. Not only is our algorithm optimal, but it is also parameter-free
and efficient: having both a space and per-trial time complexity of O(ln(T )).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

