Are We on the Right Way for Evaluating
Large Vision-Language Models?

Lin Chen1,3∗ Jinsong Li2,3∗ Xiaoyi Dong2,3 Pan Zhang3 Yuhang Zang3
Zehui Chen1 Haodong Duan3 Jiaqi Wang3† Yu Qiao3 Dahua Lin2,3,4 Feng Zhao1†
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 CPII under InnoHK
https://mmstar-benchmark.github.io/

Abstract
Large vision-language models (LVLMs) have recently achieved rapid progress,
sparking numerous studies to evaluate their multi-modal capabilities. However,
we dig into current evaluation works and identify two primary issues: 1) Visual
content is unnecessary for many samples. The answers can be directly inferred
from the questions and options, or the world knowledge embedded in LLMs. This
phenomenon is prevalent across current benchmarks. For instance, GeminiPro
achieves 42.7% on the MMMU benchmark without any visual input, and outperforms the random choice baseline across six benchmarks near 24% on average.
2) Unintentional data leakage exists in LLM and LVLM training. LLM and
LVLM could still answer some visual-necessary questions without visual content,
indicating the memorizing of these samples within large-scale training data. For
example, Sphinx-X-MoE gets 43.6% on MMMU without accessing images, surpassing its LLM backbone with 17.9%. Both problems lead to misjudgments of
actual multi-modal gains and potentially misguide the study of LVLM. To this end,
we present MMStar, an elite vision-indispensable multi-modal benchmark comprising 1,500 samples meticulously selected by humans. MMStar benchmarks 6
core capabilities and 18 detailed axes, aiming to evaluate LVLMs’ multi-modal
capacities with carefully balanced and purified samples. These samples are first
roughly selected from current benchmarks with an automated pipeline, human review is then involved to ensure each curated sample exhibits visual dependency,
minimal data leakage, and requires advanced multi-modal capabilities. Moreover,
two metrics are developed to measure data leakage and actual performance gain
in multi-modal training. We evaluate 16 leading LVLMs on MMStar to assess
their multi-modal capabilities, and on 7 benchmarks with the proposed metrics to
investigate their data leakage and actual multi-modal gain.

1

Introduction

Encouraged by the rapid development of large language models (LLMs) [60, 4, 9, 10, 14, 1, 53],
integrating visual modality into LLMs to enhance models’ interactivity capabilities has witnessed
ever-changing advances in recent days [72, 33, 31, 12, 68, 2, 61, 39, 5, 13]. These large visionlanguage models (LVLMs) showcase powerful visual perception and understanding capabilities,
enabling them to accept image inputs from users and engage in dialogues, thereby offering a more
enriched interactive experience. These achievements have further inspired the research community
∗
†

Equal contribution. This work is done during internship in Shanghai AI Laboratory.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

