Online Classification with Predictions
Vinod Raman
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48104
vkraman@umich.edu

Ambuj Tewari
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48104
tewaria@umich.edu

Abstract
We study online classification when the learner has access to predictions about
future examples. We design an online learner whose expected regret is never worse
than the worst-case regret, gracefully improves with the quality of the predictions,
and can be significantly better than the worst-case regret when the predictions
of future examples are accurate. As a corollary, we show that if the learner is
always guaranteed to observe data where future examples are easily predictable,
then online learning can be as easy as transductive online learning. Our results
complement recent work in online algorithms with predictions and smoothed online
classification, which go beyond a worse-case analysis by using machine-learned
predictions and distributional assumptions respectively.

1

Introduction

In online classification, Nature plays a game with a learner over T ∈ N rounds. In each round
t ∈ [T ], Nature selects a labeled example (xt , yt ) ∈ X × Y and reveals just the example xt to the
learner. The learner, using the history of the game (x1 , y1 ), ..., (xt−1 , yt−1 ) and the current example
xt , makes a potentially randomized prediction ŷt ∈ Y. Finally, Nature reveals the true label yt and
the learner suffers the loss 1{ŷt ̸= yt }. Given access to a hypothesis class H ⊆ Y X consisting of
functions h : X → Y, the goal of the learner is to minimize its regret, the difference between its
cumulative mistake and that of the best fixed hypothesis h ∈ H in hindsight. We say a class H is
online learnable if there exists a learning algorithm that achieves vanishing average regret for any,
potentially adversarial chosen, stream of labeled examples (x1 , y1 ), ..., (xT , yT ). Canonically, one
also distinguishes between the realizable and agnostic settings. In the realizable setting, Nature must
choose a stream (x1 , y1 ), ..., (xT , yT ) such that there exists a h ∈ H for which h(xt ) = yt for all
t ∈ [T ]. On the other hand, in the agnostic setting, no such assumptions on the stream are placed.
Due to applications in spam filtering, image recognition, and language modeling, online classification
has had a long, rich history in statistical learning theory. In a seminal work, Littlestone [1987]
provided a sharp quantitative characterization of which binary hypothesis classes H ⊆ {0, 1}X are
online learnable in the realizable setting. This characterization was in terms of the finiteness of a
combinatorial dimension called the Littlestone dimension. Twenty-two years later, Ben-David et al.
[2009] proved that the Littlestone dimension continues to characterize the online learnability of binary
hypothesis classes in the agnostic setting. Later, Daniely et al. [2011] generalized the Littlestone
dimension to multiclass hypothesis classes H ⊆ Y X , and showed that it fully characterizes multiclass
online learnability when the label space Y is finite. More recently, Hanneke et al. [2023] extended
this result to show that the multiclass Littlestone dimension continues to characterize multiclass
online learnability even when Y is unbounded.
While elegant, the characterization of online classification in terms of the Littlestone dimension is
often interpreted as an impossibility result [Haghtalab, 2018]. Indeed, due to the restrictive nature
of the Littlestone dimension, even simple classes like the 1-dimensional thresholds Hthresh = {x 7→
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

