A Bayesian Approach for Personalized Federated
Learning in Heterogeneous Settings

Disha Makhija
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78705
disham@utexas.edu

Joydeep Ghosh
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78705
jghosh@utexas.edu

Nhat Ho
Statistics and Data Science
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78705
minhnhat@utexas.edu

Abstract
Federated learning (FL), through its privacy-preserving collaborative learning approach, has significantly empowered decentralized devices. However, constraints
in either data and/or computational resources among participating clients introduce
several challenges in learning, including the inability to train large model architectures, heightened risks of overfitting, and more. In this work, we present a novel
FL framework grounded in Bayesian learning to address these challenges. Our
approach involves training personalized Bayesian models at each client tailored
to the unique complexities of the clients’ datasets and efficiently collaborating
across these clients. By leveraging Bayesian neural networks and their uncertainty
quantification capabilities, our local training procedure robustly learns from small
datasets. And the novel collaboration procedure utilizing priors in the functional
(output) space of the networks facilitates collaboration across models of varying
sizes, enabling the framework to adapt well in heterogeneous data and computational settings. Furthermore, we present a differentially private version of the
algorithm, accompanied by formal differential privacy guarantees that apply without any assumptions on the learning algorithm. Through experiments on popular
FL datasets, we demonstrate that our approach outperforms strong baselines in
both homogeneous and heterogeneous settings, and under strict privacy constraints.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a pivotal paradigm in various real-world applications,
offering a decentralized approach that allows participating clients to contribute to a shared model
without compromising the privacy of their raw data. However, implementing FL in practical scenarios
poses challenges due to the significant variability among participating clients in terms of their local
data and computational resources. Clients with restricted compute capacity may encounter difficulty
in training large machine learning models identical to those of other clients, and those with minimal
data may struggle to obtain reliable estimates of local model parameters.
Due to their ability to generalize under limited data and provide uncertainty quantifications [69, 2, 3],
we consider Bayesian based learning methods to construct improved local models. Employing
Bayesian learning in FL, however, would involve the following steps - each client doing local
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

