Linear Regression using Heterogeneous Data Batches

Ayush Jain∗
Granica Computing Inc.
ayush.jain@granica.ai

Rajat Sen
Google Research
senrajat@google.com

Abhimanyu Das
Google Research
abhidas@google.com

Weihao Kong
Google Research
weihaokong@google.com
Alon Orlitsky
UC San Diego
alon@ucsd.edu

Abstract
In many learning applications, data are collected from multiple sources, each providing a batch of samples that by itself is insufficient to learn its input-output
relationship. A common approach assumes that the sources fall in one of several
unknown subgroups, each with an unknown input distribution and input-output
relationship. We consider one of this setup’s most fundamental and important
manifestations where the output is a noisy linear combination of the inputs, and
there are k subgroups, each with its own regression vector. Prior work [KSS+ 20]
showed that with abundant small-batches, the regression
√ vectors can be learned
with only few, Ω̃(k 3/2 ), batches of medium-size with Ω̃( k) samples each. However, the paper requires that the input distribution for all k subgroups be isotropic
Gaussian, and states that removing this assumption is an “interesting and challenging problem”. We propose a novel gradient-based algorithm that improves on
the existing results in several ways. It extends the applicability of the algorithm
by: (1) allowing the subgroups’ underlying input distributions to be different, unknown, and heavy-tailed; (2) recovering all subgroups followed by a significant
proportion of batches even for infinite k; (3) removing the separation requirement
between the regression vectors; (4) reducing the number of batches and allowing
smaller batch sizes.

1

Introduction

In numerous applications, including federated learning [WCX+ 21], sensor networks [WZ89],
crowd-sourcing [SVC16] and recommendation systems [WDVR06], data are collected from multiple sources, each providing a batch of samples. For instance, in movie recommendation systems,
users typically rate multiple films. Since all samples in a batch are generated by the same source,
they are often assumed to share the same underlying distribution. However, the batches are frequently very small, e.g., many users provide only few ratings. Hence, it may be impossible to learn
a different model for each batch.
A common approach has therefore assumed [TLW99] that all batches share the same underlying
distribution and learn this common model by pooling together the data from all batches. While this
may work well for some applications, in others it may fail, or lack personalization. For instance, in
recommendation systems, it may not capture the characteristics of individual users.
A promising alternative that allows for personalization even with many small batches, assumes that
batches can be categorized into k sub-populations with similar underlying distributions. Hence in
∗

This work was done while the author was a student at UCSD and interning part-time at Google Research.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

