Improving Environment Novelty Quantification for
Effective Unsupervised Environment Design

Jayden Teoh∗ , Wenjun Li∗† , Pradeep Varakantham
Singapore Management University
{jxteoh.2023, wjli.2020, pradeepv}@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
Unsupervised Environment Design (UED) formalizes the problem of autocurricula through interactive training between a teacher agent and a student agent.
The teacher generates new training environments with high learning potential,
curating an adaptive curriculum that strengthens the student’s ability to handle
unseen scenarios. Existing UED methods mainly rely on regret, a metric that
measures the difference between the agent’s optimal and actual performance, to
guide curriculum design. Regret-driven methods generate curricula that progressively increase environment complexity for the student but overlook environment
novelty–a critical element for enhancing an agent’s generalizability. Measuring
environment novelty is especially challenging due to the underspecified nature of
environment parameters in UED, and existing approaches face significant limitations. To address this, this paper introduces the Coverage-based Evaluation of
Novelty In Environment (CENIE) framework. CENIE proposes a scalable, domainagnostic, and curriculum-aware approach to quantifying environment novelty by
leveraging the student’s state-action space coverage from previous curriculum
experiences. We then propose an implementation of CENIE that models this coverage and measures environment novelty using Gaussian Mixture Models. By
integrating both regret and novelty as complementary objectives for curriculum
design, CENIE facilitates effective exploration across the state-action space while
progressively increasing curriculum complexity. Empirical evaluations demonstrate
that augmenting existing regret-based UED algorithms with CENIE achieves stateof-the-art performance across multiple benchmarks, underscoring the effectiveness
of novelty-driven autocurricula for robust generalization.

1

Introduction

Although recent advancements in Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) have led to many successes,
e.g., super-human performance in games [26, 9] and reliable control in robotics [2, 3], training
generally-capable agents remains a significant challenge. DRL agents often fail to generalize well
to environments only slightly different from those encountered during training [21, 63]. To address
this problem, there has been a surge of interest in Unsupervised Environment Design (UED; [56, 23,
57, 28, 27, 37, 33, 7]), which formulates the autocurricula [32] generation problem as a two-player
zero-sum game between a teacher and a student agent. In UED, the teacher constantly adapts training
environments (e.g., mazes with varying obstacles and car-racing games with different track designs)
in the curriculum to improve the student’s ability to generalize across all possible levels.
To design effective autocurricula, researchers have proposed various metrics to capture learning
potential, enabling teacher agents to create training levels that adapt to the student’s capabilities.
*
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

