On the Complexity of Learning Sparse Functions with
Statistical and Gradient Queries

Nirmit Joshi
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
nirmit@ttic.edu

Theodor Misiakiewicz
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
theodor.misiakiewicz@ttic.edu

Nathan Srebro
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
nati@ttic.edu

Abstract
The goal of this paper is to investigate the complexity of gradient algorithms
when learning sparse functions (juntas). We introduce a type of Statistical Queries
(SQ), which we call Differentiable Learning Queries (DLQ), to model gradient
queries on a specified loss with respect to an arbitrary model. We provide a
tight characterization of the query complexity of DLQ for learning the support of
a sparse function over generic product distributions. This complexity crucially
depends on the loss function. For the squared loss, DLQ matches the complexity of
Correlation Statistical Queries (CSQ)—potentially much worse than SQ. But for
other simple loss functions, including the ℓ1 loss, DLQ always achieves the same
complexity as SQ. We also provide evidence that DLQ can indeed capture learning
with (stochastic) gradient descent by showing it correctly describes the complexity
of learning with a two-layer neural network in the mean field regime and linear
scaling.

1

Introduction

In recent years, major efforts have been devoted to understanding which distributions can be learned
efficiently using gradient-type algorithms on generic models [Abbe and Sandon, 2020, Allen-Zhu
and Li, 2020, Malach et al., 2021, Damian et al., 2022, Abbe et al., 2021b,a, 2022, 2023, Bietti et al.,
2023, Glasgow, 2023, Dandi et al., 2023, 2024, Edelman et al., 2024, Kou et al., 2024]. In this paper,
we focus on learning sparse functions (i.e. “juntas” [Blum and Langley, 1997]), that is functions
that depend only on a small number P out of a much larger set d ≫ P of input coordinates. The
challenge in this setting is to identify the few relevant coordinates. For some sparse functions, such
as noisy parities, learning is believed to require O(dP ) runtime [Kearns, 1998], while others, such
as linear functions, are easy to learn in Õ(d) time. Which functions are easy to learn and which
are hard? What is the complexity of learning a specific sparse function? Recent works [Abbe et al.,
2022, 2023] unveiled a rich “leap” hierarchical structure and saddle-to-saddle dynamics that drives
learning in this setting. The goal of the present paper is to provide a general characterization for the
complexity of learning sparse functions that go beyond (i) hypercube data and Fourier analysis, and
(ii) CSQ (see below) and focusing only on the squared loss.
The notion of complexity we consider is the Statistical Query (SQ) complexity, which studies learning
by measuring expectations up to some worst-case tolerance (see [Kearns, 1998, Bshouty and Feldman,
2002, Reyzin, 2020] and Section 3). Although based on worst-case error (or almost equivalently,
additive independent noise) rather than the sampling error encountered in practice, statistical query
complexity has been proven to be a useful guideline for studying the complexity of learning. In
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

