Context and Geometry Aware Voxel Transformer for
Semantic Scene Completion

Zhu Yu1
Runmin Zhang1
Jiacheng Ying1
Junchen Yu1
3
4
2,1∗
Xiaohai Hu
Lun Luo
Si-Yuan Cao
Hui-Liang Shen1∗
1
2
Zhejiang University
Ningbo Innovation Center, Zhejiang University
3
4
University of Washington
HAOMO.AI Technology Co., Ltd.
https://github.com/pkqbajng/CGFormer

Abstract
Vision-based Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) has gained much attention due
to its widespread applications in various 3D perception tasks. Existing sparseto-dense approaches typically employ shared context-independent queries across
various input images, which fails to capture distinctions among them as the focal
regions of different inputs vary and may result in undirected feature aggregation
of cross-attention. Additionally, the absence of depth information may lead to
points projected onto the image plane sharing the same 2D position or similar
sampling points in the feature map, resulting in depth ambiguity. In this paper, we
present a novel context and geometry aware voxel transformer. It utilizes a context
aware query generator to initialize context-dependent queries tailored to individual
input images, effectively capturing their unique characteristics and aggregating
information within the region of interest. Furthermore, it extend deformable crossattention from 2D to 3D pixel space, enabling the differentiation of points with
similar image coordinates based on their depth coordinates. Building upon this
module, we introduce a neural network named CGFormer to achieve semantic scene
completion. Simultaneously, CGFormer leverages multiple 3D representations (i.e.,
voxel and TPV) to boost the semantic and geometric representation abilities of the
transformed 3D volume from both local and global perspectives. Experimental
results demonstrate that CGFormer achieves state-of-the-art performance on the
SemanticKITTI and SSCBench-KITTI-360 benchmarks, attaining a mIoU of 16.87
and 20.05, as well as an IoU of 45.99 and 48.07, respectively. Remarkably,
CGFormer even outperforms approaches employing temporal images as inputs or
much larger image backbone networks.

1

Introduction

Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) aims to jointly infer the complete scene geometry and semantics.
It serves as a crucial step in a wide range of 3D perception tasks such as autonomous driving [11, 24],
robotic navigation [42, 15], mapping and planning [34]. SSCNet [40] initially formulates the semantic
scene completion task. Subsequently, many LiDAR-based approaches [5, 51, 38] have been proposed,
but these approaches usually suffer from high-cost sensors.
Recently, there has been a shift towards vision-based SSC solutions. MonoScene [3] lifts the input 2D
images to 3D volumes by densely assigning the same 2D features to both visible and occluded regions,
leading to many ambiguities. With advancements in bird’s-eye-view (BEV) perception [24, 54],
transformer-based approaches [13, 47, 23] achieve feature lifting by projecting 3D queries from 3D
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

