OxonFair: A Flexible Toolkit for Algorithmic Fairness

Eoin Delaney
University of Oxford
Sandra Wachter
University of Oxford

Zihao Fu
University of Oxford

Brent Mittelstadt
University of Oxford
firstname.lastname@oii.ox.ac.uk

Chris Russell
University of Oxford

Abstract
We present OxonFair, a new open source toolkit for enforcing fairness in binary
classification. Compared to existing toolkits: (i) We support NLP and Computer
Vision classification as well as standard tabular problems. (ii) We support enforcing fairness on validation data, making us robust to a wide range of overfitting
challenges. (iii) Our approach can optimize any measure based on True Positives, False Positive, False Negatives, and True Negatives. This makes it easily
extensible and much more expressive than existing toolkits. It supports all 9
and all 10 of the decision-based group metrics of two popular review articles.
(iv) We jointly optimize a performance objective alongside fairness constraints.
This minimizes degradation while enforcing fairness, and even improves the performance of inadequately tuned unfair baselines. OxonFair is compatible with
standard ML toolkits, including sklearn, Autogluon, and PyTorch and is available
at https://github.com/oxfordinternetinstitute/oxonfair.

1

Introduction

The deployment of machine learning systems that make decisions about people offers an opportunity
to create systems that work for everyone. However, such systems can lock in existing prejudices.
Limited data for underrepresented groups can result in ML systems that do not work for them, while
the use of training labels based on historical data can result in ML systems copying previous biases.
As such, it is unsurprising that AI systems have repeatedly exhibited unwanted biases towards certain
demographic groups in a wide range of domains including medicine [1, 2], finance [3, 4], and policing
[5]. Such groups are typically identified with respect to legally protected attributes, such as ethnicity
or gender [6, 7, 3]. The field of algorithmic fairness has sprung up in response to these biases.
Contributions to algorithmic fairness can broadly be split into methodological and policy-based
approaches. While much methodological work focuses on measuring and enforcing (un)fairness, a
common criticism from the policy side is that this work can occur ‘in isolation from policy and civil
societal contexts and lacks serious engagement with philosophical, political, legal and economic
theories of equality and distributive justice’ [8].
In response to these criticisms, we have developed OxonFair, a more expressive toolkit for algorithmic
fairness. We acknowledge that people designing algorithms are not always the right people to decide
on policy, and as such we have chosen to create as flexible a toolkit as possible to allow policymakers
and data scientists with domain knowledge to identify relevant harms and directly alter the system
behaviour to address them. Unlike existing Fairness toolkits such as AIF360 [9], which take a
method-driven approach, and provide access to a wide range of methods but with limited control over
their behaviour, we take a measure-based approach and provide one fairness method that is extremely
customizable, and can optimize user-provided objectives and group fairness constraints.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

