SfPUEL: Shape from Polarization under
Unknown Environment Light

Youwei Lyu1∗ Heng Guo1∗ Kailong Zhang1

Si Li1† Boxin Shi2,3

1

School of Artificial Intelligence,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
State Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology,
School of Computer Science, Peking University
{youweilv, guoheng, zhangkailong, lisi}@bupt.edu.cn,
shiboxin@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Shape from polarization (SfP) benefits from advancements like polarization cameras for single-shot normal estimation, but its performance heavily relies on light
conditions. This paper proposes SfPUEL, an end-to-end SfP method to jointly
estimate surface normal and material under unknown environment light. To handle
this challenging light condition, we design a transformer-based framework for enhancing the perception of global context features. We further propose to integrate
photometric stereo (PS) priors from pretrained models to enrich extracted features
for high-quality normal predictions. As metallic and dielectric materials exhibit
different BRDFs, SfPUEL additionally predicts dielectric and metallic material
segmentation to further boost performance. Experimental results on synthetic and
our collected real-world dataset demonstrate that SfPUEL significantly outperforms
existing SfP and single-shot normal estimation methods. The code and dataset is
available at https://github.com/YouweiLyu/SfPUEL.

1

Introduction

Single-shot surface normal estimation is a fundamental task in 3D reconstruction, which is widely
utilized in diverse fields such as robotics, graphics, and virtual reality. With the aid of a snapshot
polarization camera, surface normal can be obtained from a single-shot polarization image recording
image observations under different polarization states, also known as shape from polarization (SfP).
Benefiting from the passive imaging mechanism, SfP is expected to work under more general
conditions compared to photometric stereo which requires controlled lights. Also, the high-resolution
polarization image allows SfP to recover a more detailed surface shape.
Despite the prominent advantages, π and π/2-ambiguities are inherent in the azimuth angle estimation
of surface normal from SfP (38). The π-ambiguity can be partially resolved with handcrafted priors
like shape convexity (38), but handling the π/2-ambiguity related to determining specular and diffuse
reflection types is more challenging. Specular and diffuse reflections can blend at any degree under
divergent environment lights, as shown in Fig. 1(a), which leads to noisy angle of linear polarization
(AoLP) maps. Light information and object geometry entangled in polarization cues make SfP highly
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

