LaKD: Length-agnostic Knowledge Distillation for
Trajectory Prediction with Any Length Observations

Yuhang Li
Beijing Institute of Technology
596983629@qq.com

Changsheng Li ∗
Beijing Institute of Technology
lcs@bit.edu.cn

Ruilin Lv
Beijing Institute of Technology
3220231454@bit.edu.cn

Rongqing Li
Beijing Institute of Technology
lirongqing99@gmail.com

Ye Yuan
Beijing Institute of Technology
yuan-ye@bit.edu.cn

Guoren Wang
Beijing Institute of Technology
wanggrbit@126.com

Abstract
Trajectory prediction is a crucial technology to help systems avoid traffic accidents,
ensuring safe autonomous driving. Previous methods typically use a fixed-length
and sufficiently long trajectory of an agent as observations to predict its future
trajectory. However, in real-world scenarios, we often lack the time to gather
enough trajectory points before making predictions, e.g., when a car suddenly
appears due to an obstruction, the system must make immediate predictions to
prevent a collision. This poses a new challenge for trajectory prediction systems,
requiring them to be capable of making accurate predictions based on observed
trajectories of arbitrary lengths, leading to the failure of existing methods. In
this paper, we propose a Length-agnostic Knowledge Distillation framework,
named LaKD, which can make accurate trajectory predictions, regardless of the
length of observed data. Specifically, considering the fact that long trajectories,
containing richer temporal information but potentially additional interference,
may perform better or worse than short trajectories, we devise a dynamic lengthagnostic knowledge distillation mechanism for exchanging information among
trajectories of arbitrary lengths, dynamically determining the transfer direction
based on prediction performance. In contrast to traditional knowledge distillation,
LaKD employs a unique model that simultaneously serves as both the teacher
and the student, potentially causing knowledge collision during the distillation
process. Therefore, we design a dynamic soft-masking mechanism, where we first
calculate the importance of neuron units and then apply soft-masking to them, so as
to safeguard critical units from disruption during the knowledge distillation process.
In essence, LaKD is a general and principled framework that can be naturally
compatible with existing trajectory prediction models of different architectures.
Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets, Argoverse 1, nuScenes and
Argoverse 2, demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

∗

Changsheng Li (lcs@bit.edu.cn) is the corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

