Multimodal Task Vectors Enable Many-Shot
Multimodal In-Context Learning

Brandon Huang1*

Chancharik Mitra1*
Trevor Darrell1

1

University of California, Berkeley

2

Assaf Arbelle2

Leonid Karlinsky3

Roei Herzig1, 2

IBM Research

3

MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract
The recent success of interleaved Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) in fewshot learning suggests that in-context learning (ICL) with many examples can
be promising for learning new tasks. However, this many-shot multimodal ICL
setting has one crucial problem: it is fundamentally limited by the model’s context
length set at pretraining. The problem is especially prominent in the multimodal
domain, which processes both text and images, requiring additional tokens. This
motivates the need for a multimodal method to compress many shots into fewer
tokens without finetuning. In this work, we enable LMMs to perform multimodal,
many-shot in-context learning by leveraging Multimodal Task Vectors (MTV)—
compact implicit representations of in-context examples compressed in the model’s
attention heads. Specifically, we first demonstrate the existence of such MTV in
LMMs and then leverage these extracted MTV to enable many-shot in-context
learning for various vision-and-language tasks. Our experiments suggest that MTV
can scale in performance with the number of compressed shots and generalize to
similar out-of-domain tasks without additional context length for inference. Code:
https://github.com/Brandon3964/MultiModal-Task-Vector

1

Introduction

Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) such as GPT-4V [60], LLaVA [49, 50], and the BLIP [13, 43]
family of models demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on a variety of vision and language (VL)
tasks due to their strong reasoning capabilities over both text and images. Recent works show that
LMMs pre-trained on interleaved text-image data can do multimodal in-context learning [6, 39]. In
particular, few-shot, in-context learning (ICL) in text-only LLMs has been scaled with an increasing
number of examples in long-context language models—a setting called many-shot learning [1]. A
natural question arises on how to perform many-shot learning in the multimodal domain.
The first issue with directly applying a many-shot learning regimen to LMMs is the intrinsic limitation
of context length. This is especially true in the multimodal domain, as LMMs must encode both text
and images, whose embeddings are token-expensive. Moreover, long-context language models, which
LMMs leverage for reasoning, struggle to use their entire context length effectively for ICL [45, 51].
Secondly, perhaps due to the misalignment of pretraining tasks with ICL, many instruction-tuned
LMMs underperform on tasks in the ICL setting [16], suggesting the importance of interleaved LMMs.
Finally, there is also the challenge of the increasing memory and run-time required for processing long
contexts for every inference call. These challenges motivate a method for compressing multimodal
in-context examples into compact, implicit representations. Therefore, in this paper, we propose
*

Denotes Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

