ProEdit: Simple Progression is All You Need
for High-Quality 3D Scene Editing

Jun-Kun Chen Yu-Xiong Wang
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{junkun3, yxw}@illinois.edu
immortalco.github.io/ProEdit

Figure 1: By decomposing a difficult task into easy subtasks and then progressively performing them
(upper part), our ProEdit achieves high-quality 3D editing results with bright colors and detailed
textures along with introducing new controllability of the editing aggressivity (lower part). More
results are provided on our project page.

Abstract
This paper proposes ProEdit – a simple yet effective framework for high-quality
3D scene editing guided by diffusion distillation in a novel progressive manner.
Inspired by the crucial observation that multi-view inconsistency in scene editing
is rooted in the diffusion model’s large feasible output space (FOS), our framework
controls the size of FOS and reduces inconsistency by decomposing the overall
editing task into several subtasks, which are then executed progressively on the
scene. Within this framework, we design a difficulty-aware subtask decomposition
scheduler and an adaptive 3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS) training strategy, ensuring
high quality and efficiency in performing each subtask. Extensive evaluation
shows that our ProEdit achieves state-of-the-art results in various scenes and
challenging editing tasks, all through a simple framework without any expensive or
sophisticated add-ons like distillation losses, components, or training procedures.
Notably, ProEdit also provides a new way to control, preview, and select the
“aggressivity” of editing operation during the editing process.

1

Introduction

The emergence and advancement of modern scene representation models, exemplified by neural
radiance fields (NeRFs) [1] and 3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS) [2], have significantly reduced the
difficulty associated with high-quality reconstruction and rendering of large-scale scenes. In addition
to reconstructing known scenes, there is growing interest in editing existing scenes to create new ones.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

