Boosting Graph Pooling with Persistent Homology

Chaolong Ying, Xinjian Zhao, Tianshu Yu∗
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
{chaolongying,xinjianzhao1}@link.cuhk.edu.cn, yutianshu@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, there has been an emerging trend to integrate persistent homology (PH)
into graph neural networks (GNNs) to enrich expressive power. However, naively
plugging PH features into GNN layers always results in marginal improvement
with low interpretability. In this paper, we investigate a novel mechanism for
injecting global topological invariance into pooling layers using PH, motivated by
the observation that filtration operation in PH naturally aligns graph pooling in a
cut-off manner. In this fashion, message passing in the coarsened graph acts along
persistent pooled topology, leading to improved performance. Experimentally, we
apply our mechanism to a collection of graph pooling methods and observe consistent and substantial performance gain over several popular datasets, demonstrating
its wide applicability and flexibility.

1

Introduction

Persistent homology (PH) is a powerful tool in the field of topological data analysis, which is capable
of evaluating stable topological invariant properties from unstructured data in a multi-resolution
fashion [8]. Concretely, PH derives an increasing sequence of simplicial complex subsets by applying
a filtration function (see Fig. 1(a)). According to the fact that PH is at least as expressive as WeisfeilerLehman (WL) hierarchy [19], there recently emerged a series of works seeking to merge PH into graph
neural networks (GNNs), delivering competitive performance on specific tasks [52, 19]. Standard
schemes of existing works achieve this by employing pre-calculated topological features [52] or
placing learnable filtration functions in the neural architectures [16, 19]. Such integration of PH
features is claimed to enable GNNs to emphasize persistent topological sub-structures. However, it is
still unclear to what extent the feature-level integration of PH is appropriate and how to empower
GNNs with PH other than utilizing features.
Graph pooling (GP) in parallel plays an important role in a series of graph learning methods [14],
which hierarchically aggregates an upper-level graph into a more compact lower-level graph. Typically,
GP relies on calculating an assignment matrix taking into account local structural properties such as
community [34] and cuts [2]. Though the pooling paradigm in convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
is quite successful [27], some researchers raise concerns about its effectiveness and applicability in
graphs. For example, [30] challenges the local-preserving usage of GP by demonstrating that random
pooling even leads to similar performance. Till now, it remains opaque what property should be
preserved for pooled topology to better facilitate the downstream tasks.
From Fig. 1(a), it is readily observed that PH and GP both seek to coarsen/sparsify a given graph
in a hierarchical fashion: while PH gradually derives persistent sub-topology (substructures such as
cycles) by adjusting the filtering parameter, GP obtains a sub-graph by performing a more aggressive
cut-off. In a sense of understanding a graph through a hierarchical lens, PH and GP turn out to align
with each other well.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

