NeuMA: Neural Material Adaptor for Visual
Grounding of Intrinsic Dynamics

Junyi Cao1∗ Shanyan Guan2† Yanhao Ge2 Wei Li2 Xiaokang Yang1 Chao Ma1‡
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
vivo Mobile Communication Co., Ltd.
{junyicao, xkyang, chaoma}@sjtu.edu.cn
{guanshanyan, halege, liwei.yxgh}@vivo.com

Abstract
While humans effortlessly discern intrinsic dynamics and adapt to new scenarios,
modern AI systems often struggle. Current methods for visual grounding of
dynamics either use pure neural-network-based simulators (black box), which may
violate physical laws, or traditional physical simulators (white box), which rely on
expert-defined equations that may not fully capture actual dynamics. We propose
the Neural Material Adaptor (NeuMA), which integrates existing physical laws
with learned corrections, facilitating accurate learning of actual dynamics while
maintaining the generalizability and interpretability of physical priors. Additionally,
we propose Particle-GS, a particle-driven 3D Gaussian Splatting variant that bridges
simulation and observed images, allowing back-propagate image gradients to
optimize the simulator. Comprehensive experiments on various dynamics in terms
of grounded particle accuracy, dynamic rendering quality, and generalization ability
demonstrate that NeuMA can accurately capture intrinsic dynamics. Project Page:
https://xjay18.github.io/projects/neuma.html.

1

Introduction

Teaching a machine to “see, understand, and reason” the physical world like humans has been a
fundamental pursuit of machine learning and cognitive science. Imagine the flexibility, robustness,
and generalizability of human intelligence: simply by observing an object falling on the ground and
bouncing up, even a young child can make a plausible guess of its intrinsic dynamics (by telling what
material it is made of), adapt to new scenarios (involving new objects and initial conditions) and
predict interactions with other objects. However, modern AI systems still fail to match this cognitive
ability, known as visual grounding, of humans.
Many efforts have thus been made to impart the ability of visual grounding of dynamics to AI
systems [5, 25, 26, 28, 45], typically by training a differentiable simulator [14, 31, 34, 72, 90] with
pixel supervision from a differentiable renderer [37, 58]. Depending on the formulation of the
simulator, current works can be categorized into two types: black box or white box. Black box
approaches [26, 89] directly use a neural network to model the dynamic transition. Due to the deep
coupling among extrinsic attributes (e.g., geometry) and intrinsic (physical) motion during rendering,
black box approaches are prone to violating physical laws and have limited generalization capability
without any physics constraints on the transition process [25, 53].
In contrast, white box methods [45, 60, 95] use traditional physical simulators (e.g., Material Point
Method [34]) to approximate object dynamics explicitly with partial-differential equations (PDE),
a.k.a., motion equations. These methods back-propagate pixel differences from a renderer to the
* This work was done during an internship at vivo.

†

Project lead.

‡

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

