Chain-of-Thought Reasoning without Prompting

Xuezhi Wang
Google DeepMind
xuezhiw@google.com

Denny Zhou
Google DeepMind
dennyzhou@google.com

Abstract
In enhancing the reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs), prior
research primarily focuses on specific prompting techniques such as few-shot or
zero-shot chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting. These methods, while effective,
often involve manually intensive prompt engineering. Our study takes a novel
approach by asking: Can LLMs reason effectively without prompting? Our findings
reveal that, intriguingly, CoT reasoning paths can be elicited from pre-trained
LLMs by simply altering the decoding process. Rather than conventional greedy
decoding, we investigate the top-k alternative tokens, uncovering that CoT paths
are frequently inherent in these sequences. This approach not only bypasses the
confounders of prompting but also allows us to assess the LLMs’ intrinsic reasoning
abilities. Moreover, we observe that the presence of a CoT in the decoding path
correlates with a higher confidence in the model’s decoded answer. This confidence
metric effectively differentiates between CoT and non-CoT paths. Extensive
empirical studies on various reasoning benchmarks show that the proposed CoTdecoding effectively elicits reasoning capabilities from language models, which
were previously obscured by standard greedy decoding.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance on various complicated
reasoning benchmarks (Anil et al., 2023; Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2023; Gemini,
2023; OpenAI, 2023; Romera-Paredes et al., 2023). These reasoning capabilities of LLMs are
typically elicited by prompting techniques (Brown et al., 2020), which can be few-shot prompting
with intermediate steps augmented demonstration exemplars (Chen et al., 2023b; Gao et al., 2022;
Nye et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023a), or zero-shot prompting with
specific instructions which ask for showing certain intermediate steps (Kojima et al., 2022; Yasunaga
et al., 2023). The other prevalent strategy for eliciting LLM reasoning is through model training or
instruction tuning using a substantial amount of chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning data (Chung et al.,
2022; Cobbe et al., 2021; Ling et al., 2017; Nye et al., 2021).
Prompting techniques, while effective, often encode task-specific human priors, thereby making it
difficult to assess a language model’s intrinsic reasoning abilities. Ideally, a well-trained language
model should be capable of independent reasoning and delivering optimal responses, without requiring
humans to tweak the prompts or refine repeatedly when the initial response is unsatisfactory. Modeltuning can be expensive and requires a substantial amount of supervised data. In this work, we
explore a different perspective and ask: Can LLMs reason effectively without prompting? And to
what extent can they reason? We find that, perhaps surprisingly, there exists a task-agnostic way to
elicit CoT reasoning from pre-trained LLMs by simply altering the decoding procedure. Figure 1
illustrates this phenomenon: given a reasoning question, the LLM generates a wrong answer via the
standard greedy decoding path, yet alternative top-k token inspection unveiled inherent CoT paths
(e.g., decoding paths 2 and 4), which accurately resolved the query. This decoding modification
bypasses prompting and is entirely unsupervised without the need for model tuning.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

