Generalizability of Memorization Neural Networks

Lijia Yu1 , Xiao-Shan Gao2,3,∗ , Lijun Zhang1,3 , Yibo Miao2,3
Key Laboratory of System Software (Chinese Academy of Sciences)
and State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing 100190, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
1

Abstract
The neural network memorization problem is to study the expressive power of
neural networks to interpolate a finite dataset. Although memorization is widely
believed to have a close relationship with the strong generalizability of deep
learning when using over-parameterized models, to the best of our knowledge, there
exists no theoretical study on the generalizability of memorization neural networks.
In this paper, we give the first theoretical analysis of this topic. Since using i.i.d.
training data is a necessary condition for a learning algorithm to be generalizable,
memorization and its generalization theory for i.i.d. datasets are developed under
mild conditions on the data distribution. First, algorithms are given to construct
memorization networks for an i.i.d. dataset, which have the smallest number of
parameters and even a constant number of parameters. Second, we show that, in
order for the memorization networks to be generalizable, the width of the network
must be at least equal to the dimension of the data, which implies that the existing
memorization networks with an optimal number of parameters are not generalizable.
Third, a lower bound for the sample complexity of general memorization algorithms
and the exact sample complexity for memorization algorithms with constant number
of parameters are given. It is also shown that there exist data distributions such that,
to be generalizable for them, the memorization network must have an exponential
number of parameters in the data dimension. Finally, an efficient and generalizable
memorization algorithm is given when the number of training samples is greater
than the efficient memorization sample complexity of the data distribution.

1

Introduction

Memorization is to study the expressive power of neural networks to interpolate a finite dataset [9].
The main focus of the existing work is to study how many parameters are needed to memorize. For
any dataset Dtr of size N and neural networks of the form F : Rn → R, memorization networks
with O(N ) parameters have been given with various model structures and activation functions
[31, 50, 30, 29, 26, 47, 56, 11, 65]. On the other hand, it is shown that in order to memorize an
arbitrary dataset of size N [64, 56], the network must have at least Ω(N ) parameters, so the above
algorithms are approximately optimal. Under certain assumptions, it is shown that sublinear O(N 2/3 )
parameters are sufficient to memorize Dtr [49]. √
Furthermore, Vardi et al. [55] give a memorization
network with optimal number of parameters: O( N ).
Recently, it is shown that memorization is closely related to one of the most surprising properties
of deep learning, that is, over-parameterized neural networks are trained to nearly memorize noisy
data and yet can still achieve a very nice generalization on the test data [45, 7, 4]. More precisely, the
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

