Consistency of Neural Causal Partial Identification

Jiyuan Tan
Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
jiyuantan@stanford.edu

Jose Blanchet
Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
jose.blanchet@stanford.edu

Vasilis Syrgkanis
Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
vsyrgk@stanford.edu

Abstract
Recent progress in Neural Causal Models (NCMs) showcased how identification
and partial identification of causal effects can be automatically carried out via
training of neural generative models that respect the constraints encoded in a given
causal graph [52, 3]. However, formal consistency of these methods has only been
proven for the case of discrete variables or only for linear causal models. In this
work, we prove the consistency of partial identification via NCMs in a general
setting with both continuous and categorical variables. Further, our results highlight
the impact of the design of the underlying neural network architecture in terms of
depth and connectivity as well as the importance of applying Lipschitz regularization in the training phase. In particular, we provide a counterexample showing that
without Lipschitz regularization this method may not be asymptotically consistent.
Our results are enabled by new results on the approximability of Structural Causal
Models (SCMs) via neural generative models, together with an analysis of the
sample complexity of the resulting architectures and how that translates into an
error in the constrained optimization problem that defines the partial identification
bounds.

1

Introduction

Identifying causal quantities from observational data is an important problem in causal inference
which has wide applications in economics [1], social science [20], health care [34, 18], and recommendation systems [9]. One common approach is to transform causal quantities into statistical
quantities using the ID algorithm [49] and deploy general purpose methods to estimate the statistical
quantity. However, in the presence of unobserved confounding, typically the causal quantity of
interest will not be point-identified by observational data, unless special mechanisms are present
in the data generating process (e.g. instruments, unconfounded mediators, proxy controls). In the
presence of unobserved confounding, the ID algorithm will typically fail to return a statistical quantity
and declare the causal quantity as non-identifiable.
One remedy to this problem, which we focus on in this paper, is partial identification, which aims
to give informative bounds for causal quantities based on the available data. At a high level, partial
identification bounds can be defined as follows: find the maximum and the minimum value that a
target causal quantity can take, among all Structural Causal Models (SCMs) that give rise to the
same observed data distribution and respect the given causal graph (as well as any other structural
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

