Exploring the trade-off between deep-learning and
explainable models for brain-machine interfaces

Luis H. Cubillos1 , Guy Revach3 , Matthew J. Mender1 , Joseph T. Costello1 ,
Hisham Temmar1 , Aren Hite1 , Diksha Zutshi1 , Dylan M. Wallace1 , Xiaoyong Ni3 ,
Madison M. Kelberman1 , Matthew S. Willsey1,2 , Ruud J.G. van Sloun4 , Nir Shlezinger5 ,
Parag Patil1 , Anne Draelos1 , Cynthia A. Chestek1,2
1
Departments of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Biomedical Engineering, Robotics,
Computational Medicine & Bioinformatics, and Neurosurgery, University of Michigan, USA
2
Biointerfaces Institute and Neuroscience Institute, University of Michigan, USA
3
Department of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
4
Department of Electrical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, Netherlands,
5
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ben-Gurion University, Israel

Abstract
People with brain or spinal cord-related paralysis often need to rely on others for
basic tasks, limiting their independence. A potential solution is brain-machine
interfaces (BMIs), which could allow them to voluntarily control external devices
(e.g., robotic arm) by decoding brain activity to movement commands. In the
past decade, deep-learning decoders have achieved state-of-the-art results in most
BMI applications, ranging from speech production to finger control. However, the
’black-box’ nature of deep-learning decoders could lead to unexpected behaviors,
resulting in major safety concerns in real-world physical control scenarios. In these
applications, explainable but lower-performing decoders, such as the Kalman filter
(KF), remain the norm. In this study, we designed a BMI decoder based on KalmanNet, an extension of the KF that augments its operation with recurrent neural
networks to compute the Kalman gain. This results in a varying “trust” that shifts
between inputs and dynamics. We used this algorithm to predict finger movements
from the brain activity of two monkeys. We compared KalmanNet results offline
(pre-recorded data, n = 13 days) and online (real-time predictions, n = 5 days)
with a simple KF and two recent deep-learning algorithms: tcFNN (non-ReFIT
version) and LSTM. KalmanNet achieved comparable or better results than other
deep learning models in offline and online modes, relying on the dynamical model
for stopping while depending more on neural inputs for initiating movements.
We further validated this mechanism by implementing a heteroscedastic KF that
used the same strategy, and it also approached state-of-the-art performance while
remaining in the explainable domain of standard KFs. However, we also see two
downsides to KalmanNet. KalmanNet shares the limited generalization ability of
existing deep-learning decoders, and its usage of the KF as an inductive bias limits
its performance in the presence of unseen noise distributions. Despite this trade-off,
our analysis successfully integrates traditional controls and modern deep-learning
approaches to motivate high-performing yet still explainable BMI designs.

1

Introduction

Millions of people worldwide live with a neurological or spinal cord condition that limits their ability
to interact with the world [1]. These patients have to rely on others for basic tasks such as eating,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

