Enhancing Efficiency of Safe Reinforcement Learning
via Sample Manipulation

Shangding Gu1,3∗, Laixi Shi2∗ , Yuhao Ding1 , Alois Knoll3 , Costas Spanos1 , Adam Wierman2 ,
Ming Jin4
1
University of California, Berkeley, USA
2
California Institute of Technology, USA
3
Technical University of Munich, Germany
4
Virginia Tech, USA

Abstract
Safe reinforcement learning (RL) is crucial for deploying RL agents in real-world
applications, as it aims to maximize long-term rewards while satisfying safety
constraints. However, safe RL often suffers from sample inefficiency, requiring
extensive interactions with the environment to learn a safe policy. We propose
Efficient Safe Policy Optimization (ESPO), a novel approach that enhances the
efficiency of safe RL through sample manipulation. ESPO employs an optimization framework with three modes: maximizing rewards, minimizing costs, and
balancing the trade-off between the two. By dynamically adjusting the sampling
process based on the observed conflict between reward and safety gradients, ESPO
theoretically guarantees convergence, optimization stability, and improved sample
complexity bounds. Experiments on the Safety-MuJoCo and Omnisafe benchmarks
demonstrate that ESPO significantly outperforms existing primal-based and primaldual-based baselines in terms of reward maximization and constraint satisfaction.
Moreover, ESPO achieves substantial gains in sample efficiency, requiring 25–29%
fewer samples than baselines, and reduces training time by 21–38%.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [49] has demonstrated powerful capabilities in various domains [25,
46, 11]. However, ensuring safety in RL, particularly in real-world applications such as autonomous
driving, robotics, and power grids, is crucial [6, 12, 31, 35, 38, 39, 41, 48, 55, 57, 17, 59]. Safe RL
aims to maximize long-term cumulative rewards while adhering to additional safety cost constraints.
Most state-of-the-art (SOTA) safe RL methods, including primal-based baselines (e.g., CRPO [53],
PCRPO [30]) and primal-dual-based methods (e.g., CUP [54], PPOLag [32]), optimize cost and
reward with a predetermined sample size for each iteration. However, this approach may lead to
sample inefficiency due to two main reasons:
❙ Wasted samples and computational resources in simple scenarios, where the (computational/physical) cost of obtaining these samples may outweigh their learning benefits.
❙ Insufficient exploration in complex cases with high uncertainty or conflicting objectives,
potentially hindering the learning of a safe and optimal policy.
A key insight from optimization literature suggests that the selection of sample size is worthwhile
but a delicate issue, as it may vary depending on the optimization stage and landscape [13, 28, 51].
However, this insight remains largely unexplored in the context of safe RL, where the consideration
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

