XLand-MiniGrid: Scalable Meta-Reinforcement
Learning Environments in JAX

Alexander Nikulin†
AIRI, MIPT
nikulin@airi.net

Vladislav Kurenkov†
AIRI, Innopolis University
kurenkov@airi.net

Artem Agarkov†
MIPT
agarkov.as@phystech.edu

Viacheslav Sinii
T-Bank
v.siniy@tbank.ru

Ilya Zisman†
AIRI, Skoltech
zisman@airi.net
Sergey Kolesnikov
T-Bank
s.s.kolesnikov@tbank.ru

Abstract
Inspired by the diversity and depth of XLand and the simplicity and minimalism of
MiniGrid, we present XLand-MiniGrid, a suite of tools and grid-world environments for meta-reinforcement learning research. Written in JAX, XLand-MiniGrid
is designed to be highly scalable and can potentially run on GPU or TPU accelerators, democratizing large-scale experimentation with limited resources. Along
with the environments, XLand-MiniGrid provides pre-sampled benchmarks with
millions of unique tasks of varying difficulty and easy-to-use baselines that allow
users to quickly start training adaptive agents. In addition, we have conducted a
preliminary analysis of scaling and generalization, showing that our baselines are
capable of reaching millions of steps per second during training and validating that
the proposed benchmarks are challenging. XLand-MiniGrid is open-source and
available at https://github.com/corl-team/xland-minigrid.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is known to be extremely sample inefficient and prone to overfitting,
sometimes failing to generalize to even subtle variations in environmental dynamics or goals (Rajeswaran et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2018; Henderson et al., 2018; Alver & Precup, 2020). One way
to address these shortcomings are meta-RL approaches, where adaptive agents are pre-trained on
diverse task distributions to significantly increase sample efficiency on new problems (Wang et al.,
2016; Duan et al., 2016). With sufficient scaling and task diversity, these approaches are capable of
astonishing results, reducing the adaptation time on new problems to human levels and beyond (Team
et al., 2021, 2023).
At the same time, meta-RL methods have major limitations. Since the agent requires thousands
of different tasks for generalization, faster adaptation during inference comes at the expense of
significantly increased pre-training requirements. For example, a single training of the Ada agent
(Team et al., 2023) takes five weeks3 , which can be out of reach for most academic labs and
practitioners. Even those who might have the training resources would still be unable to use them,
as the XLand environment is not publicly available. We believe, and this also has been pointed out
by Wang et al. (2021), that such demanding requirements are the reason why most recent works on
adaptive agents (Laskin et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2023; Norman & Clune, 2023) avoid
complex environments in favor of more simplistic ones (e.g., simple navigation).
†
3

Work done while at T-Bank
According to Appendix D.2 in Team et al. (2023).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

