TrAct: Making First-layer Pre-Activations Trainable

Felix Petersen
Stanford University

Christian Borgelt
University of Salzburg

Stefano Ermon
Stanford University

mail@felix-petersen.de

christian@borgelt.net

ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We consider the training of the first layer of vision models and notice the clear
relationship between pixel values and gradient update magnitudes: the gradients
arriving at the weights of a first layer are by definition directly proportional to
(normalized) input pixel values. Thus, an image with low contrast has a smaller
impact on learning than an image with higher contrast, and a very bright or very dark
image has a stronger impact on the weights than an image with moderate brightness.
In this work, we propose performing gradient descent on the embeddings produced
by the first layer of the model. However, switching to discrete inputs with an
embedding layer is not a reasonable option for vision models. Thus, we propose
the conceptual procedure of (i) a gradient descent step on first layer activations to
construct an activation proposal, and (ii) finding the optimal weights of the first
layer, i.e., those weights which minimize the squared distance to the activation
proposal. We provide a closed form solution of the procedure and adjust it for
robust stochastic training while computing everything efficiently. Empirically, we
find that TrAct (Training Activations) speeds up training by factors between 1.25×
and 4× while requiring only a small computational overhead. We demonstrate the
utility of TrAct with different optimizers for a range of different vision models
including convolutional and transformer architectures.

1

Introduction

We consider the learning of first-layer embeddings / pre-activations in vision models, and in particular
learning the weights with which the input images are transformed in order to obtain these embeddings.
In gradient descent, the updates to first-layer weights are directly proportional to the (normalized)
pixel values of the input images. As a consequence (assuming that input images are standardized),
high contrast, very dark, or very bright images have a greater impact on the trained first-layer weights,
while low contrast images with medium brightness have only smaller impact on training.
While, in the past, mainly transformations of the input images, especially various forms of normalization have been considered, either as a preprocessing step or as part of the neural network architecture,
our approach targets the training process directly without modifying the model architecture or any
preprocessing. The goal of our approach is to achieve a training behavior that is equivalent to training
the pre-activations or embedding values themselves. For example, in language models [1], the first
layer is an “Embedding” layer that maps a token id to an embedding vector (via a lookup). When
training language models, this embedding vector is trained directly, i.e., the update to the embedding
directly corresponds to the gradient of the pre-activation of the first layer. As discussed above, this is
not the case in vision models as, here, the updates to the first-layer weight matrix correspond to the
outer product between the input pixel values and the gradient of the pre-activation of the first layer.
Bridging this gap between the “Embedding” layer in language models, and “Conv2D” / “Linear” /
“Dense” layers in vision models, we propose a novel technique for training the pre-activations of
the latter, effectively mimicking training behavior of the “Embedding” layer in language models.
As vision models rely on pixel values rather than tokens, and any discretization of image patches,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

