GUIDE: Real-Time Human-Shaped Agents

Lingyu Zhang1 , Zhengran Ji1 , Nicholas R Waytowich2 , Boyuan Chen1
1
Duke University, 2 Army Research Laboratory
http://www.generalroboticslab.com/GUIDE

Abstract
The recent rapid advancement of machine learning has been driven by increasingly
powerful models with the growing availability of training data and computational
resources. However, real-time decision-making tasks with limited time and sparse
learning signals remain challenging. One way of improving the learning speed
and performance of these agents is to leverage human guidance. In this work, we
introduce GUIDE, a framework for real-time human-guided reinforcement learning
by enabling continuous human feedback and grounding such feedback into dense
rewards to accelerate policy learning. Additionally, our method features a simulated
feedback module that learns and replicates human feedback patterns in an online
fashion, effectively reducing the need for human input while allowing continual
training. We demonstrate the performance of our framework on challenging tasks
with sparse rewards and visual observations. Our human study involving 50
subjects offers strong quantitative and qualitative evidence of the effectiveness of
our approach. With only 10 minutes of human feedback, our algorithm achieves up
to 30% increase in success rate compared to its RL baseline.

1

Introduction

Many real-world tasks are real-time decision-making processes [7, 48] that require understanding the
problem, exploring different options, making decisions, refining our understanding, and adjusting
decisions accordingly. Due to their inherent complexity, these tasks pose significant challenges
for current machine learning systems. Effective exploration[8, 16, 41, 36] is crucial for gathering
informative data, especially in mission-critical tasks such as search and rescue, disaster response,
and medical emergencies where time is limited. Furthermore, open-world problems often lack dense
labels and provide extremely sparse environment feedback signals[42, 19, 29, 21]. Therefore, agents
must reason over long horizons to make informed decisions [24, 26, 43].
Human-guided machine learning[32, 33, 34, 31, 1, 52], also known as human-in-the-loop machine
learning, has been proposed to integrate human feedback into reinforcement learning (RL) agents.
Various methods differ in how they obtain, format, and incorporate human feedback. Some approaches
rely on full demonstrations[32, 34] or partial corrections[12] through imitation learning [32, 33, 34] or
inverse RL [31, 1, 52], assuming that humans can directly control the agents and possess expert-level
task knowledge. Conversely, non-expert humans can often still judge the quality of the agent strategies,
leading to comparison-based feedback, such as preferences[2, 20, 45, 18, 46, 17, 47, 23, 53] and
rankings [9, 10]. These offline methods, however, require large datasets and parallel prompts and,
hence, cannot support real-time guidance, limiting their applicability in dynamic environments.
Discrete label feedback has shown promise for real-time human-guided RL, where humans provide
scalar rewards[28, 4] or discrete feedback[25, 44] (e.g., good, neutral, bad). Despite its promise, this
approach is constrained by the need for significant human efforts and the less informative nature of
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

