Improved Generation of Adversarial Examples
Against Safety-aligned LLMs

Qizhang Li1,2 , Yiwen Guo3∗, Wangmeng Zuo1 , Hao Chen4
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, 2 Tencent Security Big Data Lab, 3 Independent Researcher, 4 UC Davis
{liqizhang95,guoyiwen89}@gmail.com wmzuo@hit.edu.cn chen@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
Adversarial prompts (or say, adversarial examples) generated using gradient-based
methods exhibit outstanding performance in performing automatic jailbreak attacks
against safety-aligned LLMs. Nevertheless, due to the discrete nature of texts, the
input gradient of LLMs struggles to precisely reflect the magnitude of loss change
that results from token replacements in the prompt, leading to limited attack success
rates against safety-aligned LLMs, even in the white-box setting. In this paper,
we explore a new perspective on this problem, suggesting that it can be alleviated
by leveraging innovations inspired in transfer-based attacks that were originally
proposed for attacking black-box image classification models. For the first time,
we appropriate the ideologies of effective methods among these transfer-based
attacks, i.e., Skip Gradient Method [53] and Intermediate Level Attack [18], into
gradient-based adversarial prompt generation and achieve significant performance
gains without introducing obvious computational cost. Meanwhile, by discussing
mechanisms behind the gains, new insights are drawn, and proper combinations
of these methods are also developed. Our empirical results show that 87% of the
query-specific adversarial suffixes generated by the developed combination can
induce Llama-2-7B-Chat to produce the output that exactly matches the target
string on AdvBench. This match rate is 33% higher than that of a very strong baseline known as GCG, demonstrating advanced discrete optimization for adversarial
prompt generation against LLMs. In addition, without introducing obvious cost, the
combination achieves > 30% absolute increase in attack success rates compared
with GCG when generating both query-specific (38% → 68%) and universal adversarial prompts (26.68% → 60.32%) for attacking the Llama-2-7B-Chat model
on AdvBench. Code at: https://github.com/qizhangli/Gradient-based-JailbreakAttacks.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated a formidable capacity for language comprehension
and the generation of human-like text. Safty-aligned LLMs, refined through specific fine-tuning
mechanisms [38, 3, 21, 12], are anticipated to yield responses that are not only helpful but also devoid
of harm in response to user instructions. However, certain studies [42, 49, 58, 40, 6, 30] reveal that
these models have not yet achieved perfect alignment. It has been demonstrated that these models can
be carefully prompted to produce harmful content through the introduction of meticulously crafted
prompts, a phenomenon known as “jailbreak” [49]. The manually designed jailbreak prompts are
crafted by carefully constructing scenarios that mislead the models, necessitating a significant amount
of work. In contrast, adversarial examples are automatically generated with the intent deceiving
models to generate harmful responses, presenting a more insidious challenge to model robustness.
∗

Yiwen Guo leads the project and serves as the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

