MRConv: Reparameterized Multi-Resolution
Convolutions for Long Sequence Modelling

Harry Jake Cunningham∗
University College London

Giorgio Giannone†
University College London
Amazon

Mingtian Zhang
University College London

Marc Peter Deisenroth
University College London

Abstract
Global convolutions have shown increasing promise as powerful general-purpose
sequence models. However, training long convolutions is challenging, and kernel
parameterizations must be able to learn long-range dependencies without overfitting.
This work introduces reparameterized multi-resolution convolutions (MRConv), a
novel approach to parameterizing global convolutional kernels for long-sequence
modelling. By leveraging multi-resolution convolutions, incorporating structural
reparameterization and introducing learnable kernel decay, MRConv learns expressive long-range kernels that perform well across various data modalities. Our
experiments demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on the Long Range Arena,
Sequential CIFAR, and Speech Commands tasks among convolution models and
linear-time transformers. Moreover, we report improved performance on ImageNet
classification by replacing 2D convolutions with 1D MRConv layers.

1

Introduction

Modelling sequences with long-range dependencies is critical for solving tasks such as time-series
forecasting, speech recognition and language modelling. Numerous deep learning models have
been designed to address this challenge by aggregating information across long contexts, including
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [2, 28], convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [37, 4, 5, 40], and
Transformers [46]. Despite significant progress, these models still struggle to effectively model long
sequences due to training instabilities, inadequate inductive biases to prioritize important contextual
information and prohibitive computational complexities.
Recently, State Space Models (SSMs) [22, 23, 43, 25, 19] have demonstrated their ability to model
extremely long sequences. SSMs corresponding to a linear time-invariant (LTI) system, can be
efficiently implemented using a global depthwise convolution. The convolution kernel is parameterized according to the HiPPO framework by initializing specially constructed state matrices [20, 24].
However, despite their success, SSMs are complex models that rely on sophisticated mathematics
and linear algebra to compute the convolution kernel, which for S4 [22] and S4D [23] becomes a
bottleneck for the faster downstream convolution.
Inspired by their success and equivalence to global convolutions, several authors have aimed to reduce
the complexity of SSMs by parameterizing long convolution kernels directly [40, 27, 17, 38, 29]. In
general, explicitly parameterized long convolution kernels are extremely difficult to train and are
∗
†

Correspondence to jake.cunningham.21@ucl.ac.uk
Work done at University College London.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

