Where Do Large Learning Rates Lead Us?

Ildus Sadrtdinov1,2∗, Maxim Kodryan2∗, Eduard Pokonechny3∗,
Ekaterina Lobacheva3†, Dmitry Vetrov1†
1
Constructor University, Bremen 2 HSE University 3 Independent researcher
isadrtdinov@constructor.university, mkodryan@hse.ru, epokonechnyy@gmail.com
lobacheva.tjulja@gmail.com, dvetrov@constructor.university

Abstract
It is generally accepted that starting neural networks training with large learning
rates (LRs) improves generalization. Following a line of research devoted to
understanding this effect, we conduct an empirical study in a controlled setting
focusing on two questions: 1) how large an initial LR is required for obtaining
optimal quality, and 2) what are the key differences between models trained with
different LRs? We discover that only a narrow range of initial LRs slightly above
the convergence threshold lead to optimal results after fine-tuning with a small
LR or weight averaging. By studying the local geometry of reached minima, we
observe that using LRs from this optimal range allows for the optimization to locate
a basin that only contains high-quality minima. Additionally, we show that these
initial LRs result in a sparse set of learned features, with a clear focus on those
most relevant for the task. In contrast, starting training with too small LRs leads
to unstable minima and attempts to learn all features simultaneously, resulting in
poor generalization. Conversely, using initial LRs that are too large fails to detect a
basin with good solutions and extract meaningful patterns from the data.

1

Introduction

Understanding neural networks (NNs) training is one of the major goals in deep learning for various
reasons, from developing more efficient training protocols to handling the AI safety issues [10].
Unfortunately, the high-dimensionality, non-convexity, and stochasticity of the optimization process
make its comprehensive analysis extremely difficult. Learning rate (LR) is perhaps the most important
hyperparameter in a gradient descent optimizer [11]. LR controls the optimization step size and, due
to extreme non-convexity of the optimized loss function yielding a manifold of qualitatively different
minima in the loss landscape of neural networks, this hyperparameter is primarily responsible for the
type of solution we obtain after training [5, 6, 35, 41, 60, 62, 68].
Using large learning rates, especially at the beginning of training, has become a common practice [23,
38, 69]. Starting with large LR values is known to help avoid poor local minima [13, 34, 40, 48] while
the solutions obtained at the end of training often have favorable properties like good generalization
and flatter loss landscape around the corresponding optima [25, 35, 56, 60]. Prior work has attempted
to explain the benefits of high learning rates from various perspectives, which can be divided into
three main areas: optimization [5, 9, 27–29, 58, 59, 62, 65], model sparsity [2, 6, 12, 51, 55], and
pattern learning [41, 44, 57, 68]. Nevertheless, the following questions still remain very relevant:
1. Large LRs are preferred but how large are we talking about?
2. What are the key characteristics of the models trained with different LRs?
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Shared senior authorship.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

