Doubly Mild Generalization for Offline
Reinforcement Learning

Yixiu Mao1 , Qi Wang1 , Yun Qu1 , Yuhang Jiang1 , Xiangyang Ji1
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
myx21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) suffers from the extrapolation error and value
overestimation. From a generalization perspective, this issue can be attributed to the
over-generalization of value functions or policies towards out-of-distribution (OOD)
actions. Significant efforts have been devoted to mitigating such generalization, and
recent in-sample learning approaches have further succeeded in entirely eschewing
it. Nevertheless, we show that mild generalization beyond the dataset can be trusted
and leveraged to improve performance under certain conditions. To appropriately
exploit generalization in offline RL, we propose Doubly Mild Generalization
(DMG), comprising (i) mild action generalization and (ii) mild generalization
propagation. The former refers to selecting actions in a close neighborhood of the
dataset to maximize the Q values. Even so, the potential erroneous generalization
can still be propagated, accumulated, and exacerbated by bootstrapping. In light
of this, the latter concept is introduced to mitigate the generalization propagation
without impeding the propagation of RL learning signals. Theoretically, DMG
guarantees better performance than the in-sample optimal policy in the oracle
generalization scenario. Even under worst-case generalization, DMG can still
control value overestimation at a certain level and lower bound the performance.
Empirically, DMG achieves state-of-the-art performance across Gym-MuJoCo
locomotion tasks and challenging AntMaze tasks. Moreover, benefiting from its
flexibility in both generalization aspects, DMG enjoys a seamless transition from
offline to online learning and attains strong online fine-tuning performance.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) aims to solve sequential decision-making problems and has garnered
significant attention in recent years [53, 67, 74, 63, 12]. However, its practical applications encounter
several challenges, such as risky exploration attempts [20] and time-consuming data collection
phases [35]. Offline RL emerges as a promising paradigm to alleviate these challenges by learning
without interaction with the environment [40, 42]. It eliminates the need for unsafe exploration and
facilitates the utilization of pre-existing large-scale datasets [31, 48, 59].
However, offline RL suffers from the out-of-distribution (OOD) issue and extrapolation error [19].
From a generalization perspective, this well-known challenge can be regarded as a consequence of the
over-generalization of value functions or policies towards OOD actions [47]. Specifically, the potential
value over-estimation at OOD actions caused by intricate generalization is often improperly captured
by the max operation [73]. This over-estimation will propagate to values of in-distribution samples
through Bellman backups and further spread to values of OOD ones via generalization. In mitigating
value overestimation caused by OOD actions, substantial efforts have been dedicated [19, 39, 38, 17]
and recent advancements in in-sample learning have successfully formulated the Bellman target
solely with the actions present in the dataset [37, 85, 92, 88, 21] and extracted policies by weighted
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

