Reinforcement Learning with Euclidean Data
Augmentation for State-Based Continuous Control

Jinzhu Luo
University of South Carolina
jinzhu@email.sc.edu

Dingyang Chen
University of South Carolina
dingyang@email.sc.edu

Qi Zhang
University of South Carolina
qz5@cse.sc.edu

Abstract
Data augmentation creates new data points by transforming the original ones for
a reinforcement learning (RL) agent to learn from, which has been shown to be
effective for the objective of improving the data efficiency of RL for continuous
control. Prior work towards this objective has been largely restricted to perturbationbased data augmentation where new data points are created by perturbing the
original ones, which has been impressively effective for tasks where the RL agent
observes control states as images with perturbations including random cropping,
shifting, etc. This work focuses on state-based control, where the RL agent can
directly observe raw kinematic and task features, and considers an alternative
data augmentation applied to these features based on Euclidean symmetries under
transformations like rotations. We show that the default state features used in
exiting benchmark tasks that are based on joint configurations are not amenable
to Euclidean transformations. We therefore advocate using state features based
on configurations of the limbs (i.e., the rigid bodies connected by the joints)
that instead provide rich augmented data under Euclidean transformations. With
minimal hyperparameter tuning, we show this new Euclidean data augmentation
strategy significantly improves both data efficiency and asymptotic performance of
RL on a wide range of continuous control tasks. Our code is available on GitHub1 .

1

Introduction

While reinforcement learning (RL) has enjoyed impressive success on continuous control problems,
especially when empowered by expressive function approximators like deep neural networks, improving its notoriously poor data efficiency remains challenging. Recently, exploiting the idea of
data augmentation, the RL community has made significant progress on improving data efficiency as
well as the asymptotic performance of RL for continuous control with the agent observing images as
the state representations [1, 2, 3, 4]. CURL [1] utilized data augmentation for learning contrastive
representations [5, 6] out of their image encoder, as any auxiliary learning objective in the RL setting.
Other works, such as DrQ [3, 4] and RAD [2], directly used image data augmentations for RL without
any auxiliary objectives. Despite these technical differences in how data augmentation is integrated
into RL, these works share the key procedure of perturbation-based image augmentation: to create
new data for learning, the image in a state representation is transformed by applying perturbations
such as random crop, random shift, color jitter, etc.
Instead of image-based continuous control, this paper focuses on the more primitive problem of statebased continuous control, where the agent can observe raw physical quantities such as position and
velocity as the features to represent the underlying world state. Like the image-based case, existing
work on state-based data augmentation has been relying on introducing perturbations to original state
1

https://github.com/JinzhuLuo/EuclideanDA

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

