Zero-Shot Transfer of Neural ODEs
Tyler Ingebrand, Adam J. Thorpe, Ufuk Topcu
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712

Abstract
Autonomous systems often encounter environments and scenarios beyond the scope
of their training data, which underscores a critical challenge: the need to generalize
and adapt to unseen scenarios in real time. This challenge necessitates new mathematical and algorithmic tools that enable adaptation and zero-shot transfer. To this
end, we leverage the theory of function encoders, which enables zero-shot transfer
by combining the flexibility of neural networks with the mathematical principles
of Hilbert spaces. Using this theory, we first present a method for learning a space
of dynamics spanned by a set of neural ODE basis functions. After training, the
proposed approach can rapidly identify dynamics in the learned space using an
efficient inner product calculation. Critically, this calculation requires no gradient
calculations or retraining during the online phase. This method enables zero-shot
transfer for autonomous systems at runtime and opens the door for a new class of
adaptable control algorithms. We demonstrate state-of-the-art system modeling
accuracy for two MuJoCo robot environments and show that the learned models
can be used for more efficient MPC control of a quadrotor.

1

Introduction

Models that are adaptable, generalizable, and capable of learning online from minimal data are
essential for autonomy. These models must adapt to unseen tasks and environments at runtime
without relying upon a priori parameterizations. For example, consider an autonomous UAV delivery
robot navigating in a dense, urban environment through varying wind patterns and carrying uncertain
payloads. This scenario requires rapid adaptation to ensure safe and correct operation because
conditions can change unpredictably and online model updates are impractical. While prior works
can control autonomous systems in a single setting, they fail to adapt to the continuum of real-life
scenarios. The key challenge is enabling zero-shot transfer of learned models, where models quickly
adapt to new data provided at runtime without retraining.
We present a method for modeling differential equations by learning a set of basis functions parameterized by neural ODEs. Our key insight is to learn a space of functions that captures feasible
behaviors of the system. By focusing on learning the structure of the space of differential equations,
our approach implicitly learns how the dynamics change due to changes in the environment. Our
approach is based on the theory of function encoders [14], a framework for zero-shot transfer that has
been applied to task transfer in reinforcement learning contexts.
We formulate the space of learned functions as a linear space equipped with an inner product (e.g.
a Hilbert space), and learn a set of basis functions over this space, where each basis function is
represented by a neural ODE. This structure offers an efficient way to approximate online dynamics
via a linear combination of the basis functions.
By representing functions in a Hilbert space and pre-training on a suite of functions, we can quickly
identify the basis functions’ coefficients for a new dynamical system at runtime using minimal data.
This is useful, for instance, in scenarios where we can pre-train offline in simulation, but need to
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

