Mitigating Backdoor Attack by Injecting Proactive
Defensive Backdoor
Shaokui Wei1 Hongyuan Zha1,2 Baoyuan Wu1∗
1
School of Data Science,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518172, P.R. China
2
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Crowd Intelligence Empowered Low-Carbon Energy Network

Abstract
Data-poisoning backdoor attacks are serious security threats to machine learning
models, where an adversary can manipulate the training dataset to inject backdoors
into models. In this paper, we focus on in-training backdoor defense, aiming to
train a clean model even when the dataset may be potentially poisoned. Unlike most
existing methods that primarily detect and remove/unlearn suspicious samples to
mitigate malicious backdoor attacks, we propose a novel defense approach called
PDB (Proactive Defensive Backdoor). Specifically, PDB leverages the “home
field” advantage of defenders by proactively injecting a defensive backdoor into
the model during training. Taking advantage of controlling the training process,
the defensive backdoor is designed to suppress the malicious backdoor effectively
while remaining secret to attackers. In addition, we introduce a reversible mapping
to determine the defensive target label. During inference, PDB embeds a defensive
trigger in the inputs and reverses the model’s prediction, suppressing malicious
backdoor and ensuring the model’s utility on the original task. Experimental results
across various datasets and models demonstrate that our approach achieves stateof-the-art defense performance against a wide range of backdoor attacks. The code
is available at https://github.com/shawkui/Proactive_Defensive_Backdoor.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have become ubiquitous across diverse fields, powering
applications such as face recognition, self-driving vehicles, and medical image analysis [1, 13, 25, 38].
However, alongside these advancements, the vulnerability of DNNs to malicious attacks presents a
critical challenge to their safety and reliability. A particularly alarming threat arises from backdoor
attacks, where adversaries secretly introduce backdoors into DNN models during training by subtly
altering a fraction of the dataset. This manipulation ensures the model’s standard performance on
uncontaminated data but erroneously assigns a pre-determined label to any input carrying a specific
trigger. Considering its real threats to machine learning systems, especially in security-critical
scenarios, it’s a practical necessity to investigate and propose effective defense strategies against such
attacks to safeguard real-world applications.
To mitigate the threats posed by backdoor attacks, researchers have actively explored various backdoor
defense techniques throughout the life cycle of machine learning systems [45]. In this paper, we
specifically delve into in-training backdoor defense [44–46], which aims to train machine learning
models using datasets that may be contaminated with poisoned data. Most existing methods in this
field primarily focuses on identifying suspicious samples through various means, along with mitigating
the backdoor effect by directly removing [3, 48] or applying some techniques (e.g., unlearning [20, 4],
or relabel [15, 26, 60]) to the suspicious samples. Despite achieving remarkable performance in
∗

Corresponds to Baoyuan Wu (wubaoyuan@cuhk.edu.cn).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

