Uncertainty-aware Fine-tuning of Segmentation
Foundation Models
Kangning Liu1,2

Brian Price2 Jason Kuen2 Yifei Fan2 Zijun Wei2
Krzysztof J. Geras 1 Carlos Fernandez-Granda1
1
New York University 2 Adobe

Luis Figueroa2

Abstract
The Segment Anything Model (SAM) is a large-scale foundation model that has
revolutionized segmentation methodology. Despite its impressive generalization
ability, the segmentation accuracy of SAM on images with intricate structures is
often unsatisfactory. Recent works have proposed lightweight fine-tuning using
high-quality annotated data to improve accuracy on such images. However, here
we provide extensive empirical evidence that this strategy leads to forgetting how
to “segment anything”: these models lose the original generalization abilities of
SAM in the sense that they perform worse for segmentation tasks not represented
in the annotated fine-tuning set. To improve performance without forgetting, we
introduce a novel framework that combines high-quality annotated data with a
large unlabeled dataset. The framework relies on two methodological innovations. First, we quantify the uncertainty in the SAM pseudo labels associated
with the unlabeled data and leverage it to perform uncertainty-aware fine-tuning.
Second, we encode the type of segmentation task associated with each training
example using a task prompt to reduce ambiguity. We evaluated the proposed
Segmentation with Uncertainty Model (SUM) on a diverse test set consisting of 14
public benchmarks, where it achieves state-of-the-art results. Notably, our method
consistently surpasses SAM by 3-6 points in mean IoU and 4-7 in mean boundary IoU across point-prompt interactive segmentation rounds. Code is available
at https://github.com/Kangningthu/SUM

1

Introduction

The Segment Anything Model (SAM) [1] is a ground-breaking vision foundation model to perform
interactive binary segmentation, where the goal is to identify the pixels belonging to a target region
in an input image. The task is interactive, because the model accepts prompts from the user, which
specify the desired target region. These prompts are typically in the form of a set of points that should
be included or excluded from the target region, or a box or mask that encompasses it.
SAM is trained via a boot-strapping training procedure called a data engine on massive dataset
of unlabeled images. The key idea is to leverage model-generated pseudo-labels to annotate the
unlabeled data and use the pseudo-labels to further train the model. SAM is notable for its impressive
general-purpose capabilities, allowing it to segment a wide range of objects, parts, and visual
structures. Yet, the model encounters difficulties in achieving high-quality segmentation of intricate
structures and often produces imprecise segmentation boundaries. This is problematic for applications
such as image editing and automatic image annotation [2, 3], where accurate fine-grained predictions
are essential.
Our analysis in Appendix I reveals that inaccuracies within pseudo-labels are substantial, especially
in boundary regions. It has been reported in [1] that simply scaling up the amount of pseudo-labeled
data by 10x only achieves marginal improvement (around 0.5 mIoU). To improve segmentation
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

