EnOF-SNN: Training Accurate Spiking Neural
Networks via Enhancing the Output Feature

Yufei Guo∗, Weihang Peng∗ , Xiaode Liu, Yuanpei Chen, Yuhan Zhang, Xin Tong,
Zhou Jie, Zhe Ma†
Intelligent Science & Technology Academy of CASIC
yfguo@pku.edu.cn, pengweihang812@163.com, mazhe_thu@163.com

Abstract
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) have gained more and more interest as one of
the energy-efficient alternatives of conventional artificial neural networks (ANNs).
They exchange 0/1 spikes for processing information, thus most of the multiplications in networks can be replaced by additions. However, binary spike feature maps
will limit the expressiveness of the SNN and result in unsatisfactory performance
compared with ANNs. It is shown that a rich output feature representation (i.e.,
the feature vector before classifier) is beneficial to training an accurate model in
ANNs for classification. We wonder if it also does for SNNs and how to improve
the feature representation of the SNN. To this end, we materialize this idea in two
special designed methods for SNNs. First, inspired by some ANN-SNN methods that directly copy-paste the weight parameters from trained ANN with light
modification to homogeneous SNN can obtain a well-performed SNN, we use
rich information of the weight parameters from the trained ANN counterpart to
guide the feature representation learning of the SNN. In particular, we present the
SNN’s and ANN’s feature representation from the same input to ANN’s classifier to
product SNN’s and ANN’s outputs respectively and then align the feature with the
KL-divergence loss as in knowledge distillation methods, called LAF loss. It can be
seen as a novel and effective knowledge distillation method specially designed for
the SNN that comes from both the knowledge distillation and ANN-SNN methods.
Second, we replace the last Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) activation layer as
the ReLU activation layer to generate the output feature, thus a more powerful
SNN with full-precision feature representation can be achieved but with only a
little extra computation. Experimental results show that our method consistently
outperforms the current state-of-the-art algorithms on both popular non-spiking
static and neuromorphic datasets.

1

Introduction

Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become extremely popular due to their performing more and more well in diverse fields including pattern recognition He et al. (2016); Simonyan
& Zisserman (2014), object detection Girshick (2015); Ren et al. (2016); Ming et al. (2023), language
processing Chen et al. (2016), robotics Levine et al. (2015), and so on. However, these full-precision
CNN models make them power-hungry and tedious for real-world deployment. The spiking neural
network (SNN), which aims to mimic the behavior of the human brain, has become a promising
energy-efficient architecture to substitute for the CNN in some specific scenarios Guo et al. (2022c);
Rathi et al. (2020); Zhu et al. (2022); Wu et al. (2019a); Zhang et al. (2020); Jeffares et al. (2021);
∗
†

Equal Contributions.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

