Approximately Pareto-optimal Solutions for
Bi-Objective k-Clustering Problems

Anna Arutyunova
Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf
Düsseldorf, Germany
anna.arutyunova@hhu.de

Jan Eube
University of Bonn
Bonn, Germany
eube@cs.uni-bonn.de

Heiko Röglin
University of Bonn
Bonn, Germany
roeglin@cs.uni-bonn.de

Melanie Schmidt
Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf
Düsseldorf, Germany
mschmidt@hhu.de

Sarah Sturm
University of Bonn
Bonn, Germany
sturm@cs.uni-bonn.de

Julian Wargalla
Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf
Düsseldorf, Germany
julian.wargalla@hhu.de

Abstract
As a major unsupervised learning method, clustering has received a lot of attention
over multiple decades. The various clustering problems that have been studied
intensively include, e.g., the k-means problem and the k-center problem. However, in applications, it is common that good clusterings should optimize multiple
objectives (e.g., visualizing data on a map by clustering districts into areas that
are both geographically compact but also homogeneous with respect to the data).
We study combinations of different objectives, for example optimizing k-center
and k-means simultaneously or optimizing k-center with respect to two different
metrics. Usually these objectives are conflicting and cannot be optimized simultaneously, making it necessary to find trade-offs. We develop novel algorithms
for approximating the set of Pareto-optimal solutions for various combinations of
two objectives. Our algorithms achieve provable approximation guarantees and we
demonstrate in several experiments that the approximate Pareto front contains good
clusterings that cannot be found by considering one of the objectives separately.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a major unsupervised learning method that is used to find structure in data. It is often
described as the process of dividing objects into groups called clusters such that objects in the same
cluster are similar and objects in different clusters are dissimilar. There are several mathematical and
algorithmic ways to describe a good clustering, but two objectives that correspond to that description
for the case of metric clustering are the k-diameter problem and Single Linkage clustering.
In the k-diameter problem, we are given a point set P from a metric space and a number k and want
to find a partition of P into k clusters that minimizes the maximum diameter of any cluster. This
models the first problem: Finding clusters where the objects in the same cluster are similar. This
problem can be 2-approximated by well-known algorithms [30, 37]. But are approximate or even
optimal solutions for this problem automatically also good for the second half of the description,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

