SocraticLM: Exploring Socratic Personalized Teaching
with Large Language Models

Jiayu Liu1,2

Zhenya Huang1,2∗ Tong Xiao1,2 Jing Sha2 Jinze Wu2
Qi Liu1,2 Shijin Wang2 Enhong Chen1,2∗
1: University of Science and Technology of China
2: State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence
{jy251198,tongxiao2002}@mail.ustc.edu.cn;
{huangzhy,qiliuql,cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn;
{jingsha,jzwu4,sjwang3}@ifytek.com

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) are considered a crucial technology for advancing intelligent education since they exhibit the potential for an in-depth understanding of teaching scenarios and providing students with personalized guidance.
Nonetheless, current LLM-based application in personalized teaching predominantly follows a “Question-Answering” paradigm, where students are passively
provided with answers and explanations. In this paper, we propose SocraticLM,
which achieves a Socratic “Thought-Provoking” teaching paradigm that fulfills
the role of a real classroom teacher in actively engaging students in the thought
process required for genuine problem-solving mastery. To build SocraticLM, we
first propose a novel “Dean-Teacher-Student” multi-agent pipeline to construct a
new dataset, SocraTeach, which contains 35K meticulously crafted Socratic-style
multi-round (equivalent to 208K single-round) teaching dialogues grounded in
fundamental mathematical problems. Our dataset simulates authentic teaching scenarios, interacting with six representative types of simulated students with different
cognitive states, and strengthening four crucial teaching abilities. SocraticLM is
then fine-tuned on SocraTeach with three strategies balancing its teaching and
reasoning abilities. Moreover, we contribute a comprehensive evaluation system
encompassing five pedagogical dimensions for assessing the teaching quality of
LLMs. Extensive experiments verify that SocraticLM achieves significant improvements in the teaching performance, outperforming GPT4 by more than 12%. Our
dataset and code is available at https://github.com/Ljyustc/SocraticLM.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have achieved impressive results across a variety of tasks including
natural language processing, translation, and question-answering [54, 56, 59]. This draws widespread
attention to the potential of using LLMs to revolutionize intelligent education, especially personalized
teaching [2, 23, 39], mainly due to their two advantages. On one hand, LLMs have displayed humanlike mastery and proficiency of knowledge in fundamental subjects like math and physics [1, 48].
Therefore, they can effectively deliver subject-specific instructions to students like a real teacher. On
the other hand, LLMs exhibit exceptional understanding and adaptability to users’ (i.e., students’)
inputs. They are capable of comprehending diverse students’ demands, providing instant feedback,
and engaging in interactive pedagogy. Based on these two aspects, there has been a lot of research
∗

Corresponding Authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

