Truthfulness of Calibration Measures
Nika Haghtalab, Mingda Qiao, Kunhe Yang, and Eric Zhao
University of California, Berkeley
{nika,mingda.qiao,kunheyang,eric.zh}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study calibration measures in a sequential prediction setup. In addition to rewarding accurate predictions (completeness) and penalizing incorrect ones (soundness), an important desideratum of calibration measures is truthfulness, a minimal
condition for the forecaster not to be incentivized to exploit the system. Formally,
a calibration measure is truthful if the forecaster (approximately) minimizes the
expected penalty by predicting the conditional expectation of the next outcome,
given the prior distribution of outcomes. We conduct a taxonomy of existing calibration measures. Perhaps surprisingly, all of them are far from being truthful. We
introduce a new calibration measure termed the Subsampled Smooth Calibration
Error (SSCE), which is complete and sound, and under which truthful prediction is
optimal up to a constant multiplicative factor. In contrast, under existing calibration
measures, there are simple distributions on which a polylogarithmic (or even zero)
penalty is achievable, while truthful prediction leads to a polynomial penalty.

1

Introduction

Probability forecasting is a central prediction task to a wide range of domains and applications, such
as finance, meteorology, and medicine [MW84, DF83, WM68, JOKOM12, KSB21, VCV15, BF+ 02,
CAT16]. For forecasts to be useful, a common minimum requirement is that they are calibrated, i.e.,
the predictions are unbiased conditioned on the predicted value. Formally, for a sequence of T binary
events, a forecaster who predicts probabilities in [0, 1] is perfectly calibrated if for every α ∈ [0, 1],
among the time steps on which α is predicted, an α fraction of the outcomes is indeed 1. Since
perfectly calibrated forecasts are often unachievable, calibration measures have been introduced to
quantify some form of deviation from perfectly calibrated forecasts. Common examples of these
measures include the expected calibration error (ECE) [FV98], the smooth calibration error [KF08],
and the distance from calibration [BGHN23].
As these calibration measures are commonly used to evaluate the performance of forecasters, it
is important that their use encourages forecasters to incorporate the highest quality information
available to them (e.g., via their expert knowledge or side information) about the next outcome. This
desideratum, formally referred to as truthfulness, requires that a calibration measure incentivizes
the forecasters to predict truthfully when the true distribution of the next outcome is known to them.
Lack of truthfulness can have severe consequences: it serves as a poor measure of quality of forecasts,
tempts forecasters to make deliberately biased predictions in order to game the system, and erodes
trust in predictions provided by third-party forecasters. Given the importance of truthfulness, we set
out to identify calibration measures that demonstrate truthfulness.
While truthfulness of calibration measures has not been systematically investigated to date, evidence
of the lack of truthfulness of some calibration measures has emerged in recent literature. For example,
[FH21, QV21] noted that a forecaster can lower their ECE by predicting according to the past. This
observation was applied in the algorithm of [FH21] and motivated the “sidestepping” technique in
the lower bound proof of [QV21]. More recently, [QZ24] highlighted a large gap in the truthfulness
of a recently proposed calibration measure (called the distance from calibration [BGHN23]) by
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

