Operator World Models for Reinforcement Learning

Pietro Novelli
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
pietro.novelli@iit.it

Marco Pratticò
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
marco.prattico@iit.it

Massimiliano Pontil
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
AI Centre, University College London
massimiliano.pontil@iit.it

Carlo Ciliberto
AI Centre, University College London
c.ciliberto@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Policy Mirror Descent (PMD) is a powerful and theoretically sound methodology
for sequential decision-making. However, it is not directly applicable to Reinforcement Learning (RL) due to the inaccessibility of explicit action-value functions.
We address this challenge by introducing a novel approach based on learning a
world model of the environment using conditional mean embeddings. Leveraging
tools from operator theory we derive a closed-form expression of the action-value
function in terms of the world model via simple matrix operations. Combining
these estimators with PMD leads to POWR, a new RL algorithm for which we
prove convergence rates to the global optimum. Preliminary experiments in finite
and infinite state settings support the effectiveness of our method1 .

1

Introduction

In recent years, Reinforcement Learning (RL) [1] has seen significant progress, with methods capable
of tackling challenging applications such as robotic manipulation [2], playing Go [3] or Atari games
[4] and resource management [5] to name but a few. The central challenge in RL settings is to
balance the trade-off between exploration and exploitation, namely to improve upon previous policies
while gathering sufficient information about the environment dynamics. Several strategies have been
proposed to tackle this issue, such as Q-learning-based methods [4], policy optimization [6, 7] or
actor-critics [8] to name a few. In contrast, when full information about the environment is available,
sequential decision-making methods need only to focus on exploitation. Here, strategies such as
policy improvement or policy iteration [9] have been thoroughly studied from both the algorithmic
and theoretical standpoints. Within this context, the understanding of Policy Mirror Descent (PMD)
methods has recently enjoyed a significant step forward, with results guaranteeing convergence to a
global optimum with associated rates [10, 11, 12].
In their original formulation, PMD methods require explicit knowledge of the action-value functions for all policies generated during the optimization process. This is clearly inaccessible in RL
applications. Recently, [12] showed how PMD convergence rates can be extended to settings in
which inexact estimators of the action-value function are used (see [13] for a similar result from a
regret-based perspective). The resulting convergence rates, however, depend on uniform norm bounds
on the approximation error, usually guaranteed only under unrealistic and inefficient assumptions
such as the availability of a (perfect) simulator to be queried on arbitrary state-action pairs. Moreover,
these strategies require repeating this sampling/learning process for any policy generated by the
PMD algorithm, which is computationally expensive and demands numerous interactions with the
1

Code available at: github.com/CSML-IIT-UCL/powr

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

