4DBInfer: A 4D Benchmarking Toolbox for
Graph-Centric Predictive Modeling on RDBs

Minjie Wang1∗ , Quan Gan1∗ , David Wipf1 , Zhenkun Cai1 , Ning Li2† , Jianheng Tang3† ,
Yanlin Zhang4† , Zizhao Zhang5† , Zunyao Mao6† , Yakun Song2† , Yanbo Wang7† , Jiahang Li8† ,
Han Zhang2† , Guang Yang1 , Xiao Qin1 , Chuan Lei1 , Muhan Zhang7 , Weinan Zhang2 ,
Christos Faloutsos1,9 , Zheng Zhang1
1
2
Amazon Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
Fudan University 5 Tsinghua University 6 Southern University of Science and Technology
7
Peking University 8 Hong Kong Polytechnic University 9 Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Given a relational database (RDB), how can we predict missing column values
in some target table of interest? Although RDBs store vast amounts of rich,
informative data spread across interconnected tables, the progress of predictive
machine learning models as applied to such tasks arguably falls well behind advances in other domains such as computer vision or natural language processing.
This deficit stems, at least in part, from the lack of established/public RDB benchmarks as needed for training and evaluation purposes. As a result, related model
development thus far often defaults to tabular approaches trained on ubiquitous
single-table benchmarks, or on the relational side, graph-based alternatives such
as GNNs applied to a completely different set of graph datasets devoid of tabular characteristics. To more precisely target RDBs lying at the nexus of these
two complementary regimes, we explore a broad class of baseline models predicated on: (i) converting multi-table datasets into graphs using various strategies
equipped with efficient subsampling, while preserving tabular characteristics; and
(ii) trainable models with well-matched inductive biases that output predictions
based on these input subgraphs. Then, to address the dearth of suitable public benchmarks and reduce siloed comparisons, we assemble a diverse collection of (i) large-scale RDB datasets and (ii) coincident predictive tasks. From
a delivery standpoint, we operationalize the above four dimensions (4D) of exploration within a unified, scalable open-source toolbox called 4DBInfer; please see
https://github.com/awslabs/multi-table-benchmark/.

1

Introduction

Relational databases (RDBs) can be viewed as storing a collection of interrelated data spread across
multiple linked tables. Of vast and steadily growing importance, the market for RDB management
systems alone is expected to exceed $133 billion USD by 2028 [56]. Even so, while the machine
learning community has devoted considerable attention to predictive tasks involving single tables, or
so-called tabular modeling tasks [21, 49, 58], thus far efforts to widen the scope to handle multiple
tables and RDBs still lags behind, despite the seemingly enormous potential of doing so. With
respect to the latter, in many real-world scenarios critical features needed for accurately modeling a
∗
†

Equal contribution; correspondence to {minjiw,quagan}@amazon.com.
Work done during internship at Amazon.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

