Data-Driven Discovery of Dynamical Systems in
Pharmacology using Large Language Models

Samuel Holt∗
University of Cambridge
sih31@cam.ac.uk

Zhaozhi Qian∗†
Elm UK
zqian@elm.sa

James Weatherall
AstraZeneca

Tennison Liu
University of Cambridge
tl522@cam.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
The discovery of dynamical systems is crucial across a range of fields, including
pharmacology, epidemiology, and physical sciences. Accurate and interpretable
modeling of these systems is essential for understanding complex temporal processes, optimizing interventions, and minimizing adverse effects. In pharmacology,
for example, precise modeling of drug dynamics is vital to maximize therapeutic
efficacy while minimizing patient harm, as in chemotherapy. However, current
models, often developed by human experts, are limited by high cost, lack of scalability, and restriction to existing human knowledge. In this paper, we present
the Data-Driven Discovery (D3) framework, a novel approach leveraging Large
Language Models (LLMs) to iteratively discover and refine interpretable models of
dynamical systems, demonstrated here with pharmacological applications. Unlike
traditional methods, D3 enables the LLM to propose, acquire, and integrate new
features, validate, and compare dynamical systems models, uncovering new insights into pharmacokinetics. Experiments on a pharmacokinetic Warfarin dataset
reveal that D3 identifies a new plausible model that is well-fitting, highlighting its
potential for precision dosing in clinical applications.

1

Introduction

The discovery of dynamical systems models plays a fundamental role across various domains, including pharmacology, epidemiology, and physical systems. In pharmacology, pharmacokinetic (PK)
models are essential for understanding and predicting the time course of drug absorption, distribution,
metabolism, and excretion in the body, which is crucial for optimizing therapeutic efficacy, minimizing toxicity, and personalized treatment regimens in diseases such as cancer, cardiovascular disorders,
and infectious diseases [Gabrielsson and Weiner, 2001, Hedaya, 2012]. For example, cardiovascular
disorders requiring Warfarin therapy affect tens of millions of individuals globally [Lee and Klein,
2013], highlighting the critical need for superior models to understand the dynamic impact of drugs
and precision dosing, thereby assisting both doctors and patients.
The goal of PK modeling is to discover an underlying closed-form ordinary differential equation
(ODE) f from a dataset of observed patient trajectories. This problem is of significant interest to
the machine learning (ML) community, as evidenced by previous non-interpretable ML modeling
approaches aimed at developing better PK models [Chan and van der Schaar, 2022]. Such datasets are
collected from expensive human clinical trials, necessitating the careful selection of which features
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Work done as a Postdoc at the University of Cambridge.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

