Visual Data Diagnosis and Debiasing
with Concept Graphs
Rwiddhi Chakraborty1,2⇤ Yinong (Oliver) Wang1 Jialu Gao1
Cheng Zhang1,3 Fernando De la Torre1
1

Runkai Zheng1

Carnegie Mellon University 2 UiT The Arctic University of Norway 3 Texas A&M University

Abstract
The widespread success of deep learning models today is owed to the curation
of extensive datasets significant in size and complexity. However, such models
frequently pick up inherent biases in the data during the training process, leading
to unreliable predictions. Diagnosing and debiasing datasets is thus a necessity
to ensure reliable model performance. In this paper, we present C ON B IAS, a
novel framework for diagnosing and mitigating Concept co-occurrence Biases
in visual datasets. C ON B IAS represents visual datasets as knowledge graphs of
concepts, enabling meticulous analysis of spurious concept co-occurrences to
uncover concept imbalances across the whole dataset. Moreover, we show that by
employing a novel clique-based concept balancing strategy, we can mitigate these
imbalances, leading to enhanced performance on downstream tasks. Extensive
experiments show that data augmentation based on a balanced concept distribution
augmented by C ON B IAS improves generalization performance across multiple
datasets compared to state-of-the-art methods.2

1

Introduction

Over the last decade we have witnessed an unparalleled growth in the capabilities of deep learning
models across a wide range of tasks, such as image classification [17, 47, 7], object detection [41, 55],
semantic segmentation [20, 26, 43], and so on. More recently, with the introduction of large multimodal models, these capabilities have improved further [25, 15]. However, such models, while
demonstrating impressive performance on a wide range of tasks, have been shown to be biased in their
predictions [30, 13]. These biases come in various forms, based in texture [14], shape [39, 32], object
co-occurrence [51, 52, 48], and so on. In addition to exploring model biases, dataset diagnosis, or
evaluating biases directly within the dataset, is particularly crucial as large datasets available today are
beyond the scope of human evaluation, owing to their size and complexity. For example, ImageNet
[6], a widely used dataset in deep learning literature, is known to have thousands of erroneous labels
and a lack of diversity in its class hierarchy [33, 58]. Other popular datasets such as MS-COCO [23]
and CelebA [27], have problematic social biases with respect to gendered captions and prejudicial
attributes of people from different races. As a result, frameworks that effectively diagnose and debias
these datasets are sought.
While multiple works exist in the categorization and exploration of biases in visual data [9, 30], an
end-to-end pipeline incorporating both diagnosis and debiasing has received relatively scant attention.
ALIA [8] is the closest and most recent work exploring such a data-augmentation-based approach to
debiasing, but it has two shortcomings - first, it does not diagnose the dataset which it aims to debias.
Without such a diagnosis, it is challenging to identify the biases to be mitigated in the first place.
⇤

2

Correspondence to: rwiddhi.chakraborty@uit.no
Code: https://github.com/rwchakra/conbias

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

