Fair Wasserstein Coresets
Zikai Xiong∗

Niccolò Dalmasso†

Daniele Magazzeni†

Shubham Sharma†

Freddy Lecue†

Tucker Balch†

Manuela Veloso†

Vamsi K. Potluru†

Abstract
Data distillation and coresets have emerged as popular approaches to generate
a smaller representative set of samples for downstream learning tasks to handle
large-scale datasets. At the same time, machine learning is being increasingly
applied to decision-making processes at a societal level, making it imperative
for modelers to address inherent biases towards subgroups present in the data.
While current approaches focus on creating fair synthetic representative samples
by optimizing local properties relative to the original samples, their impact on
downstream learning processes has yet to be explored. In this work, we present fair
Wasserstein coresets (FWC), a novel coreset approach which generates fair synthetic
representative samples along with sample-level weights to be used in downstream
learning tasks. FWC uses an efficient majority minimization algorithm to minimize
the Wasserstein distance between the original dataset and the weighted synthetic
samples while enforcing demographic parity. We show that an unconstrained
version of FWC is equivalent to Lloyd’s algorithm for k-medians and k-means
clustering. Experiments conducted on both synthetic and real datasets show that
FWC: (i) achieves a competitive fairness-utility tradeoff in downstream models
compared to existing approaches, (ii) improves downstream fairness when added
to the existing training data and (iii) can be used to reduce biases in predictions
from large language models (GPT-3.5 and GPT-4).

1

Introduction

In the last decade, the rapid pace of technological advancement has provided the ability of collecting,
storing and processing massive amounts of data from multiple sources [65]. As the volume of
data continues to surge, it often surpasses both the available computational resources as well as the
capacity of machine learning algorithms. In response to this limitation, dataset distillation approaches
aim to reduce the amount of data by creating a smaller, yet representative, set of samples; see [80, 40]
for comprehensive reviews on the topic. Among those approaches, coresets provide a weighted subset
of the original data that achieve similar performance to the original dataset in (usually) a specific
machine learning task, such as clustering [26, 21], Bayesian inference [11], online learning [9] and
classification [16], among others.
In tandem with these developments, the adoption of machine learning techniques has seen a surge in
multiple decision-making processes that affect society at large [69, 81]. This proliferation of machine
learning applications has highlighted the need to mitigate inherent biases in the data, as these biases
can significantly impact the equity of machine learning models and their decisions [14]. Among many
definitions of algorithmic fairness, demographic parity is one of the most prominently used metric
[29], enforcing the distribution of an outcome of a machine learning model to not differ dramatically
across different subgroups in the data.
∗

Operations Research Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, zikai@mit.edu
J.P.Morgan
AI
Research,
{niccolo.dalmasso, shubham.x2.sharma, freddy.lecue,
daniele.magazzeni, vamsi.k.potluru, tucker.balch, manuela.veloso}@jpmchase.com
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

