VisionLLM v2: An End-to-End Generalist Multimodal
Large Language Model for Hundreds of
Vision-Language Tasks

Jiannan Wu∗2,1 , Muyan Zhong∗3 , Sen Xing∗3 , Zeqiang Lai∗4 , Zhaoyang Liu∗5,1 , Zhe Chen∗6,1 ,
Wenhai Wang∗7,1 , Xizhou Zhu3,8,1 , Lewei Lu8,1 , Tong Lu6 , Ping Luo2 , Yu Qiao1 , Jifeng Dai†3,1
1
OpenGVLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 The University of Hong Kong 3 Tsinghua University
4
Beijing Institute of Technology 5 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
6
Nanjing University 7 The Chinese University of Hong Kong 8 SenseTime Research
https://github.com/OpenGVLab/VisionLLM

Abstract
We present VisionLLM v2, an end-to-end generalist multimodal large model
(MLLM) that unifies visual perception, understanding, and generation within a
single framework. Unlike traditional MLLMs limited to text output, VisionLLM
v2 significantly broadens its application scope. It excels not only in conventional
visual question answering (VQA) but also in open-ended, cross-domain vision
tasks such as object localization, pose estimation, and image generation and editing.
To this end, we propose a new information transmission mechanism termed “super
link”, as a medium to connect MLLM with task-specific decoders. It not only
allows flexible transmission of task information and gradient feedback between the
MLLM and multiple downstream decoders but also effectively resolves training
conflicts in multi-tasking scenarios. In addition, to support the diverse range of
tasks, we carefully collected and combed training data from hundreds of public
vision and vision-language tasks. In this way, our model can be joint-trained
end-to-end on hundreds of vision language tasks and generalize to these tasks using
a set of shared parameters through different user prompts, achieving performance
comparable to task-specific models. We believe VisionLLM v2 will offer a new
perspective on the generalization of MLLMs.

1

Introduction

Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) [8, 97, 223, 107, 105, 140, 14, 169, 34, 33] have
recently made significant progress, demonstrating outstanding performance across various visionlanguage tasks, even in scenarios requiring complex understanding and reasoning. However, a notable
limitation is that current MLLM outputs are in text form, which significantly constrains their capacity
to represent structured or visual information. Some researchers [140, 182, 181, 180] have expanded
the text-based output formats of MLLMs to better align with downstream tasks. While these efforts
have shown promise, they have not fully addressed practical needs such as dense object detection,
pose estimation, and image generation.
To overcome this limitation, a line of research [116, 187, 166, 111, 117, 47] enhances the capabilities
of MLLMs by transmitting task information to tools via text messages, as illustrated in Figure 1(a).
Despite these advances, these text-based methods are restricted by the information that text can
convey. They are not end-to-end, and the feedback gradient from the tools cannot be relayed back
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding to Jifeng Dai <daijifeng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

