Theoretical guarantees in KL for Diffusion Flow
Matching

Marta Gentiloni Silveri
École polytechnique
Route de Saclay, 91120 Palaiseau, France
marta.gentiloni-silveri@polytechnique.edu
Giovanni Conforti
Università degli Studi di Padova
Via Trieste, 63, 35131 Padova, Italia
giovanni.conforti@math.unipd.it

Alain Durmus
École polytechnique
Route de Saclay, 91120 Palaiseau, France
alain.durmus@polytechnique.edu

Abstract
Flow Matching (FM) (also referred to as stochastic interpolants or rectified flows)
stands out as a class of generative models that aims to bridge in finite time the
target distribution ν ⋆ with an auxiliary distribution µ, leveraging a fixed coupling π
and a bridge which can either be deterministic or stochastic. These two ingredients
define a path measure which can then be approximated by learning the drift of its
Markovian projection. The main contribution of this paper is to provide relatively
mild assumptions on ν ⋆ , µ and π to obtain non-asymptotics guarantees for Diffusion Flow Matching (DFM) models using as bridge the conditional distribution
associated with the Brownian motion. More precisely, we establish bounds on the
Kullback-Leibler divergence between the target distribution and the one generated
by such DFM models under moment conditions on the score of ν ⋆ , µ and π, and a
standard L2 -drift-approximation error assumption.

1

Introduction

A significant task in statistics and machine learning currently revolves around generating samples
from a target distribution that is only accessible via a dataset. To tackle this challenge, generative
models have become prominent as effective computational tools for learning to simulate new data.
Essentially, these models involve learning a generator capable of mapping a source distribution into
new approximate samples from the target distribution.
One of the most productive approaches to generative modeling is based on deterministic and stochastic transport dynamics, that connect a target distribution with a base distribution. Typically, the target
distribution represents the data set from which we want to generate new samples, while the base distribution is one that can be easily simulated or sampled. Regarding the dynamics, they correspond to
SDEs Stochastic Differential Equations (SDEs) or Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs), where the
drift (for SDEs) or velocity field (for ODEs) is determined by solving a regression problem. This regression problem is usually addressed with appropriate neural networks and related training techniques
[SDWMG15a, OFLR21, FJNO20, DBMP19, CLT22, DBTHD21, SE19, LYB+ 23, GCBD19].
Among these methods, score-base generative models (SGMs) and in particular diffusion models based
on score matching [SDWMG15b, HJA20, SE20, SE19] was an important milestone. In a nutshell,
these models involve transforming an arbitrary density into a standard Gaussian model and consists
in learning the drift of the corresponding reversal process. More precisely, the idea is to first consider
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

