An Offline Adaptation Framework for Constrained
Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning

Qian Lin1 , Zongkai Liu1 , Danying Mo1 , Chao Yu1,2,3†
1
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
MoE Key Laboratory of Information Technology, Guangzhou, China
{linq67,liuzk,mody3}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, yuchao3@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
In recent years, significant progress has been made in multi-objective reinforcement
learning (RL) research, which aims to balance multiple objectives by incorporating
preferences for each objective. In most existing studies, specific preferences must
be provided during deployment to indicate the desired policies explicitly. However,
designing these preferences depends heavily on human prior knowledge, which is
typically obtained through extensive observation of high-performing demonstrations with expected behaviors. In this work, we propose a simple yet effective
offline adaptation framework for multi-objective RL problems without assuming
handcrafted target preferences, but only given several demonstrations to implicitly
indicate the preferences of expected policies. Additionally, we demonstrate that
our framework can naturally be extended to meet constraints on safety-critical
objectives by utilizing safe demonstrations, even when the safety thresholds are
unknown. Empirical results on offline multi-objective and safe tasks demonstrate
the capability of our framework to infer policies that align with real preferences
while meeting the constraints implied by the provided demonstrations.

1

Introduction

In the standard reinforcement learning (RL) setting, the primary goal is to obtain a policy that
maximizes a cumulative scalar reward [Sutton and Barto, 2018]. However, in many real-world
applications involving multiple objectives, a desired policy must not only strike a balance among
potentially conflicting objectives but also consider the constraints imposed on specific safety-critical
objectives. Such requirements motivate the research of Multi-objective RL (MORL) [Liu et al., 2014,
Mossalam et al., 2016] and safe RL [Gu et al., 2022, Achiam et al., 2017]. In addition to reward
maximization, the former aims to enable policies that cater to a target preference indicating the
trade-off between competing objectives, while the latter focuses on reducing the cost measures of
learned policies within a given safety threshold.
Despite the development of meticulous and effective mechanisms to achieve these goals, most existing
MORL and safe RL algorithms rely on predefined target preferences or safety thresholds. These elements need to be carefully designed by human experts with prior knowledge, generalized from a large
number of demonstrations through observation. Taking autonomous driving as an example, defining
aggressive, stable, and conservative strategies through different preferences between minimizing
energy consumption and increasing driving speed may require extensive human participation, which
means that researchers need to categorize driving data into different styles based on human experience
and observe the energy consumption-speed ratio to estimate appropriate preference weights and
†

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

