BetterBench: Assessing AI Benchmarks, Uncovering
Issues, and Establishing Best Practices

Anka Reuel ∗
Stanford University

Amelia Hardy∗
Stanford University

Chandler Smith
Northeastern University

Malcolm Hardy
Stanford University

Max Lamparth
Stanford University

Mykel J. Kochenderfer
Stanford University

Abstract
AI models are increasingly prevalent in high-stakes environments, necessitating
thorough assessment of their capabilities and risks. Benchmarks are popular for
measuring these attributes and for comparing model performance, tracking progress,
and identifying weaknesses in foundation and non-foundation models. They can
inform model selection for downstream tasks and influence policy initiatives.
However, not all benchmarks are the same: their quality depends on their design
and usability. In this paper, we develop an assessment framework considering 46
best practices across an AI benchmark’s lifecycle and evaluate 24 AI benchmarks
against it. We find that there exist large quality differences and that commonly used
benchmarks suffer from significant issues. We further find that most benchmarks
do not report statistical significance of their results nor allow for their results to be
easily replicated. To support benchmark developers in aligning with best practices,
we provide a checklist for minimum quality assurance based on our assessment. We
also develop a living repository of benchmark assessments to support benchmark
comparability, accessible at betterbench.stanford.edu.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

16

17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30

1

Introduction

AI systems are rapidly advancing and proliferating [58]. The increasing integration of AI, and in
particular foundation models (FMs) [14], into decision-making systems has significantly amplified
its impact and has showcased both benefits [9, 39, 57, 66] and risks [2, 75, 44, 86, 45, 30, 70]. Given
the importance of correctly assessing a model’s capabilities and potential harms, AI evaluation is
an essential discipline [15]. Current evaluation approaches include both internally (e.g., private
testing on proprietary data) and externally developed techniques (e.g., scoring on public benchmarks)
[74, 27, 73, 48, 32].
Following the work of [67], we define a benchmark “as a particular combination of a dataset or sets
of datasets [...], and a metric, conceptualized as representing one or more specific tasks or sets of
abilities, picked up by a community of researchers as a shared framework for the comparison of
methods” [67]. Using benchmarks to facilitate comparison, measure performance, track progress, and
identify weaknesses has become a standard practice. For example, benchmarks are widely used by
model developers to report performance and compare models upon release [3, 8], and as part of policy
initiatives to support third-party model evaluations, such as as part of the UK AI Safety Institute’s
∗

(*) denotes equal contribution. Corrspeonding authors: anka.reuel@stanford.edu, ahardy@stanford.edu

Submitted to the 38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets
and Benchmarks. Do not distribute.

