Identifying Selections
for Unsupervised Subtask Discovery

Yiwen Qiu
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
yiwenq@andrew.cmu.edu

Yujia Zheng
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
yujiazh2@andrew.cmu.edu

Kun Zhang∗
Carnegie Mellon University, MBZUAI
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
kunz1@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
When solving long-horizon tasks, it is intriguing to decompose the high-level
task into subtasks. Decomposing experiences into reusable subtasks can improve
data efficiency, accelerate policy generalization, and in general provide promising
solutions to multi-task reinforcement learning and imitation learning problems.
However, the concept of subtasks is not sufficiently understood and modeled yet,
and existing works often overlook the true structure of the data generation process:
subtasks are the results of a selection mechanism on actions, rather than possible
underlying confounders or intermediates. Specifically, we provide a theory to
identify, and experiments to verify the existence of selection variables in such
data. These selections serve as subgoals that indicate subtasks and guide policy. In
light of this idea, we develop a sequential non-negative matrix factorization (seqNMF) method to learn these subgoals and extract meaningful behavior patterns as
subtasks. Our empirical results on a challenging Kitchen environment demonstrate
that the learned subtasks effectively enhance the generalization to new tasks in
multi-task imitation learning scenarios. The codes are provided at this link.

1

Introduction

Being able to reuse learned skills from past experiences and conduct hierarchical planning (LeCun
[2022], Hafner et al. [2022], Gehring et al. [2021]) is crucial for tackling real-world challenging tasks
such as driving: it is meaningful to let higher levels of abstractions perform longer-term prediction
(of subgoals), while lower levels of policy perform shorter-term actions. The concept of breaking
down a task into subtasks1 can be illustrated through the example of commuting to New York.
You are at home, and the overall task, commuting to New York, can be decomposed into
smaller, manageable subtasks. This includes subtasks like walking out of the house,
getting into the car, driving and catching an airplane.
Even more
granular, each of these subtasks can be further broken down into smaller actions:
walking out of the house involves standing up, grabbing the luggage and
walking to the door. This method of decomposing a task into subtasks fits our intuition of
how humans perform actions and helps to simplify complex tasks, making them more manageable.
∗

Corresponding author.
We predominately use the concept of subtask in this paper, which has similar semantics as that of option or
skill in other literature.
1

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

