Neglected Hessian component explains mysteries in
sharpness regularization

Yann N. Dauphin
Google DeepMind
ynd@google.com

Atish Agarwala
Google DeepMind
thetish@google.com

Hossein Mobahi
Google DeepMind
hmobahi@google.com

Abstract
Recent work has shown that methods that regularize second order information like
SAM can improve generalization in deep learning. Seemingly similar methods
like weight noise and gradient penalties often fail to provide such benefits. We
investigate this inconsistency and reveal its connection to the the structure of
the Hessian of the loss. Specifically, its decomposition into the positive semidefinite Gauss-Newton matrix and an indefinite matrix, which we call the Nonlinear
Modeling Error (NME) matrix. Previous studies have largely overlooked the
significance of the NME in their analysis for various reasons. However, we provide
empirical and theoretical evidence that the NME is important to the performance
of gradient penalties and explains their sensitivity to activation functions. We
also provide evidence that the difference in regularization performance between
gradient penalties and weight noise can be explained by the NME. Our findings
emphasize the necessity of considering the NME in both experimental design and
theoretical analysis for sharpness regularization.

1

Introduction

There is a long history in machine learning of trying to use information about loss landscape geometry
to improve gradient-based learning. This has ranged from attempts to use the Fisher information
matrix to improve optimization [1], to trying to regularize the Hessian to improve generalization [2].
More recently, first order methods which implicitly use or penalize second order quantities have been
used successfully, including the sharpness aware minimization (SAM) algorithm [3]. On the other
hand, there are many approaches to use second order information which once seemed promising
but have had limited success [4]. These include methods like weight noise [5] and gradient norm
penalties [6, 7, 8, 9, 10], which have shown mixed success.
Part of the difficulty of using second order information is the difficulty of working with the Hessian
of the loss. With the large number of parameters in deep learning architectures, as well as the large
number of datapoints, many algorithms use stochastic methods to approximate statistics of the Hessian
[1, 11]. However, there is a conceptual difficulty as well which arises from the complicated structure
of the Hessian itself. Methods often involve approximating the Hessian via the Gauss-Newton (GN)
matrix - which is PSD for convex losses. This is beneficial for conditioners which try to maintain
monotonicity of gradient flow via a PSD transformation of the gradient. Thus indefinite part of the
Hessian is often neglected due to its complexity.
In this work we show that it is important to consider both parts of the Hessian to understand
certain methods that use second order information for regularization. We study the non-PSD part
of the Hessian, which we call the Nonlinear Modeling Error (NME). In contrast to commonly
held assumptions, this work reveals the NME is key to understanding two previously unexplained
phenomena in sharpness regularization:
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

