AlterMOMA: Fusion Redundancy Pruning for
Camera-LiDAR Fusion Models with Alternative
Modality Masking

Shiqi Sun∗1 , Yantao Lu†∗1 , Ning Liu∗2 , Bo Jiang3 , Jinchao Chen1 , Ying Zhang1
1
Department of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
Midea Group
3
Didi Chuxing
{shiqisun, yantaolu, cjc, ying_zhang}@nwpu.edu.cn
ningliu1220@gmail.com
boj.horizon@gmail.com

Abstract
Camera-LiDAR fusion models significantly enhance perception performance in
autonomous driving. The fusion mechanism leverages the strengths of each modality while minimizing their weaknesses. Moreover, in practice, camera-LiDAR
fusion models utilize pre-trained backbones for efficient training. However, we
argue that directly loading single-modal pre-trained camera and LiDAR backbones
into camera-LiDAR fusion models introduces similar feature redundancy across
modalities due to the nature of the fusion mechanism. Unfortunately, existing
pruning methods are developed explicitly for single-modal models, and thus, they
struggle to effectively identify these specific redundant parameters in cameraLiDAR fusion models. In this paper, to address the issue above on camera-LiDAR
fusion models, we propose a novelty pruning framework Alternative Modality
Masking Pruning (AlterMOMA), which employs alternative masking on each
modality and identifies the redundant parameters. Specifically, when one modality
parameters are masked (deactivated), the absence of features from the masked
backbone compels the model to reactivate previous redundant features of the other
modality backbone. Therefore, these redundant features and relevant redundant
parameters can be identified via the reactivation process. The redundant parameters
can be pruned by our proposed importance score evaluation function, Alternative
Evaluation (AlterEva), which is based on the observation of the loss changes when
certain modality parameters are activated and deactivated. Extensive experiments
on the nuScenes and KITTI datasets encompassing diverse tasks, baseline models,
and pruning algorithms showcase that AlterMOMA outperforms existing pruning
methods, attaining state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

Camera-LiDAR fusion models are prevalent in autonomous driving, effectively leveraging the
sensor properties, including the accurate geometric data from LiDAR point clouds and the rich
semantic context from camera images [1, 2], providing a more comprehensive understanding of the
environment [3, 4]. However, the exponential increase in parameter counts due to fusion architectures
introduces significant computational costs, especially when deploying these systems on resource∗
†

Joint first authorship. Either author can be cited first.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

