Perceptual Fairness in Image Restoration

Guy Ohayon
Faculty of Computer Science
Technion–Israel Institute of Technology
ohayonguy@cs.technion.ac.il
Michael Elad
Faculty of Computer Science
Technion–Israel Institute of Technology
elad@cs.technion.ac.il

Tomer Michaeli
Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Technion–Israel Institute of Technology
tomer.m@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Fairness in image restoration tasks is the desire to treat different sub-groups of
images equally well. Existing definitions of fairness in image restoration are highly
restrictive. They consider a reconstruction to be a correct outcome for a group (e.g.,
women) only if it falls within the group’s set of ground truth images (e.g., natural
images of women); otherwise, it is considered entirely incorrect. Consequently,
such definitions are prone to controversy, as errors in image restoration can manifest
in various ways. In this work we offer an alternative approach towards fairness
in image restoration, by considering the Group Perceptual Index (GPI), which we
define as the statistical distance between the distribution of the group’s ground truth
images and the distribution of their reconstructions. We assess the fairness of an
algorithm by comparing the GPI of different groups, and say that it achieves perfect
Perceptual Fairness (PF) if the GPIs of all groups are identical. We motivate and
theoretically study our new notion of fairness, draw its connection to previous ones,
and demonstrate its utility on state-of-the-art face image restoration algorithms.

1

Introduction

Tremendous efforts have been dedicated to understanding, formalizing, and mitigating fairness issues
in various tasks, including classification [17, 22, 29, 81, 94, 95], regression [2, 7, 8, 12, 43, 65],
clustering [4–6, 13, 70, 73], recommendation [25, 26, 46, 52, 92], and generative modeling [15,
24, 44, 66, 74, 75, 96]. Fairness definitions remain largely controversial, yet broadly speaking,
they typically advocate for independence (or conditional independence) between sensitive attributes
(ethnicity, gender, etc.) and the predictions of an algorithm. In classification tasks, for instance, the
input data carries sensitive attributes, which are often required to be statistically independent of the
predictions (e.g., deciding whether to grant a loan should not be influenced by the applicant’s gender).
Similarly, in text-to-image generation, fairness often advocates for statistical independence between
the sensitive attributes of the generated images and the text instruction used [24]. For instance,
the prompt “An image of a firefighter” should result in images featuring people of various
genders, ethnicities, etc.
While fairness is commonly associated with the desire to eliminate the dependencies between sensitive
attributes and the predictions, fairness in image restoration tasks (e.g., denoising, super-resolution)
has a fundamentally different meaning. In image restoration, both the input and the output carry
sensitive attributes, and the goal is to preserve the attributes of different groups equally well [34].
But what exactly constitutes such a preservation of sensitive attributes? Let us denote by x, y, and x̂
the unobserved source image, its degraded version (e.g., noisy, blurry), and the reconstruction of x
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

