Adaptive Randomized Smoothing: Certified
Adversarial Robustness for Multi-Step Defences

Saiyue Lyu1∗ , Shadab Shaikh1∗ , Frederick Shpilevskiy1∗ , Evan Shelhamer2 , Mathias Lécuyer1
1
University of British Columbia, 2 Google DeepMind
{saiyuel, shadabs3, fshpil}@cs.ubc.ca, shelhamer@deepmind.com, mathias.lecuyer@ubc.ca
∗

equal contribution

Abstract
We propose Adaptive Randomized Smoothing (ARS) to certify the predictions
of our test-time adaptive models against adversarial examples. ARS extends
the analysis of randomized smoothing using f -Differential Privacy to certify
the adaptive composition of multiple steps. For the first time, our theory covers the sound adaptive composition of general and high-dimensional functions
of noisy inputs. We instantiate ARS on deep image classification to certify
predictions against adversarial examples of bounded L∞ norm. In the L∞
threat model, ARS enables flexible adaptation through high-dimensional inputdependent masking. We design adaptivity benchmarks, based on CIFAR-10
and CelebA, and show that ARS improves standard test accuracy by 1 to 15%
points. On ImageNet, ARS improves certified test accuracy by up to 1.6%
points over standard RS without adaptivity. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/ubc-systopia/adaptive-randomized-smoothing.

1

Introduction

Despite impressive accuracy, deep learning models still show a worrying susceptibility to adversarial
attacks. Such attacks have been shown for a large number of tasks and models (Costa et al., 2023;
Chakraborty et al., 2018), including areas where security and safety are critical such as fraud detection
(Pumsirirat and Liu, 2018) or autonomous driving (Cao et al., 2021).
Several rigorous defences have been proposed to certify robustness. Randomized Smoothing (RS)
(Lécuyer et al., 2019; Cohen et al., 2019) does so by averaging predictions over noisy versions of
the input at test time, and as such can scale to large deep learning models. However, RS has its
limitations: it is inflexible and either degrades accuracy or only certifies against small attacks.
To address these shortcomings and improve robustness, there has been a recent push to develop
defences that adapt to inputs at test time Croce et al. (2022), including for RS (Alfarra et al., 2022a;
Súkeník et al., 2021; Hong et al., 2022). Most such adaptive defences are heuristic, unproven, and
subject to improved attacks (Croce et al., 2022; Alfarra et al., 2022a; Hong et al., 2022), running the
risk of reverting to a hopeless cat and mouse game with attackers (Athalye et al., 2018; Tramer et al.,
2020), or only provide limited adaptivity (Súkeník et al., 2021; Hong et al., 2022) and gain (§5).
We (re)connect RS to Differential Privacy (DP), after its abandonment for a tighter analysis via
hypothesis testing (Cohen et al., 2019), and introduce Adaptive Randomized Smoothing (ARS) to
provide test-time adaptivity while preserving rigorous bounds. Specifically, we analyze RS through
the lens of f -Differential Privacy (f -DP), and use this connection to leverage a key strength of DP:
the end-to-end analysis of multi-step adaptive computation using composition results (§2).
We use ARS to design two-step defence against L∞ adversaries on image classification (Figure 1),
which is a challenging setting for RS Blum et al. (2020). The first step computes an input mask that
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

