Learning Better Representations From Less Data For
Propositional Satisfiability

Mohamed Ghanem∗ Frederik Schmitt∗ Julian Siber∗ Bernd Finkbeiner∗
∗
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
{mohamed.ghanem,frederik.schmitt,julian.siber,finkbeiner}@cispa.de

Abstract
Training neural networks on NP-complete problems typically demands very large
amounts of training data and often needs to be coupled with computationally
expensive symbolic verifiers to ensure output correctness. In this paper, we
present NeuRes, a neuro-symbolic approach to address both challenges for propositional satisfiability, being the quintessential NP-complete problem. By combining
certificate-driven training and expert iteration, our model learns better representations than models trained for classification only, with a much higher data efficiency
– requiring orders of magnitude less training data. NeuRes employs propositional
resolution as a proof system to generate proofs of unsatisfiability and to accelerate
the process of finding satisfying truth assignments, exploring both possibilities in
parallel. To realize this, we propose an attention-based architecture that autoregressively selects pairs of clauses from a dynamic formula embedding to derive new
clauses. Furthermore, we employ expert iteration whereby model-generated proofs
progressively replace longer teacher proofs as the new ground truth. This enables
our model to reduce a dataset of proofs generated by an advanced solver by ∼32%
after training on it with no extra guidance. This shows that NeuRes is not limited
by the optimality of the teacher algorithm owing to its self-improving workflow.
We show that our model achieves far better performance than NeuroSAT in terms
of both correctly classified and proven instances.

1

Introduction

Boolean satisfiability (SAT) is a fundamental problem in computer science. For theory, this stems
from SAT being the first problem proven NP-complete [13]. For practice, this is due to many highlyoptimized SAT solvers being used as flexible reasoning engines in a variety of tasks such as model
checking [12, 47], software verification [17], planning [27], and mathematical proof search [24].
Recently, SAT has also served as a litmus test for assessing the symbolic reasoning capabilities of
neural models and a promising domain for neuro-symbolic systems [43, 42, 1, 10, 36]. So far, neural
models only provide limited, if any, justification for unsatisfiability predictions. NeuroCore [42],
for example, predicts an unsatisfiable core, the verification of which can be as hard as solving the
original problem. No certificates at all or certificates that are hard to check limit neural methods
in a domain where correctness is critical and prevents close integrations with symbolic methods.
Therefore, we propose a neuro-symbolic model that utilizes resolution to solve SAT problems by
generating easy-to-check certificates.
A resolution proof is a sequence of case distinctions, each involving two clauses, that ends in the
empty clause (falsum). This technique can also be used to prove satisfiability by exhaustively
applying it until no further new resolution steps are possible and the empty clause has not been
derived. Generating such a proof is an interesting problem from a neuro-symbolic perspective because
unlike other discrete combinatorial problems that have been considered before [46, 7, 28, 30, 11], it
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

