CondTSF: One-line Plugin of Dataset Condensation
for Time Series Forecasting

Jianrong Ding1,2∗ , Zhanyu Liu1∗ , Guanjie Zheng1† , Haiming Jin1 , Linghe Kong1
1

School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Zhiyuan College, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{rafaelding,zhyliu00,gjzheng,jinhaiming,linghe.kong}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Dataset condensation is a newborn technique that generates a small dataset that
can be used in training deep neural networks (DNNs) to lower storage and training
costs. The objective of dataset condensation is to ensure that the model trained with
the synthetic dataset can perform comparably to the model trained with full datasets.
However, existing methods predominantly concentrate on classification tasks, posing challenges in their adaptation to time series forecasting (TS-forecasting). This
challenge arises from disparities in the evaluation of synthetic data. In classification, the synthetic data is considered well-distilled if the model trained with the full
dataset and the model trained with the synthetic dataset yield identical labels for
the same input, regardless of variations in output logits distribution. Conversely, in
TS-forecasting, the effectiveness of synthetic data distillation is determined by the
distance between predictions of the two models. The synthetic data is deemed welldistilled only when all data points within the predictions are similar. Consequently,
TS-forecasting has a more rigorous evaluation methodology compared to classification. To mitigate this gap, we theoretically analyze the optimization objective
of dataset condensation for TS-forecasting and propose a new one-line plugin of
dataset condensation for TS-forecasting designated as Dataset Condensation for
Time Series Forecasting (CondTSF) based on our analysis. Plugging CondTSF
into previous dataset condensation methods facilitates a reduction in the distance
between the predictions of the model trained with the full dataset and the model
trained with the synthetic dataset, thereby enhancing performance. We conduct
extensive experiments on eight commonly used time series datasets. CondTSF consistently improves the performance of all previous dataset condensation methods
across all datasets, particularly at low condensing ratios.

1

Introduction

Dataset condensation is a strategy for mitigating the computational demands of training large models
on extensive datasets. It is pointed out by previous works[15, 32] that building foundation models[14,
10, 6, 35, 2, 44] on time series forecasting (TS-forecasting) have become a hot topic. However,
fine-tuning these large models using full time series datasets can entail considerable computational
overhead. Hence, the employment of dataset condensation techniques becomes imperative. In recent
years, various methods have been proposed in the field of dataset condensation, such as matchingbased methods[51, 49, 3, 20, 38, 7, 5, 41, 50, 52, 36] and kernel methods[33, 55]. To date, dataset
condensation methods have achieved success in classification tasks, including image classification[8,
11, 22], graph classification[17, 16, 23, 43, 25, 9, 27] and time series classification[26].
∗

Co-primary author. † Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

