F ED NE: Surrogate-Assisted Federated Neighbor
Embedding for Dimensionality Reduction

Ziwei Li, Xiaoqi Wang, Hong-You Chen, Han-Wei Shen, Wei-Lun Chao
The Ohio State University
{li.5326, wang.5502, chen.9301, shen.94, chao.209}@osu.edu

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) has rapidly evolved as a promising paradigm that enables
collaborative model training across distributed participants without exchanging
their local data. Despite its broad applications in fields such as computer vision,
graph learning, and natural language processing, the development of a data projection model that can be effectively used to visualize data in the context of FL
is crucial yet remains heavily under-explored. Neighbor embedding (NE) is an
essential technique for visualizing complex high-dimensional data, but collaboratively learning a joint NE model is difficult. The key challenge lies in the
objective function, as effective visualization algorithms like NE require computing
loss functions among pairs of data. In this paper, we introduce F ED NE, a novel
approach that integrates the F EDAVG framework with the contrastive NE technique,
without any requirements of shareable data. To address the lack of inter-client
repulsion which is crucial for the alignment in the global embedding space, we
develop a surrogate loss function that each client learns and shares with each other.
Additionally, we propose a data-mixing strategy to augment the local data, aiming
to relax the problems of invisible neighbors and false neighbors constructed by
the local kNN graphs. We conduct comprehensive experiments on both synthetic
and real-world datasets. The results demonstrate that our F ED NE can effectively
preserve the neighborhood data structures and enhance the alignment in the global
embedding space compared to several baseline methods.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a highly effective decentralized learning framework in
which multiple participants collaborate to learn a shared model without sharing the data. In recent
years, FL has been extensively studied and applied across various domains, including image and text
classifications [10, 31, 23, 9], computer vision tasks [3, 41, 50], and graph learning problems [42, 5,
16]. Despite the growing interest in FL, the area of dimensionality reduction within this framework has
received limited investigation. However, visualizing and interpreting data from distributed sources is
important, as real-world applications often generate large volumes of complex datasets that are stored
locally by each participant. For example, different hospitals collect high-dimensional electronic health
records (EHRs) [1] and securely store this patient data within their local systems. As each hospital
might only collect limited data or focus on particular diseases, conducting data visualization on a
combined dataset can substantially improve disease diagnosis and provide deeper insights. However,
sharing sensitive patient information is restricted due to privacy protection. Thus, developing a shared
dimensionality reduction model in the FL setting is crucial for facilitating collaborative analysis while
maintaining data on local sites.
Dimensionality reduction (DR) refers to constructing a low-dimensional representation from the input
data while preserving the essential data structures and patterns. Neighbor embedding (NE) [6, 49], a
family of DR techniques, is widely utilized to visualize complex high-dimensional data due to its
ability to preserve neighborhood structures and handle non-linear relationships effectively. Essentially,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

