SynRS3D: A Synthetic Dataset for Global 3D Semantic
Understanding from Monocular Remote Sensing
Imagery
Jian Song1,2 , Hongruixuan Chen1 , Weihao Xuan1,2 , Junshi Xia2 , Naoto Yokoya1,2
1

The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
2
RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan
song@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp
‡ https://JTRNEO.github.io/SynRS3D

Abstract
Global semantic 3D understanding from single-view high-resolution remote sensing
(RS) imagery is crucial for Earth observation (EO). However, this task faces
significant challenges due to the high costs of annotations and data collection, as
well as geographically restricted data availability. To address these challenges,
synthetic data offer a promising solution by being unrestricted and automatically
annotatable, thus enabling the provision of large and diverse datasets. We develop
a specialized synthetic data generation pipeline for EO and introduce SynRS3D,
the largest synthetic RS dataset. SynRS3D comprises 69,667 high-resolution
optical images that cover six different city styles worldwide and feature eight land
cover types, precise height information, and building change masks. To further
enhance its utility, we develop a novel multi-task unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA) method, RS3DAda, coupled with our synthetic dataset, which facilitates
the RS-specific transition from synthetic to real scenarios for land cover mapping
and height estimation tasks, ultimately enabling global monocular 3D semantic
understanding based on synthetic data. Extensive experiments on various real-world
datasets demonstrate the adaptability and effectiveness of our synthetic dataset
and the proposed RS3DAda method. SynRS3D and related codes are available at
https://github.com/JTRNEO/SynRS3D.

1

Introduction

3D reconstruction is a fundamental task in computer vision, which focuses on creating threedimensional representations from two-dimensional images. It plays a crucial role in applications
such as virtual reality, autonomous driving, and robotics. In the context of Earth observation (EO),
reconstructing semantic 3D information from single-view remote sensing (RS) images is also vital for
applications like environmental monitoring, urban planning, and disaster response [50, 52, 53, 65].
Unlike point cloud-based 3D reconstruction, which relies on LiDAR or stereo cameras, monocular
semantic 3D reconstruction is more scalable and requires less expensive equipment, making it suitable
for global applications [21, 87, 120, 44, 50, 52, 53, 65, 54, 26, 22, 49]. This task combines land cover
mapping, which is closely related to semantic segmentation in computer vision, and height estimation.
However, acquiring RS annotations is costly and time-consuming, especially for high-resolution
height data obtained through satellite LiDAR (e.g. GEDI, ICESat-2) [85, 30, 51] or stereo matching
[3, 116, 112, 57, 27, 64]. Furthermore, high-resolution land cover mapping datasets [16, 96, 101]
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

