Generative Fractional Diffusion Models
Gabriel Nobis ∗
Fraunhofer HHI

Maximilian Springenberg
Fraunhofer HHI

Marco Aversa
Dotphoton

Rembert Daems
Ghent University
FlandersMake–MIRO

Roderick Murray-Smith
University of Glasgow

Sebastian Lapuschkin
Fraunhofer HHI

Stefano Ermon
Stanford University

Manfred Opper
TU Berlin
University of Potsdam
University of Birmingham

Christoph Knochenhauer
Technical University of Munich

Michael Detzel
Fraunhofer HHI

Shinichi Nakajima
BIFOLD, TU Berlin
RIKEN AIP
Tolga Birdal
Imperial College London
Luis Oala
Dotphoton

Wojciech Samek
Fraunhofer HHI
TU Berlin
BIFOLD

Abstract
We introduce the first continuous-time score-based generative model that leverages
fractional diffusion processes for its underlying dynamics. Although diffusion
models have excelled at capturing data distributions, they still suffer from various
limitations such as slow convergence, mode-collapse on imbalanced data, and lack
of diversity. These issues are partially linked to the use of light-tailed Brownian
motion (BM) with independent increments. In this paper, we replace BM with
an approximation of its non-Markovian counterpart, fractional Brownian motion
(fBM), characterized by correlated increments and Hurst index H ∈ (0, 1), where
H = 0.5 recovers the classical BM. To ensure tractable inference and learning,
we employ a recently popularized Markov approximation of fBM (MA-fBM) and
derive its reverse-time model, resulting in generative fractional diffusion models
(GFDM). We characterize the forward dynamics using a continuous reparameterization trick and propose augmented score matching to efficiently learn the score
function, which is partly known in closed form, at minimal added cost. The ability
to drive our diffusion model via MA-fBM offers flexibility and control. H ≤ 0.5
enters the regime of rough paths whereas H > 0.5 regularizes diffusion paths
and invokes long-term memory. The Markov approximation allows added control
by varying the number of Markov processes linearly combined to approximate
fBM. Our evaluations on real image datasets demonstrate that GFDM achieves
greater pixel-wise diversity and enhanced image quality, as indicated by a lower
FID, offering a promising alternative to traditional diffusion models1 .

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed a remarkable leap in generative diffusion models [1, 2, 3], celebrated
for their ability to accurately learn data distributions and generate high-fidelity samples. These
models have made significant impact across a wide spectrum of application domains, including
the generation of complex molecular structures [4] for material [5] or drug discovery [6], realistic
∗
1

Corresponding author gabriel.nobis@hhi.fraunhofer.de
The implementation of our framework is available at https://github.com/GabrielNobis/gfdm.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

