Auditing Privacy Mechanisms via Label Inference
Attacks
Róbert István Busa-Fekete
Google Research NY
busarobi@google.com

Travis Dick
Google Research NY
tdick@google.com

Claudio Gentile
Google Research NY
cgentile@google.com

Andrés Muñoz Medina
Google Research NY
ammedina@google.com

Adam Smith
Boston University
& Google DeepMind
ads22@bu.edu

Marika Swanberg
Boston University
& Google Research NY
marikas@bu.edu

Abstract
We propose reconstruction advantage measures to audit label privatization mechanisms. A reconstruction advantage measure quantifies the increase in an attacker’s
ability to infer the true label of an unlabeled example when provided with a private
version of the labels in a dataset (e.g., aggregate of labels from different users or
noisy labels output by randomized response), compared to an attacker that only
observes the feature vectors, but may have prior knowledge of the correlation
between features and labels. We consider two such auditing measures: one additive, and one multiplicative. These incorporate previous approaches taken in the
literature on empirical auditing and differential privacy. The measures allow us
to place a variety of proposed privatization schemes—some differentially private,
some not—on the same footing. We analyze these measures theoretically under a
distributional model which encapsulates reasonable adversarial settings. We also
quantify their behavior empirically on real and simulated prediction tasks. Across a
range of experimental settings, we find that differentially private schemes dominate
or match the privacy-utility tradeoff of more heuristic approaches.

1

Introduction

Data sharing and processing provides an undeniable utility to individuals and the society at large.
The modern data ecosystem has played a significant role in scientific advancement, economic growth,
and technologies that benefit individuals in their daily lives. Yet, the collection, processing, and
sharing of sensitive information can lead to real privacy harms. Understanding the theoretical and
empirical risks associated with different types of data disclosure is a rich area of research and topic
of discussion. The privacy community has studied a number of empirical measures of disclosure
risks against several types of attacks, including: inference attacks [29], reconstruction attacks [5],
re-identification attacks [14] and label inference attacks [13, 31].
While differential privacy gives rigorous guarantees against these attacks by worst-case adversaries,
it is natural to wonder whether non-DP (deterministic) mechanisms give any empirical privacy
protections. This line of inquiry necessitates empirical measures of privacy that take adversarial uncertainty into account. At a fundamental level, whether one is studying reconstruction or membership
inference, nearly every privacy disclosure metric comes down to quantifying the relationship between
an adversary’s prior and posterior knowledge before and after a data release.
In this work, we consider a number of ways to summarize this prior-posterior relationship, and we
apply our proposed metrics to a few Privacy Enhancing Technologies (PETs). We consider two
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

