Causal Inference in the Closed-Loop: Marginal
Structural Models for Sequential Excursion Effects

Alexander W. Levis∗
Carnegie Mellon University
alevis@cmu.edu

Gabriel Loewinger∗
National Institutes of Health
gloewinger@gmail.com

Francisco Pereira
National Institutes of Health
francisco.pereira@nih.gov

Abstract
Optogenetics is widely used to study the effects of neural circuit manipulation on
behavior. However, the paucity of causal inference methodological work on this
topic has resulted in analysis conventions that discard information, and constrain
the scientific questions that can be posed. To fill this gap, we introduce a nonparametric causal inference framework for analyzing “closed-loop” designs, which use
dynamic policies that assign treatment based on covariates. In this setting, standard
methods can introduce bias and occlude causal effects. Building on the sequentially randomized experiments literature in causal inference, our approach extends
history-restricted marginal structural models for dynamic regimes. In practice, our
framework can identify a wide range of causal effects of optogenetics on trial-bytrial behavior, such as, fast/slow-acting, dose-response, additive/antagonistic, and
floor/ceiling. Importantly, it does so without requiring negative controls, and can
estimate how causal effect magnitudes evolve across time points. From another
view, our work extends “excursion effect” methods—popular in the mobile health
literature—to enable estimation of causal contrasts for treatment sequences greater
than length one, in the presence of positivity violations. We derive rigorous statistical guarantees, enabling hypothesis testing of these causal effects. We demonstrate
our approach on data from a recent study of dopaminergic activity on learning, and
show how our method reveals relevant effects obscured in standard analyses.

1

Introduction

Optogenetics is a neuroscience technique to “turn on/off” neurons in vivo in real-time, with millisecond time resolution. It works by shining lasers on neurons that have been genetically modified
through viral infection to express a light-sensitive protein. It is one of the most popular assays with
roughly 700 references to it in 2023 alone.2 Optogenetics is often applied to study the causal effect
of manipulating specific brain circuits while animals (e.g., mice) perform behavioral tasks to study,
for example, learning and decision-making. These tasks are typically composed of a sequence of
trials, t ∈ {1, 2, ..., T }, each of which involves presentation of stimuli and an opportunity for a
behavioral response. For example, a trial might begin with a cue (e.g., a light), which indicates
that a lever press will trigger delivery of a food reward. Investigators might want to know, for
instance, whether applying optogenetic stimulation on a random subset of trials alters the rate at
which mice press the lever. On trial t, an animal’s behavioral outcome, Yt , time-varying covariates, Xt , and optogenetic (treatment) indicator, At , are observed. Experiments often include both
treatment (G = 1) and negative-control (G = 0) groups, with animals assigned randomly to each.
While the laser (i.e., the sequential treatment, At ) is often applied on a random3 subset of trials in
∗

Authors contributed equally, names alphabetized
699 papers on Web of Science mention “optogenetics” in 2023 and between 526-796 in years 2015-2023.
3
Some studies deterministically set laser/no-laser trials but we focus on “stochastic” experimental designs.
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

