Advection Augmented Convolutional Neural Networks

Niloufar Zakariaei ∗
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada
nilouzk@student.ubc.ca

Siddharth Rout ∗
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada
siddharth.rout@ubc.ca

Eldad Haber
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada
ehaber@eoas.ubc.ca

Moshe Eliasof
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, United Kingdom
me532@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Many problems in physical sciences are characterized by the prediction of spacetime sequences. Such problems range from weather prediction to the analysis of
disease propagation and video prediction. Modern techniques for the solution of
these problems typically combine Convolution Neural Networks (CNN) architecture with a time prediction mechanism. However, oftentimes, such approaches
underperform in the long-range propagation of information and lack explainability.
In this work, we introduce a physically inspired architecture for the solution of
such problems. Namely, we propose to augment CNNs with advection by designing a novel semi-Lagrangian push operator. We show that the proposed operator
allows for the non-local transformation of information compared with standard
convolutional kernels. We then complement it with Reaction and Diffusion neural
components to form a network that mimics the Reaction-Advection-Diffusion
equation, in high dimensions. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our network on
a number of spatio-temporal datasets that show their merit. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Siddharth-Rout/deepADRnet.

1

Introduction and Motivation

Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs) have long been established as one of the most fundamental
and powerful family of algorithms for image and video processing tasks, in applications that range
from image classification [27, 21], denoising [5] and reconstruction [26], to generative models [17].
More examples of the impact of CNNs on various fields and applications can be found in [40, 18, 32]
and references within.
At the core of CNNs, stands the convolution operation – a simple linear operation that is local and
spatially rotation and translation equivariant. The locality of the convolution, coupled with nonlinear
activation functions and deep architectures have been the force driving CNN architectures to the
forefront of machine learning and artificial intelligence research [50, 21]. One way to understand
the success of CNNs and attempt to generate an explainable framework for them is to view CNNs
from a Partial Differential Equation (PDE) point of view [43, 7]. In this framework, the convolution
is viewed as a mix of discretized differential operators of varying order. The layers of the network
are then associated with time. Hence, the deep network can be thought of as a discretization of a
nonlinear time-dependent PDE. Such observations have motivated parabolic network design that
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

