Using Unity to Help Solve Reinforcement Learning

Connor Brennan∗
Mila–Quebec AI Institute
Université de Montréal
Omar G. Younis†
Mila–Quebec AI Institute
Université de Montréal

Andrew Robert Williams∗
Mila–Quebec AI Institute
Université de Montréal

Vedant Vyas†
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta

Daria Yasafova
Mila–Quebec AI Institute
Université de Montréal

Irina Rish
Mila–Quebec AI Institute
Université de Montréal

Abstract
Leveraging the depth and flexibility of XLand as well as the rapid prototyping
features of the Unity engine, we present the United Unity Universe, an open-source
toolkit designed to accelerate the creation of innovative reinforcement learning
environments. This toolkit includes a robust implementation of OpenXLand, a
framework for meta-RL based on XLand 2.0 [23], complemented by a user-friendly
interface which allows users to modify the details of procedurally generated terrains
and task rules with ease. Along with a ready-to-use implementation of OpenXLand,
we provide a curated selection of terrains and rule sets, accompanied by implementations of reinforcement learning baselines to facilitate quick experimentation with
novel architectural designs for adaptive agents. Furthermore, we illustrate how the
United Unity Universe serves as a high-level language that enables researchers to
develop diverse and endlessly variable 3D environments within a unified framework.
This functionality establishes the United Unity Universe (U3) as an essential tool
for advancing the field of reinforcement learning, especially in the development of
adaptive and generalizable learning systems.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) and meta-reinforcement learning (meta-RL) foundation models have
shown potential as adaptive agents that quickly adapt to diverse tasks in open-ended settings [23].
However, open-source options for open-ended environment generation rarely go beyond constrained
subsets of scenarios, with limited control or open-endedness. The availability of frameworks for
diverse, controllable, and extendable environment generation would be a boon to the development of
generally adaptive agents and meta-RL in general.
Inspired by the use of the Unity Game Engine for reinforcement learning development [27, 24, 23],
we propose the United Unity Universe (U3), an open-source environment development ecosystem
based on the Unity game engine, which is freely available for personal use.1
∗

Equal contribution.
Equal contribution.
1
https://unity.com/products/unity-personal
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

