Adaptive Sampling for Efficient Softmax
Approximation

Tavor Z. Baharav†
Eric and Wendy Schmidt Center
Broad Institute
Cambridge, MA, 02142
baharav@broadinstitute.org
Colin Sullivan†
AI Division
Software Engineering Institute
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
csullivan@sei.cmu.edu

Ryan Kang†
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
txryank@stanford.edu

Mo Tiwari
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA, 94305
motiwari@stanford.edu

David Tse
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
dntse@stanford.edu

Eric Luxenberg
Gridmatic
Cupertino, CA 95014
eric@gridmatic.com

Mert Pilanci
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
pilanci@stanford.edu

Abstract
The softmax function is ubiquitous in machine learning and optimization applications. Computing the full softmax evaluation of a matrix-vector product can
be computationally expensive in high-dimensional settings. In many applications,
however, it is sufficient to calculate only the top few outputs of the softmax function. In this work, we present an algorithm, dubbed AdaptiveSoftmax, that
adaptively computes the top k softmax values more efficiently than the full softmax
computation, with probabilistic guarantees. We demonstrate the sample efficiency
improvements afforded by AdaptiveSoftmax on real and synthetic data to corroborate our theoretical results. AdaptiveSoftmax yields > 10x gain over full
softmax computation on most datasets, yielding up to 30x improvement for Mistral7B evaluated on the Wikitext dataset. The adaptive method we propose for
estimating the partition function (the softmax denominator) is of independent
interest and can be used in other applications such as kernel density estimation.

1

Introduction

The softmax function appears in many different fields and applications. It is often used in multiclass
classification problems, as the final operation in a neural network to obtain a probability distribution
over classes, in reinforcement learning to obtain a probability distribution over possible actions, and
in statistical mechanics to derive various thermodynamic quantities.
In machine learning applications, the softmax function often appears as the final operation in
classification models and in attention layers. Crucially, the softmax function takes a vector of weights
†denotes equal contribution
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

