Memory-Efficient Gradient Unrolling for
Large-Scale Bi-level Optimization

Qianli Shen1∗ Yezhen Wang1
Zhouhao Yang1
Xiang Li1
Haonan Wang1
1
1
2
Yang Zhang
Jonathan Scarlett
Zhanxing Zhu
Kenji Kawaguchi1
1

National University of Singapore

2

University of Southampton, UK

Abstract
Bi-level optimization (BO) has become a fundamental mathematical framework
for addressing hierarchical machine learning problems. As deep learning models
continue to grow in size, the demand for scalable bi-level optimization has become
increasingly critical. Traditional gradient-based bi-level optimization algorithms,
due to their inherent characteristics, are ill-suited to meet the demands of large-scale
applications. In this paper, we introduce Forward Gradient Unrolling with Forward
Gradient, abbreviated as (FG)2 U, which achieves an unbiased stochastic approximation of the meta gradient for bi-level optimization. (FG)2 U circumvents the
memory and approximation issues associated with classical bi-level optimization approaches, and delivers significantly more accurate gradient estimates than existing
large-scale bi-level optimization approaches. Additionally, (FG)2 U is inherently designed to support parallel computing, enabling it to effectively leverage large-scale
distributed computing systems to achieve significant computational efficiency. In
practice, (FG)2 U and other methods can be strategically placed at different stages of
the training process to achieve a more cost-effective two-phase paradigm. Further,
(FG)2 U is easy to implement within popular deep learning frameworks, and can be
conveniently adapted to address more challenging black-box bi-level optimization
scenarios. We provide a thorough convergence analysis and a comprehensive
practical discussion for (FG)2 U, complemented by extensive empirical evaluations,
showcasing its superior performance in diverse large-scale bi-level optimization
tasks. Code is available at https://github.com/ShenQianli/FG2U.

1

Introduction

Bi-level optimization is a mathematical framework with a long history of research [10, 65, 73],
dealing with hierarchical optimization problems where one problem is nested within the other. A
bi-level optimization problem can be formulated as:
min f (θ ∗ (ϕ), ϕ) s.t. θ ∗ (ϕ) ∈ arg min g(θ, ϕ),
ϕ

θ

(1)

where θ ∈ Θ ⊆ RM denotes the inner parameter, ϕ ∈ Φ ⊆ RN denotes the meta parameter, and f ,
g are called the meta objective function and inner objective function, respectively.
Recently, with the rise of deep learning, bi-level optimization has regained attention as a theoretical framework covering a wide range of machine learning problems, including hyperparameter
optimization [46, 43, 17, 16, 45], neural architecture search [78, 38, 14], robust machine learning [79, 76, 71, 26], meta learning [15, 53, 49, 2], and physics-informed machine learning [23, 62].
In these scenarios, the inner problem often pertains to the optimization of neural networks, thereby
∗

Correspondence: shenqianli@u.nus.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

