ReplaceAnything3D: Text-Guided Object
Replacement in 3D Scenes with Compositional Scene
Representations

Edward Bartrum∗
University College London
London, England
edward.bartrum.18@ucl.ac.uk
Zhengqin Li
Meta Reality Labs
Redmond, Washington
zhl@meta.com

Thu Nguyen-Phuoc
Meta Reality Labs
London, England
thunp@meta.com

Numair Khan
Meta Reality Labs
Redmond, Washington
numairkhan@meta.com

Douglas Lanman
Meta Reality Labs
Redmond, Washington
douglas.lanman@meta.com

Chris Xie
Meta Reality Labs
Redmond, Washington
chrisdxie@meta.com
Armen Avetisyan
Meta Reality Labs
London, England
aavetisyan@meta.com

Lei Xiao
Meta Reality Labs
Redmond, Washington
lei.xiao@meta.com

Abstract
We introduce ReplaceAnything3D model (RAM3D), a novel method for 3D object
replacement in 3D scenes based on users’ text description. Given multi-view images
of a scene, a text prompt describing the object to replace, and another describing
the new object, our Erase-and-Replace approach can effectively swap objects in
3D scenes with newly generated content while maintaining 3D consistency across
multiple viewpoints. We demonstrate the versatility of RAM3D by applying it to
various realistic 3D scene types, showcasing results of modified objects that blend
in seamlessly with the scene without impacting its overall integrity.

1

Introduction

The explosion of new media platforms and display devices has sparked a surge in demand for highquality 3D content, and thus an increasing need for efficient tools for generating and editing them.
While there has been significant progress in 3D reconstruction and generation, 3D scene editing
remain a less-studied area. In this work, we focus on the task of replacing or adding new 3D objects
to an existing 3D scene using only input language prompts from a user. Compared to other 3D scene
editing methods such as relighting or stylization, this task involves intricate local edits to seamlessly
integrate new objects into the scene without disrupting its overall coherence. This goes beyond just
generating realistic visuals and demands a nuanced understanding of both the global scene context
and the interaction between the newly added object and the rest of the scene.
Naively using text-to-3D methods to generate 3D objects and manually adding them to a scene
can be a tedious process. More importantly, it completely ignores the interaction between objects’
∗

Work done during an internship at Meta Reality Labs Research
Project page: https://replaceanything3d.github.io

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

