Towards Next-Level Post-Training Quantization
of Hyper-Scale Transformers

Junhan Kim∗, Chungman Lee∗, Eulrang Cho, Kyungphil Park,
Ho-young Kim, Joonyoung Kim, Yongkweon Jeon†
Samsung Research
{jun_one.kim, chungman.lee, dragwon.jeon}@samsung.com

Abstract
With the increasing complexity of generative AI models, post-training quantization
(PTQ) has emerged as a promising solution for deploying hyper-scale models on
edge devices such as mobile and TVs. Existing PTQ schemes, however, consume
considerable time and resources, which could be a bottleneck in real situations
where frequent model updates and multiple hyperparameter tunings are required.
As a cost-effective alternative, learning-free PTQ schemes have been proposed.
However, the performance is somewhat limited because they cannot consider
the inter-layer dependency within the attention module, which is a significant
feature of Transformers. In this paper, we thus propose a novel PTQ algorithm
that balances accuracy and efficiency. The key idea of the proposed algorithm
called aespa is to perform quantization layer-wise for efficiency while targeting
attention-wise reconstruction to consider the cross-layer dependency. Through
extensive experiments on various language models and complexity analysis, we
demonstrate that aespa is accurate and efficient in quantizing Transformer models.
The code will be available at https://github.com/SamsungLabs/aespa.

1

Introduction

Model size has been gradually growing, resulting in deep generative models such as diffusion [25]
and large-scale language models (LLMs) [29, 35] becoming more mainstream; the trend of AI is
transitioning from discriminative models to generative models with numerous parameters in trillions.
With the explosive growth in model complexity (parameters), the performance of AI models has
been advancing and is now approaching or even exceeding human intelligence levels. However, this
growth in scale has resulted in a corresponding increase in computational costs, which necessitates
the efficient processing and compression of AI models. Interestingly, one attempts to expand the
complexity of AI models to scale up performance, whereas the other aims to compress models to
reduce cost.
Quantization is a promising solution and indispensable procedure facilitating the efficient deployment
of AI models on devices that mainly support fixed-point arithmetic. By reducing the precision of
weights, the memory bandwidth requirements can be relieved, and the embarrassing parallelism of
quantized models can be SIMDified using highly efficient vector processing units such as NPU. To
minimize the inevitable performance degradation caused by quantization, we can choose one of two
approaches: quantization-aware training (QAT) [5, 14] and post-training quantization (PTQ) [23, 18].
Considering the model complexity and required resources (e.g., training costs and available datasets),
QAT is not practical for compressing models with billions of parameters. Consequently, recent
quantization studies on hyper-scale Transformer [31] models have focused more on PTQ.
∗

Equal Contribution, † Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

