Adaptive Labeling for Efficient Out-of-distribution
Model Evaluation
Daksh Mittal∗, Yuanzhe Ma∗, Shalmali Joshi, Hongseok Namkoong
Columbia University
{dm3766, ym2865, sj3261, hn2369}@columbia.edu

Abstract
Datasets often suffer severe selection bias; clinical labels are only available on
patients for whom doctors ordered medical exams. To assess model performance
outside the support of available data, we present a computational framework for
adaptive labeling, providing cost-efficient model evaluations under severe distribution shifts. We formulate the problem as a Markov Decision Process over states
defined by posterior beliefs on model performance. Each batch of new labels incurs a “state transition” to sharper beliefs, and we choose batches to minimize
uncertainty on model performance at the end of the label collection process. Instead of relying on high-variance REINFORCE policy gradient estimators that do
not scale, our adaptive labeling policy is optimized using path-wise policy gradients computed by auto-differentiating through simulated roll-outs. Our framework is agnostic to different uncertainty quantification approaches and highlights
the virtue of planning in adaptive labeling. On synthetic and real datasets, we empirically demonstrate even a one-step lookahead policy substantially outperforms
active learning-inspired heuristics.

1

Introduction

Engineering progress in AI is predicated on
rigorous empirical evaluation. Evaluating supervised ML models is easy when there is
no distribution shift. However, naive offline
evaluations on observational data cannot reliably assess safety due to selection bias. When
ground-truth outcomes are expensive to collect, existing supervised datasets are often
heavily affected by selection bias. For example, AI-based medical diagnosis systems
are typically evaluated using past clinical la- Figure 1: Adaptive labeling to reduce epistemic
bels, which are only available for patients uncertainty over model performance. Among the
who were initially screened by doctors. This two clusters of unlabeled examples (left vs. right),
creates a fundamental limitation: we cannot we must learn to prioritize labeling inputs from the
even assess the model’s performance on pa- left cluster to better evaluate mean squared error.
tients who were never screened in the first
place. Moreover, due to the absence of positive pathological patterns in the available data, previously unseen patient types may never get diagnosed by the AI diagnosis system. Evaluating the
model’s performance on previously unscreened patients is a first step toward mitigating this negative
feedback loop.
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

