Preference Learning of Latent Decision Utilities with a
Human-like Model of Preferential Choice
Sebastiaan De Peuter
Aalto University
sebastiaan.depeuter@aalto.fi

Shibei Zhu
Aalto University
shibei.zhu@aalto.fi

Andrew Howes
University of Exeter
andrew.howes@exeter.ac.uk

Yujia Guo
Aalto University
yujia.guo@aalto.fi

Samuel Kaski
Aalto University
University of Manchester
samuel.kaski@aalto.fi

Abstract
Preference learning methods make use of models of human choice in order to infer
the latent utilities that underlie human behavior. However, accurate modeling of
human choice behavior is challenging due to a range of context effects that arise
from how humans contrast and evaluate options. Cognitive science has proposed
several models that capture these intricacies but, due to their intractable nature,
work on preference learning has, in practice, had to rely on tractable but simplified
variants of the well-known Bradley-Terry model. In this paper, we take one stateof-the-art intractable cognitive model and propose a tractable surrogate that is
suitable for deployment in preference learning. We then introduce a mechanism for
fitting the surrogate to human data and extend it to account for data that cannot be
explained by the original cognitive model. We demonstrate on large-scale human
data that this model produces significantly better inferences on static and actively
elicited data than existing Bradley-Terry variants. We further show in simulation
that when using this model for preference learning, we can significantly improve
utility in a range of real-world tasks.

1

Introduction

AI systems need exact descriptions of tasks to be performed. However, humans find more complex
tasks hard to describe. In response, preference learning has emerged as one way to learn from human
feedback. It has been used to teach AI systems a variety of tasks from how to hand objects to humans
to how to play Atari games [1–4]. More recently, human feedback has been used to train large
language models to summarize text [5], answer questions in natural language [6], and to train deep
generative models to generate realistic medical images [7].
When learning from human feedback, it is generally assumed that some latent utility function f
guides an individual’s behavior, but that the individual cannot describe this function to the machine.
Thus, preference queries are used to elicit information about f from the user. A preference query
gives a user a set of options x1 , . . . , xn and asks the user to select their preferred option, i.e., the one
with the highest utility. Given a model of how people make such choices, the machine can then infer
the underlying function f from the user’s chosen item y. For example, Stiennon et al. [5] learned a
utility function for text summaries by showing users a text with several summaries and asking them
to choose the best summary.
There are several models of choice that have been used for learning preferences from human choices.
Some recent work on Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF), for example, has used
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

