Combining Observational Data and Language
for Species Range Estimation

Max Hamilton1

Christian Lange2

Elijah Cole3

Samuel Heinrich5

Oisin Mac Aodha2

Grant Van Horn1

1

Alexander Shepard4
Subhransu Maji1

UMass Amherst 2 University of Edinburgh 3 Altos Labs
4
iNaturalist 5 Cornell University

Abstract
Species range maps (SRMs) are essential tools for research and policy-making
in ecology, conservation, and environmental management. However, traditional
SRMs rely on the availability of environmental covariates and high-quality species
location observation data, both of which can be challenging to obtain due to
geographic inaccessibility and resource constraints. We propose a novel approach
combining millions of citizen science species observations with textual descriptions
from Wikipedia, covering habitat preferences and range descriptions for tens of
thousands of species. Our framework maps locations, species, and text descriptions
into a common space, facilitating the learning of rich spatial covariates at a global
scale and enabling zero-shot range estimation from textual descriptions. Evaluated
on held-out species, our zero-shot SRMs significantly outperform baselines and
match the performance of SRMs obtained using tens of observations. Our approach
also acts as a strong prior when combined with observational data, resulting in more
accurate range estimation with less data. We present extensive quantitative and
qualitative analyses of the learned representations in the context of range estimation
and other spatial tasks, demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach.

1

Introduction

Collecting sufficient point-based observations of species in the wild allows us to infer species range
maps (SRMs), which describe the spatial extent of where a species is likely to occur. These maps are
invaluable, enhancing our understanding of natural history and informing land use and conservation
decisions. Large-scale citizen science projects like iNaturalist [2] and eBird [30] have recently
accelerated SRM generation by systematically consolidating millions of observations across tens of
thousands of species. By combining these extensive databases with environmental covariates, we can
produce accurate SRMs. However, there remains a ’long tail’ of species with few observations, and
current methods fall short of producing reliable range maps in such low-data settings.
We propose learning SRMs by combining citizen science observations with text descriptions of
species from Wikipedia (see Figure 1). These text descriptions describe a wide array of properties
including habitat preferences, range estimates, and visual attributes. Our framework learns to map
location embeddings over the Earth’s surface and text embeddings from Wikipedia [4] articles into a
common space based on the species observations (see Figure 2). This provides a way to ground the
information in text describing tens of thousands of species to spatial locations based on millions of
observations. As shown in Figure 1, our resulting model allows us to estimate SRMs based on text
descriptions that might be known to an ecologist, such as habitat preferences, even when no location
observations are available.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

