SCOREQ: Speech Quality Assessment with
Contrastive Regression

Alessandro Ragano
School of Computer Science
University College Dublin
Dublin, Ireland
alessandro.ragano@ucd.ie

Jan Skoglund
Google LLC
San Francisco, CA
jks@google.com

Andrew Hines
School of Computer Science
University College Dublin
Dublin, Ireland
andrew.hines@ucd.ie

Abstract
In this paper, we present SCOREQ, a novel approach for speech quality prediction.
SCOREQ is a triplet loss function for contrastive regression that addresses the
domain generalisation shortcoming exhibited by state of the art no-reference speech
quality metrics. In the paper we: (i) illustrate the problem of L2 loss training failing
at capturing the continuous nature of the mean opinion score (MOS) labels; (ii)
demonstrate the lack of generalisation through a benchmarking evaluation across
several speech domains; (iii) outline our approach and explore the impact of the
architectural design decisions through incremental evaluation; (iv) evaluate the final
model against state of the art models for a wide variety of data and domains. The
results show that the lack of generalisation observed in state of the art speech quality
metrics is addressed by SCOREQ. We conclude that using a triplet loss function
for contrastive regression improves generalisation for speech quality prediction
models but also has potential utility across a wide range of applications using
regression-based predictive models.

1

Introduction

No-reference speech quality assessment has seen significant advancements in recent years, thanks
to supervised learning [1, 14, 56, 50, 43, 6, 53, 3]. Supervised speech quality models learn to map
input features (waveform domain, mel spectrograms) to Mean Opinion Score (MOS), a continuous
target value derived by averaging individual listener ratings on a predefined Absolute Category Rating
(ACR) scale (1=Bad, 2=Poor, 3=Fair, 4=Good, 5=Excellent).
While no-reference deep learning MOS predictors outperform traditional full-reference metrics (e.g,
PESQ [54], POLQA [4], ViSQOL [8], CDPAM [40]), they struggle to generalise to unseen audio
degradations. Addressing the domain mismatch in speech quality metrics is urgent given the fast
growing research in generative speech e.g., neural speech coding [64], speech enhancement [36] and
speech synthesis [49]. In Figure 5 we show the significant performance gap of no-reference speech
quality metrics between in-domain and out-of-domain test sets.
The difficulty of no-reference speech quality models is the attempt to map high-dimensional data
RD to a monodimensional continuous space. Speech data include several entangled factors that
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

