Semantic Routing via Autoregressive Modeling

Eric Zhao
UC Berkeley and Google Research
eric.zh@berkeley.edu
Zhengdao Chen
Google Research
zhengdaoc@google.com

Pranjal Awasthi
Google Research
pranjalawasthi@google.com

Sreenivas Gollapudi
Google Research
sgollapu@google.com

Daniel Delling
Google
delling@google.com

Abstract
We study learning-based approaches to semantic route planning, which concerns
producing routes in response to rich queries that specify various criteria and preferences. Semantic routing is already widely found in industry applications, especially
navigational services like Google Maps; however, existing implemenations only
support limited route criteria and narrow query sets as they rely on repurposing
classical route optimization algorithms. We argue for a learning-based approach
to semantic routing as a more scalable and general alternative. To foster interest in this important application of graph learning, we are releasing a large-scale
publicly-licensed benchmark for semantic routing consisting of real-world multiobjective navigation problems—expressed via natural language queries—on the
richly annotated road networks of US cities. In addition to being intractable with
existing approaches to semantic routing, our benchmark poses a significant scaling
challenge for graph learning methods. As a proof-of-concept, we show that—at
scale—even a standard transformer network is a powerful semantic routing system and achieves non-trivial performance on our benchmark. In the process, we
demonstrate a simple solution to the challenge of scaling up graph learning: an
autoregressive approach that decomposes semantic routing into smaller “next-edge”
prediction problems.

1

Introduction

The route planning problem arises in diverse applications including navigating transportation networks
and supply chain logistics (Dantzig and Ramser, 1959). Route planning is classically formulated
in the language of graph theory as searching for paths between a source and a destination that
optimize a single static objective (Dijkstra, 1959), usually travel time. In practice, route planning
systems are not as simple. For example, navigation services like Google Maps do not only optimize
for travel time—they allow drivers to specify multiple modes of transportation, add intermediate
stops, and convey preferences about avoiding roads with bike lanes (Ratliff et al., 2009). Modern
routing systems are better described as performing semantic routing: a contextual and multi-objective
generalization of route planning that involves processing a rich user query that specifies not only a
source and destination but also various criteria—such as bike lanes preferences—and responding
with a satisfactory route (Delling et al., 2017).
Current routing systems implement semantic routing capabilities in an ad hoc way, customizing
classical route optimization algorithms to support specific and limited types of route criteria. For
example, the technique of “cost modifiers” rescales edge weights according to whether the edge
type is preferred/dispreferred, such as doubling travel time along small roads when it is indicated
that small roads should be avoided (Ratliff et al., 2009), and then runs a standard shortest-paths
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

