ChronoEpilogi: Scalable Time-Series Variable
Selection with Multiple Solutions

Etienne Vareille1 Michele Linardi1 Ioannis Tsamardinos2 Vassilis Christophides1
1
ETIS UMR-8051 Laboratory, CY Cergy Paris Universite, ENSEA, CNRS
2
Computer Science Department, University of Crete, Heraklion, Greece

Abstract
We consider the problem of selecting all the minimal-size subsets of multivariate
time-series (TS) variables whose past leads to an optimal predictive model for the
future (forecasting) of a given target variable (multiple feature selection problem for
times-series). Identifying these subsets leads to gaining insights, domain intuition,
and a better understanding of the data-generating mechanism; it is often the first
step in causal modeling. While identifying a single solution to the feature selection problem suffices for forecasting purposes, identifying all such minimal-size,
optimally predictive subsets is necessary for knowledge discovery and important
to avoid misleading a practitioner. We develop the theory of multiple feature
selection for time-series data, propose the ChronoEpilogi algorithm, and prove its
soundness and completeness under two mild, broad, non-parametric distributional
assumptions, namely Compositionality of the distribution and Interchangeability
of time-series variables in solutions. Experiments on synthetic and real datasets
demonstrate the scalability of ChronoEpilogi to hundreds of TS variables and its
efficacy in identifying multiple solutions. In the real datasets, ChronoEpilogi is
shown to reduce the number of TS variables by 96% (on average) by conserving
or even improving forecasting performance. Furthermore, it is on par with Group
Lasso performance, with the added benefit of providing multiple solutions.

1

Introduction

In analysis tasks involving TS with hundreds or even tens of thousands of variables (e.g., in manufacturing, environmental monitoring, energy grids, etc.), selecting appropriate series for TS forecasting
not only has the potential to improve models’ performance, but also to gain intuition, discover new
knowledge, and understand the data-generating mechanism (causal structure). Time-series variable
selection (TVS) is defined as the problem of discovering a minimal-size subset of the available,
measured TS variables whose past values optimally predict the future of a target TS variable T .
Such a series subset is called a Markov Boundary (MB) of T in the causal discovery literature
[Pea88], denoted as MB(T). Hence, MB(T ) filters out the TS variables that are both irrelevant
and redundant in forecasting T .
Identifying a small-size MB leads to a computationally more efficient model for T when real-time
predictions are required. Moreover, it facilitates all subsequent analysis operations such as modeling,
explanation calculations (e.g., SHAP values, feature importance), visualizations, and interpretations
[VALC23]. Perhaps most importantly, identifying the MB of every series could be the first step in
causal modeling of the data-generating mechanism. Indeed, under broad causal assumptions, the
MB(T ) contains the observable direct causes of T , i.e., the quantities that could causally influence
and optimize the future values of T [LTB+ 16]. It is not an accident then that variable selection is the
first step in several causal discovery algorithms for time-series or cohort data [AST+ 10b, AST+ 10a].
However, we note that the MB(T ) may also contain variables confounded by latent ones (in general,
variables connected to T by a collider path). Distilling the possible direct causes of T out of its
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

