Closed-Loop Visuomotor Control with
Generative Expectation for Robotic Manipulation

Qingwen Bu1,2,∗ Jia Zeng1,∗ Li Chen1,3,∗ Yanchao Yang3,♮ Guyue Zhou4
Junchi Yan2 Ping Luo3 Heming Cui3 Yi Ma3 Hongyang Li1,♮
1
Shanghai AI Lab 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 HKU 4 Tsinghua University
∗
Equal contribution ♮ Corresponding authors

Abstract
Despite significant progress in robotics and embodied AI in recent years, deploying robots for long-horizon tasks remains a great challenge. Majority of prior
arts adhere to an open-loop philosophy and lack real-time feedback, leading to
error accumulation and undesirable robustness. A handful of approaches have
endeavored to establish feedback mechanisms leveraging pixel-level differences
or pre-trained visual representations, yet their efficacy and adaptability have been
found to be constrained. Inspired by classic closed-loop control systems, we propose CLOVER, a closed-loop visuomotor control framework that incorporates
feedback mechanisms to improve adaptive robotic control. CLOVER consists
of a text-conditioned video diffusion model for generating visual plans as reference inputs, a measurable embedding space for accurate error quantification,
and a feedback-driven controller that refines actions from feedback and initiates
replans as needed. Our framework exhibits notable advancement in real-world
robotic tasks and achieves state-of-the-art on CALVIN benchmark, improving by
8% over previous open-loop counterparts. Code and checkpoints are maintained at
https://github.com/OpenDriveLab/CLOVER.

1

Introduction

Robotics and embodied generalists have gained enormous achievements in recent years, with the
successful advancement of representation learning and visual generation in computer vision [1, 2, 3, 4],
large (vision-)language models [5, 6], policy learning [7, 8], etc. Remarkable behavior intelligence
has been demonstrated in diverse and complex single-task settings from picking up a Lego block to
solving a Rubik’s cube [9, 10]. However, deploying the robots for long-horizon manipulation tasks
remains a long-standing challenge [11, 12].
Some literature have attempted to tackle the problem with large language models, splitting a prolonged
job into detailed instructions for each minor movement [13, 14], or sub-goals. Though effective in
high-level descriptions, texts could still be inadequate for detailed portrayals of the environment
and robot state, leading to considerable issues under cross-morphology or multi-environments [15].
Therefore, recent efforts have started embracing vision as a universal medium to develop an embodied
agent capable of planning diverse tasks through imagination and execution [16, 15, 17]. These
approaches involve a generative model for predicting future videos or goal images, followed by a
goal-conditioned policy for translating the visual plan into actual actions. Despite success, they adhere
to an open-loop paradigm, i.e., proceeding with a fixed sequence of actions without verifying whether
the actual trajectory aligns with the planned one. For instance, when a robot is tasked to “grab a
Coke from the fridge”, current works assume that the predicted sub-goal is the visual image
of the door opening, and the robot should naturally achieve the state (sub-goal) prior to grabbing
the bottle. However, the lack of error measurement and real-time feedback leads to accumulative
deviation, undesirable robustness, and limited adaptability—particularly inadequate for long-horizon
tasks and dynamic environments [11, 18].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

