HEMM: Holistic Evaluation of
Multimodal Foundation Models
Paul Pu Liang∗ , Akshay Goindani∗ , Talha Chafekar, Leena Mathur, Haofei Yu,
Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Louis-Philippe Morency
Machine Learning Department and Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
https://github.com/pliang279/HEMM

Abstract
Multimodal foundation models that can holistically process text alongside images,
video, audio, and other sensory modalities are increasingly used in a variety of realworld applications. However, it is challenging to characterize and study progress
in multimodal foundation models, given the range of possible modeling decisions,
tasks, and domains. In this paper, we introduce Holistic Evaluation of Multimodal
Models (HEMM) to systematically evaluate the capabilities of multimodal foundation models across a set of 3 dimensions: basic skills, information flow, and
real-world use cases. Basic multimodal skills are internal abilities required to solve
problems, such as learning interactions across modalities, fine-grained alignment,
multi-step reasoning, and the ability to handle external knowledge. Information
flow studies how multimodal content changes during a task through querying, translation, editing, and fusion. Use cases span domain-specific challenges introduced
in real-world multimedia, affective computing, natural sciences, healthcare, and
human-computer interaction applications. Through comprehensive experiments
across the 30 tasks in HEMM, we (1) identify key dataset dimensions (e.g., basic
skills, information flows, and use cases) that pose challenges to today’s models,
and (2) distill performance trends regarding how different modeling dimensions
(e.g., scale, pre-training data, multimodal alignment, pre-training, and instruction
tuning objectives) influence performance. Our conclusions regarding challenging
multimodal interactions, use cases, and tasks requiring reasoning and external
knowledge, the benefits of data and model scale, and the impacts of instruction
tuning yield actionable insights for future work in multimodal foundation models.

1

Introduction

Building upon rapid progress in large-scale language and vision pretraining [24, 69, 106], the new
generation of multimodal foundation models is increasing adept at learning interactions between
modalities [83], enables both static prediction and dynamic interaction [55], and even shows emergent
properties never seen before in pretraining corpora [60]. Previous standards for benchmarking
multimodal models based on collections of modality and task-specific datasets [8, 57, 29, 66] are
increasingly insufficient in light of these general capabilities. In order to study fundamental questions
regarding why multimodal foundation models exhibit certain behaviors, when they perform well
in the real world, and which modeling paradigms are most effective, there is a need for a holistic
evaluation scheme beyond individual datasets or contexts.
To address this need, we contribute Holistic Evaluation of Multimodal Models (HEMM), visualized in Figure 1. HEMM, as an evaluation framework, goes beyond conventional lists of datasets to
emphasize holistic benchmarking at three levels. The first level benchmarks basic multimodal skills:
fundamental internal abilities required to address multimodal problems, such as interactions between
*

These authors contributed equally to this work

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

