TrajCLIP: Pedestrian Trajectory Prediction Method
Using Contrastive Learning and Idempotent Networks

Pengfei Yao1
yaopengfei22@mails.ucas.ac.cn
Huikun Bi3
bihuikun@senseauto.com
1

Yinglong Zhu2♯
z.yinglong@bupt.edu.cn

Tianlu Mao4⋆∗
ltm@ict.ac.cn

Zhaoqi Wang4
zqwang@ict.ac.cn

Institute of Computing Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
SenseTime
4
Beijing Key Laboratory of Mobile Computing and Pervasive Device

Abstract
The distribution of pedestrian trajectories is highly complex and influenced by the
scene, nearby pedestrians, and subjective intentions. This complexity presents
challenges for modeling and generalizing trajectory prediction. Previous methods
modeled the feature space of future trajectories based on the high-dimensional
feature space of historical trajectories, but this approach is suboptimal because it
overlooks the similarity between historical and future trajectories. Our proposed
method, TrajCLIP, utilizes contrastive learning and idempotent generative networks
to address this issue. By pairing historical and future trajectories and applying
contrastive learning on the encoded feature space, we enforce same-space consistency constraints. To manage complex distributions, we use idempotent loss
and tightness loss to control over-expansion in the latent space. Additionally, we
have developed a trajectory interpolation algorithm and synthetic trajectory data
to enhance model capacity and improve generalization. Experimental results on
public datasets demonstrate that TrajCLIP achieves state-of-the-art performance
and excels in scene-to-scene transfer, few-shot transfer, and online learning tasks.

1

Introduction

Pedestrian trajectory prediction involves predicting future paths based on observed historical trajectories. This task is crucial in real-world applications such as autonomous driving [4, 13], and
robotics [11]. It is challenging to model diverse trajectory distributions across different scenes
(e.g., roundabouts and intersections), various patterns (e.g., staggering and strolling), and different
interactions (e.g., walking together or avoiding strangers) due to their complexity.
The existing methods [31, 21, 6] assume that the training and test motions follow the same distribution
to effectively model complex distributions within a specific range. These approaches focus on
modeling the high-dimensional feature space distribution of trajectories within a particular dataset.
They use generative models, such as Conditional Variational AutoEncoder [23, 24] and diffusion,
to change the feature space of past trajectories into the feature space of future trajectories. This
process aids in generating predicted trajectories and fitting the distribution of pedestrian trajectories
to specific datasets. However, as shown in Fig. 1, this approach has limitations. It involves reducing
∗

⋆ denotes the corresponding author. ♯ contributed equally to this work as co-first author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

