Public-data Assisted Private Stochastic Optimization:
Power and Limitations
Enayat Ullah
Meta ∗
enayat@meta.com

Michael Menart
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
The Ohio State University †
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
Vector Institute
menart.2@osu.edu

Raef Bassily
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Translational Data Analytics Institute (TDAI)
The Ohio State University
bassily.1@osu.edu

Cristóbal Guzmán
Inst. for Mathematical and Comput. Eng.
Fac. de Matemáticas and Esc. de Ingeniería
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
crguzmanp@uc.cl

Raman Arora
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
arora@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
We study the limits and capability of public-data assisted differentially private (PA-DP) algorithms. Specifically, we focus on the problem of stochastic
convex optimization (SCO) with either labeled or unlabeled public data. For
complete/labeled public
data, we show that any (, δ)-PA-DP has excess risk
√


Ω̃ min √n1pub , √1n + nd , where d is the dimension, npub is the number of
public samples, npriv is the number of private samples, and n = npub + npriv .
These lower bounds are established via our new lower bounds for PA-DP mean
estimation, which are of a similar form. Up to constant factors, these lower bounds
show that the simple strategy of either treating all data as private or discarding the
private data, is optimal. We also study PA-DP supervised learning with unlabeled
public samples. In contrast to our previous result, we here show novel methods
for leveraging public data in private supervised learning. For generalized linear
models (GLM) with unlabeled public data, we show an efficient algorithm which,
given Õ(npriv ) unlabeled public samples, achieves the dimension independent rate

Õ √n1priv + √n1priv  . We develop new lower bounds for this setting which shows
that this rate cannot be improved with more public samples, and any fewer public
samples leads to a worse rate. Finally, we provide extensions of this result to
general hypothesis classes with finite fat-shattering dimension with applications to
neural networks and non-Euclidean geometries.

∗
†

Work done while the author was at the Johns Hopkins University.
This work was done while M. Menart was at The Ohio State University.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

