B’MOJO: Hybrid State Space Realizations of
Foundation Models with Eidetic and Fading Memory

Luca Zancato∗

Arjun Seshadri

Benjamin Bowman

Yonatan Dukler

Matthew Trager

Aditya Golatkar

Alessandro Achille

Yantao Shen

Stefano Soatto

AWS AI Labs

Abstract
We describe a family of architectures to support transductive inference by allowing
memory to grow to a finite but a-priori unknown bound while making efficient
use of finite resources for inference. Current architectures use such resources to
represent data either eidetically over a finite span (“context” in Transformers), or
fading over an infinite span (in State Space Models, or SSMs). Recent hybrid
architectures have combined eidetic and fading memory, but with limitations that
do not allow the designer or the learning process to seamlessly modulate the
two, nor to extend the eidetic memory span. We leverage ideas from Stochastic
Realization Theory to develop a class of models called B’MOJO to seamlessly
combine eidetic and fading memory within an elementary composable module.
The overall architecture can be used to implement models that can access shortterm eidetic memory “in-context,” permanent structural memory “in-weights,”
fading memory “in-state,” and long-term eidetic memory “in-storage” by natively
incorporating retrieval from an asynchronously updated memory. We show that
Transformers, existing SSMs such as Mamba, and hybrid architectures such as
Jamba are special cases of B’MOJO and describe a basic implementation that can
be stacked and scaled efficiently in hardware. We test B’MOJO on transductive
inference tasks, such as associative recall, where it outperforms existing SSMs and
Hybrid models; as a baseline, we test ordinary language modeling where B’MOJO
achieves perplexity comparable to similarly-sized Transformers and SSMs up to
1.4B parameters, while being up to 10% faster to train. Finally, we test whether
models trained inductively on a-priori bounded sequences (up to 8K tokens) can
still perform transductive inference on sequences many-fold longer. B’MOJO’s
ability to modulate eidetic and fading memory results in better inference on longer
sequences tested up to 32K tokens, four-fold the length of the longest sequences
seen during training.

1

Introduction

In Machine Learning, data representations are parametric maps trained to re-present data either
individually, by optimizing a reconstruction criterion, or collectively, by optimizing a classification
criterion. A trained representation can be co-opted to map a previously unseen datum to a hypothesis,
for instance a class label. Representation learning with deep neural networks has been at the core of
recent progress in artificial intelligence (AI) during the past decade. This paper is instead concerned
with data realizations, which are maps trained to realize, i.e., to make real, bring into existence, or
generate data. Roughly speaking, realizations are “generative representations,” trained by optimizing
a prediction criterion, that can be used as sequential decision or prediction maps, or as generative
∗

Correspondence to: zancato@amazon.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

