Generative Modelling of Structurally Constrained
Graphs

Manuel Madeira
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
manuel.madeira@epfl.ch

Clément Vignac
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland

Dorina Thanou
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland

Pascal Frossard
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland

Abstract
Graph diffusion models have emerged as state-of-the-art techniques in graph generation; yet, integrating domain knowledge into these models remains challenging.
Domain knowledge is particularly important in real-world scenarios, where invalid generated graphs hinder deployment in practical applications. Unconstrained
and conditioned graph diffusion models fail to guarantee such domain-specific
structural properties. We present ConStruct, a novel framework that enables graph
diffusion models to incorporate hard constraints on specific properties, such as
planarity or acyclicity. Our approach ensures that the sampled graphs remain within
the domain of graphs that satisfy the specified property throughout the entire trajectory in both the forward and reverse processes. This is achieved by introducing an
edge-absorbing noise model and a new projector operator. ConStruct demonstrates
versatility across several structural and edge-deletion invariant constraints and
achieves state-of-the-art performance for both synthetic benchmarks and attributed
real-world datasets. For example, by incorporating planarity constraints in digital
pathology graph datasets, the proposed method outperforms existing baselines,
improving data validity by up to 71.1 percentage points.

1

Introduction

Learning how to generate realistic graphs that faithfully mirror a target distribution is crucial for
tasks such as data augmentation in network analysis or discovery of novel network structures.
This has become a prominent problem in diverse real-world modelling scenarios, ranging from
molecule design [55] and inverse protein folding [86] to anti-money laundering [45] or combinatorial
optimization [76]. While the explicit representation of relational and structural information with
graphs encourage their widespread adoption in numerous applications, their sparse and unordered
nature make the task of graph generation challenging.
In many real-world problems, we possess a priori knowledge about specific properties of the target
distribution of graphs. Incorporating such knowledge into generative models is a natural approach
to enforce the generated graphs to comply with the domain-specific properties. Indeed, common
generative models, even when conditioned towards graph desired properties, fail to offer guarantees.
This may however become particularly critical in settings where noncompliant graphs can lead to
real-world application failures. Many of these desired properties are edge-related, i.e., constraints
in the structure of the graph. For example, in digital pathology, graphs extracted from tissue slides
are planar [26, 69]. Similarly, in contact networks between patients and healthcare workers within
hospitals, the degrees of healthcare workers are upper bounded to effectively prevent the emergence
of superspreaders and mitigate the risk of infectious disease outbreaks [32, 1]. In graph generation,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

