Atlas3D: Physically Constrained Self-Supporting
Text-to-3D for Simulation and Fabrication
Yunuo Chen1∗, Tianyi Xie1∗, Zeshun Zong1∗, Xuan Li1 ,
Feng Gao2†, Yin Yang3 , Ying Nian Wu1 , Chenfanfu Jiang1
1
University of California, Los Angeles, 2 Amazon, 3 University of Utah
{yunuoch, tianyixie77, zeshunzong, xuanli1}@ucla.edu, fenggo@amazon.com,
yin.yang@utah.edu, ywu@stat.ucla.edu, cffjiang@ucla.edu

Abstract
Existing diffusion-based text-to-3D generation methods primarily focus on producing visually realistic shapes and appearances, often neglecting the physical
constraints necessary for downstream tasks. Generated models frequently fail to
maintain balance when placed in physics-based simulations or 3D-printed. This
balance is crucial for satisfying user design intentions in interactive gaming, embodied AI, and robotics, where stable models are needed for reliable interaction.
Additionally, stable models ensure that 3D-printed objects, such as figurines for
home decoration, can stand on their own without requiring additional support. To
fill this gap, we introduce Atlas3D, an automatic and easy-to-implement method
that enhances existing Score Distillation Sampling (SDS)-based text-to-3D tools.
Atlas3D ensures the generation of self-supporting 3D models that adhere to physical laws of stability under gravity, contact, and friction. Our approach combines a
novel differentiable simulation-based loss function with physically inspired regularization, serving as either a refinement or a post-processing module for existing
frameworks. We verify Atlas3D’s efficacy through extensive generation tasks and
validate the resulting 3D models in both simulated and real-world environments.

1

Introduction

Generating high-quality 3D content is of great importance in modern visual computing. Realistic 3D
models are highly sought after in computer graphics, while robust real 3D assets are gaining attention
in training embodied AI. Nevertheless, the standability of 3D models – the ability to stand steadily
without additional support – is often neglected. Real-world man-made objects such as action figures,
toys, and furniture inherently possess some degree of geometric stability, allowing them to be safely
placed on the ground. Although one usually takes such standability for granted, existing generative
models fail to produce steady 3D assets due to their lack of physical perception; see Fig. 1.
Incorporating this stability expectation into 3D generation will significantly reduce the human effort
required for tasks such as sorting out unqualified meshes, post-processing geometries, or adding
external supports before actually using the 3D asset in any simulator or the real world. Furthermore,
creating physically plausible 3D content will enhance the fidelity of simulations and policy training
with these objects, potentially narrowing the sim-to-real gap and empowering embodied AI in robotic
tasks. Towards this goal, we develop a 3D generation framework that can produce high-quality
models adhering to basic physical laws, such as gravity, stability, and frictional contact.
Several attempts have been made to incorporate physical constraints into 3D generation. Yang et al.
utilized the spatial and physical sense of LLM to design floor plans and furniture arrangements [98].
∗
†

Equal contribution.
This work is not related to F. Gao’s position at Amazon.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

