Multimodal Large Language Models Make
Text-to-Image Generative Models Align Better

Xun Wu1 , Shaohan Huang1B , Guolong Wang2 , Jing Xiong3 , Furu Wei1
1
Microsoft Research Asia, 2 University of International Business and Economics
3
The University of Hong Kong
xunwu@microsoft.com, shaohanh@microsoft.com, fuwei@microsoft.com

Right

Right

Left

Aesthetic

Prompt-Following

Left

“beautiful render, soviet brutalist city,
brutalism, architecture 60s, …”

“happy artists painting things”
Left

Right

Harmlessness

Right

Fidelity

Left

NSFW
“professional photography of human hands”

“a wet plate photograph, a portrait of a strikingly
beautiful woman with regal features”

Figure 1: Fine-grained feedback from multimodal large language model help to yield more
human-preferred images. Left: Output generated by the baseline text-to-image generative model.
Right: Output generated by the baseline model optimized with fine-grained feedback from multimodal
large language model. We illustrate improvements in generation quality across four aspects: PromptFollowing, Aesthetic, Fidelity and Harmlessness. See in Appendix for more visualization examples.

Abstract
Recent studies have demonstrated the exceptional potentials of leveraging human
preference datasets to refine text-to-image generative models, making it to generate
more human-preferred images. Despite these advances, current human preference
datasets are either prohibitively expensive to construct or suffer from a lack of
diversity in preference dimensions, resulting in limited applicability for instruction
tuning in open-source text-to-image generative models and hinder further exploration. To address these challenges, we first leverage multimodal large language
models to create VisionPrefer, a fine-grained preference dataset that captures multiple preference aspects (prompt-following, aesthetic, fidelity, and harmlessness).
Then we train a corresponding reward model, VP-Score, over VisionPrefer to guide
the tuning of text-to-image generative models. The preference prediction accuracy
of VP-Score is validated to be comparable to that of human annotators. To validate
the effectiveness of VisionPrefer and VP-Score, we adopt two reinforcement learning methods, Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) and Direct Policy Optimization
(DPO), to supervised fine-tune generative models, and extensive experimental
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

