D-CPT Law: Domain-specific Continual Pre-Training
Scaling Law for Large Language Models

Haoran Que*1 , Jiaheng Liu*†,1 , Ge Zhang*3,7 , Chenchen Zhang2 , Xingwei Qu4,7 ,
Yinghao Ma5,7 , Feiyu Duan1 , Zhiqi Bai1 , Jiakai Wang2 , Yuanxing Zhang2 , Xu Tan7 ,
Jie Fu6 , Jiamang Wang2 , Lin Qu2 , Wenbo Su1 , Bo Zheng1
1
Taobao & Tmall Group of Alibaba, 2 Alibaba Group, 3 University of Waterloo
4
University of Manchester, 5 QMUL, 6 HKUST, 7 M-A-P
{quehaoran.qhr, ljh411989}@taobao.com, gezhang@umich.edu

Abstract
Continual Pre-Training (CPT) on Large Language Models (LLMs) has been widely
used to expand the model’s fundamental understanding of specific downstream
domains (e.g., math and code). For the CPT on domain-specific LLMs, one
important question is how to choose the optimal mixture ratio between the generalcorpus (e.g., Dolma, Slim-pajama) and the downstream domain-corpus. Existing
methods usually adopt laborious human efforts by grid-searching on a set of
mixture ratios, which require high GPU training consumption costs. Besides, we
cannot guarantee the selected ratio is optimal for the specific domain. To address
the limitations of existing methods, inspired by the Scaling Law for performance
prediction, we propose to investigate the Scaling Law of the Domain-specific
Continual Pre-Training (D-CPT Law) to decide the optimal mixture ratio with
acceptable training costs for LLMs of different sizes. Specifically, by fitting the
D-CPT Law, we can easily predict the general and downstream performance of
arbitrary mixture ratios, model sizes, and dataset sizes using small-scale training
costs on limited experiments. Moreover, we also extend our standard D-CPT
Law on cross-domain settings and propose the Cross-Domain D-CPT Law to
predict the D-CPT law of target domains, where very small training costs (about
1% of the normal training costs) are needed for the target domains. Comprehensive
experimental results on six downstream domains demonstrate the effectiveness and
generalizability of our proposed D-CPT Law and Cross-Domain D-CPT Law.

1

Introduction

Continual Pre-Training (CPT) is an essential part of training better Large Language models
(LLMs). In this work, we mainly focus on Domain-specific CPT (D-CPT), which aims to enhance
the fundamental understanding abilities of the specific downstream domains and has been widely
used in existing works [49, 41, 30]. In practice, for D-CPT, we usually need to collect high-quality
domain-corpus to enhance the downstream performance and general-corpus to mitigate catastrophic
forgetting on the general abilities [13, 40, 54, 47, 32, 20, 53]. Therefore, how to determine the data
composition or mixture ratio of the domain-corpus and general-corpus plays an important role in
producing well-performed domain-specific LLMs. Besides, grid-searching on the mixture ratios
requires heavy GPU consumption costs, and we cannot always obtain the optimal ratio under limited
GPU usage. Recently, Scaling Law has been widely used for performance prediction [31, 27, 43, 26],
* First three authors contributed equally.
†
Corresponding Author: Jiaheng Liu.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

