Test Where Decisions Matter:
Importance-driven Testing for Deep Reinforcement
Learning

Stefan Pranger,1 Hana Chockler,2 Martin Tappler,3 Bettina Könighofer1
1
Institute of Information Security,
Graz University of Technology
2
Kings College London
3
Institute of Computer Engineering,
TU Wien
{stefan.pranger,bettina.koenighofer}@tugraz.at
hana.chockler@kcl.ac.uk
martin.tappler@tuwien.ac.at

Abstract
In many Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) problems, decisions in a trained policy
vary in significance for the expected safety and performance of the policy. Since
RL policies are very complex, testing efforts should concentrate on states in which
the agent’s decisions have the highest impact on the expected outcome. In this
paper, we propose a novel model-based method to rigorously compute a ranking of
state importance across the entire state space. We then focus our testing efforts on
the highest-ranked states. In this paper, we focus on testing for safety. However, the
proposed methods can be easily adapted to test for performance. In each iteration,
our testing framework computes optimistic and pessimistic safety estimates. These
estimates provide lower and upper bounds on the expected outcomes of the policy
execution across all modeled states in the state space. Our approach divides the
state space into safe and unsafe regions upon convergence, providing clear insights
into the policy’s weaknesses. Two important properties characterize our approach.
(1) Optimal Test-Case Selection: At any time in the testing process, our approach
evaluates the policy in the states that are most critical for safety. (2) Guaranteed
Safety: Our approach can provide formal verification guarantees over the entire
state space by sampling only a fraction of the policy. Any safety properties assured
by the pessimistic estimate are formally proven to hold for the policy. We provide
a detailed evaluation of our framework on several examples, showing that our
method discovers unsafe policy behavior with low testing effort.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) [1] is a powerful method for training policies that complete
tasks in complex environments. Due to the high potential of RL in safety-critical domains, such
as autonomous driving [2], ensuring the reliability of its safety-critical properties is becoming
increasingly vital. Formal verification provides provable correctness guarantees [3]. However, the
most significant challenge in the formal verification of RL policies is scalability, which limits its
current applicability [4]. As for conventional software, a complete safety evaluation by exhaustively
testing a policy’s decisions is infeasible. Hence, it is necessary to establish as much confidence as
possible in a policy with a limited testing budget.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

