Certified Adversarial Robustness via Randomized
α-Smoothing for Regression Models

Aref Miri Rekavandi
University of Melbourne
aref.mirirekavandi@unimelb.edu.au
Olga Ohrimenko
University of Melbourne
oohrimenko@unimelb.edu.au

Farhad Farokhi
University of Melbourne
farhad.farokhi@unimelb.edu.au

Benjamin I.P. Rubinstein
University of Melbourne
benjamin.rubinstein@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
Certified adversarial robustness of large-scale deep networks has progressed substantially after the introduction of randomized smoothing. Deep net classifiers
are now provably robust in their predictions against a large class of threat models,
including ℓ1 , ℓ2 , and ℓ∞ norm-bounded attacks. Certified robustness analysis
by randomized smoothing has not been performed for deep regression networks
where the output variable is continuous and unbounded. In this paper, we extend the existing results for randomized smoothing into regression models using powerful tools from robust statistics, in particular, α-trimming filter as the
smoothing function. Adjusting the hyperparameter α achieves a smooth trade-off
between desired certified robustness and utility. For the first time, we propose
a benchmark for certified robust regression in visual positioning systems using
the Cambridge Landmarks dataset where robustness analysis is essential for autonomous navigation of AI agents and self-driving cars. Code is publicly available
at https://github.com/arekavandi/Certified_adv_RRegression/.

1

Introduction

Adversarial examples first swayed the narrative on deep models over a decade ago [2, 26]. Where
deep nets had demonstrated remarkable generalization on classically challenging tasks [10], these
small perturbations to an input sample that make no apparent change to the input’s semantics or
true class, yield high rates of misclassifications. While defenses had so far not tipped the balance
away from the attacker, the combination of Certified Robustness (CR) with adversarial training has
excited the security and ML communities recently [15]. For a given model and input sample, CR
can guarantee the absence of any adversarial examples in close vicinity of the sample. Randomized
Smoothing (RS) is a widely used technique for CR as it scales to arbitrary large-scale models as
it requires only black-box access to model evaluations [12, 6]. Despite attacks targeting ML tasks
beyond classification [5], little is known of certification (or RS) for other standard ML tasks such as
regression. Robustness analysis for regression has been examined through Lipschitz continuity [27]
which is only feasible for small-scale regression models with full access to the models’ parameters
and certain types of activation functions.
In this paper, we present a framework for black-box certification of arbitrary regression models with
either bounded or unbounded outputs. Our results extend the findings of [17] which considers the
class of bounded-output regression models with large sample sizes in the evaluation stage. While they
introduce averaging as an aggregation operator in randomized smoothing for regression, without limits
on output range, averaged predictions may not be stable. This boundedness assumption, however,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

