Extending Multi-modal Contrastive Representations

Ziang Zhang†1, 2 Zehan Wang†1, 2 Luping Liu1 Rongjie Huang1 Xize Cheng1
Zhenhui Ye1 Wang Lin1 Huadai Liu1 Haifeng Huang1
Yang Zhao1 Tao Jin1 Siqi Zheng3 Zhou Zhao1, 2∗
1
Zhejiang University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 Alibaba Group
{ziangzhang, wangzehan01}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-modal contrastive representation (MCR) of more than three modalities is
critical in multi-modal learning. Although recent methods showcase impressive
achievements, the high dependence on large-scale, high-quality paired data and
the expensive training costs limit their further development. Inspired by recent CMCR, this paper proposes Extending Multimodal Contrastive Representation (ExMCR), a training-efficient and paired-data-free method to build unified contrastive
representation for many modalities. Since C-MCR is designed to learn a new
latent space for the two non-overlapping modalities and projects them onto this
space, a significant amount of information from their original spaces is lost in
the projection process. To address this issue, Ex-MCR proposes to extend one
modality’s space into the other’s, rather than mapping both modalities onto a
completely new space. This method effectively preserves semantic alignment
in the original space. Experimentally, we extend pre-trained audio-text and 3Dimage representations to the existing image-text space. Without using paired data,
Ex-MCR achieves comparable performance to advanced methods on a series of
audio-image-text and 3D-image-text tasks and achieves superior performance when
used in parallel with data-driven methods. Moreover, semantic alignment also
emerges between the extended modalities (e.g., audio and 3D). Our project page is
available at https://github.com/MCR-PEFT/Ex-MCR.

1

Introduction

Multi-modal Contrastive Representation (MCR) learning aims to align inputs from diverse modalities
within a shared representation space. Recently, the high-quality contrastive representations of more
than three modalities attract increasing attention [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7], and play a fundamental role in
many application scenarios of multi-modal understanding [8, 9, 10, 11, 12] and generation [13, 14,
15, 16, 17, 18]. Previous methods focused on collecting a large amount of paired data for cross-modal
semantic alignment. However, as the number of modalities increases, the costs associated with data
preparation and model training to learn a contrastive representation space escalate significantly.
Recently, [19] introduces a novel training-efficient method, called C-MCR, for learning contrastive
representations between modalities that lack paired data by mining knowledge from existing semanticaligned spaces. It connects two pre-trained spaces onto a new shared space via overlapping modalities.
Since the modalities of pre-trained spaces are intrinsically aligned, the connection learned from
overlapping modalities can also be transferred to non-overlapping modalities. Experimentally,
without using image-audio and 3D-text data pairs, C-MCR demonstrates advanced performance in
image-audio and 3D-text downstream tasks.
∗

Corresponding author. †Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

