Fully Distributed, Flexible Compositional Visual
Representations via Soft Tensor Products

Bethia Sun∗

Maurice Pagnucco

Yang Song

School of Computer Science and Engineering
UNSW Sydney

Abstract
Since the inception of the classicalist vs. connectionist debate, it has been argued
that the ability to systematically combine symbol-like entities into compositional
representations is crucial for human intelligence. In connectionist systems, the
field of disentanglement has gained prominence for its ability to produce explicitly compositional representations; however, it relies on a fundamentally symbolic,
concatenative representation of compositional structure that clashes with the continuous, distributed foundations of deep learning. To resolve this tension, we extend
Smolensky’s Tensor Product Representation (TPR) and introduce Soft TPR, a representational form that encodes compositional structure in an inherently distributed,
flexible manner, along with Soft TPR Autoencoder, a theoretically-principled architecture designed specifically to learn Soft TPRs. Comprehensive evaluations in the
visual representation learning domain demonstrate that the Soft TPR framework
consistently outperforms conventional disentanglement alternatives – achieving
state-of-the-art disentanglement, boosting representation learner convergence, and
delivering superior sample efficiency and low-sample regime performance in downstream tasks. These findings highlight the promise of a distributed and flexible
approach to representing compositional structure by potentially enhancing alignment with the core principles of deep learning over the conventional symbolic
approach.

1

Introduction

Compositional structure, capturing the property of being decomposable into a set of constituent parts,
permeates numerous aspects of our world – from the recursive application of syntax in language, to
the parsing of richly complex visual scenes into their constituent parts. Given this ubiquity, it is natural
to seek deep learning representations that also embody compositional structure. Indeed, empirical
evidence demonstrates a multitude of benefits conferred by explicitly compositional representations,
including increased interpretability [10, 12], reduced sample complexity [30, 33], increased fairness
[20, 25, 41], and improved performance in out-of-distribution generalisation [33, 48, 50].
We consider the following, intuitive notion of compositional representations. A representation of
compositionally-structured data is a compositional representation if its structure explicitly reflects the
constituency structure of the represented data [49]. In the visual representation learning domain, data
is clearly compositionally-structured, as images can be decomposed into a set of constituent factors
of variation (FoVs), e.g., {magenta floor,orange wall, aqua object colour, oblong object shape}
for the image in Figure 1.
∗

Correspondence to: bethia.sun@unsw.edu.au
Code is available at: https://github.com/gomb0c/soft_tpr/

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

