Protected Test-Time Adaptation
via Online Entropy Matching: A Betting Approach

Yarin Bar1∗

Shalev Shaer2∗

Yaniv Romano1,2

1

2

Department of Computer Science, Technion—Israel Institute of Technology
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion—Israel Institute of Technology
{yarinbar,shalev.shaer}@campus.technion.ac.il
yromano@technion.ac.il

Abstract
We present a novel approach for test-time adaptation via online self-training, consisting of two components. First, we introduce a statistical framework that detects
distribution shifts in the classifier’s entropy values obtained on a stream of unlabeled samples. Second, we devise an online adaptation mechanism that utilizes
the evidence of distribution shifts captured by the detection tool to dynamically
update the classifier’s parameters. The resulting adaptation process drives the
distribution of test entropy values obtained from the self-trained classifier to match
those of the source domain, building invariance to distribution shifts. This approach
departs from the conventional self-training method, which focuses on minimizing
the classifier’s entropy. Our approach combines concepts in betting martingales and
online learning to form a detection tool capable of quickly reacting to distribution
shifts. We then reveal a tight relation between our adaptation scheme and optimal
transport, which forms the basis of our novel self-supervised loss. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach improves test-time accuracy under distribution
shifts while maintaining accuracy and calibration in their absence, outperforming
leading entropy minimization methods across various scenarios.

1

Introduction

The deployment of machine learning (ML) models in real-world settings presents a significant
challenge, as these models often encounter testing environments (target domains) that differ from
their training, source domain [1–15]. Consider, for example, an image recognition system employed
for medical diagnostic support [16–20], where the quality of images acquired during testing deviates
from the training data due to factors such as equipment degradation and novel illumination conditions.
ML models are sensitive to such distribution shifts, often resulting in performance deterioration,
which can be unexpected [15]. Ultimately, we want predictive models to dynamically adapt to new
testing environments without the laborious work required to annotate new, up-to-date labels.
Recognizing this pressing need, there has been a surge in the development of adaptation methodologies
to enhance test-time robustness to shifting distributions [21–28]. One commonly used approach
involves jointly training a model on both the source and target domains [29–34]. However, such
train-time adaptation methods assume access to unlabeled test data from the target domains, limiting
the ability to adapt the model to new domains that emerge during testing. To overcome this limitation,
test-time adaptation techniques offer strategies that dynamically update the model parameters as new
unlabeled test points become available. In particular, leading methodologies draw inspiration from
∗1

Equal Contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

