MoME: Mixture of Multimodal Experts for Generalist
Multimodal Large Language Models

Leyang Shen∗ Gongwei Chen∗ Rui Shao† Weili Guan Liqiang Nie†
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
{chengongwei, shaorui, guanweili, nieliqiang}@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities across various vision-language tasks. However, a generalist MLLM
typically underperforms compared with a specialist MLLM on most VL tasks,
which can be attributed to task interference. In this paper, we propose a mixture of
multimodal experts (MoME) to mitigate task interference and obtain a generalist
MLLM. Our MoME is composed of two key components, a mixture of vision
experts (MoVE) and a mixture of language experts (MoLE). MoVE can adaptively
modulate the features transformed from various vision encoders, and has a strong
compatibility in transformation architecture. MoLE incorporates sparsely gated
experts into LLMs to achieve painless improvements with roughly unchanged
inference costs. In response to task interference, our MoME specializes in both
vision and language modality to adapt to task discrepancies. Extensive experiments
show that MoME significantly improves the performance of generalist MLLMs
across various VL tasks.

1

Introduction

Recently, Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [39, 35, 48, 31, 67] have witnessed remarkable progress. With the help of Large Language Models (LLMs) [13, 63, 1] and Modality
Encoders [50, 30, 17, 52, 70], MLLMs demonstrate excellent multimodal comprehensive abilities,
especially in solving a wide range of vision-language (VL) tasks [3, 42, 37, 55, 57, 56], such as Image
Cpation, Visual Question Answering, Referring Expression Comprehension, and Optical Character
Recognition. However, it is increasingly acknowledged that a generalist MLLM tends to have lower
performance compared to a specialist MLLM on most VL tasks [12, 8], as depicted in Fig. 1 (a).
This phenomenon can be attributed to task interference, a fundamental and crucial issue in multi-task
learning [16, 41, 64].
There are some preliminary attempts [15, 6, 12, 5, 8, 58] to address this issue in instruction-tuning
MLLMs. The most promising direction [12, 5, 8, 58] among these attempts is to use a mixture of
experts (MoE) in MLLMs, aiming for each expert to specialize in several tasks. However, these
works only investigate MoE in LLMs and primarily concentrate on textual differences between
tasks, overlooking the equally important visual information. As shown in Fig. 1 (b-c), we analyze
the distribution of various VL tasks across both vision and language modalities. It is evident that
images from different groups of VL tasks exhibit distinct feature distributions, as do texts. Inspired
by this observation, we argue that handling task interference needs to comprehensively exploit task
differences in both vision and language modalities.
* Equal contribution
†

Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

