BMRS: Bayesian Model Reduction for Structured
Pruning

Dustin Wright, Christian Igel, and Raghavendra Selvan
Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen
{dw,igel,raghav}@di.ku.dk

Abstract
Modern neural networks are often massively overparameterized leading to high
compute costs during training and at inference. One effective method to improve
both the compute and energy efficiency of neural networks while maintaining good
performance is structured pruning, where full network structures (e.g. neurons or
convolutional filters) that have limited impact on the model output are removed. In
this work, we propose Bayesian Model Reduction for Structured pruning (BMRS),
a fully end-to-end Bayesian method of structured pruning. BMRS is based on
two recent methods: Bayesian structured pruning with multiplicative noise, and
Bayesian model reduction (BMR), a method which allows efficient comparison of
Bayesian models under a change in prior. We present two realizations of BMRS derived from different priors which yield different structured pruning characteristics:
1) BMRSN with the truncated log-normal prior, which offers reliable compression
rates and accuracy without the need for tuning any thresholds and 2) BMRSU
with the truncated log-uniform prior that can achieve more aggressive compression based on the boundaries of truncation. Overall, we find that BMRS offers a
theoretically grounded approach to structured pruning of neural networks yielding
both high compression rates and accuracy. Experiments on multiple datasets and
neural networks of varying complexity showed that the two BMRS methods offer a
competitive performance-efficiency trade-off compared to other pruning methods.1

1

Introduction

Modern neural networks come with an increasing computational burden, as scale is often seen to be
associated with performance [34]. The response to this has been a focus on research around the topic
of neural network efficiency [3], where the goal is to reduce the computational cost of a system while
maintaining other desirable metrics. As such, selecting a method to improve efficiency comes with
many tradeoffs, including how to balance compute and energy consumption with accuracy [35].
Neural network pruning seeks to do this by removing parts of a network which have limited impact
on its output. This comes in two primary forms: unstructured pruning, where individual weights
are removed, and structured pruning, where entire neural network structures such as neurons and
convolutional filters are removed [27]. Structured pruning is often desirable as unstructured pruning
can result in sparse computations which are energy intensive on current hardware, while structured
pruning can maintain more energy efficient dense operations [14, 17, 31]. Many ways to perform
structured pruning have been proposed, but the challenge of how to appropriately balance accuracy
and complexity in a principled manner has remained.
In this work, we address this challenge by proposing BMRS: Bayesian Model Reduction for
Structured pruning. BMRS is a principled method based on combining two complementary lines
1

Source code: https://github.com/saintslab/bmrs-structured-pruning/

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

