Sample Complexity of Posted Pricing for a Single Item

Billy Jin∗

Thomas Kesselheim†

Will Ma‡

Sahil Singla§

Abstract
Selling a single item to n self-interested buyers is a fundamental problem in
economics, where the two objectives typically considered are welfare maximization
and revenue maximization. Since the optimal mechanisms are often impractical and
do not work for sequential buyers, posted pricing mechanisms, where fixed prices
are set for the item for different buyers, have emerged as a practical and effective
alternative. This paper investigates how many samples are needed from buyers’
value distributions to find near-optimal posted prices, considering both independent
and correlated buyer distributions, and welfare versus revenue maximization. We
obtain matching upper and lower bounds (up to logarithmic factors) on the sample
complexity for all these settings.

1

Introduction

A fundamental problem in Economics is how to sell a single indivisible item to a set of n selfinterested buyers. This problem is challenging because the value associated to the item is private
knowledge of each buyer and thus can be strategically misreported. The mechanism designer usually
has one of two objectives: (a) welfare maximization where we want to maximize the value of the
winning buyer, and (b) revenue maximization where we want to maximize the price paid by the
winning buyer. The welfare maximization problem was resolved by Vickrey in 1961 [Vic61] and
the revenue maximization problem was resolved (for independent distributions) by Myerson in 1981
[Mye81], both of whom were awarded the Nobel prize in Economics for their contributions. In either
case the optimal mechanism is a truthful auction, in which buyers report their values and have no
incentive to misreport.
Although we know optimal mechanisms for selling a single item, these auctions are often difficult/impossible to implement in practice. For instance, the buyer does not know exactly how much
they will pay if they win the item and these auctions do not work for online settings where the buyers
arrive one-by-one [AM+ 06, HR09]. Thus, the last two decades has seen a lot of progress on understanding the power of simple but near-optimal mechanisms. In this regard, posted pricing mechanisms
have been identified to be very successful (see books and surveys [Rou16, Har13, CFH+ 19, Luc17]).
Here, the mechanism designer puts a (carefully chosen) price πi on the item and then the i-th
buyer takes the item if the item is not already sold and if they value it above πi . Posted pricing
mechanisms have several advantages: they are truthful since πi does not depend on the i-th buyer’s
value; the buyer knows exactly how much they pay on winning an item; and they work even for
online settings so the buyers do not have to be simultaneously present. Additionally, in the setting of
Myerson’s 1981 paper of independent buyer valuations, they are known to give a 2-approximation
to both the optimal welfare (which is usually called Prophet Inequality) and the optimal revenue
∗

Cornell University, School of Operations Research and Information Engineering, bzj3@cornell.edu.
University of Bonn, Institute of Computer Science and Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial
Intelligence, thomas.kesselheim@uni-bonn.de
‡
Columbia University, Graduate School of Business and Data Science Institute, wm2428@gsb.columbia.edu.
§
Georgia Tech, School of Computer Science, ssingla@gatech.edu. Supported in part by NSF award CCF2327010.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

