Improving Context-Aware Preference Modeling
for Language Models

Silviu Pitisa,b
a

Ziang Xiaoc

University of Toronto

b

Nicolas Le Rouxb,d

Microsoft Research

c

Alessandro Sordonib,d

Johns Hopkins University

d

MILA

Abstract
While finetuning language models (LMs) from pairwise preferences has proven
remarkably effective, the underspecified nature of natural language presents critical
challenges. Direct preference feedback is uninterpretable, difficult to provide where
multidimensional criteria may apply, and often inconsistent, either because it is
based on incomplete instructions or provided by diverse principals. To address
these challenges, we consider the two-step preference modeling procedure that
first resolves the under-specification by selecting a context, and then evaluates
preference with respect to the chosen context. We decompose reward modeling
error according to these two steps, which suggests that supervising context in
addition to context-specific preference may be a viable approach to aligning models with diverse human preferences. For this to work, the ability of models to
evaluate context-specific preference is critical. To this end, we contribute contextconditioned preference datasets and accompanying experiments that investigate
the ability of language models to evaluate context-specific preference. We use
our datasets to (1) show that existing preference models benefit from, but fail to
fully consider, added context, (2) finetune a context-aware reward model with
context-specific performance exceeding that of GPT-4 and Llama 3 70B on tested
datasets, and (3) investigate the value of context-aware preference modeling.

1

Introduction

As the general purpose capabilities of Language Models (LMs) [11, 42] and other foundation
models [9] progress toward handling diverse instructions and executing long-range trajectories in
real-world applications [44, 47, 41], it becomes increasingly important to have a principled system
for ensuring that LM agents behave as expected. The prevailing approach for aligning an LM to
human preferences uses pairwise preferences between different outputs to finetune the LM [52, 6],
which falls short of addressing the critical challenges presented by the reality of diverse user intents
and contexts [51, 50, 13]. In the presence of unspecified contexts, such as the user’s identity or
goals, preference queries are notoriously ambiguous [62] and one typically observes poor agreement
(∼ 65%) between human annotators on binary preference queries [35, 59].
In this paper, we consider modeling preferences using a two-step, context-aware approach (Figure 1).
This approach first resolves the underspecification by selecting a context [38, 22], and then evaluates
preference with respect to the chosen context [61, 14, 27, 30, 58]. Decomposing general preference
into context and context-specific preference has several potential advantages. First and foremost, this
approach explicitly identifies contextual assumptions that underlie preference, and shifts the alignment
burden from preference modeling to a hybrid of preference modeling and context supervision. Second,
this approach is naturally pluralistic [51], allowing the model to adapt to diverse users and use cases.
Finally, it offers more flexibility for principled aggregation: whereas the Bradley-Terry approach
corresponds to aggregating contexts using the Borda rule [50], which may under-serve certain
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

