MotionBooth: Motion-Aware Customized
Text-to-Video Generation
Jianzong Wu1,3 , Xiangtai Li2,3 † , Yanhong Zeng3 , Jiangning Zhang4 , Qianyu Zhou5 ,
Yining Li3 , Kai Chen3 , Yunhai Tong1
1
2
PKU S-Lab, NTU 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 ZJU 5 SJTU
Project Page: https://jianzongwu.github.io/projects/motionbooth
Code: https://github.com/jianzongwu/MotionBooth
Email: jzwu@stu.pku.edu.cn, xiangtai94@gmail.com

Subject

Subject motion

Generated Videos

Camera motion

Down Left

A dog jumping down the stairs

A monster toy walking in Times Square

A cat jumping over the wall

Right

A cartoon running in a painting forest

Figure 1: Motion-aware customized video generation results of MotionBooth. Our method animates a
customized object with controllable subject and camera motions.

Abstract
In this work, we present MotionBooth, an innovative framework designed for
animating customized subjects with precise control over both object and camera
movements. By leveraging a few images of a specific object, we efficiently finetune a text-to-video model to capture the object’s shape and attributes accurately.
Our approach presents subject region loss and video preservation loss to enhance
the subject’s learning performance, along with a subject token cross-attention loss
to integrate the customized subject with motion control signals. Additionally, we
propose training-free techniques for managing subject and camera motions during
inference. In particular, we utilize cross-attention map manipulation to govern
subject motion and introduce a novel latent shift module for camera movement
control as well. MotionBooth excels in preserving the appearance of subjects while
simultaneously controlling the motions in generated videos. Extensive quantitative
and qualitative evaluations demonstrate the superiority and effectiveness of our
method. Models and codes will be made publicly available.
Work done when Jianzong is an intern at Shanghai AI Laboratory. † : Project Lead. Corresponding: Xiangtai
Li and Yunhai Tong.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

