PrivCirNet: Efficient Private Inference via Block
Circulant Transformation
Tianshi Xu
Peking University
tianshixu@stu.pku.edu.cn

Lemeng Wu
Meta, Inc.
lmwu@meta

Runsheng Wang
Peking University
r.wang@pku.edu.cn

Meng Li∗
Peking University
meng.li@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Homomorphic encryption (HE)-based deep neural network (DNN) inference protects data and model privacy but suffers from significant computation overhead.
We observe transforming the DNN weights into circulant matrices converts general matrix-vector multiplications into HE-friendly 1-dimensional convolutions,
drastically reducing the HE computation cost. Hence, in this paper, we propose
PrivCirNet, a protocol/network co-optimization framework based on block circulant transformation. At the protocol level, PrivCirNet customizes the HE encoding
algorithm that is fully compatible with the block circulant transformation and reduces the computation latency in proportion to the block size. At the network level,
we propose a latency-aware formulation to search for the layer-wise block size
assignment based on second-order information. PrivCirNet also leverages layer
fusion to further reduce the inference cost. We compare PrivCirNet with the stateof-the-art HE-based framework Bolt (IEEE S&P 2024) and HE-friendly pruning
method SpENCNN (ICML 2023). For ResNet-18 and Vision Transformer (ViT) on
Tiny ImageNet, PrivCirNet reduces latency by 5.0× and 1.3× with iso-accuracy
over Bolt, respectively, and improves accuracy by 4.1% and 12% over SpENCNN,
respectively. For MobileNetV2 on ImageNet, PrivCirNet achieves 1.7× lower
latency and 4.2% better accuracy over Bolt and SpENCNN, respectively. Our code
and checkpoints are available on Git Hub.

1

Introduction

The past few years have witnessed the rapid evolution of deep learning (DL) as well as its increasing
adoption in sensitive and private applications, including face authentication [1], medical diagnosis [2],
code auto-completion [3], etc. Privacy emerges as a major concern and leads to a growing demand
for privacy-preserving DL [4, 5, 6, 7]. Homomorphic encryption (HE) is proposed as a promising
technology for privacy protection and attracts a lot of attention [8, 9, 10, 7]. By encrypting the data
into ciphertexts, HE allows computation over the encrypted data directly and produces encrypted
results, without leaking any knowledge of the data itself [8].
To apply HE for private deep neural network (DNN) inference, there are two main approaches,
including the end-to-end HE-based schemes [8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18] and the hybrid
HE/multi-party computation (MPC)-based schemes [7, 10, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23]. As shown in
Figure 1 (a), the hybrid HE/MPC scheme leverages HE and MPC protocols to evaluate the linear
∗

Corresponding author: meng.li@pku.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

