DataStealing: Steal Data from Diffusion Models in
Federated Learning with Multiple Trojans

Yuan Gan
ReLER, CCAI
Zhejiang University
ganyuan@zju.edu.cn

Jiaxu Miao∗
School of Cyber Science and Technology
Sun Yat-sen University
miaojx@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Yi Yang
ReLER, CCAI
Zhejiang University
yangyics@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is commonly used to collaboratively train models with
privacy preservation. In this paper, we found out that the popular diffusion models
have introduced a new vulnerability to FL, which brings serious privacy threats. Despite stringent data management measures, attackers can steal massive private data
from local clients through multiple Trojans, which control generative behaviors
with multiple triggers. We refer to the new task as DataStealing and demonstrate
that the attacker can achieve the purpose based on our proposed Combinatorial
Triggers (ComboTs) in a vanilla FL system. However, advanced distance-based
FL defenses are still effective in filtering the malicious update according to the
distances between each local update. Hence, we propose an Adaptive Scale Critical
Parameters (AdaSCP) attack to circumvent the defenses and seamlessly incorporate malicious updates into the global model. Specifically, AdaSCP evaluates
the importance of parameters with the gradients in dominant timesteps of the
diffusion model. Subsequently, it adaptively seeks the optimal scale factor and
magnifies critical parameter updates before uploading to the server. As a result,
the malicious update becomes similar to the benign update, making it difficult
for distance-based defenses to identify. Extensive experiments reveal the risk
of leaking thousands of images in training diffusion models with FL. Moreover,
these experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of AdaSCP in defeating advanced
distance-based defenses. We hope this work will attract more attention from the
FL community to the critical privacy security issues of Diffusion Models. Code:
https://github.com/yuangan/DataStealing.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a popular framework for distributed machine learning due
to its local data protection capabilities. Meanwhile, the issue of privacy data leakage in federated
learning has attracted significant attention. Most previous FL works focused on discriminative
models, and several studies [19, 61, 68] have demonstrated that FL may leak small amounts of
arbitrary local data through gradient inversion. Recently, FL has begun to be utilized to train diffusion
models [27, 51, 25], one of the advanced generative methods [22, 48, 45, 58, 11]. In this paper,
we found that diffusion models have brought new privacy vulnerabilities to FL. Attackers can steal
thousands of specified high-quality local data through diffusion models trained with FL, which
exposes more severe privacy security issues compared with discriminative models.
Specifically, to safeguard data privacy, using FL to train diffusion models is considered a definitive
choice. According to GDPR [52], strict data privacy management mechanisms should be adopted to
prevent attackers from directly accessing or transmitting data from local clients, including banning
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

