Bayesian Optimisation with
Unknown Hyperparameters:
Regret Bounds Logarithmically Closer to Optimal

Juliusz Ziomek†,⋆ , Masaki Adachi†,‡ , Michael A. Osborne† ,
†

Machine Learning Research Group, University of Oxford
‡

Toyota Motor Corporation
⋆

Corresponding Author

{juliusz, masaki, mosb}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Bayesian Optimization (BO) is widely used for optimising black-box functions but
requires us to specify the length scale hyperparameter, which defines the smoothness of the functions the optimizer will consider. Most current BO algorithms
choose this hyperparameter by maximizing the marginal likelihood of the observed
data, albeit risking misspecification if the objective function is less smooth in
regions we have not yet explored. The only prior solution addressing this problem
with theoretical guarantees was A-GP-UCB, proposed by Berkenkamp et al. (2019).
This algorithm progressively decreases the length scale, expanding the class of
functions considered by the optimizer. However, A-GP-UCB lacks a stopping
mechanism, leading to over-exploration and slow convergence. To overcome this,
we introduce Length scale Balancing (LB)—a novel approach, aggregating multiple base surrogate models with varying length scales. LB intermittently adds
smaller length scale candidate values while retaining longer scales, balancing exploration and exploitation. We formally derive a cumulative regret bound of LB
and compare it with the regret of an oracle BO algorithm using the optimal length
scale. Denoting the factor by which the regret bound of A-GP-UCB was away from
oracle as g(T ), we show that LB is only log g(T ) away from oracle regret. We also
empirically evaluate our algorithm on synthetic and real-world benchmarks and
show it outperforms A-GP-UCB, maximum likelihood estimation and MCMC.

1

Introduction

Bayesian Optimisation (BO) [16] has proven to be an efficient solution for black-box optimisation
problems, finding applications across science, engineering and machine learning [12, 18, 23]. As
a model-based optimisation technique, BO constructs a surrogate model of the black box function,
which is typically a Gaussian Process (GP) [40]. However, to construct this surrogate, we need to
specify our expectations about the smoothness of the black-box function. In the case of GP, the choice
of smoothness is reflected in the selection of an appropriate length scale value for the kernel function.
Selecting smaller length scales allows us to model less smooth functions and, as such, expands the
class of all possible black-box functions the optimiser will consider. At the same time, it makes
the convergence of the algorithm slower, due to an increase in the number of possible ‘candidate’
functions, the algorithm has to explore the space much more. As such, we wish to consider the
smallest possible class of functions that still contains the black-box function we wish to solve. This
translates to selecting some optimal length scale value, which is neither too short nor too long.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

