Mitigating Spurious Correlations
via Disagreement Probability

Hyeonggeun Han1,2 Sehwan Kim1 Hyungjun Joo1,2
Sangwoo Hong1,2 Jungwoo Lee1,2,3∗
1
ECE & 2 NextQuantum, Seoul National University 3 Hodoo AI Labs
{hygnhan, sehwankim, joohj911, tkddn0606, junglee}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Models trained with empirical risk minimization (ERM) are prone to be biased
towards spurious correlations between target labels and bias attributes, which leads
to poor performance on data groups lacking spurious correlations. It is particularly
challenging to address this problem when access to bias labels is not permitted. To
mitigate the effect of spurious correlations without bias labels, we first introduce a
novel training objective designed to robustly enhance model performance across
all data samples, irrespective of the presence of spurious correlations. From this
objective, we then derive a debiasing method, Disagreement Probability based Resampling for debiasing (DPR), which does not require bias labels. DPR leverages
the disagreement between the target label and the prediction of a biased model to
identify bias-conflicting samples—those without spurious correlations—and upsamples them according to the disagreement probability. Empirical evaluations on
multiple benchmarks demonstrate that DPR achieves state-of-the-art performance
over existing baselines that do not use bias labels. Furthermore, we provide a theoretical analysis that details how DPR reduces dependency on spurious correlations.

1

Introduction

Background
Desert
Pasture

Class label
In the realm of machine learning, many classification models emCow
Camel
ploy Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) [46], which optimizes
average performance. However, this approach has been found to
underperform on certain groups of data [4, 15, 11] due to the prevalence of spurious correlations within training datasets [31, 38, 39].
Spurious correlations refer to the strong correlations between target labels and easy-to-learn attributes (i.e., bias attributes), which
are present in a majority of the training examples. ERM-trained
models often rely on these bias attributes [12], leading to biased
predictions and poor generalization on minority groups where spurious correlations are absent. For example, consider the cow/camel
classification task illustrated in Figure 1. A majority of camel
images feature desert backgrounds, while a majority of cow im- Figure 1: An illustration of the
ages feature pasture backgrounds. Models trained via ERM might cow/camel classification task.
learn to recognize animals based on their backgrounds—desert Red dotted boxes indicate samfor camels and pasture for cows—rather than on their distinctive ples where spurious correlations
features. This reliance can result in misclassifications, such as do not hold.
erroneously identifying a camel in a pasture as a cow. Addressing these spurious correlations is a
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

