ZSC-Eval: An Evaluation Toolkit and Benchmark
for Multi-agent Zero-shot Coordination

Xihuai Wang∗, Shao Zhang∗, Wenhao Zhang, Wentao Dong, Jingxiao Chen,
Ying Wen†, Weinan Zhang†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{leoxhwang,shaozhang,ying.wen,wnzhang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Zero-shot coordination (ZSC) is a new cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) challenge that aims to train an ego agent to work with diverse, unseen
partners during deployment. The significant difference between the deploymenttime partners’ distribution and the training partners’ distribution determined by the
training algorithm makes ZSC a unique out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization
challenge. The potential distribution gap between evaluation and deploymenttime partners leads to inadequate evaluation, which is exacerbated by the lack
of appropriate evaluation metrics. In this paper, we present ZSC-Eval, the first
evaluation toolkit and benchmark for ZSC algorithms. ZSC-Eval consists of: 1)
Generation of evaluation partner candidates through behavior-preferring rewards
to approximate deployment-time partners’ distribution; 2) Selection of evaluation
partners by Best-Response Diversity (BR-Div); 3) Measurement of generalization
performance with various evaluation partners via the Best-Response Proximity
(BR-Prox) metric. We use ZSC-Eval to benchmark ZSC algorithms in Overcooked
and Google Research Football environments and get novel empirical findings.
We also conduct a human experiment of current ZSC algorithms to verify the
ZSC-Eval’s consistency with human evaluation. ZSC-Eval is now available at
https://github.com/sjtu-marl/ZSC-Eval.

1

Introduction

Building agents that can interact and collaborate with others without prior coordination in various
scenarios is a crucial challenge of cooperative AI [50, 61, 9, 14]. One aspect of this challenge,
known as Zero-shot coordination (ZSC) in cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
[55, 56, 63] involves developing an agent that learns coordination skills with a limited set of training
partners and generalizes them to unseen partners during deployment [13, 34]. The distribution of
training partners is determined by training algorithms, while deployment-time partners are determined
by deployment requirements [16], making ZSC an out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization problem.
ZSC capability evaluation requires specific methods, such as partners that meet deployment-time
distributions and metrics that focus on generalization performance and not only task performance [25].
Current ZSC evaluation methods still face challenges. The distribution gap between evaluation and
deployment-time partners is crucial. Human proxy agents might not fully mimic human behaviors [60], and generating evaluation and training partners using identical methods [51, 27] results in
similar distributions, compromising the reliability of evaluation results. Cross-play evaluations among
∗
†

Both authors contribute equally to this work.
Correspondence Authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

