Using Time-Aware Graph Neural Networks to Predict
Temporal Centralities in Dynamic Graphs

Franziska Heeg
Chair of Machine Learning for Complex Networks
Center for Artificial Intelligence and Data Science (CAIDAS)
Julius-Maximilans-Universität, Würzburg
franziska.heeg@uni-wuerzburg.de
Ingo Scholtes
Chair of Machine Learning for Complex Networks
Center for Artificial Intelligence and Data Science (CAIDAS)
Julius-Maximilans-Universität, Würzburg
ingo.scholtes@uni-wuerzburg.de

Abstract
Node centralities play a pivotal role in network science, social network analysis,
and recommender systems. In temporal data, static path-based centralities like
closeness or betweenness can give misleading results about the true importance
of nodes in a temporal graph. To address this issue, temporal generalizations
of betweenness and closeness have been defined that are based on the shortest
time-respecting paths between pairs of nodes. However, a major issue of those
generalizations is that the calculation of such paths is computationally expensive.
Addressing this issue, we study the application of De Bruijn Graph Neural Networks
(DBGNN), a time-aware graph neural network architecture, to predict temporal
path-based centralities in time series data. We experimentally evaluate our approach in 13 temporal graphs from biological and social systems and show that
it considerably improves the prediction of betweenness and closeness centrality
compared to (i) a static Graph Convolutional Neural Network, (ii) an efficient
sampling-based approximation technique for temporal betweenness, and (iii) two
state-of-the-art time-aware graph learning techniques for dynamic graphs.

1

Motivation

Node centralities are important in the analysis of complex networks, with applications in network
science, social network analysis, and recommender systems. An important class of centrality measures
are path-based centralities like, e.g. betweenness or closeness centrality [5, 16], which are based
on the shortest paths between all nodes. While centralities in static networks are important, we
increasingly have access to time series data on temporal graphs with time-stamped edges. Due to
the timing and ordering of those edges, the paths in a static time-aggregated representation of such
time series data can considerably differ from time-respecting paths in the corresponding temporal
graph. In a nutshell, two time-stamped edges (u, v; t) and (v, w; t′ ) only form a time-respecting
path from node u via v to w iff for the time stamps t and t′ we have t < t′ , i.e. time-respecting
paths must minimally respect the arrow of time. Moreover, we often consider scenarios where we
need to additionally account for a maximum time difference δ between time-stamped edges, i.e. we
require 0 < t′ − t ≤ δ [22]. Several works have shown that temporal correlations in the sequence
of time-stamped edges can significantly change the causal topology of a temporal graph, i.e. which
nodes can influence each other via time-respecting paths, compared to what is expected based on the
static topology [30, 35, 39].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

