Med-Real2Sim: Non-Invasive Medical Digital Twins
using Physics-Informed Self-Supervised Learning

Keying Kuang∗
UC Berkeley

Frances Dean∗
UC Berkeley & UCSF

Anthony Philippakis†
Google Ventures

Jack B. Jedlicki∗
University of Barcelona

David Sontag†
MIT

David Ouyang
Cedars Sinai

Ahmed Alaa†
UC Berkeley & UCSF

Abstract
A digital twin is a virtual replica of a real-world physical phenomena that uses
mathematical modeling to characterize and simulate its defining features. By constructing digital twins for disease processes, we can perform in-silico simulations
that mimic patients’ health conditions and counterfactual outcomes under hypothetical interventions in a virtual setting. This eliminates the need for invasive
procedures or uncertain treatment decisions. In this paper, we propose a method to
identify digital twin model parameters using only noninvasive patient health data.
We approach the digital twin modeling as a composite inverse problem, and observe
that its structure resembles pretraining and finetuning in self-supervised learning
(SSL). Leveraging this, we introduce a physics-informed SSL algorithm that initially
pretrains a neural network on the pretext task of learning a differentiable simulator
of a physiological process. Subsequently, the model is trained to reconstruct physiological measurements from noninvasive modalities while being constrained by the
physical equations learned in pretraining. We apply our method to identify digital
twins of cardiac hemodynamics using noninvasive echocardiogram videos, and
demonstrate its utility in unsupervised disease detection and in-silico clinical trials.

1

Introduction

With increasing health data availability, there is excitement about refining physics-based models of
human body systems to be patient specific, as personalized physical models can provide the basis for
in-silico experiments and timely diagnosis (27; 31; 55; 25). This personalized vision of healthcare has
given rise to virtual patients constructed with data-tuned models, known as digital twins. Originally
an engineering concept, digital twins have recently been realized as a resource in healthcare (6; 4).
The concept combines data-driven approaches with mechanistic or simulation techniques, serving as
a bidirectional map between real data and simulations. Medical digital twins have been applied and
developed broadly in applications ranging from cellular mechanics (24) to the development of whole
body and human digital twins (50; 76), with aims ranging from tailoring cardiovascular interventions
(30) to agent-based trauma care management systems (14). Both academic and industry efforts are
prolific with digital twins having been developed for various medical problems (9; 69; 74; 13; 22; 70).
In this paper, we propose a framework for identifying patient-level digital twins using noninvasive
medical images. We focus on scenarios where identifying a patient’s digital twin from noninvasive
data allows us to simulate other physiological parameters that typically require invasive measurement,
such as through catheterization. Such an approach assumes that there is a mapping from rich noninvasive imaging data to patient-specific mechanistic models of physiology; such a mapping is not
known to scientists humans but can be learned from data. This hypothesis is supported by previous
experimental work (2; 64; 43). However, the challenge lies in the absence of datasets containing both
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

