MoGenTS: Motion Generation based on
Spatial-Temporal Joint Modeling

Weihao Yuan1∗ Yisheng He1∗ Weichao Shen1 Yuan Dong1 Xiaodong Gu1
Zilong Dong1† Liefeng Bo1 Qixing Huang2
1
Alibaba Group 2 The University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
Motion generation from discrete quantization offers many advantages over continuous regression, but at the cost of inevitable approximation errors. Previous methods
usually quantize the entire body pose into one code, which not only faces the difficulty in encoding all joints within one vector but also loses the spatial relationship
between different joints. Differently, in this work we quantize each individual
joint into one vector, which i) simplifies the quantization process as the complexity
associated with a single joint is markedly lower than that of the entire pose; ii)
maintains a spatial-temporal structure that preserves both the spatial relationships
among joints and the temporal movement patterns; iii) yields a 2D token map,
which enables the application of various 2D operations widely used in 2D images.
Grounded in the 2D motion quantization, we build a spatial-temporal modeling
framework, where 2D joint VQVAE, temporal-spatial 2D masking technique, and
spatial-temporal 2D attention are proposed to take advantage of spatial-temporal
signals among the 2D tokens. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
significantly outperforms previous methods across different datasets, with a 26.6%
decrease of FID on HumanML3D and a 29.9% decrease on KIT-ML.

1

Introduction

Human motion generation from textual prompts is a fast-growing field in computer vision and is
valuable for numerous applications like film making, the gaming industry, virtual reality, and robotics.
Given a text prompt describing the motion of a person, the goal is to generate a sequence containing
the positions of all joints in the human body at each moment corresponding to the text prompt.
Previous attempts to tackle this challenge generally proceeded in two directions. The first directly
regresses the continuous human motions from the text inputs using methods such as generative
adversarial networks (GANs) [1], variational autoencoders (VAEs) [2, 3, 4, 5], or recent diffusion
models [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. Although continuous regression has the advantage of directly optimizing
towards ground-truth data and does not lose the numerical precision, it struggles with the challenge of
regressing continuous motion that encompasses intricate skeletal joint information and is limited by
the quality and scale of current text-to-motion datasets. The second leverages the vector quantization
(VQ) technique to convert continuous motion to discrete tokens, which transform the regression
problem into a classification problem [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17]. In this way, the difficulty of motion
generation could be greatly reduced. In a broader picture, approaching continuous regression problems
using quantization techniques is becoming increasingly popular [18, 19, 20]. In this paper, we seek
to push the limit of the second path by designing a novel representation and learning paradigm.
∗

Equal Contribution † Corresponding Author
Project Page: https://aigc3d.github.io/mogents

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

