Policy Aggregation

Parand A. Alamdari∗
University of Toronto & Vector Institute
parand@cs.toronto.edu

Soroush Ebadian∗
University of Toronto
soroush@cs.toronto.edu

Ariel D. Procaccia
Harvard University
arielpro@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
We consider the challenge of AI value alignment with multiple individuals that have
different reward functions and optimal policies in an underlying Markov decision
process. We formalize this problem as one of policy aggregation, where the goal
is to identify a desirable collective policy. We argue that an approach informed
by social choice theory is especially suitable. Our key insight is that social choice
methods can be reinterpreted by identifying ordinal preferences with volumes
of subsets of the state-action occupancy polytope. Building on this insight, we
demonstrate that a variety of methods — including approval voting, Borda count,
the proportional veto core, and quantile fairness — can be practically applied to
policy aggregation.

1

Introduction

Early discussion of AI value alignment had often focused on learning desirable behavior from an
individual teacher, for example, through inverse reinforcement learning [27, 1]. But, in recent
years, the conversation has shifted towards aligning AI models with large groups of people or even
entire societies. This shift is exemplified at a policy level by OpenAI’s “democratic inputs to AI”
program [41] and Meta’s citizens’ assembly on AI governance [8], and at a technical level by the
ubiquity of reinforcement learning from human feedback [30] as a method for fine-tuning large
language models.
We formalize the challenge of value alignment with multiple individuals as a problem that we view as
fundamental — policy aggregation. Our starting point is the common assumption that the environment
can be represented as a Markov decision process (MDP). While the states, actions and transition
functions are shared by all agents, their reward functions — which incorporate values, priorities
or subjective beliefs — may be different. In particular, each agent has its own optimal policy in
the underlying MDP. Our question is this: How should we aggregate the individual policies into a
desirable collective policy?
A naïve answer is to define a new reward function that is the sum of the agents’ reward functions (for
each state-action pair separately) and compute an optimal policy for this aggregate reward function;
such a policy would guarantee maximum utilitarian social welfare. This approach has a major
shortcoming, however, in that it is sensitive to affine transformations of rewards, so, for example, if
we doubled one of the reward functions, the aggregate optimal policy may change. This is an issue
because each agent’s individual optimal policy is invariant to (positive) affine transformations of
rewards, so while it is possible to recover a reward function that induces an agent’s optimal policy by
∗

Equal contribution. Authors are listed alphabetically.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

