Consent in Crisis:
The Rapid Decline of the AI Data Commons
Shayne Longpre1 , Robert Mahari1 , Ariel Lee1 , Campbell Lund1 , Hamidah Oderinwale2 ,
William Brannon2 , Nayan Saxena2 , Naana Obeng-Marnu2 , Tobin South2 , Cole Hunter2 , Kevin
Klyman2 , Christopher Klamm2 , Hailey Schoelkopf2 , Nikhil Singh2 , Manuel Cherep2 , Ahmad
Mustafa Anis3 , An Dinh3 , Caroline Chitongo3 , Da Yin3 , Damien Sileo3 , Deividas Mataciunas3 ,
Diganta Misra3 , Emad Alghamdi3 , Enrico Shippole3 , Jianguo Zhang3 , Joanna Materzynska3 ,
Kun Qian3 , Kush Tiwary3 , Lester Miranda3 , Manan Dey3 , Minnie Liang3 , Mohammed
Hamdy3 , Niklas Muennighoff3 , Seonghyeon Ye3 , Seungone Kim3 , Shrestha Mohanty3 , Vipul
Gupta3 , Vivek Sharma3 , Vu Minh Chien3 , Xuhui Zhou3 , Yizhi Li3 , Caiming Xiong4 , Luis Villa4 ,
Stella Biderman4 , Hanlin Li4 , Daphne Ippolito4 , Sara Hooker4 , Jad Kabbara4 , and Sandy
Pentland4
1

Team Leads

2

Top Contributors

3

Contributors (alphabetized)

4

Advisors

Data Provenance Initiative
Correspondence: data.provenance.init@gmail.com

Abstract
General-purpose artificial intelligence (AI) systems are built on massive swathes of
public web data, assembled into corpora such as C4, RefinedWeb, and Dolma. To
our knowledge, we conduct the first, large-scale, longitudinal audit of the consent
protocols for the web domains underlying AI training corpora. Our audit of 14, 000
web domains provides an expansive view of crawlable web data and how codified
data use preferences are changing over time. We observe a proliferation of AIspecific clauses to limit use, acute differences in restrictions on AI developers, as
well as general inconsistencies between websites’ expressed intentions in their
Terms of Service and their robots.txt. We diagnose these as symptoms of ineffective
web protocols, not designed to cope with the widespread re-purposing of the internet
for AI. Our longitudinal analyses show that in a single year (2023-2024) there has
been a rapid crescendo of data restrictions from web sources, rendering ~5%+ of
all tokens in C4, or 28%+ of the most actively maintained, critical sources in C4,
fully restricted from use. For Terms of Service crawling restrictions, a full 45% of
C4 is now restricted. If respected or enforced, these restrictions are rapidly biasing
the diversity, freshness, and scaling laws for general-purpose AI systems. We hope
to illustrate the emerging crises in data consent, for both developers and creators.
The foreclosure of much of the open web will impact not only commercial AI, but
also non-commercial AI and academic research.

1

Introduction

The web has become the primary communal source of data, or “data commons”, for general-purpose
and multi-modal AI systems. The scale and heterogeneity of web-sourced training datasets provide
the foundation for both open and closed AI systems, such as OLMo [1], GPT-4o [2], and Gemini [3].
However, the use of web content for AI poses ethical and legal challenges to data consent, attribution,
copyright, and the potential impact on creative industries [4, 5, 6, 7]. This has spurred new initiatives
to better verify data quality and provenance [8, 9, 10, 11, 12], isolate public domain and permissively
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

