Questioning the Survey Responses of
Large Language Models

Ricardo Dominguez-Olmedo1,2
1

Moritz Hardt1,2

Celestine Mendler-Dünner1,2,3

Max-Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
2
Tübingen AI Center
3
ELLIS Institute Tübingen
{rdo,hardt,cmendler}@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
Surveys have recently gained popularity as a tool to study large language models.
By comparing survey responses of models to those of human reference populations, researchers aim to infer the demographics, political opinions, or values best
represented by current language models. In this work, we critically examine this
methodology on the basis of the well-established American Community Survey by
the U.S. Census Bureau. Evaluating 43 different language models using de-facto
standard prompting methodologies, we establish two dominant patterns. First,
models’ responses are governed by ordering and labeling biases, for example,
towards survey responses labeled with the letter ‘A’. Second, when adjusting for
these systematic biases through randomized answer ordering, models across the
board trend towards uniformly random survey responses, irrespective of model
size or pre-training data. As a result, in contrast to conjectures from prior work,
survey-derived alignment measures often permit a simple explanation: models
consistently appear to better represent subgroups whose aggregate statistics are
closest to uniform for any survey under consideration.

1

Introduction

Surveys have a long tradition in social science research as a means for gathering statistical information
about the characteristics, values, and opinions of human populations [Groves et al., 2009]. Insights
from surveys inform policy interventions, business decisions, and science across various domains.
Surveys typically consist of a series of well-curated questions in a multiple-choice format, with
unambiguous framing and a set of answer choices carefully selected by domain experts. Surveys are
then presented to groups of individuals and their answers are aggregated to gain statistical insights
about the populations that these groups of individuals represent.
Many established survey questionnaires together with the carefully collected answer statistics are
publicly available. Machine learning researchers have identified the potential benefits of building on
this valuable data resource to study large language models (LLMs). Survey questions offer a way
to systematically prompt LLMs, and the aggregate statistics over answers collected by surveying
human populations serve as a reference point for evaluation. As a result, the use of surveys has
recently gained popularity for studying LLMs’ biases [Santurkar et al., 2023, Durmus et al., 2023].
Also prompting LLMs with survey questions, researchers in the social sciences have explored using
LLMs to emulate the survey responses of human populations [Argyle et al., 2023, Lee et al., 2023]. If
effective proxies, simulated responses could augment or replace the expensive data collection process
involving human subjects and provide insights into subpopulations that are otherwise hard to reach.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

