Thinking Forward: Memory-Efficient
Federated Finetuning of Language Models

Kunjal Panchal
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003-9264
kpanchal@umass.edu

Nisarg Parikh
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003-9264
nkparikh@umass.edu

Sunav Choudhary
Adobe Research
Bangalore, India 560103
schoudha@adobe.com

Lijun Zhang
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003-9264
lijunzhang@cs.umass.edu

Yuriy Brun
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003-9264
brun@cs.umass.edu

Hui Guan
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003-9264
huiguan@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Finetuning large language models (LLMs) in federated learning (FL) settings
has become increasingly important as it allows resource-constrained devices to
finetune a model using private data. However, finetuning LLMs using backpropagation requires excessive memory (especially from intermediate activations) for
resource-constrained devices. While Forward-mode Auto-Differentiation (AD) can
significantly reduce memory footprint from activations, we observe that directly
applying it to LLM finetuning results in slow convergence and poor accuracy. In
this paper, we introduce S PRY, an FL algorithm that splits trainable weights of an
LLM among participating clients, such that each client computes gradients using
Forward-mode AD that are closer estimations of the true gradients. S PRY achieves
a low memory footprint, high accuracy, and fast convergence. We formally prove
that the global gradients in S PRY are unbiased estimators of true global gradients
for homogeneous data distributions across clients, while heterogeneity increases
bias of the estimates. We also derive S PRY’s convergence rate, showing that the
gradients decrease inversely proportional to the number of FL rounds, indicating
the convergence up to the limits of heterogeneity. Empirically, S PRY reduces
the memory footprint during training by 1.4–7.1× in contrast to backpropagation,
while reaching comparable accuracy, across a wide range of language tasks, models,
and FL settings. S PRY reduces the convergence time by 1.2–20.3× and achieves
5.2–13.5% higher accuracy against state-of-the-art zero-order methods. When
finetuning Llama2-7B with LoRA, compared to the peak memory consumption of
33.9GB of backpropagation, S PRY only consumes 6.2GB of peak memory. For
OPT13B, the reduction is from 76.5GB to 10.8GB. S PRY makes feasible previously
impossible FL deployments on commodity mobile and edge devices. Our source
code is available for replication at https://github.com/Astuary/Spry.

1

Introduction

In cross-device federated learning (FL), thousands of edge devices (called clients) collaborate through
an orchestrator (called server) to jointly train a machine learning (ML) model [1, 2]. In each round
of FL, the server sends an ML model to participating clients, who then update the model weights
for several epochs on their individual data and send the new weights back to the server. The server
aggregates the weights to update the model and initiates the next round of FL training. Due to the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

