Hierarchical Hybrid Sliced Wasserstein: A Scalable
Metric for Heterogeneous Joint Distributions

Khai Nguyen
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
khainb@utexas.edu

Nhat Ho
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
minhnhat@utexas.edu

Abstract
Sliced Wasserstein (SW) and Generalized Sliced Wasserstein (GSW) have been
widely used in applications due to their computational and statistical scalability.
However, the SW and the GSW are only defined between distributions supported on
a homogeneous domain. This limitation prevents their usage in applications with
heterogeneous joint distributions with marginal distributions supported on multiple
different domains. Using SW and GSW directly on the joint domains cannot make
a meaningful comparison since their homogeneous slicing operator, i.e., Radon
Transform (RT) and Generalized Radon Transform (GRT) are not expressive
enough to capture the structure of the joint supports set. To address the issue,
we propose two new slicing operators, i.e., Partial Generalized Radon Transform
(PGRT) and Hierarchical Hybrid Radon Transform (HHRT). In greater detail,
PGRT is the generalization of Partial Radon Transform (PRT), which transforms
a subset of function arguments non-linearly while HHRT is the composition of
PRT and multiple domain-specific PGRT on marginal domain arguments. By
using HHRT, we extend the SW into Hierarchical Hybrid Sliced Wasserstein
(H2SW) distance which is designed specifically for comparing heterogeneous
joint distributions. We then discuss the topological, statistical, and computational
properties of H2SW. Finally, we demonstrate the favorable performance of H2SW
in 3D mesh deformation, deep 3D mesh autoencoders, and datasets comparison1 .

1

Introduction

Optimal transport [55, 47] is a powerful mathematical tool for machine learning, statistics, and
data sciences. As an example, Wasserstein distance [47], defined as the optimal transportation
cost between two distributions, has been used successfully in many areas of machine learning and
statistics, such as generative modeling on images [2, 53], representation learning [35], vocabulary
learning [57], and so on. Despite being accepted as an effective distance, Wasserstein distance has
been widely known as a computationally expensive distance. In particular, when comparing two
distributions that have at most n supports, the time complexity and the memory complexity of the
Wasserstein distance scale with the order of O(n3 log n) [45] and O(n2 ) respectively. In addition,
the Wasserstein distance requires more samples to approximate a continuous distribution with its
empirical distribution in high dimension since its sample complexity is of the order of O(n−1/d ) [20],
where n is the sample size and d is the number of dimensions. Therefore, Wasserstein distance is not
statistically and computationally scalable, especially in high dimensions.
Along with entropic regularization [17] which can reduce the time complexity and memory complexity of computing optimal transport to O(n2 ) and O(n2 ) in turn, sliced Wasserstein (SW) distance [11]
1

Code for this paper is published at https://github.com/khainb/H2SW.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

