VLG-CBM: Training Concept Bottleneck Models
with Vision-Language Guidance

Divyansh Srivastava∗, Ge Yan∗ , Tsui-Wei Weng
{ddivyansh, geyan, lweng}@ucsd.edu
UC San Diego

Abstract
Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) provide interpretable prediction by introducing an intermediate Concept Bottleneck Layer (CBL), which encodes humanunderstandable concepts to explain models’ decision. Recent works proposed
to utilize Large Language Models and pre-trained Vision-Language Models to
automate the training of CBMs, making it more scalable and automated. However,
existing approaches still fall short in two aspects: First, the concepts predicted
by CBL often mismatch the input image, raising doubts about the faithfulness of
interpretation. Second, it has been shown that concept values encode unintended
information: even a set of random concepts could achieve comparable test accuracy
to state-of-the-art CBMs. To address these critical limitations, in this work, we
propose a novel framework called Vision-Language-Guided Concept Bottleneck
Model (VLG-CBM) to enable faithful interpretability with the benefits of boosted
performance. Our method leverages off-the-shelf open-domain grounded object detectors to provide visually grounded concept annotation, which largely enhances the
faithfulness of concept prediction while further improving the model performance.
In addition, we propose a new metric called Number of Effective Concepts (NEC)
to control the information leakage and provide better interpretability. Extensive
evaluations across five standard benchmarks show that our method, VLG-CBM,
outperforms existing methods by at least 4.27% and up to 51.09% on Accuracy
at NEC=5 (denoted as ANEC-5), and by at least 0.45% and up to 29.78% on
average accuracy (denoted as ANEC-avg), while preserving both faithfulness and
interpretability of the learned concepts as demonstrated in extensive experiments2 .

1

Introduction

As deep neural networks become popular in real-world applications, it is crucial to understand the
decision of these black-box models. One approach to provide interpretable decisions is the Concept
Bottleneck Model (CBM) [6], which introduced an intermediate concept layer to encode humanunderstandable concepts. The model makes final predictions based on these concepts. Unfortunately,
one major limitation of this approach is that it requires concept annotations from human experts,
making it expensive and less applicable in practice as concept labels may not always be available.
Recently, a line of works utilized the powerful Vision-Language Models (VLMs) to replace manual
annotation [15, 27, 25]. They used Large Language Models (LLMs) to generate set of concepts,
and then trained the models in a post-hoc manner under the guidance of VLMs or neuron-level
interpretability tool [14]. By eliminating the expensive manual annotations, some of these CBMs
[15] could be scaled to large datasets such as ImageNet [18]. However, these CBMs [15, 27, 25] still
face two critical challenges:
∗
2

Equal contribution
Our code is available at https://github.com/Trustworthy-ML-Lab/VLG-CBM

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

