Knowledge Composition using Task Vectors with
Learned Anisotropic Scaling

Frederic Z. Zhang∗ Paul Albert∗ Cristian Rodriguez-Opazo
Anton van den Hengel Ehsan Abbasnejad
Australian Institute for Machine Learning The University of Adelaide
{firstname.lastname}@adelaide.edu.au
https://github.com/fredzzhang/atlas

Abstract
Pre-trained models produce strong generic representations that can be adapted via
fine-tuning on specialised datasets. The learned weight difference relative to the
pre-trained model, known as a task vector, characterises the direction and stride of
fine-tuning that enables the model to capture these specialised representations. The
significance of task vectors is such that simple arithmetic operations on them can be
used to combine diverse representations from different domains. This paper builds
on these properties of task vectors and aims to answer (1) whether components
of task vectors, particularly parameter blocks, exhibit similar characteristics, and
(2) how such blocks can be used to enhance knowledge composition and transfer.
To this end, we introduce aTLAS, an algorithm that linearly combines parameter
blocks with different learned coefficients, resulting in anisotropic scaling at the
task vector level. We show that such linear combinations explicitly exploit the low
intrinsic dimensionality of pre-trained models, with only a few coefficients being
the learnable parameters. Furthermore, composition of parameter blocks enables
modular learning that effectively leverages the already learned representations,
thereby reducing the dependency on large amounts of data. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method in task arithmetic, few-shot recognition and test-time
adaptation, with supervised or unsupervised objectives. In particular, we show
that (1) learned anisotropic scaling allows task vectors to be more disentangled,
causing less interference in composition; (2) task vector composition excels with
scarce or no labelled data and is less prone to domain shift, thus leading to better
generalisability; (3) mixing the most informative parameter blocks across different
task vectors prior to training can reduce the memory footprint and improve the
flexibility of knowledge transfer. Moreover, we show the potential of aTLAS as a
parameter-efficient fine-tuning method, particularly with less data, and demonstrate
that it can be easily scaled up for higher performance.

1

Introduction

One practical advantage of neural networks is the fact that knowledge learned from a previous problem,
in the form of network weights, can be transferred to solve other related problems. Commonly
referred to as transfer learning [6, 73], this technique is often applied when a model trained on a
general-purpose dataset—ImageNet [52] for many years—is fine-tuned on other datasets to improve
∗

Equal contribution. Listed order was determined by a coin toss. Fred formalised the idea; developed the
original codebase; conducted experiments on task arithmetic; and drafted the paper. Paul designed and conducted
experiments on few-shot recognition, test-time adaptation, parameter-efficient fine-tuning; investigated numerous
properties of task vector compositions; and was crucially involved in every stage of the work.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

