Calibrating Reasoning in Language Models with
Internal Consistency

Zhihui Xie† § Jizhou Guo† Tong Yu‡ Shuai Li∗†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University ‡Adobe Research §The University of Hong Kong
zhxieml@gmail.com shuaili8@sjtu.edu.cn

†

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities in various reasoning tasks, aided by techniques like chain-of-thought prompting that
elicits verbalized reasoning. However, LLMs often generate text with obvious
mistakes and contradictions, raising doubts about their ability to robustly process
and utilize generated rationales. In this work, we investigate reasoning in LLMs
through the lens of internal representations, focusing on how these representations
are influenced by generated rationales. Our preliminary analysis reveals that while
generated rationales improve answer accuracy, inconsistencies emerge between
the model’s internal representations in middle layers and those in final layers,
potentially undermining the reliability of their reasoning processes. To address
this, we propose internal consistency as a measure of the model’s confidence by
examining the agreement of latent predictions decoded from intermediate layers.
Extensive empirical studies across different models and datasets demonstrate that
internal consistency effectively distinguishes between correct and incorrect reasoning paths. Motivated by this, we propose a new approach to calibrate reasoning
by up-weighting reasoning paths with high internal consistency, resulting in a
significant boost in reasoning performance. Further analysis uncovers distinct
patterns in attention and feed-forward modules across layers, providing insights
into the emergence of internal inconsistency. In summary, our results demonstrate
the potential of using internal representations for self-evaluation of LLMs.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities in various reasoning tasks,
aided by techniques like chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting that elicits verbalized reasoning (Wei
et al., 2022; Merrill and Sabharwal, 2024). This approach directs the model to articulate step-by-step
rationales before answering a question, simulating the reasoning process used by humans. With these
verbalized rationales, it is expected that not only will the model’s problem-solving capabilities be
enhanced, but also the interpretability of its predictions will improve. Understanding how LLMs
reason is essential for aligning them with human values (Bai et al., 2022; Li et al., 2024).
Despite the continued improvement in performance and the emergence of new capabilities, LLMs
often generate text with obvious mistakes and contradictions, raising doubts about their ability to
robustly process and utilize generated rationales (Ye and Durrett, 2022; Turpin et al., 2023). One
notable failure mode is unfaithful reasoning, where LLMs provide rationales that contradict their
final predictions (Lyu et al., 2023; Lanham et al., 2023). This makes it difficult to determine the
trustworthiness of their predictions, highlighting the need for effective calibration methods to assess
the reliability of rationales.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

