Towards Efficient and Optimal Covariance-Adaptive
Algorithms for Combinatorial Semi-Bandits

Julien Zhou

Pierre Gaillard

Thibaud Rahier

Criteo AI Lab
Paris, France

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria,
CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK,
38000 Grenoble, France

Criteo AI Lab,
Paris, France

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria,
CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK,
38000 Grenoble, France
julien.zhou@inria.fr
Houssam Zenati

Julyan Arbel

Université Paris-Saclay, Inria,
Palaiseau, France

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria,
CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK,
38000 Grenoble, France

Abstract
We address the problem of stochastic combinatorial semi-bandits, where a player
selects among P actions from the power set of a set containing d base items. Adaptivity to the problem’s structure is essential in order to obtain optimal regret upper
bounds. As estimating the coefficients of a covariance matrix can be manageable
in practice, leveraging them should improve the regret. We design “optimistic”
covariance-adaptive algorithms relying on online estimations of the covariance
structure, called OLS-UCB-C and COS-V (only the variances for the latter). They
both yield improved gap-free regret. Although COS-V can be slightly suboptimal,
it improves on computational complexity by taking inspiration from Thompson
√
Sampling approaches. It is the first sampling-based algorithm satisfying a O( T )
gap-free regret (up to poly-logs). We also show that in some cases, our approach
efficiently leverages the semi-bandit feedback and outperforms bandit feedback
approaches, not only in exponential regimes where P ≫ d but also when P ≤ d,
which is not covered by existing analyses.

1

Introduction

In sequential decision-making, the bandit framework has been extensively studied and was instrumental to several applications, e.g. A/B testing (Guo et al., 2020), online advertising and recommendation
services (Zeng et al., 2016), network routing (Tabei et al., 2023), demand-side management (Brégère
et al., 2019), etc. Its popularity stems from its relative simplicity, allowing it to model and analyze a
wide range of challenging real-world settings. Reference books like Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi (2012)
or Lattimore and Szepesvári (2020) offer a wide perspective on the subject.
In this framework, a decision-maker or player must make choices and receives associated rewards,
but it lacks prior knowledge of its environment. This naturally leads to an exploration-exploitation
trade-off: the player must explore different actions to determine the best one, but an inefficient
exploration strategy may harm the cumulative rewards. Efficient algorithms rely on exploiting the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

