Parameter Efficient Adaptation for Image Restoration
with Heterogeneous Mixture-of-Experts

Hang Guo1 Tao Dai∗ 2 Yuanchao Bai3 Bin Chen3
Xudong Ren1 Zexuan Zhu2 Shu-Tao Xia1,4
1
Tsinghua University 2 Shenzhen University
3
Harbin Institute of Technology 4 Peng Cheng Larboratory
https://github.com/csguoh/AdaptIR

Abstract
Designing single-task image restoration models for specific degradation has seen
great success in recent years. To achieve generalized image restoration, all-in-one
methods have recently been proposed and shown potential for multiple restoration
tasks using one single model. Despite the promising results, the existing all-in-one
paradigm still suffers from high computational costs as well as limited generalization on unseen degradations. In this work, we introduce an alternative solution to
improve the generalization of image restoration models. Drawing inspiration from
recent advancements in Parameter Efficient Transfer Learning (PETL), we aim to
tune only a small number of parameters to adapt pre-trained restoration models
to various tasks. However, current PETL methods fail to generalize across varied
restoration tasks due to their homogeneous representation nature. To this end, we
propose AdaptIR, a Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) with orthogonal multi-branch design
to capture local spatial, global spatial, and channel representation bases, followed
by adaptive base combination to obtain heterogeneous representation for different
degradations. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our AdaptIR achieves stable
performance on single-degradation tasks, and excels in hybrid-degradation tasks,
with fine-tuning only 0.6% parameters for 8 hours.

1

Introduction

Image restoration, aiming to restore high-quality images from their degraded counterparts, is a
fundamental computer vision problem and has been studied for many years. Due to its ill-posed
nature, early research efforts [1, 2, 3] typically focus on developing single-task models, with each
model handling only one specific degradation. Consequently, these methods often exhibit limited
generalization across different image restoration tasks.
To improve generalization ability, all-in-one image restoration methods [4, 5, 6] have recently been
proposed and have attracted great research interest. By training one model with multiple degradation
data, these methods enable the single model to handle various degradations. Despite the promising
results, the existing all-in-one paradigm still faces several challenges. Firstly, the all-in-one model
can only restore degradations encountered during training; once training is complete, the model
cannot handle new degradations. Secondly, since the knowledge of restoring multiple degradations is
learned by a single model, it incurs a significant cost to train and store these all-in-one models.
In this work, we propose an alternative solution to improve the generalization ability of restoration
models in handling multiple degradations. Drawing inspiration from Parameter Efficient Transfer
Learning (PETL) [7, 8, 9, 10], we aim to insert a small number of trainable modules into frozen
pre-trained restoration backbones. By training only these newly added modules on downstream tasks,
the pre-trained restoration backbone can be adapted to unseen restoration tasks. Since only a small
* Corresponding author: Tao Dai (daitao.edu@gmail.com).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

