Classification Diffusion Models:
Revitalizing Density Ratio Estimation

Shahar Yadin Noam Elata Tomer Michaeli
Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
{shahar.yadin@campus,noamelata@campus,tomer.m@ee}.technion.ac.il

Abstract
A prominent family of methods for learning data distributions relies on density ratio
estimation (DRE), where a model is trained to classify between data samples and
samples from some reference distribution. DRE-based models can directly output
the likelihood for any given input, a highly desired property that is lacking in most
generative techniques. Nevertheless, to date, DRE methods have failed in accurately
capturing the distributions of complex high-dimensional data, like images, and
have thus been drawing reduced research attention in recent years. In this work we
present classification diffusion models (CDMs), a DRE-based generative method
that adopts the formalism of denoising diffusion models (DDMs) while making use
of a classifier that predicts the level of noise added to a clean signal. Our method is
based on an analytical connection that we derive between the MSE-optimal denoiser
for removing white Gaussian noise and the cross-entropy-optimal classifier for
predicting the noise level. Our method is the first DRE-based technique that can
successfully generate images beyond the MNIST dataset. Furthermore, it can
output the likelihood of any input in a single forward pass, achieving state-ofthe-art negative log likelihood (NLL) among methods with this property. Code is
available on the project’s webpage.

1

Introduction

A classical family of methods for learning data distributions relies on the concept of density-ratio
estimation (DRE) [46]. DRE techniques transform the unsupervised task of learning the distribution
of data into the supervised task of learning to classify between data samples and samples from some
reference distribution [15, 4, 35, 7]. These methods have attracted significant research efforts over
the years [27, 14, 35, 47], particularly for their inherent capability to directly output the likelihood
for any given input. However, to date, they have not succeeded in capturing the distribution of
complex high-dimensional data, like natural images. Instead, their generative performance was
demonstrated only on low-dimensional toy examples and on the simple MNIST handwritten digits
dataset [28, 35, 7]. As illustrated in Fig. 1, while the state-of-the-art DRE method, telescoping
density-ratio estimation (TRE) [35], succeeds in capturing the distribution of the MNIST dataset [28],
it fails on the slightly more complex CIFAR-10 dataset [26].
As opposed to DRE methods, denoising diffusion models (DDMs) [38, 19] have had unprecedented
success in generative modeling of complex high-dimensional data, including images [9, 36], audio
[25, 5], and video [12, 1]. This has made them perhaps the most prominent technique for learning
data distributions in recent years, with applications in solving inverse problems [21, 37], image
editing [33, 16, 3, 20] and medical data enhancement [44, 8], to name just a few. However, assessing
the likelihood of data samples is a challenging task with DDMs; it requires many neural function
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

