Interpreting and Analysing CLIP’s Zero-Shot Image
Classification via Mutual Knowledge

Fawaz Sammani, Nikos Deligiannis
ETRO Department, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Pleinlaan 2, B-1050 Brussels, Belgium
imec, Kapeldreef 75, B-3001 Leuven, Belgium
fawaz.sammani@vub.be, ndeligia@etrovub.be

Abstract
Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) performs zero-shot image classification by mapping images and textual class representation into a shared embedding
space, then retrieving the class closest to the image. This work provides a new
approach for interpreting CLIP models for image classification from the lens of
mutual knowledge between the two modalities. Specifically, we ask: what concepts
do both vision and language CLIP encoders learn in common that influence the
joint embedding space, causing points to be closer or further apart? We answer
this question via an approach of textual concept-based explanations, showing their
effectiveness, and perform an analysis encompassing a pool of 13 CLIP models
varying in architecture, size and pretraining datasets. We explore those different
aspects in relation to mutual knowledge, and analyze zero-shot predictions. Our
approach demonstrates an effective and human-friendly way of understanding
zero-shot classification decisions with CLIP. 1

1

Introduction

Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) [44] has catalyzed a paradigm shift in zero-shot and
few-shot learning methodologies for image classification [61, 54, 31, 36, 66, 57]. CLIP consists of a
vision and language encoder, both which are trained to map positive image-text pairs close together
in embedding space, while pushing away negative ones. In the context of information theory, the
channel which connects two information sources is referred to as the information channel [10], and
its reliability and effectiveness is often studied through Mutual Information (MI) analysis between the
two sources [53]. The training dynamics of contrastive models inherently involve a significant degree
of shared knowledge between the vision and language sources, as both models must map similar
points close in the embedding space. This suggests the existence of a vision-language information
channel (Figure 1a) wherein the shared knowledge between the two modalities is stored.
Inspired by this, we aim to interpret this channel and measure the relationship and mutual knowledge
between the image and text encoders of CLIP, for a given zero-shot prediction. We therefore pose the
following question: What concepts did the vision and language encoders learn in common, such that
the image-text points are closer or further apart in the joint space?
The two sources of information—the vision encoder and the text encoder—differ in modality: the
vision encoder provides interpretation as visual regions, while the text encoder can only provide
interpretation as text. To understand the commonalities in what both encoders learn, we must establish
a shared medium for their interpretations. As a result, applying existing attribution techniques
[51, 60, 45, 2] does not suffice. Moreover, the information channel is composed of discrete units of
information (i.e., bits), however these attribution techniques provide general, high-level interpretations
1

https://github.com/fawazsammani/clip-interpret-mutual-knowledge

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

