Video Token Merging
for Long-form Video Understanding

Seon-Ho Lee∗
Korea University
seonholee@mcl.korea.ac.kr
Zhikang Zhang
Amazon AGI
zhikang@amazon.com

Jue Wang
Amazon AGI
juewangn@amazon.com

David Fan†
Meta FAIR
davidfan@meta.com

Xinyu Li
Amazon AGI
xxnl@amazon.com

Abstract
As the scale of data and models for video understanding rapidly expand, handling
long-form video input in transformer-based models presents a practical challenge.
Rather than resorting to input sampling or token dropping, which may result in
information loss, token merging shows promising results when used in collaboration
with transformers. However, the application of token merging for long-form video
processing is not trivial. We begin with the premise that token merging should not
rely solely on the similarity of video tokens; the saliency of tokens should also be
considered. To address this, we explore various video token merging strategies
for long-form video classification, starting with a simple extension of image token
merging, moving to region-concentrated merging, and finally proposing a learnable
video token merging (VTM) algorithm that dynamically merges tokens based
on their saliency. Extensive experimental results show that we achieve better or
comparable performances on the LVU, COIN, and Breakfast datasets. Moreover,
our approach significantly reduces memory costs by 84% and boosts throughput
by approximately 6.89 times compared to baseline algorithms.

1

Introduction

Over the past few years, the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) has risen as a revolutionary
paradigm within natural language processing (NLP) (Devlin et al., 2018) and has seamlessly expanded
its influence into the domain of computer vision (Wang & Torresani, 2022; Bertasius et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2022; Akbari et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2021). This expansion has been exemplified
by remarkable achievements in recent multi-modality foundation models such as Sora (Brooks et al.,
2024), GPT4 (Achiam et al., 2023), and Gemini (gem), showcasing its exceptional performance and
versatility across diverse applications.
In contrast to the natural language processing, the visual input has much lower information density
and thus tokenizing the raw RGB image as non-overlapped patches becomes the essential operation
in vision transformers (Wang & Torresani, 2022; Bertasius et al., 2021; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021).
However, the computational cost of transformer exponentially increases with the sequence length,
which generates tremendous computation when feeding visual input into the large-scaled transformer
models with billions of parameters. Due to the redundancy in video sequence, this phenomenon
becomes more severe with video input, especially for long-form videos. This bottleneck impedes the
∗
†

Work done during an internship at Amazon Prime Video.
Work done while at Amazon Prime Video.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

