Can We Leave Deepfake Data Behind in Training
Deepfake Detector?

Jikang Cheng1∗, Zhiyuan Yan2 , Ying Zhang3 , Yuhao Luo2 , Zhongyuan Wang1†, Chen Li3
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen)
3
WeChat, Tencent Inc.
ChengJikang@whu.edu.cn, wzy_hope@163.com

Abstract
The generalization ability of deepfake detectors is vital for their applications in realworld scenarios. One effective solution to enhance this ability is to train the models
with manually-blended data, which we termed “blendfake”, encouraging models to
learn generic forgery artifacts like blending boundary. Interestingly, current SoTA
methods utilize blendfake without incorporating any deepfake data in their training
process. This is likely because previous empirical observations suggest that vanilla
hybrid training (VHT), which combines deepfake and blendfake data, results in
inferior performance to methods using only blendfake data (so-called “1+1<2”).
Therefore, a critical question arises: Can we leave deepfake behind and rely solely
on blendfake data to train an effective deepfake detector? Intuitively, as deepfakes
also contain additional informative forgery clues (e.g., deep generative artifacts),
excluding all deepfake data in training deepfake detectors seems counter-intuitive.
In this paper, we rethink the role of blendfake in detecting deepfakes and formulate
the process from "real to blendfake to deepfake" to be a progressive transition.
Specifically, blendfake and deepfake can be explicitly delineated as the oriented
pivot anchors between "real-to-fake" transitions. The accumulation of forgery
information should be oriented and progressively increasing during this transition
process. To this end, we propose an Oriented Progressive Regularizor (OPR) to
establish the constraints that compel the distribution of anchors to be discretely
arranged. Furthermore, we introduce feature bridging to facilitate the smooth
transition between adjacent anchors. Extensive experiments confirm that our design
allows leveraging forgery information from both blendfake and deepfake effectively
and comprehensively. Code is available at https://github.com/beautyremain/ProDet.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the development of deepfake3 has aroused significant concerns regarding privacy and
security among the public. Deepfake detection aims to identify whether a face from an unknown
source has been manipulated by deepfake techniques. Most detection methods perform promisingly when trained and tested on identical manipulations. However, given the unpredictability and
complexity of real-world scenarios, it is increasingly critical for these methods to generalize and
identify previously unseen manipulations. One particularly effective and mainstream solution is data
synthesis, which involves image blending to create new training forgery samples [7, 28, 39, 27, 55].
∗

Work done during an internship at WeChat
Corresponding author.
3
The term “deepfake" hereafter specifically refers to face forgery technology. The entire (or natural) image
synthesis is not within our scope.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

