Enhancing LLM’s Cognition via Structurization

Kai Liu1,2∗, Zhihang Fu2†, Chao Chen2 , Wei Zhang1 , Rongxin Jiang1†,
Fan Zhou1 , Yaowu Chen1 , Yue Wu2 , Jieping Ye2
1

Zhejiang University,

2

Alibaba Cloud

Abstract
When reading long-form text, human cognition is complex and structurized. While
large language models (LLMs) process input contexts through a causal and sequential perspective, this approach can potentially limit their ability to handle intricate
and complex inputs effectively. To enhance LLM’s cognition capability, this paper
presents a novel concept of context structurization. Specifically, we transform
the plain, unordered contextual sentences into well-ordered and hierarchically
structurized elements. By doing so, LLMs can better grasp intricate and extended
contexts through precise attention and information-seeking along the organized
structures. Extensive evaluations are conducted across various model architectures
and sizes (including a series of auto-regressive LLMs as well as BERT-like masking
models) on a diverse set of NLP tasks (e.g., context-based question-answering,
exhaustive hallucination evaluation, and passage-level dense retrieval). Empirical
results show consistent and significant performance gains afforded by a singleround structurization. In particular, we boost the open-sourced LLaMA2-70B
model to achieve comparable performance against GPT-3.5-Turbo as the hallucination evaluator. Besides, we show the feasibility of distilling advanced LLMs’
language processing abilities to a smaller yet effective StruXGPT-7B to execute
structurization, addressing the practicality of our approach. Code is available at
https://github.com/alibaba/struxgpt.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have emerged with remarkable language capabilities [6, 53, 1], yet
remain at a discernible distance from human-level intelligence, especially when handling long-form,
sophisticated contexts as inputs [3, 36]. Scaling up the model size has significant benefits for boosting
context-comprehension and instruction-following abilities for LLMs [47, 58]. However, it is generally
resource-intensive on both model training and inference. This paper presents another perspective on
enhancing LLMs’ cognition capability without altering the models: context structurization.
The idea of structurization is motivated by neurocognitive science [51, 5, 17]. In human cognition, as
indicated in Fig. 1, sophisticated text sequences will be processed and consolidated into a structured
knowledge tree, with factual elements well-organized hierarchically [28, 15]. This process is defined
as structurization. People can precisely search information from general concepts to specific details
and make connections and comparisons along structures. We thus aim to transform plain texts into
structurized inputs, helping LLMs recognize and understand contexts in a human manner [71].
As Fig. 1 illustrates, input sequences are reorganized in a simple but generic three-layer structure:
scope, aspects, and descriptions. The scope summarizes the topic and contents, unfolding into
several main aspects with corresponding detailed descriptions. The structurized results can be freely
* Work done during Kai Liu’s research internship at Alibaba Cloud. Email: kail@zju.edu.cn.
†

Corresponding authors. Email: rongxinj@zju.edu.cn, zhihang.fzh@alibaba-inc.com.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

