Text-space Graph Foundation Models: Comprehensive
Benchmarks and New Insights

Zhikai Chen1 , Haitao Mao1 , Jingzhe Liu1 , Yu Song1 , Bingheng Li1 ,
Wei Jin2 , Bahare Fatemi3 , Anton Tsitsulin3 , Bryan Perozzi3 ,
Hui Liu1 , Jiliang Tang1
1
Michigan State University, 2 Emory University, 3 Google Research

Abstract
Given the ubiquity of graph data and its applications in diverse domains, building
a Graph Foundation Model (GFM) that can work well across different graphs
and tasks with a unified backbone has recently garnered significant interests. A
major obstacle to achieving this goal stems from the fact that graphs from different
domains often exhibit diverse node features. Inspired by multi-modal models
that align different modalities with natural language, the text has recently been
adopted to provide a unified feature space for diverse graphs. Despite the great
potential of these text-space GFMs, current research in this field is hampered by
two problems. First, the absence of a comprehensive benchmark with unified
problem settings hinders a clear understanding of the comparative effectiveness
and practical value of different text-space GFMs. Second, there is a lack of
sufficient datasets to thoroughly explore the methods’ full potential and verify
their effectiveness across diverse settings. To address these issues, we conduct a
comprehensive benchmark providing novel text-space datasets and comprehensive
evaluation under unified problem settings. Empirical results provide new insights
and inspire future research directions. Our code and data are publicly available
from https://github.com/CurryTang/TSGFM.

1

Introduction

Foundation Models (FMs) [1] have achieved remarkable success in various domains like computer
vision [2, 3] and natural language processing [4, 5]. Through large-scale pre-training on diverse
data [6, 7], FMs exhibit several intriguing properties compared to task-specific models trained in
an end-to-end manner. First, one model can serve diverse tasks with better effectiveness [7, 8], and
second, they present emergent capabilities such as in-context learning [9] and reasoning [10].
Nonetheless, the common practice in today’s graph machine learning remains training task-specific
models from scratch on each individual dataset [11]. Despite the success of graph models in diverse
domains such as social networks [12, 13], e-commerce [14, 15, 16], and biology [17], most graph
models still necessitate tailored data engineering and specific design for each dataset, which makes it
hard to scale up due to limited data available for a single dataset [18].
Feature heterogeneity is the key obstacle for extending graph machine learning to training across
data and tasks. [11]. Specifically, it refers to the fact that different graphs present different feature
dimensions, where the corresponding dimension may have entirely different semantic meanings.
Such a problem makes it impossible to train a GFM. To mitigate this problem, [19, 20] propose
transforming different kinds of node attributes into texts and then using a large language model
(LLM) to generate embeddings, which provides a unified feature space. This feature space offers two
advantages: (1) it can mitigate the feature heterogeneity by mapping diverse node features into the
same textual space, and (2) thanks to the rich latent knowledge in LLMs, the generated high-quality
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

