Goal Conditioned Reinforcement Learning for Photo
Finishing Tuning

Jiarui Wu1,2∗, Yujin Wang1† , Lingen Li1,2 , Fan Zhang1 , Tianfan Xue2
1

Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{wj024,tfxue}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, lgli@link.cuhk.edu.hk,
{wangyujin,zhangfan}@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
Photo finishing tuning aims to automate the manual tuning process of the photo
finishing pipeline, like Adobe Lightroom or Darktable. Previous works either use
zeroth-order optimization, which is slow when the set of parameters increases,
or rely on a differentiable proxy of the target finishing pipeline, which is hard
to train. To overcome these challenges, we propose a novel goal-conditioned
reinforcement learning framework for efficiently tuning parameters using a goal
image as a condition. Unlike previous approaches, our tuning framework does not
rely on any proxy and treats the photo finishing pipeline as a black box. Utilizing
a trained reinforcement learning policy, it can efficiently find the desired set of
parameters within just 10 queries, while optimization-based approaches normally
take 200 queries. Furthermore, our architecture utilizes a goal image to guide
the iterative tuning of pipeline parameters, allowing for flexible conditioning on
pixel-aligned target images, style images, or any other visually representable
goals. We conduct detailed experiments on photo finishing tuning and photo
stylization tuning tasks, demonstrating the advantages of our method. Project
website: https://openimaginglab.github.io/RLPixTuner/.

1

Introduction

Image processing pipelines (ISPs) are widely used by photographers and artists to retouch images
to match their desired appearance. Existing pipelines like Adobe Lightroom and Darktable allow
users to interactively tweak meaningful sliders such as exposure, white balance, and contrast, which
control the pipeline to perform a series of non-destructive edits to the input image. Though users can
manually tune the slider parameters, it is laborious and time-consuming even for experienced experts.
To this end, automatic photo finishing algorithms have been introduced to automate the process and
have drawn growing attention in the community [11].
In this work, we aim to design an automatic tuning algorithm for black-box non-differentiable image
processing pipelines. Although some preliminary research tries to propose fully differentiable image
processing pipelines [11, 7] or approximate the existing pipelines using neural networks [29], they
only support a limited set of image processing operations. On the other side, most commercial image
processing pipelines, like Adobe Lightroom, are still black-box and non-differentiable, with a set of
tunable parameters exposed to users. Under this setup, the goal of pipeline tuning is to automatically
find the set of optimal parameters to achieve a desired image appearance, named the tuning target.
More specifically, in this work, we study two different tuning targets. One is a target image with the
same content as the input, but with a different rendering style, and we call it photo finishing tuning.
The other is a target style image with different content, and the algorithm is to render the target in a
similar way as the style target, and we call that photo stylization tuning.
∗
†

This work was done while Jiarui Wu interned at Shanghai AI Laboratory.
Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

