Intrinsic Robustness of Prophet Inequality to
Strategic Reward Signaling

Wei Tang∗

Haifeng Xu†

Ruimin Zhang‡

Derek Zhu§

Abstract
Prophet inequality concerns a basic optimal stopping problem and states that simple threshold stopping policies — i.e., accepting the first reward larger than a certain threshold — can achieve tight 1/2-approximation to the optimal prophet value.
Motivated by its economic applications, this paper studies the robustness of this
approximation to natural strategic manipulations in which each random reward
is associated with a self-interested player who may selectively reveal his realized
reward to the searcher in order to maximize his probability of being selected.
We say a threshold policy is α(-strategically)-robust if it (a) achieves the αapproximation to the prophet value for strategic players; and (b) meanwhile remains a 1/2-approximation in the standard non-strategic setting. Starting with
a characterization of each player’s optimal information revealing strategy, we
demonstrate the intrinsic robustness of prophet inequalities to strategic reward signaling through the following results: (1) for arbitrary reward distributions, there
1
is a threshold policy that is 1−2 /e -robust, and this ratio is tight; (2) for i.i.d. reward distributions, there is a threshold policy that is 1/2-robust, which is tight for
the setting; and (3) for log-concave (but non-identical) reward distributions, the
1/2-robustness can also be achieved under certain regularity assumptions.5

1

Introduction

The prophet inequality of Krengel and Sucheston [37] is a foundational framework for the theory
of optimal stopping problems and sequential decision-making. In the classic prophet inequality,
a searcher faces a finite sequence of non-negative, real-valued and independent random variables
X1 , . . . , XN with known distributions Hi from which a reward of value Xi is drawn sequentially
for i = 1, . . . , N . Once a random reward is realized, the searcher decides whether to accept the realized reward and stop searching, or reject the reward and proceed to the next reward. The searcher’s
objective is to maximize the value of the accepted reward. The performance of the searcher’s stopping policy is evaluated against a prophet value which equals to the ex-post maximum realized
reward. The classic and elegant result of Samuel-Cahn [42] showed that a simple static threshold
policy achieves at least half of the prophet value, and surprisingly, this bound is the best possible
even among dynamic policies. Samuel-Cahn’s policy uses the threshold that is the median of the distribution of the highest prizes, and then accepts the first realized reward that exceeds this threshold.
The existence of this 1/2-approximation is now known as the prophet inequality.
Recently, there is a regained interest of the prophet inequality due to its beautiful connection to
online mechanism design (see, e.g., [31, 16]), and many different settings of the prophet inequality
∗

Chinese University of Hong Kong. Email: weitang@cuhk.edu.hk.
University of Chicago. Email: haifengxu@uchicago.edu.
‡
University of Chicago. Email: ruimin@uchicago.edu.
§
University of Chicago. Email: dzhu8@uchicago.edu.
5
The full version of this paper can be found at https://arxiv.org/pdf/2409.18269
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

