Understanding the Gains from
Repeated Self-Distillation

Divyansh Pareek
Simon S. Du
Sewoong Oh
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Washington, Seattle, WA
{dpareek,ssdu,sewoong}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Self-Distillation is a special type of knowledge distillation where the student model
has the same architecture as the teacher model. Despite using the same architecture
and the same training data, self-distillation has been empirically observed to
improve performance, especially when applied repeatedly. For such a process,
there is a fundamental question of interest: How much gain is possible by applying
multiple steps of self-distillation? To investigate this relative gain, we propose
studying the simple but canonical task of linear regression. Our analysis shows that
the excess risk achieved by multi-step self-distillation can significantly improve
upon a single step of self-distillation, reducing the excess risk by a factor as large
as d, where d is the input dimension. Empirical results on regression tasks from the
UCI repository show a reduction in the learnt model’s risk (MSE) by up to 47%.

1

Introduction

Knowledge distillation [12] was initially proposed as a way to transfer the knowledge learnt by a
larger teacher model to a smaller student model, which can then be deployed in limited resource
settings. The process is as follows: Train a teacher (T ) model using ground-truth labels, then use its
predictions to supervise the training of a student (S) model via a combined per-sample loss,


ξ · ℓ ŷT , yS (θ) + (1 − ξ) · ℓ y, yS (θ) ,
(1)
where ℓ denotes the loss function, y is the ground-truth label, ŷT denotes the teacher’s prediction, and
yS (θ) denotes the student’s prediction, parameterized by the learnable θ. The extra hyperparameter ξ
is called the imitation parameter [25], generally restricted to ξ ∈ [0, 1]. It gives additional freedom
to the student to balance importance between labels and teacher’s predictions. The student trained
via this distillation objective (i.e., utilizing the teacher’s predictions through ξ ̸= 0) has been widely
observed to generalize better than when trained only on the labels (i.e., ξ = 0). This gain has been
attributed to ‘dark knowledge’ that is (i) impossible to be directly extracted from the training data by
the small model, but (ii) easily learnt by the large model and transferred to the small model.
Challenging this interpretation, Li et al. [20] and Furlanello et al. [10] empirically observed performance gains through distillation even when the teacher and student are same-sized models. One can
set T and S to have the same architecture, and S trained with the objective in Eq. (1) outperforms
T . This is referred to as Born-Again Networks (BANs) or Self-Distillation (SD). Furthermore,
repeatedly applying self-distillation on the same training data with a student model having the same
architecture provides additional gains on benchmark datasets and architectures [10, 36, 44]. At each
step, the student from the previous step acts as the teacher used to train a new student model under the
self-distillation loss of Eq. (1). For such multi-step self-distillation, there is a fundamental question
of interest: How much more gain can we get by repeatedly applying self-distillation?
Recently, Das and Sanghavi [9] provided theoretical understanding of the original one-step selfdistillation. For the canonical task of fixed design linear regression, considering the standard ridge
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

