F LAME : Factuality-Aware Alignment
for Large Language Models

Sheng-Chieh Lin1∗, Luyu Gao2 , Barlas Oguz3 , Wenhan Xiong3 ,
Jimmy Lin1 , Wen-tau Yih3 , Xilun Chen3†
University of Waterloo1 , Carnegie Mellon University2 , Meta AI3
s269lin@uwaterloo.ca, xilun@meta.com

Abstract
Alignment is a procedure to fine-tune pre-trained large language models (LLMs)
to follow natural language instructions and serve as helpful AI assistants. We
have observed, however, that the conventional alignment process fails to enhance
the factual accuracy of LLMs, and often leads to the generation of more false
facts (i.e., hallucination). In this paper, we study how to make the LLM alignment process more factual, by first identifying factors that lead to hallucination
in both alignment steps: supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and reinforcement learning
(RL). In particular, we find that training the LLM on new or unfamiliar knowledge
can encourage hallucination. This makes SFT less factual as it trains on humanlabeled data that may be novel to the LLM. Furthermore, reward functions used
in standard RL often inadequately capture factuality and favor longer and more
detailed responses, which inadvertently promote hallucination. Based on these
observations, we propose FactuaLity-aware AlignMEnt (F LAME ), comprised of
factuality-aware SFT and factuality-aware RL through direct preference optimization. Experiments show that our proposed F LAME guides LLMs to output more
factual responses while maintaining their instruction-following capability.

1

Introduction

Alignment [Ouyang et al., 2022] is a procedure to make pre-trained large language models
(LLMs) [Brown et al., 2020, Touvron et al., 2023] follow human instructions and serve as helpful AI
assistants. Despite significant progress in general LLM alignment [Ouyang et al., 2022, Bai et al.,
2022, Yuan et al., 2024], state-of-the-art aligned LLMs are still prone to generate false claims [OpenAI, 2023, Min et al., 2023]. In this work, we therefore attempt to advance the understanding of the
underlying causes of LLM hallucination as well as its relation to the alignment procedure.
We consider the commonly seen alignment process consisting of two training phases: (1) supervised
fine-tuning (SFT) [Sanh et al., 2022]; (2) reinforcement learning (RL) with human [RLHF, Ouyang
et al., 2022, Bai et al., 2022] or automated feedback [RLAIF, Bai et al., 2023]. In our study, we find
that both the SFT and RL steps in the standard alignment process may actually encourage LLMs to
hallucinate. First, in the SFT stage, LLMs are fine-tuned with diverse instructions paired with humancreated high-quality responses. While this leads to strong instruction-following capability [Ouyang
et al., 2022, Köpf et al., 2023, Zhou et al., 2023, Touvron et al., 2023], our study shows that such
human-labeled responses may present new or unknown information to the LLM. This, in turn, may
inadvertently promote hallucination. Second, we find that the standard reward used in the RL stage
∗
†

This work is done during Sheng-Chieh’s internship at Meta.
Xilun and Sheng-Chieh contributed equally to this work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

