Policy Learning from Tutorial Books
via Understanding, Rehearsing and Introspecting
Xiong-Hui Chen1,+,∗, Ziyan Wang2,∗ , Yali Du2, ⋄ , Shengyi Jiang5 ,
Meng Fang4 , Yang Yu1, ⋄ , Jun Wang3, ⋄
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China & School of
Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China 2 Cooperative AI Lab, Department of Informatics,
King’s College London 3 AI Centre, Department of Computer Science, University College London
4
University of Liverpool 5 The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
When humans need to learn a new skill, we can acquire knowledge through written
books, including textbooks, tutorials, etc. However, current research for decisionmaking, like reinforcement learning (RL), has primarily required numerous real
interactions with the target environment to learn a skill, while failing to utilize
the existing knowledge already summarized in the text. The success of Large
Language Models (LLMs) sheds light on utilizing such knowledge behind the
books. In this paper, we discuss a new policy learning problem called Policy
Learning from tutorial Books (PLfB) upon the shoulders of LLMs’ systems, which
aims to leverage rich resources such as tutorial books to derive a policy network.
Inspired by how humans learn from books, we solve the problem via a three-stage
framework: Understanding, Rehearsing, and Introspecting (URI). In particular, it
first rehearses decision-making trajectories based on the derived knowledge after
understanding the books, then introspects about the imaginary dataset to distill a
policy network. We build two benchmarks for PLfB based on Tic-Tac-Toe and
Football games. In the experiment, URI’s policy achieves a minimum of 44% net
winning rate against GPT-based agents without any real data. In the much more
complex football game, URI’s policy beat the built-in AIs with a 37% winning
rate while GPT-based agents can only achieve a 6% winning rate. The project
page: plfb-football.github.io.

1

Introduction

Humans can acquire new skills through various written materials that provide condensed knowledge,
without the need for direct interactions with the target environment. In contrast, traditional policy
learning paradigms, such as reinforcement learning (RL) [1] primarily rely on trial and error [2–4].
Despite recent advances in offline RL [5, 6] showing that policy improvements can be achieved
simply by using pre-collected data, in fields such as embodied AI for robotics [7], the process of
collecting large amounts of decision-making data remains costly and, at times, impractical or even
impossible. Therefore, a question arises: similar to how humans learn, can a policy learn from
non-real data, e.g., from tutorial books?
We argue that the recent successes of Large Language Models (LLMs), such as GPT-4 [8], and
LLaMA [9] already demonstrated the potential to learn from textual content. However, current studies
focus on using LLM directly for decision making [10, 11] or integrating them as auxiliary modules
in other machine learning workflows [12–14]. In this study, we introduce a novel topic built upon
the shoulders of LLMs’ systems: Policy Learning from Books (PLfB). PLfB aims to derive a policy
∗
⋄

Equal Contribution. + Work done during Xiong-Hui Chen’s visit at King’s College London.
Corresponding: yali.du@kcl.ac.uk, yuy@nju.edu.cn,jun.wang@cs.ucl.ac.uk.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

