Explicit Eigenvalue Regularization Improves
Sharpness-Aware Minimization

Haocheng Luo1 , Tuan Truong2 , Tung Pham2 , Mehrtash Harandi1 , Dinh Phung1 , Trung Le1
1

Monash University, Australia
2
VinAI Research, Vietnam

haocheng.luo@monash.edu, v.tuantm27@vinai.io, v.tungph4@vinai.io,
mehrtash.harandi@monash.edu, dinh.phung@monash.edu, trunglm@monash.edu

Abstract
Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) has attracted significant attention for its
effectiveness in improving generalization across various tasks. However, its underlying principles remain poorly understood. In this work, we analyze SAM’s
training dynamics using the maximum eigenvalue of the Hessian as a measure of
sharpness and propose a third-order stochastic differential equation (SDE), which
reveals that the dynamics are driven by a complex mixture of second- and thirdorder terms. We show that alignment between the perturbation vector and the top
eigenvector is crucial for SAM’s effectiveness in regularizing sharpness, but find
that this alignment is often inadequate in practice, which limits SAM’s efficiency.
Building on these insights, we introduce Eigen-SAM, an algorithm that explicitly
aims to regularize the top Hessian eigenvalue by aligning the perturbation vector
with the leading eigenvector. We validate the effectiveness of our theory and the
practical advantages of our proposed approach through comprehensive experiments.
Code is available at https://github.com/RitianLuo/EigenSAM.

1

Introduction

Understanding the generalization of deep learning algorithms is one of the core challenges in modern
machine learning. Overparameterization makes the loss landscape of neural networks highly nonconvex, often featuring numerous global optima, while simple gradient-based algorithms surprisingly
tend to find solutions that generalize well. A body of empirical and theoretical work suggests that the
"flatness" or "sharpness" of the minima is a promising explanation for generalization (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber, 1997; Keskar et al., 2016; Dinh et al., 2017; Jiang et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2020; Liu
et al., 2023b), and the implicit bias of optimization algorithms drives them toward flatter solutions,
thereby ensuring good generalization (Blanc et al., 2020; Wen et al., 2022; Arora et al., 2022; Damian
et al., 2022; Ahn et al., 2023; Tahmasebi et al., 2024).
Inspired by research on flatness and generalization, recent work by Foret et al. (2021) proposed
Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM), a dual optimization method that perturbs parameters before
performing gradient descent to enhance generalization performance by minimizing sharpness. Although SAM has demonstrated empirical success across various fields (Foret et al., 2021; Kaddour
et al., 2022), theoretical analysis of the principles underlying its success remains limited. The work
by Compagnoni et al. (2023) explains SAM’s generalization advantage as an implicit minimization of
the gradient norm, while Wen et al. (2022) suggests that SAM regularizes the Hessian spectrum near
the minima manifold. However, existing theories are either somewhat simplified or rely on overly
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

