DeepLag: Discovering Deep Lagrangian Dynamics
for Intuitive Fluid Prediction
Qilong Ma∗, Haixu Wu∗, Lanxiang Xing, Shangchen Miao, Mingsheng Long
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China
{mql22,wuhx23,xlx22,msc21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Accurately predicting the future fluid is vital to extensive areas such as meteorology,
oceanology, and aerodynamics. However, since the fluid is usually observed from
the Eulerian perspective, its moving and intricate dynamics are seriously obscured
and confounded in static grids, bringing thorny challenges to the prediction. This
paper introduces a new Lagrangian-Eulerian combined paradigm to tackle the
tanglesome fluid dynamics. Instead of solely predicting the future based on Eulerian
observations, we propose DeepLag to discover hidden Lagrangian dynamics within
the fluid by tracking the movements of adaptively sampled key particles. Further,
DeepLag presents a new paradigm for fluid prediction, where the Lagrangian
movement of the tracked particles is inferred from Eulerian observations, and their
accumulated Lagrangian dynamics information is incorporated into global Eulerian
evolving features to guide future prediction respectively. Tracking key particles
not only provides a transparent and interpretable clue for fluid dynamics but also
makes our model free from modeling complex correlations among massive grids
for better efficiency. Experimentally, DeepLag excels in three challenging fluid
prediction tasks covering 2D and 3D, simulated and real-world fluids. Code is
available at this repository: https://github.com/thuml/DeepLag.

1

Introduction

Fluids, characterized by a molecular structure that offers no resistance to external shear forces, easily
deform even under minimal stress, leading to highly complex and often chaotic dynamics [10].
Consequently, the solvability of fundamental theorems in fluid mechanics, such as Navier-Stokes
equations, is constrained to only a limited subset of flows due to their inherent complexity and
intricate multiphysics interactions [38]. In practical applications, computational fluid dynamics
(CFD) is widely employed to predict fluid behavior through numerical simulations, but it is hindered
by significant computational costs. Accurately forecasting future fluid dynamics remains a formidable
challenge. Recently, deep learning models [8, 28, 22] have shown great promise for fluid prediction
due to their exceptional non-linear modeling capabilities. These models, trained on CFD simulations
or real-world data, can serve as efficient surrogate models, dramatically accelerating inference.
A booming direction for deep fluid prediction is learning deep models to solve partial differential
equations (PDEs) [45]. However, most of these methods [48, 29, 22, 21] attempt to capture fluid
dynamics from the Eulerian perspective, which means modeling spatiotemporal correlations among
massive grids unchanging over time. From this perspective, the complicated moving dynamics
in fluids could be seriously obscured and confounded in static grids, bringing challenges in both
computational efficiency and learning difficulties for accurately predicting future fluids.
In parallel to the Eulerian method, we notice another major approach for elucidating fluid dynamics,
the Lagrangian method [13], also known as the particle tracking method. This method primarily
∗

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

