Diffusion Priors for Variational Likelihood Estimation
and Image Denoising

Jun Cheng, Shan Tan∗
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
jcheng24@hust.edu.cn, shantan@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Real-world noise removal is crucial in low-level computer vision. Due to the
remarkable generation capabilities of diffusion models, recent attention has shifted
towards leveraging diffusion priors for image restoration tasks. However, existing
diffusion priors-based methods either consider simple noise types or rely on approximate posterior estimation, limiting their effectiveness in addressing structured
and signal-dependent noise commonly found in real-world images. In this paper,
we build upon diffusion priors and propose adaptive likelihood estimation and
MAP inference during the reverse diffusion process to tackle real-world noise. We
introduce an independent, non-identically distributed likelihood combined with
the noise precision (inverse variance) prior and dynamically infer the precision
posterior using variational Bayes during the generation process. Meanwhile, we
rectify the estimated noise variance through local Gaussian convolution. The final denoised image is obtained by propagating intermediate MAP solutions that
balance the updated likelihood and diffusion prior. Additionally, we explore the
local diffusion prior inherent in low-resolution diffusion models, enabling direct
handling of high-resolution noisy images. Extensive experiments and analyses on
diverse real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. Code is
available at https://github.com/HUST-Tan/DiffusionVI.

1

Introduction

Real-world imaging modalities, such as photography and biomedical imaging, frequently encounter
complex image noise that is both signal-dependent and spatially correlated [23, 35]. Removing such
noise is critical for subsequent image analysis and understanding. Existing deep learning-based image
denoising methods rely on either large amounts of paired images for supervised training [50, 48,
49, 25] or noisy images for self-supervised training [31, 23, 46, 33]. However, collecting massive
amounts of data is expensive and time-consuming in real-world scenarios. Therefore, designing
effective and data-efficient real-world denoising methods is of significant practical importance.
Incorporating image priors and the likelihood, and conducting the corresponding posterior inference
(e.g., maximum-a-posteriori (MAP) estimation and mean estimation), is a classical and data-efficient
approach to image restoration [26, 18]. Nowadays, deep generative models such as VAE, GAN, and
Normalizing-flow have shown the capacity to capture and model complex image statistics, surpassing
traditional analytical image priors [32]. Recent diffusion models have demonstrated state-of-the-art
image generation capabilities [14, 37] and have been incorporated into various image restoration
tasks as powerful image priors [19, 12, 5].
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

