EvolveDirector: Approaching Advanced Text-to-Image
Generation with Large Vision-Language Models

Rui Zhao1 , Hangjie Yuan2 , Yujie Wei2,3 , Shiwei Zhang2 , Yuchao Gu1 , Lingmin Ran1 ,
Xiang Wang2,4 , Zhangjie Wu1 , Junhao Zhang1 , Yingya Zhang2 , Mike Zheng Shou1,∗
1

Show Lab, National University of Singapore
4

2

Alibaba Group

3

Fudan University

Huazhong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Recent advancements in generation models have showcased remarkable capabilities
in generating fantastic content. However, most of them are trained on proprietary
high-quality data, and some models withhold their parameters and only provide
accessible application programming interfaces (APIs), limiting their benefits for
downstream tasks. To explore the feasibility of training a text-to-image generation
model comparable to advanced models using publicly available resources, we
introduce EvolveDirector. This framework interacts with advanced models through
their public APIs to obtain text-image data pairs to train a base model. Our
experiments with extensive data indicate that the model trained on generated
data of the advanced model can approximate its generation capability. However,
it requires large-scale samples of 10 million or more. This incurs significant
expenses in time, computational resources, and especially the costs associated with
calling fee-based APIs. To address this problem, we leverage pre-trained large
vision-language models (VLMs) to guide the evolution of the base model. VLM
continuously evaluates the base model during training and dynamically updates and
refines the training dataset by the discrimination, expansion, deletion, and mutation
operations. Experimental results show that this paradigm significantly reduces
the required data volume. Furthermore, when approaching multiple advanced
models, EvolveDirector can select the best samples generated by them to learn
powerful and balanced abilities. The final trained model Edgen is demonstrated to
outperform these advanced models. The code and model weights are available at
https://github.com/showlab/EvolveDirector.

1

Introduction

In the field of AI-generated content, an increasing number of advanced models have showcased
their ability to generate realistic and imaginative images, such as Imagen [1], DALL·E 3 [2], Stable
Diffusion 3 [3], Midjourney [4]. While these models benefit from publicly available datasets such as
ImageNet [5], LAION [6], and SAM [7], they rely more heavily on proprietary, high-quality data
collections that surpass the quality of publicly accessible datasets. Models such as Midjourney [4] are
particularly noted for deriving substantial benefits from their internal datasets. However, given the
significant commercial advantages brought by their impressive capabilities, most advanced models
keep their parameters private, hindering reproducibility and democratization. In this paper, we aim to
explore training an open-source text-to-image model with public resources to achieve comparable
capabilities with the existing advanced models.
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

