Déjà vu Memorization in Vision–Language Models

Bargav Jayaraman
FAIR, Meta
California, USA
bargav@meta.com

Chuan Guo
FAIR, Meta
California, USA
chuanguo@meta.com

Kamalika Chaudhuri
FAIR, Meta
California, USA
kamalika@meta.com

Abstract
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have emerged as the state-of-the-art representation learning solution, with myriads of downstream applications such as image classification, retrieval and generation. A natural question is whether these
models memorize their training data, which also has implications for generalization. We propose a new method for measuring memorization in VLMs, which
we call déjà vu memorization. For VLMs trained on image-caption pairs, we
show that the model indeed retains information about individual objects in the
training images beyond what can be inferred from correlations or the image caption. We evaluate déjà vu memorization at both sample and population level, and
show that it is significant for OpenCLIP trained on as many as 50M image-caption
pairs. Finally, we show that text randomization considerably mitigates memorization while only moderately impacting the model’s downstream task performance.
The code is available here: https://github.com/facebookresearch/
VLMDejaVu.

1

Introduction

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have emerged as the state-of-the-art solution for learning representations from images and text data, with a number of downstream applications such as image
generation [Ramesh et al., 2021, 2022, Yu et al., 2022b], retrieval [Wang et al., 2015, Cao et al.,
2016, Zhang et al., 2021, Baldrati et al., 2022], captioning [Mokady et al., 2021], and classification. At the same time, large foundation models are known to memorize and retain information
about their training data [Carlini et al., 2019, Meehan et al., 2023, Carlini et al., 2023], and hence,
a natural question is whether these Vision-Language Models memorize as well. If so, this raises
questions about generalizability of these models. We investigate whether Vision-Language Models
retain information about their training data beyond the bounds of generalization.
The main challenge in measuring memorization is designing a measurement technique that can tease
apart memorization from spurious correlations. For example, for an image of a black swan on water,
a representation learning model may learn to predict black swan given the background water if
either: (i) it retains extra information about the training image, or, (ii) if most of the examples in
the training corpus with water also involve black swans. The first kind constitutes as memorization
whereas the second kind is spurious correlation. This uncoupling of memorization from spurious
correlation is particularly complicated for VLMs. Unlike generative models, VLMs as well as other
representation learning models lack decoders that can directly generate images or text; therefore,
what the model learns about its training data has to be detected more subtly.
Prior work has looked into this problem for image-only representation models [Meehan et al., 2023]
by measuring whether the model can predict the foreground of an image (e.g, black swan) beyond
simple correlations based simply on its background (e.g, water). However, such simple solutions do
not apply here. VLMs have two separate modalities – text and image, and the data sets used to train
and evaluate them are considerably more complex than the simple foreground-background structure
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

