SpatialPIN: Enhancing Spatial Reasoning Capabilities
of Vision-Language Models through Prompting and
Interacting 3D Priors

Chenyang Ma

Kai Lu

Ta-Ying Cheng Niki Trigoni
University of Oxford

Andrew Markham

chenyang.ma@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art spatial reasoning-enhanced VLMs are trained to excel at
spatial visual question answering (VQA). However, we believe that higher-level
3D-aware tasks, such as articulating dynamic scene changes and motion planning,
require a fundamental and explicit 3D understanding beyond current spatial VQA
datasets. In this work, we present SpatialPIN, a framework designed to enhance
the spatial reasoning capabilities of VLMs through prompting and interacting
with priors from multiple 3D foundation models in a zero-shot, training-free
manner. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our spatial reasoning-imbued
VLM performs well on various forms of spatial VQA and can extend to help in
various downstream robotics tasks such as pick and stack and trajectory planning.

1

Introduction

Equipping vision-language models (VLMs) the capacities of spatial reasoning unlocks exciting
applications, such as general-purpose reward annotation [52], robotic data generation [61], and
grounding 3D object affordances [26, 38]. However, the spatial reasoning capabilities of VLMs
on fine-grained spatial understanding tasks are somewhat limited. Current state-of-the-art (SOTA)
spatial reasoning-enhanced VLM [12] is mostly tested on spatial visual question answering (VQA),
such as determining objects’ relative positions and orientations; experiments on higher-level tasks,
such as scene comparisons and trajectory planning, which require more nuanced comprehension, are
underexplored.
Many works enhance the spatial reasoning capabilities of VLMs by training/fine-tuning them on
standard spatial VQA datasets [12]. As a result, VLMs primarily learn surface-level associations
between image-text-data triplets. Given the scarcity and difficulty of obtaining spatially rich embodied
data or high-quality human annotations for 3D-aware queries, we hypothesize that these VLMs may
not generalize to questions outside their dataset distribution or adapt to more challenging tasks that
require an advanced level of spatial understanding.
Recent studies [73, 7, 65, 69] in image space understanding show that VLMs, equipped with internetscale language knowledge, and multimodal foundation models capture complementary knowledge
that can be combined to conduct new tasks spanning both modalities without additional training.
Given the recent advancements in 3D foundation models [4, 41, 29], this work explores whether there
exists an alternative approach to enhance VLMs with higher-level spatial-awareness by incorporating
3D priors from these models.
To this end, we propose SpatialPIN, a framework that utilizes progressive prompting and interactions
between VLMs and 2D/3D foundation models as “free lunch” to enhance spatial reasoning capabilities
in a zero-shot, training-free manner. By using these foundation models to decompose, comprehend,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

