SWE-agent: Agent-Computer Interfaces Enable
Automated Software Engineering

John Yang∗

Carlos E. Jimenez∗

Shunyu Yao

Alexander Wettig

Karthik Narasimhan

Kilian Lieret

Ofir Press

Princeton Language and Intelligence, Princeton University

Abstract
Language model (LM) agents are increasingly being used to automate complicated
tasks in digital environments. Just as humans benefit from powerful software
applications, such as integrated development environments, for complex tasks like
software engineering, we posit that LM agents represent a new category of end
users with their own needs and abilities, and would benefit from specially-built
interfaces to the software they use. We investigate how interface design affects the
performance of language model agents. As a result of this exploration, we introduce
SWE-agent: a system that facilitates LM agents to autonomously use computers to
solve software engineering tasks. SWE-agent’s custom agent-computer interface
(ACI) significantly enhances an agent’s ability to create and edit code files, navigate
entire repositories, and execute tests and other programs. We evaluate SWE-agent
on SWE-bench and HumanEvalFix, achieving state-of-the-art performance on both
with a pass@1 rate of 12.5% and 87.7%, respectively, far exceeding the previous
state-of-the-art achieved with non-interactive LMs. Finally, we provide insight on
how the design of the ACI can impact agents’ behavior and performance.

1

Introduction

Recent work has demonstrated the efficacy of LM agents for code generation with execution feedback [39]. However, applying agents to more complex code tasks like software engineering remains
unexplored. To solve programming tasks, LM agents are typically designed to use existing applications, such as the Linux shell or Python interpreter [53, 57, 59]. However, to perform more complex
programming tasks such as software engineering [20], human engineers benefit from sophisticated applications like VSCode with powerful tools and extensions. Inspired by human-computer interaction
(HCI) studies on the efficacy of user interfaces for humans [7], we investigate whether LM agents
could similarly benefit from better-designed interfaces for performing software engineering tasks.
SWE-agent

Agent-Computer Interface
LM-friendly commands
Navigate repo 


Search files


View files

Edit lines

LM Agent

Computer
Terminal
Filesystem
sklearn/

LM-friendly

environment feedback

examples/
README.rst

Figure 1: SWE-agent is an LM interacting with a computer through an agent-computer interface
(ACI), which includes the commands the agent uses and the format of the feedback from the computer.
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to johnby@stanford.edu, carlosej@princeton.edu.
Data, code, and leaderboard at swe-agent.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

