Textual Training for the Hassle-Free Removal of
Unwanted Visual Data :
Case Studies on OOD and Hateful Image Detection

Saehyung Lee1∗ Jisoo Mok1 Sangha Park1 Yongho Shin2 Dahuin Jung3† Sungroh Yoon1,4†
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
2
Qualcomm Korea YH, Seoul, South Korea
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Soongsil University
4
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University
{halo8218, magicshop1118, wiarae}@snu.ac.kr,
yshin@qti.qualcomm.com, dahuin.jung@ssu.ac.kr, sryoon@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
In our study, we explore methods for detecting unwanted content lurking in visual
datasets. We provide a theoretical analysis demonstrating that a model capable of
successfully partitioning visual data can be obtained using only textual data. Based
on the analysis, we propose Hassle-Free Textual Training (HFTT), a streamlined
method capable of acquiring detectors for unwanted visual content, using only synthetic textual data in conjunction with pre-trained vision-language models. HFTT
features an innovative objective function that significantly reduces the necessity for
human involvement in data annotation. Furthermore, HFTT employs a clever textual data synthesis method, effectively emulating the integration of unknown visual
data distribution into the training process at no extra cost. The unique characteristics
of HFTT extend its utility beyond traditional out-of-distribution detection, making
it applicable to tasks that address more abstract concepts. We complement our analyses with experiments in out-of-distribution detection and hateful image detection.
Our codes are available at https://github.com/Saehyung-Lee/HFTT

1

Introduction

We are currently in the midst of what is known as the large-scale AI era. The growth in both the size
of deep neural networks and training datasets led to unparalleled achievements in a wide array of tasks
[4, 43]. However, this transition to large-scale AI presents new, unforeseen challenges. Particularly,
the recent reports on the biased behavior of large AI models raise significant concerns surrounding the
continuously expanding size of training datasets without proper quality control and regulation [2, 41].
The massive scale of visual training datasets necessary to train large-scale models presents a challenge
in curating data to ensure unbiased and safe datasets. This is primarily due to the impracticality of
manually selecting and removing unwanted content from such an extensive collection of images.
This issue of data curation has traditionally been addressed by: (i) creating a supervised dataset for a
specific objective; (ii) training a model on this dataset; and then (iii) utilizing the model to develop
a larger dataset [28]. However, this approach exploits considerable human labor and needs to be
re-initiated from the beginning whenever there are changes in the training objective.
∗
This publication was created by Saehyung Lee while an intern at QTI and currently attends Seoul National
University.
†
Corresponding Authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

