Pre-trained Large Language Models Use
Fourier Features to Compute Addition

Tianyi Zhou Deqing Fu Vatsal Sharan Robin Jia
Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089
{tzhou029,deqingfu,vsharan,robinjia}@usc.edu

Abstract
Pre-trained large language models (LLMs) exhibit impressive mathematical reasoning capabilities, yet how they compute basic arithmetic, such as addition, remains
unclear. This paper shows that pre-trained LLMs add numbers using Fourier
features—dimensions in the hidden state that represent numbers via a set of features sparse in the frequency domain. Within the model, MLP and attention layers
use Fourier features in complementary ways: MLP layers primarily approximate
the magnitude of the answer using low-frequency features, while attention layers
primarily perform modular addition (e.g., computing whether the answer is even
or odd) using high-frequency features. Pre-training is crucial for this mechanism:
models trained from scratch to add numbers only exploit low-frequency features,
leading to lower accuracy. Introducing pre-trained token embeddings to a randomly
initialized model rescues its performance. Overall, our analysis demonstrates that
appropriate pre-trained representations (e.g., Fourier features) can unlock the ability
of Transformers to learn precise mechanisms for algorithmic tasks.

1

Introduction

Mathematical problem solving has become a crucial task for evaluating the reasoning capabilities
of large language models (LLMs) [20, 7, 23, 13]. While LLMs exhibit impressive mathematical
abilities [34, 17, 1, 45, 40, 4, 11], it remains unclear how they perform even basic mathematical tasks.
Do LLMs apply mathematical principles when solving math problems, or do they merely reproduce
memorized patterns from the training data?
In this work, we unravel how pre-trained language models solve simple mathematical problems such
as “Put together 15 and 93. Answer:
”. Prior work has studied how Transformers, the underlying
architecture of LLMs, perform certain mathematical tasks. Most studies [5, 14, 42, 2, 12, 28, 18, 36]
focus on Transformers with a limited number of layers or those trained from scratch; [19] analyzes
how the pre-trained GPT-2-small performs the greater-than task. Our work focuses on a different task
from prior interpretability work—integer addition—and shows that pre-trained LLMs learn distinct
mechanisms from randomly initialized Transformers.
In §3, we show that pre-trained language models compute addition with Fourier features—dimensions
in the hidden state that represent numbers via a set of features sparse in the frequency domain. First,
we analyze the behavior of pre-trained LLMs on the addition task after fine-tuning, which leads to
almost perfect accuracy on the task. Rather than merely memorizing answers from the training data,
the models progressively compute the final answer layer by layer. Next, we analyze the contributions
of individual model components using Logit Lens [3]. We observe that some components primarily
approximate the answer—they promote all numbers close to the correct answer in magnitude—
while other components primarily classify the answer modulo m for various numbers m. Then,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

