GeoNLF: Geometry guided Pose-Free
Neural LiDAR Fields
Weiyi Xue∗
Tongji University
xwy@tongji.edu.cn

Zehan Zheng∗
Tongji University
zhengzehan@tongji.edu.cn

Fan Lu
Tongji University
lufan@tongji.edu.cn

Haiyun Wei
Tongji University
2311399@tongji.edu.cn

Guang Chen†
Tongji University
guangchen@tongji.edu.cn

Changjun Jiang
Tongji University
cjjiang@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
Although recent efforts have extended Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) into LiDAR
point cloud synthesis, the majority of existing works exhibit a strong dependence
on precomputed poses. However, point cloud registration methods struggle to
achieve precise global pose estimation, whereas previous pose-free NeRFs overlook geometric consistency in global reconstruction. In light of this, we explore the
geometric insights of point clouds, which provide explicit registration priors for
reconstruction. Based on this, we propose Geometry guided Neural LiDAR Fields
(GeoNLF), a hybrid framework performing alternately global neural reconstruction and pure geometric pose optimization. Furthermore, NeRFs tend to overfit
individual frames and easily get stuck in local minima under sparse-view inputs.
To tackle this issue, we develop a selective-reweighting strategy and introduce
geometric constraints for robust optimization. Extensive experiments on NuScenes
and KITTI-360 datasets demonstrate the superiority of GeoNLF in both novel view
synthesis and multi-view registration of low-frequency large-scale point clouds.

1

Introduction

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [37] have achieved tremendous achievements in image novel view
synthesis (NVS). Recent studies have extended it to LiDAR point cloud synthesis [23, 51, 67, 70],
mitigating the domain gap to real data and far surpassing traditional methods. Nevertheless, the
majority of existing works exhibit a strong dependence on known precise poses. In the domain of
images, conventional approaches rely on Structure-from-Motion algorithms like COLMAP [48] to
estimate poses, which are prone to failure with sparse or textureless views. As an alternative, recent
works [6, 21, 31, 41] such as BARF [31] employ bundle-adjusting techniques to achieve high-quality
NVS while simultaneously enhancing the precision of pose estimation.
However, the sparse nature of LiDAR point clouds and their inherent absence of texture information
distinguish them significantly from images. Trivial bundle-adjusting techniques from the image
domain become less applicable in this context, encountering the following challenges: (1) Outdoor
LiDAR point clouds (e.g., 2Hz, 32-beam LiDAR keyframes in Nuscenes [9]) exhibit temporal and
spatial sparsity. NeRF easily overfits the input views without addressing the geometric inconsistencies
caused by inaccurate poses. Consequently, it fails to propagate sufficient gradients for effective pose
optimization. (2) Point clouds lack texture and color information but contain explicit geometric
features. However, the photometric-based optimization scheme of NeRFs overlooks these abundant
geometric cues within the point cloud, which hinders geometric-based registration.
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author. Our code is availiable at https://github.com/ispc-lab/GeoNLF.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

