Randomized Exploration for Reinforcement Learning
with Multinomial Logistic Function Approximation

Wooseong Cho∗
Seoul National University
Seoul, South Korea
wooseong_cho@snu.ac.kr

Taehyun Hwang∗
Seoul National University
Seoul, South Korea
th.hwang@snu.ac.kr

Joongkyu Lee
Seoul National University
Seoul, South Korea
jklee0717@snu.ac.kr

Min-hwan Oh†
Seoul National University
Seoul, South Korea
minoh@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We study reinforcement learning with multinomial logistic (MNL) function approximation where the underlying transition probability kernel of the Markov decision
processes (MDPs) is parametrized by an unknown transition core with features of
state and action. For the finite horizon episodic setting with inhomogeneous state
transitions, we propose provably efficient algorithms with randomized exploration
having frequentist regret guarantees. For our first algorithm, RRL-MNL, we adapt
optimistic sampling to ensure the optimism of the estimated value function
√ with
e −1 d 32 H 32 T ) fresufficient frequency. We establish that RRL-MNL achieves a O(κ
quentist regret bound with constant-time computational cost per episode. Here, d is
the dimension of the transition core, H is the horizon length, T is the total number
of steps, and κ is a problem-dependent constant. Despite the simplicity and practicality of RRL-MNL, its regret bound scales with κ−1 , which is potentially large in
the worst case. To improve the dependence on κ−1 , we propose ORRL-MNL, which
estimates the value function using the local gradient information of
the MNL transi3√
3
e
2
2
tion model. We show that its frequentist regret bound is O(d H
T +κ−1 d2 H 2 ).
To the best of our knowledge, these are the first randomized RL algorithms for
the MNL transition model that achieve statistical guarantees with constant-time
computational cost per episode. Numerical experiments demonstrate the superior
performance of the proposed algorithms.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a sequential decision-making problem in which an agent tries to
maximize its expected cumulative reward by interacting with an unknown environment over time.
Despite significant empirical progress in RL algorithms for various applications [47, 52, 65, 66, 25],
the theoretical understanding of RL algorithms had long been limited to tabular methods [40, 56,
10, 77, 79], which explicitly enumerate the entire state and action spaces and learn the value (or
the policy) for each state and action. Recently, there has been an increasing body of research in
RL with function approximation to extend beyond the tabular problem setting. In particular, linear
function approximation has served as a foundational model [43, 73, 22, 9, 37]. On the other hand,
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

