UKnow: A Unified Knowledge Protocol with
Multimodal Knowledge Graph Datasets for Reasoning
and Vision-Language Pre-Training

Biao Gong1 , Shuai Tan2 , Yutong Feng1 , Xiaoying Xie1 ,
Yuyuan Li3,4† , Chaochao Chen4 , Kecheng Zheng2 , Yujun Shen2 , Deli Zhao1 ,
1
Alibaba Group, 2 Ant Group, 3 Hangzhou Dianzi University, 4 Zhejiang University
{a.biao.gong, tanshuai2001, fengyutong.fyt}@gmail.com souyu.xxy@alibaba-inc.com
y2li@hdu.edu.cn zjuccc@zju.edu.cn {zkechengzk, shenyujun0302, zhaodeli}@gmail.com

Abstract
This work presents a unified knowledge protocol, called UKnow, which facilitates
knowledge-based studies from the perspective of data. Particularly focusing on
visual and linguistic modalities, we categorize data knowledge into five unit types,
namely, in-image, in-text, cross-image, cross-text, and image-text, and set up an
efficient pipeline to help construct the multimodal knowledge graph from any data
collection. Thanks to the logical information naturally contained in knowledge
graph, organizing datasets under UKnow format opens up more possibilities of
data usage compared to the commonly used image-text pairs. Following UKnow
protocol, we collect, from public international news, a large-scale multimodal
knowledge graph dataset that consists of 1,388,568 nodes (with 571,791 visionrelated ones) and 3,673,817 triplets. The dataset is also annotated with rich event
tags, including 11 coarse labels and 9,185 fine labels. Experiments on 4 benchmarks
demonstrate the potential of UKnow in supporting common-sense reasoning and
boosting vision-language pre-training with a single dataset, benefiting from its
unified form of knowledge organization. See Appendix A to download the dataset.

1

Introduction

Recent efforts have been attracted to leverage the multimodal knowledge graph [95] for data-driven
intelligence. Inspired by the human mastery knowledge network [49], we consider that the multimodal knowledge graph, which naturally accommodates heterogeneous data based on its format of
complex network [93, 77], is well suited for constructing a unified knowledge criterion from the
perspective of data. Driven by the multimodal knowledge graph, models can easily introduce external
knowledge [57], discover long-range relations [82] and understand more logical semantics [52].
However, existing datasets of the multimodal knowledge graph commonly focus on only one task like
common-sense reasoning [81, 46] due to their limited scale and irregular data organization. Therefore,
it is imperative to construct a well-organized multimodal knowledge graph dataset with large-scale
and rich-logic, which enables delving into deeper foundational problems in lower layers, such as the
knowledge based vision-language pre-training.
To this end, we propose UKnow, a Unified Knowledge protocol, which facilitates knowledge-based
studies from data perspective. Particularly focusing on visual and linguistic modalities, we categorize
data knowledge into five unit types, namely, in-image Iin , in-text Tin , cross-image Icross , crosstext Tcross , and image-text ITcross . As shown in Fig. 1, these knowledge types are together named
as Knowledge-View which can be easily used to construct a multimodal knowledge graph (Gm ).
† Corresponding Author.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

