Statistical-Computational Trade-offs for Density
Estimation
Anders Aamand
University of Copenhagen
aamand@mit.edu
Piotr Indyk
MIT
indyk@mit.edu

Alexandr Andoni
Columbia University
andoni@cs.columbia.edu

Shyam Narayanan
Citadel Securities∗
shyam.s.narayanan@gmail.com

Justin Y. Chen
MIT
justc@mit.edu
Sandeep Silwal
UW-Madison
silwal@cs.wisc.edu

Haike Xu
MIT
haikexu@mit.edu

Abstract
We study the density estimation problem defined as follows: given k distributions
p1 , . . . , pk over a discrete domain [n], as well as a collection of samples chosen
from a “query” distribution q over [n], output pi that is “close” to q. Recently [1]
gave the first and only known result that achieves sublinear bounds in both the
sampling complexity and the query time while preserving polynomial data structure
space. However, their improvement over linear samples and time is only by
subpolynomial factors.
Our main result is a lower bound showing that, for a broad class of data structures,
their bounds cannot be significantly improved. In particular, if an algorithm uses
O(n/ logc k) samples for some constant c > 0 and polynomial space, then the
query time of the data structure must be at least k 1−O(1)/ log log k , i.e., close to
linear in the number of distributions k. This is a novel statistical-computational
trade-off for density estimation, demonstrating that any data structure must use
close to a linear number of samples or take close to linear query time. The lower
bound holds even in the realizable case where q = pi for some i, and when the
distributions are flat (specifically, all distributions are uniform over half of the
domain [n]). We also give a simple data structure for our lower bound instance with
asymptotically matching upper bounds. Experiments show that the data structure
is quite efficient in practice.

1

Introduction

The general density estimation problem is defined as follows: given k distributions p1 , . . . , pk over a
domain [n]2 , build a data structure which when queried with a collection of samples chosen from
a “query” distribution q over [n], outputs pi that is “close” to q. An ideal data structure reports the
desired pi quickly given the samples (i.e., has fast query time), uses few samples from q (i.e., has low
sampling complexity) and uses little space.
∗
2

Work done as a student at MIT
In this paper we focus on finite domains.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

