Foundation Inference Models for
Markov Jump Processes

David Berghaus1, 2 , Kostadin Cvejoski1, 2 , Patrick Seifner1, 3
César Ojeda4 & Ramsés J. Sánchez1, 2, 3
1
Lamarr Institute , Fraunhofer IAIS2 , University of Bonn3 & University of Potsdam4
{david.berghaus, kostadin.cvejoski}@iais.fraunhofer.de
seifner@cs.uni-bonn.de, ojedamarin@uni-potsdam.de, sanchez@cs.uni-bonn.de

Abstract
Markov jump processes are continuous-time stochastic processes which describe
dynamical systems evolving in discrete state spaces. These processes find wide
application in the natural sciences and machine learning, but their inference is
known to be far from trivial. In this work we introduce a methodology for zeroshot inference of Markov jump processes (MJPs), on bounded state spaces, from
noisy and sparse observations, which consists of two components. First, a broad
probability distribution over families of MJPs, as well as over possible observation
times and noise mechanisms, with which we simulate a synthetic dataset of hidden
MJPs and their noisy observations. Second, a neural recognition model that
processes subsets of the simulated observations, and that is trained to output
the initial condition and rate matrix of the target MJP in a supervised way. We
empirically demonstrate that one and the same (pretrained) recognition model can
infer, in a zero-shot fashion, hidden MJPs evolving in state spaces of different
dimensionalities. Specifically, we infer MJPs which describe (i) discrete flashing
ratchet systems, which are a type of Brownian motors, and the conformational
dynamics in (ii) molecular simulations, (iii) experimental ion channel data and (iv)
simple protein folding models. What is more, we show that our model performs on
par with state-of-the-art models which are trained on the target datasets.
Our pretrained model, repository and tutorials are available online1 .

1

Introduction

Very often one encounters dynamic phenomena of wildly different nature, that display features which
can be reasonably described in terms of a macroscopic variable that jumps among a finite set of
long-lived, metastable discrete states. Think, for example, of the changes in economic activity of
a country, which exhibit jumps between recession and expansion states (Hamilton, 1989), or the
internal motion in proteins or enzymes, which feature jumps between different conformational states
(Elber and Karplus, 1987). The states in these phenomena are said to be long-lived, inasmuch as
every jump event among them is rare, at least as compared to every other event (or subprocess, or
fluctuation) that composes the phenomenon and that occurs, by construction, within the metastable
states. Such a description in terms of macroscopic variables effectively decouples the fast, intra-state
events from the slow, inter-state ones, and allows for a simple probabilistic treatment of the jumping
sequences as Markov stochastic processes: the Markov Jump Processes (MJPs). In this work we are
interested in the general problem of inferring the MJPs that best describe empirical (time series) data,
recorded from dynamic phenomena of very different kinds.
1

https://fim4science.github.io/OpenFIM/intro.html

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

