Learning 1D Causal Visual Representation
with De-focus Attention Networks
Chenxin Tao1,3∗, Xizhou Zhu1,2* , Shiqian Su1,3* , Lewei Lu3 , Changyao Tian4 , Xuan Luo1 ,
Gao Huang1 , Hongsheng Li4 , Yu Qiao2 , Jie Zhou1 , Jifeng Dai1,2
1

Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
SenseTime Research 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong

{tcx20,ssq20,luoxuan21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
{zhuxizhou,gaohuang,jzhou,daijifeng}@tsinghua.edu.cn,luotto@sensetime.com
tcyhost@link.cuhk.edu.hk, hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, qiaoyu@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
Modality differences have led to the development of heterogeneous architectures for
vision and language models. While images typically require 2D non-causal modeling, texts utilize 1D causal modeling. This distinction poses significant challenges
in constructing unified multi-modal models. This paper explores the feasibility of
representing images using 1D causal modeling. We identify an "over-focus" issue
in existing 1D causal vision models, where attention overly concentrates on a small
proportion of visual tokens. The issue of "over-focus" hinders the model’s ability
to extract diverse visual features and to receive effective gradients for optimization.
To address this, we propose De-focus Attention Networks, which employ learnable
bandpass filters to create varied attention patterns. During training, large and scheduled drop path rates, and an auxiliary loss on globally pooled features for global
understanding tasks are introduced. These two strategies encourage the model to
attend to a broader range of tokens and enhance network optimization. Extensive
experiments validate the efficacy of our approach, demonstrating that 1D causal
visual representation can perform comparably to 2D non-causal representation in
tasks such as global perception, dense prediction, and multi-modal understanding.
Code shall be released.

1

Introduction

Due to inherent modality differences, vision and language models have evolved into distinct heterogeneous architectures. A key difference is that images usually require 2D non-causal modeling, while
texts often utilize 1D causal modeling. This distinction presents a significant challenge in constructing
unified multi-modal models. Many existing multi-modal models [37, 3, 11, 5, 29] have to train vision
and language encoders separately before combining them. A crucial question in advancing unified
vision-language modeling is how to represent images using 1D causal modeling.
Following the success of causal language modeling (e.g., GPT-series [52, 53, 8]), some studies [10, 17]
have explored causal modeling in the vision domain. These efforts primarily focus on auto-regressive
visual pre-training by adding a causal attention mask to standard Transformers [15]. Despite numerous
attempts, the gap between 1D causal and 2D non-causal vision models remains unbridged. As shown
in Sec. 5, many 1D causal vision models, such as State Space Models [61, 21] and causal ViTs [15],
perform inferiorly compared to their modified 2D non-causal counterparts.
∗
Equal contribution. This work is done when Chenxin Tao and Shiqian Su are interns at SenseTime Research.
Corresponding to Jifeng Dai <daijifeng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

