Faster Repeated Evasion Attacks in Tree Ensembles

Lorenzo Cascioli
Department of Computer Science
KU Leuven
Leuven, Belgium
lorenzo.cascioli@kuleuven.be

Laurens Devos
Department of Computer Science
KU Leuven
Leuven, Belgium

Ondrej Kuzelka
Faculty of Electrical Engineering
Czech Technical University in Prague
Prague, Czech Republic

Jesse Davis
Department of Computer Science
KU Leuven
Leuven, Belgium

Abstract
Tree ensembles are one of the most widely used model classes. However, these models are susceptible to adversarial examples, i.e., slightly perturbed examples that
elicit a misprediction. There has been significant research on designing approaches
to construct such examples for tree ensembles. But this is a computationally challenging problem that often must be solved a large number of times (e.g., for all
examples in a training set). This is compounded by the fact that current approaches
attempt to find such examples from scratch. In contrast, we exploit the fact that
multiple similar problems are being solved. Specifically, our approach exploits the
insight that adversarial examples for tree ensembles tend to perturb a consistent but
relatively small set of features. We show that we can quickly identify this set of
features and use this knowledge to speedup constructing adversarial examples.

1

Introduction

One of the most popular and widely used classes of models is tree ensembles which encompasses
techniques such as gradient boosting [16] and random forests [3]. However, like other flexible model
classes such as (deep) neural networks [28, 17], they are susceptible to evasion attacks [23]. That is,
an adversary can craft an imperceptible perturbation that, when applied to an otherwise valid input
example, elicits a misprediction by the ensemble. As an example, consider a bank that uses a learned
model to assess whether to approve or deny loan applications. In this setting, an evasion attack could
entail slightly altering a potential customer’s data (e.g., adding one month to their work seniority)
that results in the model making a different decision on the customer’s application. The slightly
modified customer record is an adversarial example. There is significant interest in reasoning about
tree ensembles to both generate such adversarial examples [15, 36] and perform empirical robustness
checking [23, 8, 10] where the goal is to determine how close the nearest adversarial example is.
Generating adversarial examples is an NP-hard problem [23], which has spurred the development of
approximate techniques [8, 36, 10]. These methods exploit the structure of the trees to find adversarial
examples faster, e.g., by using graph transformations [8] or discrete (heuristic) search [36, 10, 12].
Still, these techniques can be slow, particularly if there is a large number of attributes in the domain.
This is compounded by the fact that one often wants to generate large sets of adversarial examples.
A weakness to existing approaches is that they ignore the fact that adversarial example generation
is often a sequential task where multiple similar problems are being solved in a row. That is, one
has access to a large number of “normal” examples each of which should be perturbed to elicit
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

