Benchmark Data Repositories for Better
Benchmarking

Rachel Longjohn1∗, Markelle Kelly2∗, Sameer Singh2 , Padhraic Smyth2
Department of Statistics1 , Department of Computer Science2
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697
{rlongjoh,kmarke,sameer,pjsmyth}@uci.edu

Abstract
In machine learning research, it is common to evaluate algorithms via their performance on standard benchmark datasets. While a growing body of work establishes
guidelines for—and levies criticisms at—data and benchmarking practices in machine learning, comparatively less attention has been paid to the data repositories
where these datasets are stored, documented, and shared. In this paper, we analyze
the landscape of these benchmark data repositories and the role they can play in
improving benchmarking. This role includes addressing issues with both datasets
themselves (e.g., representational harms, construct validity) and the manner in
which evaluation is carried out using such datasets (e.g., overemphasis on a few
datasets and metrics, lack of reproducibility). To this end, we identify and discuss a
set of considerations surrounding the design and use of benchmark data repositories,
with a focus on improving benchmarking practices in machine learning.

1

Introduction

Evaluating machine learning (ML) algorithms on benchmark datasets is a central pillar of ML research.
This performance benchmarking facilitates direct comparison across different techniques, which is
important, for example, in the publication of research that introduces a novel method or for selecting
the most appropriate approach for a particular application [1–5]. Ideally, these benchmark datasets
serve as proxies for real-world tasks, so that performing well on the task represents meaningful
advancement toward some desired real-world ML capability [6–10]. Benchmarking can help quantify
progress on these tasks over time, and the availability of a well-studied, standard task evaluation
environment can be a critical first step before moving to real-world applications, especially in highstakes or expensive domains. In addition, evaluating with a benchmark dataset can be useful as a
sanity check when developing a new methodology, as well as for ML education and training [11, 12].
Early data repositories, such as the UCI ML Repository, arose to address the data needs that come
with ML benchmarking [13]. These repositories started as relatively small-scale efforts, but as the
field of ML has rapidly grown, they have become more sophisticated, supporting additional features
such as leaderboards comparing the benchmarked performance of ML models on a given dataset
[14–20]. ML data repositories are fundamentally different from traditional domain-specific data
repositories. For example, they tend to contain datasets from a wide variety of domains, and the
process of selecting a dataset is often less about a scientific or engineering application and more
about the compositional characteristics of the data and its associated tasks, for which a particular
class of methods is applicable, e.g., multivariate spatiotemporal or network datasets.
∗

Denotes equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

