TabularBench: Benchmarking Adversarial Robustness
for Tabular Deep Learning in Real-world Use-cases

Thibault Simonetto
University of Luxembourg
Luxembourg
thibault.simonetto@uni.lu

Salah Ghamizi
LIST / RIKEN AIP
Luxembourg
salah.ghamizi@gmail.com

Maxime Cordy
University of Luxembourg
Luxembourg
maxime.cordy@uni.lu

Abstract
While adversarial robustness in computer vision is a mature research field, fewer
researchers have tackled the evasion attacks against tabular deep learning, and
even fewer investigated robustification mechanisms and reliable defenses. We
hypothesize that this lag in the research on tabular adversarial attacks is in part
due to the lack of standardized benchmarks. To fill this gap, we propose TabularBench, the first comprehensive benchmark of robustness of tabular deep learning
classification models. We evaluated adversarial robustness with CAA, an ensemble of gradient and search attacks which was recently demonstrated as the
most effective attack against a tabular model. In addition to our open benchmark https://github.com/serval-uni-lu/tabularbench where we welcome submissions of new models and defenses, we implement 7 robustification
mechanisms inspired by state-of-the-art defenses in computer vision and propose
the largest benchmark of robust tabular deep-learning over 200 models across five
critical scenarios in finance, healthcare, and security. We curated real datasets
for each use case, augmented with hundreds of thousands of realistic synthetic
inputs, and trained and assessed our models with and without data augmentations.
We open-source our library that provides API access to all our pre-trained robust
tabular models, and the largest datasets of real and synthetic tabular inputs. Finally,
we analyze the impact of various defenses on the robustness and provide actionable
insights to design new defenses and robustification mechanisms.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning (ML) models have reached or surpassed human-level performance in
numerous tasks, leading to their adoption in critical settings such as finance, security, and healthcare.
However, concomitantly to their increasing deployment, researchers have uncovered significant
vulnerabilities in generating valid adversarial examples (i.e., constraint-satisfying) where test or deployment data are manipulated to deceive the model. Most analyses of these performance drops have
focused on the fields of Computer Vision and Large Language Models where extensive benchmarks
for adversarial robustness are available (e.g., Croce et al. (2020) and Wang et al. (2023)).
Despite the widespread use of tabular data and the maturity of Deep Learning (DL) models for this
field, the impact of evasion attacks on tabular data has not been thoroughly investigated. Although
there are existing benchmarks for in-distribution (ID) tabular classification (Borisov et al., 2021), and
distribution shifts (Gardner et al., 2023), there is no available benchmark of adversarial robustness
for deep tabular models, in particular in critical real-world settings. We summarize in Table 1 these
related benchmarks.
The need for dedicated benchmarks for tabular model robustness is enhanced by the unique challenges
that tabular machine learning raises compared to computer vision and NLP tasks.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

