Exploring Low-Dimensional Subspaces in Diffusion
Models for Controllable Image Editing

Siyi Chen1∗

Huijie Zhang1∗

Minzhe Guo1 Yifu Lu1 Peng Wang1 Qing Qu1
University of Michigan
{siyich,huijiezh,vincegmz,yifulu,pengwa,qingqu}@umich.edu
1

Abstract
Recently, diffusion models have emerged as a powerful class of generative models.
Despite their success, there is still limited understanding of their semantic spaces.
This makes it challenging to achieve precise and disentangled image generation
without additional training, especially in an unsupervised way. In this work, we
improve the understanding of their semantic spaces from intriguing observations:
among a certain range of noise levels, (1) the learned posterior mean predictor
(PMP) in the diffusion model is locally linear, and (2) the singular vectors of its
Jacobian lie in low-dimensional semantic subspaces. We provide a solid theoretical
basis to justify the linearity and low-rankness in the PMP. These insights allow us to
propose an unsupervised, single-step, training-free LOw-rank COntrollable image
editing (LOCO Edit) method for precise local editing in diffusion models. LOCO
Edit identified editing directions with nice properties: homogeneity, transferability,
composability, and linearity. These properties of LOCO Edit benefit greatly from
the low-dimensional semantic subspace. Our method can further be extended to
unsupervised or text-supervised editing in various text-to-image diffusion models
(T-LOCO Edit). Finally, extensive empirical experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of LOCO Edit. The code and the arXiv version can be found
on the project website.1

1

Introduction

Recently, diffusion models have emerged as a powerful new family of deep generative models with
remarkable performance in many applications such as image generation across various domains
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6], audio synthesis [7, 8], solving inverse problem [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14], and video
generation [15, 16, 17]. For example, recent advances in AI-based image generation, revolutionized
by diffusion models such as Dalle-2 [18], Imagen [19], and stable diffusion [4], have taken the world
of “AI Art generation”, enabling the generation of images directly from descriptive text inputs. These
models corrupt images by adding noise through multiple steps of forward process and then generate
samples by progressive denoising through multiple steps of the reverse generative process.
Although modern diffusion models are capable of generating photorealistic images from text prompts,
manipulating the generated content by diffusion models in practice has remaining challenges. Unlike
generative adversarial networks [20], the understanding of semantic spaces in diffusion models is
still limited. Thus, achieving disentangled and localized control over content generation by direct
manipulation of the semantic spaces remains a difficult task for diffusion models. Although effective,
some existing editing methods in diffusion models often demand additional training procedures
and are limited to global control of content generation [21, 22, 23]. Some methods are trainingfree or localized but are still based upon heuristics, lacking clear mathematical interpretations, or
for text-supervised editing only [24, 25, 26, 27, 28]. Others provide analysis in diffusion models
[29, 30, 31, 32, 33], but also have difficulty in local edits such as hair color.
1

https://chicychen.github.io/LOCO

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

