Accuracy is Not All You Need

Sanjeev Krishnan
Microsoft Research
Bangalore, India
sakrishnan@microsoft.com

Abhinav Dutta
Microsoft Research
Bangalore, India
t-abdutta@microsoft.com
Nipun Kwatra
Microsoft Research
Bangalore, India
nipun.kwatra@microsoft.com

Ramachandran Ramjee
Microsoft Research
Bangalore, India
ramjee@microsoft.com

Abstract
When Large Language Models (LLMs) are compressed using techniques such as
quantization, the predominant way to demonstrate the validity of such techniques
is by measuring the model’s accuracy on various benchmarks. If the accuracies of
the baseline model and the compressed model are close, it is assumed that there
was negligible degradation in quality. However, even when the accuracies of the
baseline and compressed model are similar, we observe the phenomenon of flips,
wherein answers change from correct to incorrect and vice versa in proportion.
We conduct a detailed study of metrics across multiple compression techniques,
models and datasets, demonstrating that the behavior of compressed models as
visible to end-users is often significantly different from the baseline model, even
when accuracy is similar. We further evaluate compressed models both qualitatively
and quantitatively using MT-Bench and show that compressed models exhibiting
high flips are worse than baseline models in this free-form generative task. Thus,
we argue that accuracy and perplexity are necessary but not sufficient for evaluating
compressed models, since these metrics hide large underlying changes that have
not been observed by previous work. Hence, compression techniques should
also be evaluated using distance metrics. We propose two such distance metrics,
KL-Divergence and % flips, and show that they are well correlated.

1

Introduction

The high cost and latency of Large Language Models (LLMs) has motivated the design of multiple
model compression techniques for optimizing LLM efficiency such as quantization (Dettmers et al.,
2022), Key-Value (KV) cache compression (Ge et al., 2023), pruning (Sun et al., 2023) and sparsification (Ashkboos et al., 2024). However, today, there is no standardized way of evaluating the
effectiveness of these techniques.
The predominant way of establishing the validity of the LLM compression methods today is to report
accuracy on selected benchmark tasks such as MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2021a), Hellaswag (Zellers
et al., 2019), ARC (Clark et al., 2018), LAMBADA (Paperno et al., 2016), etc. It is assumed that
if the compressed model preserves accuracy on such benchmarks, it can be used as an equivalent
replacement for the baseline model.
In this paper, we conduct a detailed evaluation of various compression techniques. We find that while
the difference in the aggregate accuracy metric across various benchmarks between the baseline and
compressed LLM is negligible in most cases ( ≤ 2%), the actual percentage change in the answers
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

