DEPrune: Depth-wise Separable Convolution Pruning
for Maximizing GPU Parallelism

Cheonjun Park1 , Mincheol Park23 , Hyunchan Moon4 , Myung Kuk Yoon5 ,
Seokjin Go6 , Suhyun Kim3∗ , Won Woo Ro2∗
1
Samsung Electronics 2 Yonsei University 3 Korea Institute of Science and Technology
4
LG Electronics 5 Ewha Womans University 6 Georgia Institute of Technology
{cheonjun.park, mincheol.park, wro}@yonsei.ac.kr,
{mhcqwe92, dr.suhyun.kim}@gmail.com,
myungkuk.yoon@ewha.ac.kr, seokjin.go@gatech.edu

Abstract
Depth-wise Separable Convolution (DSConv) has a powerful representation even
with fewer parameters and computation, leading to its adoption by almost all of
the state-of-the-art CNN models. DSConv models are already compact making it
hard to apply pruning, and there are few previous pruning techniques that target
depth-wise convolution (DW-conv). In this paper, we present Depth-wise Separable
Convolution Pruning (DEPrune), a novel pruning method applied to both point-wise
and depth-wise convolutions. DEPrune is optimized by analyzing the computation
of DSConv on GPUs. DEPrune employs a fine-grained pruning approach, yet it
achieves the structured sparsity typically absent in fine-grained pruning, enabling
practical hardware acceleration. Moreover, this method maintains a high pruning
ratio without causing any accuracy drop. We additionally represent techniques
that further enhance DEPrune performance: 1) balanced workload tuning (BWT),
and 2) hardware-aware sparsity recalibration (HSR). Experiment results show that
DEPrune achieves up to 3.74× practical speedup in DSConv inference on GPUs
while maintaining the accuracy of EfficientNet-B0 on ImageNet.

1

Introduction

In computer vision tasks, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have dramatically gained parameters and computation [54] to solve complex and varied tasks [8]. Such massive computation and
memory footprint poses challenges in environments with limited hardware resources, such as mobile
devices. Many research efforts have been made to address such problems, and two techniques have
been most effective: Depth-wise Separable Convolution (DSConv) [6] and DNN pruning [17].
DSConv [6, 43, 45] is composed of Depth-wise Convolution (DW-conv) and Point-wise Convolution
(PW-conv), allowing it to have a similar representation power to traditional CNNs that use standard
convolution, even with fewer parameters and computation [3]. Therefore, modern CNNs primarily
adopt DSConv when designing models [9, 40, 46, 48].
DNN pruning eliminates redundant weight parameters without compromising representation power.
Weight pruning [18] brings a significant pruning ratio (P R) due to the fine-grained approach but rarely
reduces inference time compared to the unpruned model because of index computation overhead [54].
In contrast, structured pruning [16, 30, 32, 21, 38] is a coarse-grained approach that is GPU-friendly
and leads to a practical reduction in inference time.
∗

co-corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

