Newswire: A Large-Scale Structured Database of a
Century of Historical News

Emily Silcock
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02478
emilysilcock@fas.harvard.edu

Abhishek Arora
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02478
abhishekarora@fas.harvard.edu

Luca D’Amico-Wong
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02478
ldamicowong@college.harvard.edu

Melissa Dell
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02478
melissadell@fas.harvard.edu

Abstract
In the U.S. historically, local newspapers drew their content largely from newswires
like the Associated Press. Historians argue that newswires played a pivotal role in
creating a national identity and shared understanding of the world, but there is no
comprehensive archive of the content sent over newswires. We reconstruct such an
archive by applying a customized deep learning pipeline to hundreds of terabytes
of raw image scans from thousands of local newspapers. The resulting dataset
contains 2.7 million unique public domain U.S. newswire articles, written between
1878 and 1977. Locations in these articles are georeferenced, topics are tagged
using customized neural topic classification, named entities are recognized, and
individuals are disambiguated to Wikipedia using a novel entity disambiguation
model. To construct the Newswire dataset, we first recognize newspaper layouts
and transcribe around 138 million structured article texts from raw image scans. We
then use a customized neural bi-encoder model to de-duplicate reproduced articles,
in the presence of considerable abridgement and noise, quantifying how widely
each article was reproduced. A text classifier is used to ensure that we only include
newswire articles, which historically are in the public domain. The structured data
that accompany the texts provide rich information about the who (disambiguated
individuals), what (topics), and where (georeferencing) of the news that millions of
Americans read over the course of a century. We also include Library of Congress
metadata information about the newspapers that ran the articles on their front pages.
The Newswire dataset is useful both for large language modeling - expanding
training data beyond what is available from modern web texts - and for studying a
diversity of questions in computational linguistics, social science, and the digital
humanities.

1

Introduction

As large language models become more widely-used, researchers are likely to turn increasingly to the
past in an effort to expand the world knowledge that they can access. The past is inherently of interest,
both to researchers and the general public, and making past texts accessible to language models can
increase our capacity to draw insights from history. While a much larger portion of historical data has
entered the public domain compared to present-day data, historical texts are not as readily accessible
as web texts. They often require sophisticated pipelines to extract before they can power downstream
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

