What to Say and When to Say it:
Live Fitness Coaching as a Testbed for
Situated Interaction
Sunny Panchal1∗ Apratim Bhattacharyya1∗ Guillaume Berger1
Antoine Mercier1
2‡
‡
1
Cornelius Böhm
Florian Dietrichkeit Reza Pourreza
Xuanlin Li3§ Pulkit Madan1
1
1
1
Mingu Lee
Mark Todorovich
Ingo Bax
Roland Memisevic1
1
†
2
3
Qualcomm AI Research
Aignostics GmbH
UC San Diego

Abstract
Vision-language models have shown impressive progress in recent years. However, existing models are largely limited to turn-based interactions, where each
turn must be stepped (i.e., prompted) by the user. Open-ended, asynchronous
interactions, where an AI model may proactively deliver timely responses or feedback based on the unfolding situation in real-time, are an open challenge. In this
work, we present the Q EVD benchmark and dataset, which explores human-AI
interaction in the challenging, yet controlled, real-world domain of fitness coaching – a task which intrinsically requires monitoring live user activity and providing immediate feedback. The benchmark requires vision-language models to
recognize complex human actions, identify possible mistakes, and provide appropriate feedback in real-time. Our experiments reveal the limitations of existing
state-of-the-art vision-language models for such asynchronous situated interactions. Motivated by this, we propose a simple end-to-end streaming baseline that
can respond asynchronously to human actions with appropriate feedback at the
appropriate time.

1

Introduction

Datasets that combine visual information and language have greatly contributed to advancing the
abilities of AI models over the past years, ranging from captioning [19], to visual questions answering [6], to visual dialogue [17], and beyond. Particularly impressive showcases of this progress are
recent models such as GPT-4o [48] and Gemini [58], which can interact with users in real-time.
Despite the impressive recent progress, existing vision-language models still lag far behind human
capabilities. While state-of-the-art models can be queried (e.g., through prompting) to comment on
events shown in the camera stream, they lack the ability to interact asynchronously with the user
as demanded by the situation, rather than only when prompted. Such interactive scenarios that are
grounded in the spatial and temporal context of an unfolding situation are commonly referred to as
“situated” [5, 12, 13]. Addressing such situated interactive scenarios will be a key to developing
real-world assistive vision-language models.
A notable type of situated interaction is the instructional or coaching scenario, where an instructor
guides a user through a complex activity, such as live fitness coaching. The real-world domain of
* Authors contributed equally
†

Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
Work performed at TwentyBN GmbH
§
Work performed at Qualcomm AI Research
‡

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

