SparseLLM: Towards Global Pruning of Pre-trained
Language Models

Guangji Bai1

Yijiang Li2 Chen Ling1 Kibaek Kim2 Liang Zhao1,∗
1
Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA
2
Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL, USA
∗
Corresponding Author
{guangji.bai,chen.ling,liang.zhao}@emory.edu
{yijiang.li,kimk}@anl.gov

Abstract
The transformative impact of large language models (LLMs) like LLaMA and GPT
on natural language processing is countered by their prohibitive computational
demands. Pruning has emerged as a pivotal compression strategy, introducing
sparsity to enhance both memory and computational efficiency. Yet, traditional
global pruning is impractical for LLMs due to scalability issues, while local pruning,
despite its efficiency, leads to suboptimal solutions. Addressing these challenges,
we propose SparseLLM, a novel framework that redefines the global pruning
process into manageable, coordinated subproblems, allowing for resource-efficient
optimization with global optimality. SparseLLM’s approach, which conceptualizes
LLMs as a chain of modular functions and leverages auxiliary variables for problem
decomposition, not only facilitates a pragmatic application on LLMs but also
demonstrates significant performance improvements, particularly in high-sparsity
regimes, surpassing current state-of-the-art methods. Our source code is publicly
available at https://github.com/BaiTheBest/SparseLLM.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) [1, 2] have recently transformed the field of natural language processing (NLP) by delivering exceptional results across a variety of intricate language benchmarks [3, 4, 5].
Nonetheless, these models, with billions of parameters, generally necessitate significant computational resources. To make LLMs more accessible, extensive efforts have been devoted to model
compression of LLMs [6, 7], including pruning, quantization, knowledge distillation, and low-rank
factorization. Pruning, by introducing sparsity, jointly enhances memory and computational efficiency and offers unparalleled flexibility, seamlessly integrating with any LLMs, thus standing out as
a highly effective and widely adopted compression strategy.
Model pruning has a long history [8] and has proven effective in applications related to vision and
smaller language models [9]. However, conventional pruning techniques, which rely on global
pruning and require loading the entire model into the same GPU [10, 11], become impractical for
today’s LLMs due to their vast size. Recently, several local pruning methods have been proposed
for billion-scale LLMs. These methods compress each layer separately, and the overall compressed
model is then obtained by “stitching together” the individually compressed layers. SparseGPT [12],
an efficient unstructured pruning method for LLMs with hundreds of billions of parameters, achieves
parameter reduction of up to 60% with minimal performance loss. Another approach, Wanda [13],
introduces a novel pruning criterion that evaluates weights by considering both magnitude and related
input activations. Despite its efficiency gains, local pruning only aims to minimize the local error for
each specific layer under sparsity constraints, resulting in a suboptimal solution for the overall model.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

