Diffusion-based Curriculum Reinforcement Learning

Erdi Sayar1 , Giovanni Iacca2 , Ozgur S. Oguz3 , Alois Knoll1
Technical University of Munich1 University of Trento2 Bilkent University3
erdi.sayar@tum.de, giovanni.iacca@unitn.it,
ozgur@cs.bilkent.edu.tr, knoll@in.tum.de

Abstract
Curriculum Reinforcement Learning (CRL) is an approach to facilitate the learning
process of agents by structuring tasks in a sequence of increasing complexity.
Despite its potential, many existing CRL methods struggle to efficiently guide
agents toward desired outcomes, particularly in the absence of domain knowledge.
This paper introduces DiCuRL (Diffusion Curriculum Reinforcement Learning), a
novel method that leverages conditional diffusion models to generate curriculum
goals. To estimate how close an agent is to achieving its goal, our method uniquely
incorporates a Q-function and a trainable reward function based on Adversarial Intrinsic Motivation within the diffusion model. Furthermore, it promotes exploration
through the inherent noising and denoising mechanism present in the diffusion
models and is environment-agnostic. This combination allows for the generation
of challenging yet achievable goals, enabling agents to learn effectively without
relying on domain knowledge. We demonstrate the effectiveness of DiCuRL in
three different maze environments and two robotic manipulation tasks simulated in
MuJoCo, where it outperforms or matches nine state-of-the-art CRL algorithms
from the literature.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a computational method that allows an agent to discover optimal
actions through trial and error by receiving rewards and adapting its strategy to maximize cumulative
rewards. Deep RL, which integrates deep neural networks (NNs) with RL, is an effective way to
solve large-dimensional decision-making problems, such as learning to play video games [1, 2], chess
[3], Go [4], and robot manipulation tasks [5, 6, 7, 8]. One of the main advantages of deep RL is that
it can tackle difficult search problems where the expected behaviors and rewards are often sparsely
observed. The drawback, however, is that it typically needs to thoroughly explore the state space,
which can be costly especially when the dimensionality of this space grows.
Some methods, such as reward shaping [9], can mitigate the burden of exploration, but they require
domain knowledge and prior task inspection, which limits their applicability. Alternative strategies
have been proposed to enhance the exploration efficiency in a domain-agnostic way, such as prioritizing replay sampling [8, 10, 11], or generating intermediate goals [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19].
This latter approach, known as Curriculum Reinforcement Learning (CRL), focuses on designing a
suitable curriculum to guide the agent gradually toward the desired goal.
Various approaches have been proposed for the generation of curriculum goals. Some methods focus
on interpolation between a source task distribution and a target task distribution [20, 21, 22, 17].
However, these methods often rely on assumptions that may not hold in complex RL environments,
such as specific parameterization of distributions, hence ignoring the manifold structure in space.
Other approaches adopt optimal transport [13, 23], but they are typically applied in less challenging
exploration scenarios. Curriculum generation based on uncertainty awareness has also been explored,
but such methods often struggle with identifying uncertain areas as the goal space expands [15, 24, 12].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

