Slack-Free Spiking Neural Network Formulation for
Hypergraph Minimum Vertex Cover

Tam Ngoc-Bang Nguyen1 , Anh-Dzung Doan1 , Zhipeng Cai2 , Tat-Jun Chin1
1
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide,
2
Intel Labs
{tam.nb.nguyen,dzung.doan,tat-jun.chin}@adelaide.edu.au
zhipeng.cai@intel.com

Abstract
Neuromorphic computers open up the potential of energy-efficient computation
using spiking neural networks (SNN), which consist of neurons that exchange
spike-based information asynchronously. In particular, SNNs have shown promise
in solving combinatorial optimization. Underpinning the SNN methods is the
concept of energy minimization of an Ising model, which is closely related to
quadratic unconstrained binary optimization (QUBO). Thus, the starting point for
many SNN methods is reformulating the target problem as QUBO, then executing
an SNN-based QUBO solver. For many combinatorial problems, the reformulation
entails introducing penalty terms, potentially with slack variables, that implement
feasibility constraints in the QUBO objective. For more complex problems such
as hypergraph minimum vertex cover (HMVC), numerous slack variables are
introduced which drastically increase the search domain and reduce the effectiveness of the SNN solver. In this paper, we propose a novel SNN formulation for
HMVC. Rather than using penalty terms with slack variables, our SNN architecture
introduces additional spiking neurons with a constraint checking and correction
mechanism that encourages convergence to feasible solutions. In effect, our method
obviates the need for reformulating HMVC as QUBO. Experiments on neuromorphic hardware show that our method consistently yielded high quality solutions for
HMVC on real and synthetic instances where the SNN-based QUBO solver often
failed, while consuming measurably less energy than global solvers on CPU.

1

Introduction

Neuromorphic computing research aims to develop computational models inspired by neural architectures found in nature. Spiking neural networks (SNN), in which a network of processing units
(neurons) asynchronously transmit spike-based messages to each other [34], is a notable representative of the neuromorphic paradigm. Through parallelism, stochastic behavior, event-driven computing
and other biologically-inspired properties, SNNs promise higher energy efficiency than conventional
computing, which includes the successful artificial neural networks (ANN) [16].
The advent of neuromorphic computing hardware that can implement SNNs has boosted research
in the area. Notable examples include IBM TrueNorth [25] and Intel Loihi [12, 30, 35]. Rigorous
benchmarking [13] indicate the promise of SNNs in delivering energy efficient computations, which
not only benefit edge computing applications, but also reducing the energy consumption of data centers. The recent introduction of Intel Hala Point [1], the world’s largest neuromorphic supercomputer
with 1.15 billion neurons and 138.2 billion synapses, is a testament of confidence in the technology.
Two major classes of problems have been explored for SNNs: machine learning and combinatorial
optimization [13]. Representative approaches in the former include training SNNs using asynchronous
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

