A theoretical case-study of Scalable Oversight in
Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning

Tom Yan, Zachary Lipton
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{tyyan, zlipton}@cmu.edu

Abstract
A key source of complexity in next-generation AI models is the size of model
outputs, making it time-consuming to parse and provide reliable feedback on. To
ensure such models are aligned, we will need to bolster our understanding of
scalable oversight and how to scale up human feedback. To this end, we study
the challenges of scalable oversight in the context of goal-conditioned hierarchical reinforcement learning. Hierarchical structure is a promising entrypoint into
studying how to scale up human feedback, which in this work we assume can only
be provided for model outputs below a threshold size. In the cardinal feedback
setting, we develop an apt sub-MDP reward and algorithm that allows us to acquire
and scale up low-level feedback for learning with sublinear regret. In the ordinal
feedback setting, we show the necessity of both high- and low-level feedback,
and develop a hierarchical experimental design algorithm that efficiently acquires
both types of feedback for learning. Altogether, our work aims to consolidate the
foundations of scalable oversight, formalizing and studying the various challenges
thereof.

1

Introduction

Next-generation AI models are poised to produce sophisticated outputs such as long-form texts and
videos, and execute complex tasks as agents. To build these AIs responsibly, we need to better
our understanding of scalable oversight: the ability to provide scalable human feedback to these
complex models [2, 8, 15, 5]. An immediate, key challenge to overcome is the size of model
outputs, making it time-consuming for humans to parse and provide reliable feedback on, even with
AI-assistance [24, 27, 23]. To this end, in this work, we consider human labelers with bounded
processing ability such that accurate feedback can only be provided for outputs below some threshold
size. We are interested in answering the question:
How can we scale this limited feedback to supervise a model with outputs larger
than this limit?
Verily, this task is difficult without further assumptions. If the model output can only be assessed
in its entirety, it is impossible for humans to provide reliable feedback. Thus, we investigate a
natural setup that gives us hope to overcome the limitation in feedback — when model outputs have
hierarchical structure. Hierarchical structure exists in many high-dimensional outputs of interest,
including long-form texts (books made up of chapters), videos (movies made up of scenes) and code
(main functions made up of helper functions). Indeed, it reflects the way we humans produce many
of our most complex creations.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

