Why Go Full? Elevating Federated Learning
Through Partial Network Updates

Haolin Wang♢† , Xuefeng Liu♢♡ , Jianwei Niu♢♡‡ , Wenkai Guo♢† , Shaojie Tang♠
♢ State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
♠ Center for AI Business Innovation, Department of Management Science and Systems,
University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA.
♡ Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
{wanghaolin, liu_xuefeng, niujianwei, kyeguo}@buaa.edu.cn
shaojiet@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Federated learning is a distributed machine learning paradigm designed to protect
user data privacy, which has been successfully implemented across various scenarios. In traditional federated learning, the entire parameter set of local models is
updated and averaged in each training round. Although this full network update
method maximizes knowledge acquisition and sharing for each model layer, it
prevents the layers of the global model from cooperating effectively to complete
the tasks of each client, a challenge we refer to as layer mismatch. This mismatch
problem recurs after every parameter averaging, consequently slowing down model
convergence and degrading overall performance. To address the layer mismatch
issue, we introduce the FedPart method, which restricts model updates to either
a single layer or a few layers during each communication round. Furthermore, to
maintain the efficiency of knowledge acquisition and sharing, we develop several
strategies to select trainable layers in each round, including sequential updating
and multi-round cycle training. Our theoretical analysis and experimental results
show that the FedPart method significantly outperforms traditional full-network
update strategies, achieving faster convergence, greater accuracy, and reduced
communication and computational overhead.

1

Introduction

Federated learning is a machine learning framework that protects data privacy, which has attracted
widespread attention from researchers in recent years [McMahan et al., 2017, Kairouz et al., 2019, Li
et al., 2019]. In traditional federated learning, after receiving the global model sent by the server,
each client uses their local data to update the entire model parameters set for several iterations; then,
the server averages the updated models to obtain a new global model and broadcasts it to all clients,
starting the next training round.
While this approach has proven effective in many applications [Hard et al., 2018, Rieke et al., 2020],
its convergence speed and ultimate performance are often lower than those of centralized schemes
[McMahan et al., 2017, Zou et al., 2023], even when data across clients are independently and
identically distributed (i.i.d.). This suggests that while full network updates and sharing enrich each
model layer with more knowledge, they may also introduce factors that negatively impact final
performance. To further investigate the underlying reason, we conduct an experiment to visualize
† Equal contribution. ‡ Corresponding Author.
The source code is available at: https://github.com/FLAIR-Community/Fling
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

