Treatment of Statistical Estimation Problems in
Randomized Smoothing for Adversarial Robustness

Václav Voráček
Tübingen AI center, University of Tübingen
vaclav.voracek@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
Randomized smoothing is a popular certified defense against adversarial attacks.
In its essence, we need to solve a problem of statistical estimation which is usually
very time-consuming since we need to perform numerous (usually 105 ) forward
passes of the classifier for every point to be certified. In this paper, we review
the statistical estimation problems for randomized smoothing to find out if the
computational burden is necessary. In particular, we consider the (standard)
task of adversarial robustness where we need to decide if a point is robust at a
certain radius or not using as few samples as possible while maintaining statistical
guarantees. We present estimation procedures employing confidence sequences
enjoying the same statistical guarantees as the standard methods, with the optimal
sample complexities for the estimation task and empirically demonstrate their good
performance. Additionally, we provide a randomized version of Clopper-Pearson
confidence intervals resulting in strictly stronger certificates. The code can be
found at https://github.com/vvoracek/RS_conf_seq.
We encourage the readers only interested in statistics to start at Subsection 2.1.

1

Introduction

Adversarial robustness: It is well known that a tiny, adversarial, perturbation of the input can
change the output of basically any undefended machine learning model (Biggio et al., 2013; Szegedy
et al., 2014); this is unpleasant and we continue in the mitigation of the problem. There are two main
lines of work tackling this problem: (1) Empirical: the standard approach here is to use adversarial
training (Madry et al., 2018; Goodfellow et al., 2014) where the model is trained on adversarial
examples. This approach does not provide guarantees, only empirical evidence suggesting that the
model may be robust. With stronger attacks, we might (yet again) realize it is not the case. (2)
Certified: with formal robustness guarantees for the model. We will focus on this, and in particular on
randomized smoothing (Lecuyer et al., 2019) which is currently the strongest certification method1 .
We will not cover other certification methods and we refer the reader to the survey Li et al. (2023)
instead. We consider the standard task of certified robustness; the goal is to decide if the decision of a
classifier F at a particular input x is robust against additive perturbations δ such that ∥δ∥ ≤ r for
some norm ∥·∥. Formally, we ask if F (x) = F (x′ ) whenever ∥x − x′ ∥ ≤ r.
Randomized smoothing is a framework providing state of the art formal guarantees on the adversarial robustness for many datasets. One of its benefits lies in the fact that there are no assumptions on
the model, making it possible to readily transfer the methods from defending image classifiers against
sparse pixel changes to different modalities; e.g., defending large language models against change of
1

see leaderboard https://sokcertifiedrobustness.github.io/leaderboard/

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

