QGym: Scalable Simulation and Benchmarking of
Queuing Network Controllers

Haozhe Chen1,∗ Ang Li1,∗ Ethan Che2,∗
Tianyi Peng2 Jing Dong2 Hongseok Namkoong2
1

Columbia University 2 Columbia Business School
{haozhe.chen, al4263}@columbia.edu
{eche25, tianyi.peng, jing.dong, namkoong}@gsb.columbia.edu

Abstract
Queuing network control determines the allocation of scarce resources to manage congestion, a fundamental problem in manufacturing, communications, and
healthcare. Compared to standard RL problems, queueing problems are distinguished by unique challenges: i) a system operating in continuous time, ii) high
stochasticity, and iii) long horizons over which the system can become unstable
(exploding delays). To spur methodological progress tackling these challenges, we
present an open-sourced queueing simulation framework, QGym, that benchmark
queueing policies across realistic problem instances. Our modular framework
allows the researchers to build on our initial instances, which provide a wide range
of environments including parallel servers, criss-cross, tandem, and re-entrant
networks, as well as a realistically calibrated hospital queuing system. QGym
makes it easy to compare multiple policies, including both model-free RL methods
and classical queuing policies. Our testbed complements the traditional focus on
evaluating algorithms based on mathematical guarantees in idealized settings, and
significantly expands the scope of empirical benchmarking in prior work. QGym
code is open-sourced at https://github.com/namkoong-lab/QGym.

1

Introduction

Queuing network control is a fundamental control problem in managing congestion in job-processing
systems, such as semiconductor manufacturing fabrication plants, communications networks, cloud
computing facilities, call centers, healthcare delivery systems, ride-sharing platforms, and limit-order
books [44, 23, 37, 2, 4, 7, 14]. In a typical queuing system, jobs arrive at random intervals, wait in
queues until an available server can service them, and then either leave the system or move on to
another queue for further processing. The stochastic workload is the defining challenge in queueing:
the variability inherent in real-world systems makes the time it takes to process jobs random. To
manage performance objectives such as minimizing processing delays, balancing workloads, and
improving overall service quality and efficiency, a good controller must dynamically allocate resources
accounting for future stochasticity. The ability to plan is especially crucial for systems that experience
varying levels of congestion over time.
Routing/scheduling control (i.e., matching jobs with servers) in industrial-scale systems is challenging
due to several factors. First, queueing networks can be large and complex, with many different job
classes and server types (see, e.g., [23, 4]). The processing speeds can depend on the server and job
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

