Enhancing Chess Reinforcement Learning with Graph
Representation
Tomas Rigaux∗
Kyoto University
Kyoto, Japan
tomas@rigaux.com

Hisashi Kashima
Kyoto University
Kyoto, Japan
kashima@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Mastering games is a hard task, as games can be extremely complex, and still
fundamentally different in structure from one another. While the AlphaZero
algorithm has demonstrated an impressive ability to learn the rules and strategy of
a large variety of games, ranging from Go and Chess, to Atari games, its reliance
on extensive computational resources and rigid Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) architecture limits its adaptability and scalability. A model trained to play
on a 19 × 19 Go board cannot be used to play on a smaller 13 × 13 board, despite
the similarity between the two Go variants. In this paper, we focus on Chess,
and explore using a more generic Graph-based Representation of a game state,
rather than a grid-based one, to introduce a more general architecture based on
Graph Neural Networks (GNN). We also expand the classical Graph Attention
Network (GAT) layer to incorporate edge-features, to naturally provide a generic
policy output format. Our experiments, performed on smaller networks than the
initial AlphaZero paper, show that this new architecture outperforms previous
architectures with a similar number of parameters, being able to increase playing
strength an order of magnitude faster. We also show that the model, when trained
on a smaller 5×5 variant of chess, is able to be quickly fine-tuned to play on regular
8 × 8 chess, suggesting that this approach yields promising generalization abilities.
Our code is available at https://github.com/akulen/AlphaGateau.

1

Introduction

In the past decade, combining Reinforcement Learning (RL) with Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) has
proven to be a powerful way to design game agents for a wide range of games. Notable achievements
include AlphaGo’s dominance in Go [17], AlphaZero’s human-like style of play in Chess and
Shogi [18], and MuZero’s proficiency across various Atari games [15]. They use self-play and Monte
Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) [6] to iteratively improve their performance, mirroring the way humans
learn through experience, or intuition, and game-tree exploration.
Previous attempts to make RL-based chess engines were unsuccessful as the MCTS exploration
requires a precise position heuristic to guide its exploration. Handcrafted heuristics such as the ones
used in traditional minimax exhaustive tree searches were too simplistic, and lacked the degree of
sophistication that the random tree explorations of MCTS expects to be able to more accurately
evaluate a complex chess position. By combining the advances in computing powers with the progress
of the field of Deep Learning, AlphaZero was able to provide an adequate heuristic in the form of a
Deep Neural Network that was able to learn in symbiosis with the MCTS algorithm to iteratively
improve itself.
∗

tomas.rigaux.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

