Zero-shot Generalizable Incremental Learning for
Vision-Language Object Detection
Jieren Deng1, 2 , Haojian Zhang ∗ 1 , Kun Ding1 , Jianhua Hu1 , Xingxuan Zhang3 , and Yunkuan Wang1
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS)
{dengjieren2019, jianhua.hu, zhanghaojian2014, yunkuan.wang}@ia.ac.cn
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Science, UCAS
3
Shanghai Sixth People’s Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine
zhangxingxuan@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper presents Incremental Vision-Language Object Detection (IVLOD), a
novel learning task designed to incrementally adapt pre-trained Vision-Language
Object Detection Models (VLODMs) to various specialized domains, while simultaneously preserving their zero-shot generalization capabilities for the generalized
domain. To address this new challenge, we present the Zero-interference Reparameterizable Adaptation (ZiRa), a novel method that introduces Zero-interference
Loss and reparameterization techniques to tackle IVLOD without incurring a
significant increase in memory usage. Comprehensive experiments on COCO
and ODinW-13 datasets demonstrate that ZiRa effectively safeguards the zeroshot generalization ability of VLODMs while continuously adapting to new tasks.
Specifically, after training on ODinW-13 datasets, ZiRa exhibits superior performance compared to CL-DETR and iDETR, boosting zero-shot generalizability by substantial 13.91 and 8.74 AP, respectively. Our code is available at
https://github.com/JarintotionDin/ZiRaGroundingDINO.

1

Introduction

Object detection has achieved remarkable strides in recent years [2, 44]. However, most object detection models are typically trained to predict a predefined, closed set of categories [32, 2], constraining
their prospect in real-world applications. Recent research endeavors [12, 27, 45, 19, 22] focus on
developing intelligent systems capable of detecting objects specified by natural language inputs,
giving rise to the field of Vision-Language Object Detection (VLOD) (also named Open Vocabulary
Object Detection), also referred to as Open Vocabulary Object Detection. In this framework, the
models are termed Vision-Language Object Detection Models (VLODMs). By incorporating natural
language inputs, VLODMs can recognize a much broader set of visual concepts beyond a fixed
category set, resulting in exceptional zero-shot generalizability.
Despite VLODMs’ great zero-shot recognition ability in the general domain, VLODMs often exhibit
suboptimal performance in more specialized domains, such as identifying aquatic organisms in
aquariums or interpreting remote sensing images from aerial drones. In real-world scenarios, the
necessity to adapt VLODMs to various unforeseen downstream tasks remains crucial in order to
attain the desired accuracy, as highlighted in recent research [19, 45].
A straightforward idea is to adapt different individual VLODMs to different downstream tasks.
However, a general agent often needs to simultaneously recognize objects from diverse tasks, each
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

