A S TRO NG REJ ECT for Empty Jailbreaks

Alexandra Souly∗
Tu Trinh†

Elvis Hsieh†

Scott Emmons‡

Qingyuan Lu∗
Sana Pandey

Dillon Bowen∗

Pieter Abbeel

Olivia Watkins‡

Justin Svegliato
Sam Toyer‡

Center for Human-Compatible AI, UC Berkeley

Abstract
Most jailbreak papers claim the jailbreaks they propose are highly effective, often
boasting near-100% attack success rates. However, it is perhaps more common
than not for jailbreak developers to substantially exaggerate the effectiveness of
their jailbreaks. We suggest this problem arises because jailbreak researchers lack
a standard, high-quality benchmark for evaluating jailbreak performance, leaving
researchers to create their own. To create a benchmark, researchers must choose
a dataset of forbidden prompts to which a victim model will respond, along with
an evaluation method that scores the harmfulness of the victim model’s responses.
We show that existing benchmarks suffer from significant shortcomings and introduce the StrongREJECT benchmark to address these issues. StrongREJECT’s
dataset contains prompts that victim models must answer with specific, harmful information, while its automated evaluator measures the extent to which a
response gives useful information to forbidden prompts. In doing so, the StrongREJECT evaluator achieves state-of-the-art agreement with human judgments
of jailbreak effectiveness. Notably, we find that existing evaluation methods significantly overstate jailbreak effectiveness compared to human judgments and the
StrongREJECT evaluator. We describe a surprising and novel phenomenon that
explains this discrepancy: jailbreaks bypassing a victim model’s safety fine-tuning
tend to reduce its capabilities. Together, our findings underscore the need for
researchers to use a high-quality benchmark, such as StrongREJECT, when developing new jailbreak attacks. We release the StrongREJECT code and data at
https://strong-reject.readthedocs.io/.

1

Introduction

Many jailbreak papers claim that their jailbreaks can bypass LLM safety training with near-100%
attack success rates [43, 18, 40, 4, 19, 29, 39, 7, 17, 21, 44]. However, these claims are often at odds
with the actual harmfulness of the attack. For instance, Yong et al. [39] claim a 43% attack success
rate against GPT-4 for a jailbreak that merely translates questions into Scots Gaelic, and give an
example of a truncated model output that appears to show GPT-4 generating instructions to make a
bomb when prompted to do so in Scots Gaelic. We attempted to reproduce this result but found the
∗
Primary contributor. † Equal contribution. ‡ Equal advising.
Correspondence to: Alexandra Souly <alexandrasouly@gmail.com>, Sam Toyer <sdt@berkeley.edu>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

