ReST-MCTS∗: LLM Self-Training via Process Reward
Guided Tree Search
Dan Zhang1∗† , Sining Zhoubian1∗ , Ziniu Hu2∗ , Yisong Yue2 , Yuxiao Dong1 , Jie Tang1
1
The Knowledge Engineering Group (KEG), Tsinghua University;
2
California Institute of Technology
{zd21,zbsn21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
https://rest-mcts.github.io/

Abstract
Recent methodologies in LLM self-training mostly rely on LLM generating responses and filtering those with correct output answers as training data. This
approach often yields a low-quality fine-tuning training set (e.g., incorrect plans
or intermediate reasoning). In this paper, we develop a reinforced self-training
approach, called ReST-MCTS∗ , based on integrating process reward guidance with
tree search MCTS∗ for collecting higher-quality reasoning traces as well as per-step
value to train policy and reward models. ReST-MCTS∗ circumvents the per-step
manual annotation typically used to train process rewards by tree-search-based
reinforcement learning: Given oracle final correct answers, ReST-MCTS∗ is able to
infer the correct process rewards by estimating the probability this step can help lead
to the correct answer. These inferred rewards serve dual purposes: they act as value
targets for further refining the process reward model and also facilitate the selection
of high-quality traces for policy model self-training. We first show that the treesearch policy in ReST-MCTS∗ achieves higher accuracy compared with prior LLM
reasoning baselines such as Best-of-N and Tree-of-Thought, within the same search
budget. We then show that by using traces searched by this tree-search policy as
training data, we can continuously enhance the three language models for multiple
iterations, and outperform other self-training algorithms such as ReSTEM and SelfRewarding LM. We release all code at https://github.com/THUDM/ReST-MCTS.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) are mostly trained on human-generated data. But as we approach
the point where most available high-quality human-produced text on the web has been crawled and
used for LLM training [1], the research focus has shifted towards using LLM-generated content to
conduct self-training [2; 3; 4; 5; 6; 7]. Similar to most Reinforcement Learning (RL) problems, LLM
self-training requires a reward signal. Most existing reinforced self-improvement approaches (e.g.,
STaR [4], RFT [5], ReSTEM [6], V-STaR [7]) assume to have access to a ground-truth reward model
(labels from supervised dataset, or a pre-trained reward model). These approaches use an LLM to
generate multiple samples for each question, and assume the one that leads to high reward (correct
solution) is the high-quality sample, and later train on these samples (hence self-training). Such
procedures can be effective in improving LLM performance, in some cases solving reasoning tasks
that the base LLM cannot otherwise solve [8; 9; 10].
However, a key limitation of the above procedure is that even if a reasoning trace results in a
correct solution, it does not necessarily imply that the entire trace is accurate. LLMs often generate
* Equal contribution.
†

Work done while DZ visited at Caltech.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

