FinBen: A Holistic Financial Benchmark for Large
Language Models

Qianqian Xieb,a , Weiguang Hanb , Zhengyu Chenb , Ruoyu Xianga , Xiao Zhanga , Yueru Hea ,
Mengxi Xiaob , Dong Lib , Yongfu Daig , Duanyu Fengg , Yijing Xua , Haoqiang Kange ,
Ziyan Kuangl , Chenhan Yuanc , Kailai Yangc , Zheheng Luoc , Tianlin Zhangc ,
Zhiwei Liuc , Guojun Xiongj , Zhiyang Dengi , Yuechen Jiangi , Zhiyuan Yaoi ,
Haohang Lii , Yangyang Yui,∗ , Gang Huh , Jiajia Huangk , Xiao-Yang Liue,∗ ,
Alejandro Lopez-Lirad,∗ , Benyou Wangf , Yanzhao Laim , Hao Wangg , Min Pengb,∗ ,
Sophia Ananiadouc,∗ , Jimin Huanga,∗
a
b
The Fin AI, Wuhan University, c The University of Manchester, d University of Florida,
e
Columbia University, f The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen,
g
Sichuan University, h Yunnan University, i Stevens Institute of Technology
j
Stony Brook University, k Nanjing Audit University,
l
Jiangxi Normal University, m Southwest Jiaotong University

Abstract
LLMs have transformed NLP and shown promise in various fields, yet their potential in finance is underexplored due to a lack of comprehensive benchmarks, the
rapid development of LLMs, and the complexity of financial tasks. In this paper, we
introduce FinBen, the first extensive open-source evaluation benchmark, including
42 datasets spanning 24 financial tasks, covering eight critical aspects: information
extraction (IE), textual analysis, question answering (QA), text generation, risk
management, forecasting, decision-making, and bilingual (English and Spanish).
FinBen offers several key innovations: a broader range of tasks and datasets, the
first evaluation of stock trading, novel agent and Retrieval-Augmented Generation
(RAG) evaluation, and two novel datasets for regulations and stock trading. Our
evaluation of 21 representative LLMs, including GPT-4, ChatGPT, and the latest
Gemini, reveals several key findings: While LLMs excel in IE and textual analysis,
they struggle with advanced reasoning and complex tasks like text generation and
forecasting. GPT-4 excels in IE and stock trading, while Gemini is better at text
generation and forecasting. Instruction-tuned LLMs improve textual analysis but
offer limited benefits for complex tasks such as QA. FinBen has been used to host
the first financial LLMs shared task at the FinNLP-AgentScen workshop during
IJCAI-2024, attracting 12 teams. Their novel solutions outperformed GPT-4, showcasing FinBen’s potential to drive innovations in financial LLMs. All datasets and
code are publicly available for the research community2 , with results shared and
updated regularly on the Open Financial LLM Leaderboard3 .

∗

Corresponding Authors
https://github.com/The-FinAI/PIXIU
3
Now under the umbrella of FINOS
Open-Financial-LLM-Leaderboard
2

at

Linux

Foundation,

https://finosfoundation/

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

