Personalizing Reinforcement Learning from Human
Feedback with Variational Preference Learning

Sriyash Poddar∗, Yanming Wan∗ , Hamish Ivison, Abhishek Gupta† , Natasha Jaques†
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
<sriyash, ymwan, hamishiv, abhgupta, nj>@cs.washington.edu
weirdlabuw.github.io/vpl

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) is a powerful paradigm
for aligning foundation models to human values and preferences. However, current RLHF techniques cannot account for the naturally occurring differences in
individual human preferences across a diverse population. When these differences
arise, traditional RLHF frameworks simply average over them, leading to inaccurate rewards and poor performance for individual subgroups. To address the
need for pluralistic alignment, we develop a class of multimodal RLHF methods.
Our proposed techniques are based on a latent variable formulation - inferring a
novel user-specific latent and learning reward models and policies conditioned on
this latent without additional user-specific data. While conceptually simple, we
show that in practice, this reward modeling requires careful algorithmic considerations around model architecture and reward scaling. To empirically validate
our proposed technique, we first show that it can provide a way to combat underspecification in simulated control problems, inferring and optimizing user-specific
reward functions. Next, we conduct experiments on pluralistic language datasets
representing diverse user preferences and demonstrate improved reward function
accuracy. We additionally show the benefits of this probabilistic framework in
terms of measuring uncertainty, and actively learning user preferences. This work
enables learning from diverse populations of users with divergent preferences,
an important challenge that naturally occurs in problems from robot learning to
foundation model alignment.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) has become the predominant technique for
aligning AI foundation models to human values. Across domains like natural language processing
(NLP) [52] to robotics [62, 50], RLHF is an effective way to improve the performance, accuracy, and
safety of AI models, by ensuring that they align with human preferences [45, 34, 29] The question
then becomes: whose preferences? Current RLHF approaches rely on a prescriptive set of values
curated by a small set of AI researchers [39, 60, 2]. Moreover, they typically assume that all end-users
share the same set of values. Given the concerning lack of diversity in AI [22], it is clear that this
approach cannot account for the range of social, moral, and political values that inform preferences
in populations. Recent work has demonstrated that with current RLHF techniques if the majority
population has a weak preference for an outcome that will severely disadvantage a minority group,
∗†

= Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

