Magnet: We Never Know How Text-to-Image
Diffusion Models Work, Until We Learn How
Vision-Language Models Function
Chenyi Zhuang1
2

Ying Hu1

Pan Gao1,2∗

1
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Key Laboratory of Brain-Machine Intelligence Technology, Ministry of Education
{chenyi.zhuang,ying.hu,pan.gao}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion models particularly Stable Diffusion, have revolutionized
the field of computer vision. However, the synthesis quality often deteriorates
when asked to generate images that faithfully represent complex prompts involving
multiple attributes and objects. While previous studies suggest that blended text
embeddings lead to improper attribute binding, few have explored this in depth.
In this work, we critically examine the limitations of the CLIP text encoder in
understanding attributes and investigate how this affects diffusion models. We
discern a phenomenon of attribute bias in the text space and highlight a contextual
issue in padding embeddings that entangle different concepts. We propose Magnet,
a novel training-free approach to tackle the attribute binding problem. We introduce
positive and negative binding vectors to enhance disentanglement, further with a
neighbor strategy to increase accuracy. Extensive experiments show that Magnet
significantly improves synthesis quality and binding accuracy with negligible computational cost, enabling the generation of unconventional and unnatural concepts.
Code is available at https://github.com/I2-Multimedia-Lab/Magnet.

1

Introduction

Recently, Text-to-Image (T2I) diffusion models [1, 2, 3, 4] have drawn considerable attention from
both the research community and industry. Among these models, Stable Diffusion (SD) [2] uses the
CLIP text encoder [5] to encode the given prompt, which is relatively lightweight than other diffusion
models that adopt T5 [6]. Unfortunately, generating text-aligned images is still challenging for SD
and requires multiple runs to achieve the desirable results. Several works [7, 8, 9, 10] have pointed
out that the blended context by the CLIP text encoder causes improper binding. However, few have
analyzed in detail how the text encoder affects the generation of the diffusion model.
Step back and refocus on the CLIP text encoder—an integral part of the Vision-Language Model
(VLM). Prior studies [11, 12] have observed VLMs lacking compositional understanding and investigated them on image-to-text retrieval benchmarks. In this work, we are motivated to answer how
the text encoder understands attribute, and how it affects the attribute binding of T2I diffusion
models. Upon closer inspection, we observe a phenomenon of attribute bias and discern a contextual
problem in padding embeddings, leading to a well-known T2I issue—concept bleeding [10].
Based on the observation, we introduce the binding vector, which is applied to the text embedding
of each object. With positive and negative binding vectors, each object can pull target attributes
and push unrelated attributes to distinguish them from each other. We further introduce a neighbor
strategy to ensure an accurate estimation of the binding vector. Our manipulation is performed strictly
in the textual space, without training, fine-tuning, or additional datasets and inputs. Overall, the main
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

