Model Decides How to Tokenize: Adaptive DNA
Sequence Tokenization with MxDNA

Lifeng Qiao1,2∗, Peng Ye1,3†, Yuchen Ren1,4 , Weiqiang Bai1 , Chaoqi Liang1 ,
Xinzhu Ma1,3 , Nanqing Dong1 , Wanli Ouyang1,3
1
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 4 The University of Sydney
yepeng@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
Foundation models have made significant strides in understanding the genomic
language of DNA sequences. However, previous models typically adopt the tokenization methods designed for natural language, which are unsuitable for DNA
sequences due to their unique characteristics. In addition, the optimal approach
to tokenize DNA remains largely under-explored, and may not be intuitively
understood by humans even if discovered. To address these challenges, we introduce MxDNA, a novel framework where the model autonomously learns an
effective DNA tokenization strategy through gradient decent. MxDNA employs
a sparse Mixture of Convolution Experts coupled with a deformable convolution to model the tokenization process, with the discontinuous, overlapping, and
ambiguous nature of meaningful genomic segments explicitly considered. On
Nucleotide Transformer Benchmarks and Genomic Benchmarks, MxDNA demonstrates superior performance to existing methods with less pretraining data and
time, highlighting its effectiveness. Finally, we show that MxDNA learns unique
tokenization strategy distinct to those of previous methods and captures genomic
functionalities at a token level during self-supervised pretraining. Our MxDNA
aims to provide a new perspective on DNA tokenization, potentially offering broad
applications in various domains and yielding profound insights. Code is available
at https://github.com/qiaoqiaoLF/MxDNA.

1

Introduction

Foundation models in natural language processing (NLP) have achieved remarkable success, transforming how machines understand and generate human language [1, 2, 3]. Inspired by this success,
researchers are now exploring the application of foundation models to decode the complex “language”
of genomic sequences, aiming to potentially revolutionize our understanding of genomics [4, 5, 6, 7].
Tokenization, a critical initial step in NLP models, leverages human knowledge of natural language
structures such as grammar and punctuation to segment text into meaningful units. However, DNA
sequences present a distinct challenge: they lack natural delimiters and their “grammar” is not readily
understood by humans. These challenges make the tokenization process of DNA sequences not
straightforward.
Various tokenization methods have been employed by existing foundation models to analyse DNA
sequences [7, 4, 6, 5]. For example, single nucleotide tokenization [7] treats each nucleotide as an
individual token, K-mer [4, 6] segments the DNA blocks of k consecutive nucleotides, and Byte-Pair
∗
†

Work done during an internship at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

