Dynamic Model Predictive Shielding for
Provably Safe Reinforcement Learning

Arko Banerjee
The University of Texas at Austin
arko.banerjee@utexas.edu

Kia Rahmani
The University of Texas at Austin
kia@durable.ai

Joydeep Biswas
The University of Texas at Austin
joydeepb@utexas.edu

Isil Dillig
The University of Texas at Austin
isil@utexas.edu

Abstract
Among approaches for provably safe reinforcement learning, Model Predictive
Shielding (MPS) has proven effective at complex tasks in continuous, highdimensional state spaces, by leveraging a backup policy to ensure safety when the
learned policy attempts to take unsafe actions. However, while MPS can ensure
safety both during and after training, it often hinders task progress due to the
conservative and task-oblivious nature of backup policies. This paper introduces
Dynamic Model Predictive Shielding (DMPS), which optimizes reinforcement learning objectives while maintaining provable safety. DMPS employs a local planner to
dynamically select safe recovery actions that maximize both short-term progress
as well as long-term rewards. Crucially, the planner and the neural policy play
a synergistic role in DMPS. When planning recovery actions for ensuring safety,
the planner utilizes the neural policy to estimate long-term rewards, allowing it
to observe beyond its short-term planning horizon. Conversely, the neural policy
under training learns from the recovery plans proposed by the planner, converging
to policies that are both high-performing and safe in practice. This approach guarantees safety during and after training, with bounded recovery regret that decreases
exponentially with planning horizon depth. Experimental results demonstrate that
DMPS converges to policies that rarely require shield interventions after training
and achieve higher rewards compared to several state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Safe Reinforcement Learning (SRL) [1, 2] aims to learn policies that adhere to important safety
requirements and is essential for applying reinforcement learning to safety-critical applications,
such as autonomous driving. Some SRL approaches give statistical guarantees and reduce safety
violations by directly incorporating safety constraints into the learning objective [3, 4, 5, 6]. In
contrast, Provably Safe RL (PSRL) methods aim to learn policies that never violate safety and are
essential in high-stakes domains where even a single safety violation can be catastrophic [7].
A common approach to PSRL is shielding [8], where actions proposed by the policy are monitored for
potential safety violations. If necessary, these actions are overridden by a safe action that is guaranteed
to retain the system’s safety. Model Predictive Shielding (MPS) is an emerging PSRL method that
has proven effective in high-dimensional, continuous state spaces with complex dynamics, surpassing
previous shielding approaches in applicability and performance [9, 10]. At a high level, MPS methods
leverage the concept of recoverable states that lead to a safe equilibrium in N time-steps by following
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

