A Tractable Inference Perspective of Offline RL

Xuejie Liu1,3∗ , Anji Liu2∗, Guy Van den Broeck2 , Yitao Liang1†
1
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
2
Computer Science Department, University of California, Los Angeles
3
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
xjliu@stu.pku.edu.cn, liuanji@cs.ucla.edu
guyvdb@cs.ucla.edu, yitaol@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
A popular paradigm for offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) tasks is to first fit the
offline trajectories to a sequence model, and then prompt the model for actions that
lead to high expected return. In addition to obtaining accurate sequence models,
this paper highlights that tractability, the ability to exactly and efficiently answer
various probabilistic queries, plays an important role in offline RL. Specifically,
due to the fundamental stochasticity from the offline data-collection policies and
the environment dynamics, highly non-trivial conditional/constrained generation
is required to elicit rewarding actions. While it is still possible to approximate
such queries, we observe that such crude estimates undermine the benefits brought
by expressive sequence models. To overcome this problem, this paper proposes
Trifle (Tractable Inference for Offline RL), which leverages modern tractable
generative models to bridge the gap between good sequence models and high
expected returns at evaluation time. Empirically, Trifle achieves 7 state-of-the-art
scores and the highest average scores in 9 Gym-MuJoCo benchmarks against strong
baselines. Further, Trifle significantly outperforms prior approaches in stochastic
environments and safe RL tasks with minimum algorithmic modifications. 3

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in deep generative models have opened up the possibility of solving offline
Reinforcement Learning (RL) [27] tasks with sequence modeling techniques (termed RvS approaches).
Specifically, we first fit a sequence model to the trajectories provided in an offline dataset. During
evaluation, the model is tasked to sample actions with high expected returns given the current
state. Leveraging modern deep generative models such as GPTs [5] and diffusion models [18], RvS
algorithms have significantly boosted the performance on various RL problems [1, 6].
Despite its appealing simplicity, it is still unclear whether expressive modeling alone guarantees good
performance of RvS algorithms, and if so, on what types of environments. This paper discovers that
many common failures of RvS algorithms are not caused by modeling problems. Instead, while useful
information is encoded in the model during training, the model is unable to elicit such knowledge
during evaluation. Specifically, this issue is reflected in two aspects: (i) inability to accurately estimate
the expected return of a state and a corresponding action sequence to be executed given near-perfect
learned transition dynamics and reward functions; (ii) even when accurate return estimates exist
in the offline dataset and are learned by the model, it could still fail to sample rewarding actions
during evaluation.4 At the heart of such inferior evaluation-time performance is the fact that highly
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding author
3
Our code is available at https://github.com/liebenxj/Trifle.git
4
Both observations are supported by empirical evidence as illustrated in Section 3.

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

