Normalization Layer Per-Example Gradients are
Sufficient to Predict Gradient Noise Scale in
Transformers
Gavia Gray
Cerebras Systems
Toronto, Canada
gavia.gray@cerebras.net

Aman Tiwari
Subjective
London, UK

Shane Bergsma
Cerebras Systems
Toronto, Canada

Joel Hestness
Cerebras Systems
Sunnyvale, CA

Abstract
Per-example gradient norms are a vital ingredient for estimating gradient noise
scale (GNS) with minimal variance. Observing the tensor contractions required to
compute them, we propose a method with minimal FLOPs in 3D or greater tensor
regimes by simultaneously computing the norms while computing the parameter
gradients. Using this method we are able to observe the GNS of different layers at
higher accuracy than previously possible. We find that the total GNS of contemporary transformer models is predicted well by the GNS of only the normalization
layers. As a result, focusing only on the normalization layer, we develop a custom
kernel to compute the per-example gradient norms while performing the LayerNorm backward pass with zero throughput overhead. Tracking GNS on only those
layers, we are able to guide a practical batch size schedule that reduces training
time by 18% on a Chinchilla-optimal language model.

1

Introduction

The gradients gathered during the backward pass while training a neural network are typically
inspected via their Frobenius norm, the magnitude of the vector. This gradient vector may be viewed
as the sum of gradients computed over each individual example in the minibatch. Each of these has
its own norm. In this work, we develop a method to access these norms that works at any scale, for
three common layer types in deep learning models: linear, normalization and embedding layers.
One primary application of a per-example gradient norm is in estimating the Gradient Noise Scale
(GNS) [39], a metric that has been shown to be useful in training large scale models [9]. The
uncertainty of the GNS estimator depends directly on the size of the batch used to compute the small
batch gradient norm as shown in Section 2.1. So, the most precise estimate of the GNS is obtained by
computing the gradient norms for each example in the minibatch: the per-example gradient norm.
To demonstrate GNS measurement in practice we perform experiments on contemporary language
model architectures, providing a detailed visualisation of the movement of the GNS components
throughout training, presented in Section 4. By inspecting these components it was found that the
GNS of the model is highly correlated between layer types, which we give an intuition for in Figure 1.
However, the practical utility of measuring GNS with per-example gradient norms is only present if it
can be gathered without affecting training time. Focusing on LayerNorm [4] layers, we note the main
speed bottleneck is the memory I/O when not implemented as a fused kernel. To demonstrate this,
we develop a custom kernel to compute both the backward pass and the per-example gradient norms
at the same time. Using this kernel the throughput overhead of gathering the per-example gradient is
zero, even outperforming PyTorch’s LayerNorm at larger dimensions. We apply this to a practical
batch size schedule case study in Section 5.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

