Learning Neural Contracting Dynamics: Extended
Linearization and Global Guarantees
Sean Jaffe1,2∗ , Alexander Davydov1 , Deniz Lapsekili2 , Ambuj K. Singh2 , and Francesco Bullo1
1

Center for Control, Dynamical Systems and Computation, University of California, Santa Barbara.
2
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Santa Barbara.

Abstract
Global stability and robustness guarantees in learned dynamical systems are essential to ensure well-behavedness of the systems in the face of uncertainty. We present
Extended Linearized Contracting Dynamics (ELCD), the first neural network-based
dynamical system with global contractivity guarantees in arbitrary metrics. The
key feature of ELCD is a parametrization of the extended linearization of the
nonlinear vector field. In its most basic form, ELCD is guaranteed to be (i) globally
exponentially stable, (ii) equilibrium contracting, and (iii) globally contracting
with respect to some metric. To allow for contraction with respect to more general
metrics in the data space, we train diffeomorphisms between the data space and
a latent space and enforce contractivity in the latent space, which ensures global
contractivity in the data space. We demonstrate the performance of ELCD on the
high dimensional LASA, multi-link pendulum, and Rosenbrock datasets.

1

Introduction

Due to their representation power, deep neural networks have become a popular candidate for
modeling continuous-time dynamical systems of the form
ẋ =

dx
= f (x),
dt

(1)

where f (x) is an unknown (autonomous) vector field governing a dynamical process. Beyond
approximating the vector field f , it is desirable to ensure that the learned vector field is well-behaved.
In many robotic tasks like grasping and navigation, a well-behaved system should always reach
a fixed endpoint. Ideally, a learned system will still stably reach the desired endpoint even when
pushed away from demonstration trajectories. Additionally, the learned system should robustly reach
the desired endpoint in the face of uncertainty. In tasks such as manufacturing, animation, and
human-robot interaction, functionality and safety require the learned system must smoothly follow a
specific trajectory to its target.
To enforce stability guarantees, a popular approach has been to ensure that the learned dynamics
admit a unique equilibrium point and have a Lyapunov function, e.g. [30]. While popular, approaches
based on Lyapunov functions typically struggle to provide general robustness guarantees since global
asymptotic stability does not ensure robustness guarantees in the presence of disturbances. Indeed,
input-to-state stability of global asymptotically stable dynamical systems needs to be separately
established, e.g., see Chapter 5 in [21].
To ensure robustness and to allow for smooth trajectory following, there has been increased interest
in learning contracting dynamics from data [6]. A dynamical system is said to be contracting if any
∗

Corresponding author: sjaffe@ucsb.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

