Visual Pinwheel Centers Act as Geometric Saliency
Detectors
Haixin Zhong1,2
hxzhong@fudan.edu.cn
Haoyu Wang3
haoyuwang18@fudan.edu.cn

Mingyi Huang1,3
myhuang20@fudan.edu.cn

Wei P. Dai1,5
weidai@fudan.edu.cn

Anna Wang Roe4
annawang@zju.edu.cn

Yuguo Yu1,2,3,5,∗
yuyuguo@fudan.edu.cn

1. Research Institute of Intelligent Complex Systems, Fudan University.
2. State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology and MOE Frontiers Center for Brain Science,
Institutes of Brain Science, Fudan University.
3. Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-Inspired Intelligence, Fudan University.
4. MOE Frontier Science Center for Brain Science and Brain-machine Integration, School of Brain
Science and Brain Medicine, Key Laboratory of Biomedical Engineering of Ministry of Education,
College of Biomedical Engineering and Instrument Science, Zhejiang University.
5. Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
∗ Corresponding author.

Abstract
During natural evolution, the primary visual cortex (V1) of lower mammals typically forms salt-and-pepper organizations, while higher mammals and primates
develop pinwheel structures with distinct topological properties. Despite the
general belief that V1 neurons primarily serve as edge detectors, the functional
advantages of pinwheel structures over salt-and-peppers are not well recognized.
To this end, we propose a two-dimensional self-evolving spiking neural network
that integrates Hebbian-like plasticity and empirical morphological data. Through
extensive exposure to image data, our network evolves from salt-and-peppers to
pinwheel structures, with neurons becoming localized bandpass filters responsive
to various orientations. This transformation is accompanied by an increase in visual
field overlap. Our findings indicate that neurons in pinwheel centers (PCs) respond
more effectively to complex spatial textures in natural images, exhibiting quicker
responses than those in salt-and-pepper organizations. PCs act as first-order stage
processors with heightened sensitivity and reduced latency to intricate contours,
while adjacent iso-orientation domains serve as second-order stage processors that
refine edge representations for clearer perception. This study presents the first
theoretical evidence that pinwheel structures function as crucial detectors of spatial
contour saliency in the visual cortex.

1

Introduction

The seminal work of Hubel and Wiesel revealed orientation-selective columns in the visual cortex
of higher mammals [1, 2]. In higher mammals’ primary visual cortex (V1), neurons cluster into
"pinwheel" structures around singularities [3], unlike in some mammals like rodents, which display
"salt-and-pepper" organizations [4] or mini-columns [5]. While there are established theories and
experiments for studying the formation of topological organization maps in the visual cortex [6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11], the functional significance of pinwheel-like columnar organization remains an unresolved
question and is even debated [12, 13].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

