No “Zero-Shot” Without Exponential Data:
Pretraining Concept Frequency Determines
Multimodal Model Performance
Vishaal Udandarao∗ 1,2 Ameya Prabhu*1,3 Adhiraj Ghosh1 Yash Sharma1
Philip H.S. Torr3 Adel Bibi3 Samuel Albanie2† Matthias Bethge1†
1
Tübingen AI Center, University of Tübingen 2 University of Cambridge 3 University of Oxford
§ github.com/bethgelab/frequency_determines_performance
õ huggingface.co/datasets/bethgelab/let-it-wag

Abstract
Web-crawled datasets underlie the impressive “zero-shot” performance of multimodal models, such as CLIP for classification and Stable-Diffusion for image
generation. However, it is unclear how meaningful the notion of “zero-shot” generalization is for such models because the extent to which their pretraining datasets
encompass downstream concepts used in “zero-shot” evaluation is unknown. In
this work, we ask: How is the performance of multimodal models on downstream
concepts influenced by the frequency of these concepts in their pretraining datasets?
We comprehensively investigate this question across 34 models and 5 standard
pretraining datasets, generating over 300GB of data artifacts. We consistently find
that, far from exhibiting “zero-shot” generalization, multimodal models require
exponentially more data to achieve linear improvements in downstream “zero-shot”
performance, following a sample inefficient log-linear scaling trend. This trend
persists even when controlling for sample-level similarity between pretraining and
evaluation datasets [81], and testing on purely synthetic data distributions [52].
Furthermore, upon benchmarking models on long-tailed data sampled based on our
analysis, we demonstrate that multimodal models across the board perform poorly.
We contribute this long-tail test dataset as the Let it Wag! benchmark to further
research in this direction. Taken together, our study reveals an exponential need for
training data which implies that the key to “zero-shot” generalization capabilities
under large-scale training data and compute paradigms remains to be found.

1

Introduction

Multimodal models like CLIP [98] and Stable Diffusion [104] have revolutionized performance on
downstream tasks. CLIP is now the de facto standard for “zero-shot” image recognition [143, 74,
136, 49, 142] and image-text retrieval [47, 64, 25, 127, 139], while Stable Diffusion is now the de
facto standard for “zero-shot” text-to-image (T2I) generation [100, 18, 104, 42]. In this work, we
investigate this empirical success through the lens of zero-shot generalization [70], which refers to the
ability of models to apply their learned knowledge to new unseen concepts (not seen during training).
Accordingly, we ask: Are current multimodal models truly capable of “zero-shot” generalization?
To tackle this question, we conduct a comparative analysis involving two main factors: (1) the
performance of models across various downstream tasks, and (2) the frequency of test concepts within
their pretraining datasets. We compile a comprehensive list of 4, 029 concepts2 from 27 downstream
∗

equal contribution, † equal supervising
class categories for classification tasks, objects in the text captions for retrieval tasks, and objects in the text
prompts for generation tasks, see Sec. 2 for more details on how we define concepts.
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

