Continuous Temporal Domain Generalization
Zekun Cai1,4 , Guangji Bai2 , Renhe Jiang1* , Xuan Song3,4 , and Liang Zhao2
1

The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA
3
Jilin University, Changchun, China
4
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
{caizekun,jiangrh,songxuan}@csis.u-tokyo.ac.jp
{guangji.bai,liang.zhao}@emory.edu
2

Abstract
Temporal Domain Generalization (TDG) addresses the challenge of training predictive models under temporally varying data distributions. Traditional TDG
approaches typically focus on domain data collected at fixed, discrete time intervals, which limits their capability to capture the inherent dynamics within
continuous-evolving and irregularly-observed temporal domains. To overcome
this, this work formalizes the concept of Continuous Temporal Domain Generalization (CTDG), where domain data are derived from continuous times and are
collected at arbitrary times. CTDG tackles critical challenges including: 1) Characterizing the continuous dynamics of both data and models, 2) Learning complex
high-dimensional nonlinear dynamics, and 3) Optimizing and controlling the generalization across continuous temporal domains. To address them, we propose a
Koopman operator-driven continuous temporal domain generalization (Koodos)
framework. We formulate the problem within a continuous dynamic system and
leverage the Koopman theory to learn the underlying dynamics; the framework
is further enhanced with a comprehensive optimization strategy equipped with
analysis and control driven by prior knowledge of the dynamics patterns. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our approach. The
code can be found at: https://github.com/Zekun-Cai/Koodos.

1

Introduction

In practice, the distribution of training data often differs from that of test data, leading to a failure
in generalizing models outside their training environments. Domain Generalization (DG) [49; 46;
21; 14; 40] is a machine learning strategy designed to learn a generalized model that performs well
on the unseen target domain. The task becomes particularly pronounced in dynamic environments
where the statistical properties of the target domains change over time [16; 33; 4], prompting the
development of Temporal Domain Generalization (TDG) [27; 39; 41; 2; 55; 57]. TDG recognizes
that domain shifts are temporally correlated. It extends DG approaches by modeling domains as a
sequence rather than as categorical entities, making it especially beneficial in fields where data is
inherently time-varying.
Existing works in TDG typically concentrate on the discrete temporal domain, where domains are
defined by distinct "points in time" with fixed time intervals, such as second-by-second data (Rot
2-Moons [48]) and annual data (Yearbook [54]). In this framework, data bounded in a time interval
are considered as a detached domain, and TDG approaches primarily employ probabilistic models to
predict domain evolutions. For example, LSSAE [41] employs a probabilistic generative model to
analyze latent structures within domains; DRAIN [2] builds a Bayesian framework to predict future
model parameters, and TKNets [57] constructs domain transition matrix derived from the data.
* Corresponding author
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

