Nonlinear dynamics of localization in
neural receptive fields

Leon Lufkin
Yale University
leon.lufkin@yale.edu

Andrew Saxe
Gatsby Unit & SWC, UCL
a.saxe@ucl.ac.uk

Erin Grant
Gatsby Unit & SWC, UCL
erin.grant@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Localized receptive fields—neurons that are selective for certain contiguous spatiotemporal features of their input—populate early sensory regions of the mammalian brain. Unsupervised learning algorithms that optimize explicit sparsity or
independence criteria replicate features of these localized receptive fields, but fail
to explain directly how localization arises through learning without efficient coding,
as occurs in early layers of deep neural networks and might occur in early sensory
regions of biological systems. We consider an alternative model in which localized
receptive fields emerge without explicit top-down efficiency constraints—a feedforward neural network trained on a data model inspired by the structure of natural
images. Previous work identified the importance of non-Gaussian statistics to
localization in this setting but left open questions about the mechanisms driving dynamical emergence. We address these questions by deriving the effective learning
dynamics for a single nonlinear neuron, making precise how higher-order statistical
properties of the input data drive emergent localization, and we demonstrate that
the predictions of these effective dynamics extend to the many-neuron setting.
Our analysis provides an alternative explanation for the ubiquity of localization as
resulting from the nonlinear dynamics of learning in neural circuits.1

1

Introduction

A striking feature of peripheral responses in the animal nervous system is localization—that is, the
linear receptive fields of simple-cell neurons often respond to contiguous regions much smaller than
their full input domain. In vision, retinal ganglion cells approximate localized center-surround filters
that tile the input [Dac+00; Doi+12; KK78], and simple cells downstream in primary visual cortex
have localized filters that are selective for spatial frequency and orientation [HW59; HW68; RT95;
NS08; WMG11; RSH02; Rin02]. In primary somatosensory cortex, neurons respond to stimulation
of restricted regions of skin [Cro+11] and in primary auditory cortex, spatiotemporal receptive fields
are typically localized in both time and frequency domains [DWZ03; HDZ08]; see Fig. 1 (left).
By contrast, artificial learning systems do not always learn localized filters. Principal component
analysis tends to fit weights that span the entire input signal, as do unregularized autoencoder neural
network architectures and restricted Boltzmann machines [Sax+11]. This difference has prompted
the search for artificial learning models that can learn localized receptive fields from naturalistic
stimuli, the most notable of which are sparse coding [OF96; OF97] and independent component
analysis [ICA; BS97; vHvdS98]. Sparse coding, ICA, and related compression methods that produce
localized receptive fields from naturalistic data share a top-down approach—they find an efficient
representation of the input signal by optimizing an explicit sparsity criterion, or an independence
criterion that necessitates sparsity in a critically parameterized regime [Fie99; Sax+11].
1

Code to replicate experiments and figures at https://github.com/leonlufkin/localization.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

