GRANOLA: Adaptive Normalization for Graph
Neural Networks
Moshe Eliasof∗
University of Cambridge
me532@cam.ac.uk

Beatrice Bevilacqua∗
Purdue University
bbevilac@purdue.edu

Carola-Bibiane Schönlieb
University of Cambridge
cbs31@cam.ac.uk

Haggai Maron
Technion & NVIDIA Research
hmaron@nvidia.com

Abstract
Despite the widespread adoption of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), these models
often incorporate off-the-shelf normalization layers like BatchNorm or InstanceNorm, which were not originally designed for GNNs. Consequently, these
normalization layers may not effectively capture the unique characteristics of
graph-structured data, potentially even weakening the expressive power of the
overall architecture. While existing graph-specific normalization layers have been
proposed, they often struggle to offer substantial and consistent benefits. In this
paper, we propose G RANOLA, a novel graph-adaptive normalization layer. Unlike
existing normalization layers, G RANOLA normalizes node features by adapting to
the specific characteristics of the graph, particularly by generating expressive representations of its nodes, obtained by leveraging the propagation of Random Node
Features (RNF) in the graph. We provide theoretical results that support our design
choices as well as an extensive empirical evaluation demonstrating the superior
performance of G RANOLA over existing normalization techniques. Furthermore,
G RANOLA emerges as the top-performing method among all baselines in the same
time complexity class of Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs).

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved remarkable success in several application domains [35,
61], showcasing their ability to leverage the rich structural information within graph data. Recently, a
plethora of different layer designs has been proposed, each tailored to address specific challenges in
the context of GNNs, such as limited expressive power [63, 41, 40] and oversmoothing [46]. Notably,
analogously to architectures in other domains [30, 18], these GNN layers are often interleaved with
normalization layers, as the integration of normalization methods has empirically proven beneficial
in optimizing neural networks, facilitating convergence and enhancing generalization [34, 7, 55].
In practice, most existing GNN architectures employ standard normalization techniques, such as
BatchNorm [34], LayerNorm [3], or InstanceNorm [58]. However, these widely adopted normalization techniques were not originally designed with graphs and GNNs in mind. Consequently, they
may not effectively capture the unique characteristics of graph-structured data, and can also hinder
the expressive power of the overall architecture [11]. These observations highlight the need for
graph-specific normalization layers.
∗

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

