Hierarchical Selective Classification
Shani Goren*
Technion
shani.goren@gmail.com

Ido Galil*
Technion, NVIDIA
idogalil.ig@gmail.com, igalil@nvidia.com

Ran El-Yaniv
Technion, NVIDIA
rani@cs.technion.ac.il, relyaniv@nvidia.com

Abstract
Deploying deep neural networks for risk-sensitive tasks necessitates an uncertainty
estimation mechanism. This paper introduces hierarchical selective classification
(HSC), extending selective classification to a hierarchical setting. Our approach
leverages the inherent structure of class relationships, enabling models to reduce the
specificity of their predictions when faced with uncertainty. In this paper, we first
formalize hierarchical risk and coverage, and introduce hierarchical risk-coverage
curves. Next, we develop algorithms for performing HSC (which we refer to as “inference rules”), and propose an efficient algorithm that guarantees a target accuracy
constraint with high probability. We also introduce Calibration-Coverage curves,
which analyze the effect of hierarchical selective classification on calibration. Our
extensive empirical studies on over a thousand ImageNet classifiers reveal that training regimes such as CLIP, pretraining on ImageNet21k, and knowledge distillation
boost hierarchical selective performance. Lastly, we show that HSC improves both
selective performance and confidence calibration. Code is available at https://
github.com/shanigoren/Hierarchical-Selective-Classification.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved incredible success across various domains, including
computer vision and natural language processing. To ensure the reliability of models intended for
real-world applications we must incorporate an uncertainty estimation mechanism, such as selective
classification [19], which allows a model to abstain from classifying samples when it is uncertain
about their predictions. Standard selective classification, however, has an inherent shortcoming:
for any given sample, it is limited to either making a prediction or rejecting it, thereby ignoring
potentially useful information about the sample, in case of rejection.
To illustrate the potential consequences of this limitation, consider a model trained for classifying
different types of brain tumors from MRI scans, including both benign and malignant tumors. If
a malignant tumor is identified with high confidence, immediate action is needed. For a particular
hypothetical scan, suppose the model struggles to distinguish between 3 subtypes of malignant tumors,
assigning a confidence score of 0.33 to each of them (assuming those estimates are well-calibrated
and sum to 1). In the traditional selective classification framework, if the confidence threshold is
higher than 0.33, the model will reject the sample, failing to provide valuable information to alert
healthcare professionals about the patient’s condition, even though the model has enough information
to conclude that the tumor is malignant with high certainty. This could potentially result in delayed
diagnosis and treatment, posing a significant risk to the patient’s life. However, a hierarchically-aware
selective model with an identical confidence threshold would classify the tumor as malignant with
*The first two authors have equal contribution.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

