Parallelizing Model-based Reinforcement Learning
Over the Sequence Length

ZiRui Wang
Zhejiang University, China
ziseoiwong@zju.edu.cn

Yue Deng
Zhejiang University, China
devindeng@zju.edu.cn

Junfeng Long
Shanghai AI Laboratory, China
junfengac@gmail.com

Yin Zhang∗
Zhejiang University, China
zhangyin98@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, Model-based Reinforcement Learning (MBRL) methods have demonstrated stunning sample efficiency in various RL domains. However, achieving this
extraordinary sample efficiency comes with additional training costs in terms of
computations, memory, and training time. To address these challenges, we propose
the Parallelized Model-based Reinforcement Learning (PaMoRL) framework.
PaMoRL introduces two novel techniques: the Parallel World Model (PWM) and
the Parallelized Eligibility Trace Estimation (PETE) to parallelize both model
learning and policy learning stages of current MBRL methods over the sequence
length. Our PaMoRL framework is hardware-efficient and stable, and it can be
applied to various tasks with discrete or continuous action spaces using a single
set of hyperparameters. The empirical results demonstrate that the PWM and
PETE within PaMoRL significantly increase training speed without sacrificing
inference efficiency. In terms of sample efficiency, PaMoRL maintains an MBRLlevel sample efficiency that outperforms other no-look-ahead MBRL methods and
model-free RL methods, and it even exceeds the performance of planning-based
MBRL methods and methods with larger networks in certain tasks.

1

Introduction

Model-based Reinforcement Learning (MBRL) is widely believed to have the great potential to
substantially enhance sample efficiency by training a policy through a learned world model [1, 2, 3].
Previous studies [4, 5, 3, 6] achieve the same asymptotic performance as their model-free counterparts
while requiring orders of magnitude less interactions. In particular, some recent works have even
achieved human-level efficiency in complex RL domains like Atari [7, 8, 9] and robot control [10, 11].
MBRL methods can be generally divided into two stages: model learning and policy learning. During
the model learning stage, a parameterized world model is required to predict the environmental
dynamics by constructing specific self-supervised learning tasks. The policy learning stage benefits
from synthetic interactions between the policy and the world model, hence on-policy actor-critic
methods or planning methods such as Model Predictive Path Integral (MPPI) [12, 13] or Monte-Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS) [7, 9] can be used for policy improvement. To obtain better performance,
techniques like sequential modeling and ensembling are frequently used in the model learning stage,
while the policy learning stage mostly involves the computation of eligibility traces or multi-step
returns [2, 14]. However, these powerful techniques often come with additional computations,
∗

Corresponding author: Yin Zhang.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

