MetaUAS: Universal Anomaly Segmentation with
One-Prompt Meta-Learning

Bin-Bin Gao
Tencent YouTu Lab, Shenzhen, China
csgaobb@gmail.com
Code and Models: https://github.com/gaobb/MetaUAS

Abstract
Zero- and few-shot visual anomaly segmentation relies on powerful vision-language
models that detect unseen anomalies using manually designed textual prompts.
However, visual representations are inherently independent of language. In this
paper, we explore the potential of a pure visual foundation model as an alternative
to widely used vision-language models for universal visual anomaly segmentation. We present a novel paradigm that unifies anomaly segmentation into change
segmentation. This paradigm enables us to leverage large-scale synthetic image
pairs, featuring object-level and local region changes, derived from existing image
datasets, which are independent of target anomaly datasets. We propose a oneprompt Meta-learning framework for Universal Anomaly Segmentation (MetaUAS)
that is trained on this synthetic dataset and then generalizes well to segment any
novel or unseen visual anomalies in the real world. To handle geometrical variations between prompt and query images, we propose a soft feature alignment
module that bridges paired-image change perception and single-image semantic
segmentation. This is the first work to achieve universal anomaly segmentation
using a pure vision model without relying on special anomaly detection datasets
and pre-trained visual-language models. Our method effectively and efficiently
segments any anomalies with only one normal image prompt and enjoys trainingfree without guidance from language. Our MetaUAS significantly outperforms
previous zero-shot, few-shot, and even full-shot anomaly segmentation methods.

1

Introduction

Visual anomaly classification (AC) and segmentation (AS) aims to group images and pixels into
two different semantics, normal and anomalous, facilitating many applications such as industrial
defect inspection in manufacturing [4, 39, 3, 74], medical image diagnosis [28, 65], and video
surveillance [55, 40, 18], etc. Generally, AS is performed first, and then AC is obtained based on postprocessing of the segmentation results. Therefore, AS is more essential than AC. AS can be viewed as
binary semantic segmentation assuming that pixel-level annotated images are available. Unfortunately,
it is usually difficult to collect anomaly images due to their scarcity in practical applications, and
pixel-level annotations also involve labor costs. Based on available training images, e.g., only normal,
normal with noise, few-shot normal or anomaly, and multi-class normal, have led to different types
of AS tasks, such as unsupervised [47, 31, 72, 12, 37, 29], fully-unsupervised [9, 27, 38], fewshot [24, 14, 66, 69, 15], and unified AS [70, 17], etc. These methods achieve excellent performance
on seen objects but often perform poorly on unseen objects.
To address this fragmentation, recent works, such as WinCLIP [26] and AnomalyCLIP [76], have
attempted to design universal models, that are capable of recognizing anomalies for unseen objects.
They typically build on vision-language models (i.e., CLIP [42]), benefiting from strong generalization
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

