Optimizing over Multiple Distributions under
Generalized Quasar-Convexity Condition

Shihong Ding1
dingshihong@stu.pku.edu.cn

†

Luo Luo2,4
luoluo@fudan.edu.cn

1

Long Yang1
YANGLONG001@pku.edu.cn
Cong Fang1,3
fangcong@pku.edu.cn

State Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
School of Data Science, Fudan University
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
4
Shanghai Key Laboratory for Contemporary Applied Mathematics

Abstract
We study a typical optimization model where the optimization variable is composed of multiple probability distributions. Though the model appears frequently in
practice, such as for policy problems, it lacks specific analysis in the general setting.
For this optimization problem, we propose a new structural condition/landscape
description named generalized quasar-convexity (GQC) beyond the realms of convexity. In contrast to original quasar-convexity [24], GQC allows an individual
quasar-convex parameter γi for each variable block i and the smaller of γi implies
less block-convexity. To minimize the objective function, we consider a generalized
oracle termed as the internal function that includes the standard gradient oracle as
a special case. We provide optimistic mirror descent (OMD) for multiple distriPd
butions and prove that the algorithm can achieve an adaptive Õ(( i=1 1/γi )ε−1 )
iteration complexity to find an ε-suboptimal global solution without pre-known
the exact values of γi when the objective admits “polynomial-like” structural.
Notably, it achieves iteration complexity that does not explicitly depend on the
Pd
number of distributions and strictly faster ( i=1 1/γi v.s. d maxi∈[1:d] 1/γi ) than
mirror decent methods. We also extend GQC to the minimax optimization problem
proposing the generalized quasar-convexity-concavity (GQCC) condition and a
decentralized variant of OMD with regularization. Finally, we show the applications of our algorithmic framework on discounted Markov Decision Processes
problem and Markov games, which bring new insights on the landscape analysis of
reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

We study a common class of generic minimization problem
min f (x),

x∈X

(1)

where the optimization variable x is composed of d probability distributions {xi }di=1 and X denotes
the product space of the d probability simplexes. Problem (1) meets widespread applications in
†

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

