Rethinking Parity Check Enhanced
Symmetry-Preserving Ansatz

Ge Yan, Mengfei Ran, Ruocheng Wang, Kaiseng Pan, Junchi Yan∗
Dept. of CSE & School of AI & Zhiyuan College, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{yange98,rmf2021,Ignite,pks0813,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
With the arrival of the Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) era, Variational
Quantum Algorithms (VQAs) have emerged to obtain possible quantum advantage.
In particular, how to effectively incorporate hard constraints in VQAs remains
a critical and open question. In this paper, we manage to seamlessly combine
the Hamming Weight Preserving ansatz with a topological-aware parity check on
physical qubits to enforce error mitigation and further hard constraints. We demonstrate such a combination significantly outperforms peer VQA methods on both
quantum chemistry problems and constrained combinatorial optimization problems
e.g. Quadratic Assignment Problem. Our extensive experimental results on both
simulators and superconducting quantum processors verify that the combination of
HWP ansatz with parity check is among the most promising candidates to show
quantum advantages in the NISQ era to solve more realistic problems.

1

Introduction

Variational Quantum Algorithms (VQAs) [17, 73] and their derivatives [80] have garnered increasing
attention as numerous studies investigate their potential to achieve quantum supremacy. With the
advent of the NISQ era [65, 10] and the improved deployment capability [77], the exploration of new
VQAs has accelerated, as these algorithms have shown promise in delivering quantum advantage
on near-term quantum devices [17]. However, despite their potential, commonly used VQAs such
as the QAOA [27] for Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimization (QUBO) and UCCSD [67] for
ground state energy estimation are not inherently designed to handle hard constraints. Typically, these
constraints are modeled as soft penalty terms within the objective function, which may not be the
most efficient approach. Addressing the natural incorporation of symmetries and hard constraints
directly into VQAs remains an open and critical challenge for advancing the field.
In this paper, we investigate Hamming Weight preserving (HWP) ansatz [78] and parity check [53]
as a novel approach for error mitigation and the imposition of hard constraints in quantum circuits,
rather than modeling these constraints as penalty terms in the Hamiltonian, as is common in the
literature [18, 48]. The HWP ansatz, operating in a constrained subspace, utilizes parameterized
gates that maintain the number of non-zero elements in the quantum state. Recent work [78]
has thoroughly analyzed the expressivity and trainability of the HWP ansatz, demonstrating its
outstanding performance in capturing fundamental symmetries, such as total spin conservation.
Meanwhile, quantum LDPC code [53, 13] and surface code [29] have been widely widely adopted in
quantum error correction through the use of stabilizers to detect and correct qubit errors. However, a
significant challenge remains in identifying quantum ansatze that naturally facilitate error correction
mechanisms. In response, we propose a combined framework that integrates the HWP ansatz with
parity check operations. Since the HWP ansatz inherently preserves the number of non-zero elements
in quantum states, it offers a promising foundation for enhancing parity check performance in
mitigating errors. By employing parity checks as projective measurements, quantum states can be
∗
Correspondence author. This work was partly supported by NSFC (92370201, 62222607) and Shanghai
Municipal Science and Technology Major Project under Grant 2021SHZDZX0102.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

