On Divergence Measures for Training GFlowNets

Tiago da Silva Eliezer de Souza da Silva Diego Mesquita
{tiago.henrique, eliezer.silva, diego.mesquita}@fgv.br
School of Applied Mathematics
Getulio Vargas Foundation
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

Abstract
Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets) are amortized samplers of unnormalized
distributions over compositional objects with applications to causal discovery, NLP,
and drug design. Recently, it was shown that GFlowNets can be framed as a
hierarchical variational inference (HVI) method for discrete distributions. Despite
this equivalence, attempts to train GFlowNets using traditional divergence measures
as learning objectives were unsuccessful. Instead, current approaches for training
these models rely on minimizing the log-squared difference between a proposal
(forward policy) and a target (backward policy) distribution. In this work, we
first formally extend the relationship between GFlowNets and HVI to distributions
on arbitrary measurable topological spaces. Then, we empirically show that the
ineffectiveness of divergence-based learning of GFlowNets is due to the large
gradient variance of the corresponding stochastic objectives. To address this issue,
we devise a collection of provably variance-reducing control variates for gradient
estimation based on the REINFORCE leave-one-out estimator. Our experimental
results suggest that the resulting algorithms often accelerate training convergence
when compared against previous approaches. All in all, our work contributes
by narrowing the gap between GFlowNet training and HVI, paving the way for
algorithmic advancements inspired by the divergence minimization viewpoint.

1

Introduction

The approximation of intractable distributions is one of the central issues in machine learning and
modern statistics [7, 35]. In reinforcement learning (RL), a recurring goal is to find a diverse set
of high-valued state–action trajectories according to a reward function. This problem may be cast
as sampling trajectories proportionally to the reward, which is generally an intractable distribution
over the environment [3, 9, 38, 50]. Similarly, practical Bayesian inference and probabilistic models
computations involve assessing intractable posterior distributions [36, 78, 102]. In the variational
inference (VI) approach, circumventing this intractability involves searching for a tractable approximation to the target distribution within a family of parametric models. Conventionally, the problem
reduces to minimizing a divergence measure, such as Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence [7, 36, 92]
or Renyi-α divergence [51, 70], between the variational approximation and the target.
In particular, Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets) [3, 4, 48] are a recently proposed family of
variational approximations well-suited for distribution over compositional objects (e.g., graphs and
texts). GFlowNets have found empirical success within various applications from causal discovery
[15, 16], NLP [30], and chemical and biological modeling [3, 32]. In a nutshell, a GFlowNet
learns an iterative generative process (IGP) [26] over an extension of the target’s support, which,
for sufficiently expressive parameterizations of transition kernels, yields independent and correctly
distributed samples [3, 48]. Remarkably, training GFlowNets typically consists of minimizing the
log-squared difference between a proposal and target distributions over the extended space via SGD
[4, 55], contrasting with divergence-minimizing algorithms commonly used in VI [7, 72].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

