CemiFace: Center-based Semi-hard Synthetic Face
Generation for Face Recognition

Zhonglin Sun
Queen Mary University of London
zhonglin.sun@qmul.ac.uk

Siyang Song∗
University of Exeter
ss2796@cam.ac.uk

Ioannis Patras
Queen Mary University of London
i.patras@qmul.ac.uk

Georgios Tzimiropoulos
Queen Mary University of London
g.tzimiropoulos@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
Privacy issue is a main concern in developing face recognition techniques. Although synthetic face images can partially mitigate potential legal risks while
maintaining effective face recognition (FR) performance, FR models trained by
face images synthesized by existing generative approaches frequently suffer from
performance degradation problems due to the insufficient discriminative quality
of these synthesized samples. In this paper, we systematically investigate what
contributes to solid face recognition model training, and reveal that face images
with certain degree of similarities to their identity centers show great effectiveness in the performance of trained FR models. Inspired by this, we propose a
novel diffusion-based approach (namely Center-based Semi-hard Synthetic Face
Generation (CemiFace)) which produces facial samples with various levels of
similarity to the subject center, thus allowing to generate face datasets containing
effective discriminative samples for training face recognition. Experimental results
show that with a modest degree of similarity, training on the generated dataset can
produce competitive performance compared to previous generation methods. The
code will be available at:https://github.com/szlbiubiubiu/CemiFace

1

Introduction

Face Recognition (FR) has gained significant achievement in recent years owing to the combination of
discriminative loss function [1–5], proprietary backbones [6–11] and large-scale face datasets [12–15].
For example, with a 4M training set, existing FR models can achieve over 99% accuracy on various
academic datasets [3, 6, 2, 16]. However, in real-world industrial face recognition applications,
collecting large-scale face datasets is not always available due to the related licence agreements,
ethical issues and privacy policies [17].
To expand limited training samples in real-world scenarios, generative models [18–23] are widely
adopted owing to their ability to generate high-quality images. However, simply adopting face images
produced by those generic generative models to train face recognition models is impractical as there
is ambiguity about the identities of the produced images because they are derived from random
noises, i.e., the identities of these generated face images cannot be obtained without a well-trained
FR model [24]. To address such issues, synthetic face dataset generation-based solutions [24–28]
have been found to gain benefits in developing effective face recognition models. Existing synthetic
face recognition (SFR) methods are frequently built upon recent advances of generative models
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

