Amortized Eigendecomposition for Neural Networks

Tianbo Li1,∗ , Zekun Shi1,2 , Jiaxi Zhao3 , Min Lin1
1
SEA AI Lab
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
3
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore
∗
litb@sea.com

Abstract
Performing eigendecomposition during neural network training is essential for
tasks such as dimensionality reduction, network compression, image denoising,
and graph learning. However, eigendecomposition is computationally expensive as
it is orders of magnitude slower than other neural network operations. To address
this challenge, we propose a novel approach called “amortized eigendecomposition”
that relaxes the exact eigendecomposition by introducing an additional loss term
called eigen loss. Our approach offers significant speed improvements by replacing
the computationally expensive eigendecomposition with a more affordable QR
decomposition at each iteration. Theoretical analysis guarantees that the desired
eigenpair is attained as optima of the eigen loss. Empirical studies on nuclear norm
regularization, latent-space principal component analysis, and graphs adversarial
learning demonstrate significant improvements in training efficiency while producing nearly identical outcomes to conventional approaches. This novel methodology
promises to integrate eigendecomposition efficiently into neural network training,
overcoming existing computational challenges and unlocking new potential for
advanced deep learning applications.

Introduction

Eigendecomposition is a fundamental technique in
linear algebra that finds applications across numerous scientific domains ranging from quantum manybody problems to multivariate statistical analysis.
In the context of deep learning, eigendecomposition
also plays a crucial role in tasks such as weights
normalization [8, 16, 41], dimensionality reduction [6, 44, 27, 38], network compression [17, 30],
image denoising [13, 12, 14], graph adversarial
learning [10, 18, 47]. By uncovering the structure of networks, eigendecomposition allows us
to enforce low-rankness, ensuring generalization,
robustness, and computational efficiency. Eigendecomposition is also instrumental in the spectral
analysis of graphs, where it can detect community
structure, which is essential in spectral graph neural networks. The ability of eigendecomposition
to detect the intrinsic matrix structures and properties makes it a valuable tool in various machine
learning tasks with neural networks.

Mean CPU Time Ratio to matmul

1

106
2.1E5

1.5E5

105
104

1.3E4
2.0E3

103
102

PyTorch

qr
eigh
SVD

6.0E3
1.0E3

JAX

Figure 1: A comparison that illustrates the forward execution time of three linear algebra operations: qr, eigh, and svd, when performed
on a 10000 × 10000 matrix using PyTorch and
JAX. The presented values represent the mean
ratios of the execution time relative to that of
matrix multiplication (matmul) of 100 runs.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

