GraphMorph: Tubular Structure Extraction by
Morphing Predicted Graphs

1

Zhao Zhang1,5 Ziwei Zhao2 Dong Wang2 Liwei Wang3,4,B
Center for Data Science, Peking University 2 Yizhun Medical AI Co., Ltd
3
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
4
Center for Machine Learning Research, Peking University
5
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, Guangdong, China
zhangzh@stu.pku.edu.cn ziwei.zhao@yizhun-ai.com
dong.wang@yizhun-ai.com
wanglw@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Accurately restoring topology is both challenging and crucial in tubular structure
extraction tasks, such as blood vessel segmentation and road network extraction.
Diverging from traditional approaches based on pixel-level classification, our proposed method, named GraphMorph, focuses on branch-level features of tubular
structures to achieve more topologically accurate predictions. GraphMorph comprises two main components: a Graph Decoder and a Morph Module. Utilizing
multi-scale features extracted from an image patch by the segmentation network,
the Graph Decoder facilitates the learning of branch-level features and generates
a graph that accurately represents the tubular structure in this patch. The Morph
Module processes two primary inputs: the graph and the centerline probability
map, provided by the Graph Decoder and the segmentation network, respectively.
Employing a novel SkeletonDijkstra algorithm, the Morph Module produces a
centerline mask that aligns with the predicted graph. Furthermore, we observe
that employing centerline masks predicted by GraphMorph significantly reduces
false positives in the segmentation task, which is achieved by a simple yet effective
post-processing strategy. The efficacy of our method in the centerline extraction
and segmentation tasks has been substantiated through experimental evaluations
across various datasets. Source code will be released soon.

1

Introduction

Extraction of tubular structures is an essential step in many computer vision tasks [39, 13, 1, 27].
In medical applications, accurate segmentation of retinal vessels can provide crucial insights into
various cardiovascular and ophthalmologic diseases [8]. In the field of urban planning and geographic
information systems, the precise extraction of road networks aids in traffic management, urban development, and emergency response planning [28]. Existing deep learning-based methods model tubular
structure extraction as a pixel-level classification task [34] or point set prediction task [40], without
explicitly predicting the topological structures. To focus more on topology, some advanced methods
design novel backbones or modules [36, 23, 33], or introduce new loss functions from the topological
perspective [14, 37, 25]. However, they are still limited to the framework of pixel-level prediction.
We argue that most pixel-level frameworks have not effectively exploited the nature of tubular
structures, which are inherently composed of several branches that are interconnected in complex
ways. Specifically, pixel-level loss functions, like softDice Loss [26] and Focal Loss [20], struggle
with subtle inaccuracies and are particularly ineffective at addressing complex topological errors.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

