Generative Hierarchical Materials Search
Sherry Yang∗, Simon Batzner, Ruiqi Gao, Muratahan Aykol, Alexander Gaunt,
Brendan McMorrow, Danilo Rezende, Dale Schuurmans, Igor Mordatch, Ekin Dogus Cubuk
Google DeepMind

Abstract
Generative models trained at scale can now produce text, video, and more recently,
scientific data such as crystal structures. In applications of generative approaches
to materials science, and in particular to crystal structures, the guidance from
the domain expert in the form of high-level instructions can be essential for an
automated system to output candidate crystals that are viable for downstream
research. In this work, we formulate end-to-end language-to-structure generation
as a multi-objective optimization problem, and propose Generative Hierarchical
Materials Search (GenMS) for controllable generation of crystal structures. GenMS
consists of (1) a language model that takes high-level natural language as input and
generates intermediate textual information about a crystal (e.g., chemical formulae),
and (2) a diffusion model that takes intermediate information as input and generates
low-level continuous value crystal structures. GenMS additionally uses a graph
neural network to predict properties (e.g., formation energy) from the generated
crystal structures. During inference, GenMS leverages all three components to
conduct a forward tree search over the space of possible structures. Experiments
show that GenMS outperforms other alternatives of directly using language models
to generate structures both in satisfying user request and in generating low-energy
structures. We confirm that GenMS is able to generate common crystal structures
such as double perovskites, or spinels, solely from natural language input, and
hence can form the foundation for more complex structure generation in near
future.

1

Introduction

Modern technologies increasingly rely on the development of materials, such as semiconductors [1],
solar cells [2], and lithium batteries [3]. Large-scale generative models, trained on expansive internet
data, exhibit intriguing generalization capabilities. For example, these models can synthesize a highly
realistic image of “an astronaut riding a horse” by merging two distant concepts [4]. This raises a
compelling question: can the generalization capabilities of large generative models, pretrained on
existing materials science knowledge, be harnessed to combine knowledge from existing materials
systems to propose candidate crystals?
Previous research has demonstrated that generative models can output crystal structures that are not
in the the training data [5, 6, 7]. However, these works typically require either a vast number of
unconditional samples to generate an unknown material [5, 8] or a chemical formula provided during
inference [6, 9]. It is difficult for end users to come up with new chemical formulae, as it is hard to
know which compositions will result in what material properties. Therefore, it is highly desirable to
develop an interface that allows users to describe the desired characteristics of crystal structures —
such as properties, compositions, space groups, and geometric characteristics — in natural language.
For example, a user might specify “a stable chalcogenide with atom ratio 1:1:2 that is not on ICSD.”
Ideally, a model should automatically interpret these high-level language instructions to search for,
∗
Correspondence to sherryy@google.com and cubuk@google.com.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

