SLowcal-SGD: Slow Query Points Improve Local-SGD
for Stochastic Convex Optimization

Tehila Dahan
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technion
Haifa, Israel
t.dahan@campus.technion.ac.il

Kfir Y. Levy
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technion
Haifa, Israel
kfirylevy@technion.ac.il

Abstract
We consider distributed learning scenarios where M machines interact with a
parameter server along several communication rounds in order to minimize a joint
objective function. Focusing on the heterogeneous case, where different machines
may draw samples from different data-distributions, we design the first local update
method that provably benefits over the two most prominent distributed baselines:
namely Minibatch-SGD and Local-SGD. Key to our approach is a slow querying
technique that we customize to the distributed setting, which in turn enables a
better mitigation of the bias caused by local updates.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) is a framework that enables huge scale collaborative learning among a
large number of heterogeneous1 clients (or machines). FL may potentially promote fairness among
participants, by allowing clients with small scale datasets to participate in the learning process and
affect the resulting model. Additionally, participants are not required to directly share data, which
may improve privacy. Due to these reasons, FL has gained popularity in the past years, and found use
in applications like voice recognition [1, 4], fraud detection [2], drug discovery [3], and more [34].
The two most prominent algorithmic approaches towards federated learning are Minibatch-SGD
[10] and Local-SGD (a.k.a. Federated-Averaging) [27, 28, 33] . In Minibatch-SGD all machines
(or clients) always compute unbiased gradient estimates of the same query points, while using large
batch sizes; and it is well known that this approach is not degraded due to data heterogeneity [37].
On the downside, the number of model updates made by Minibatch-SGD may be considerably
smaller compared to the number of gradient queries made by each machine; which is due to the use of
minibatches. This suggests that there may be room to improve over this approach by employing local
update methods like Local-SGD, where the number of model updates and the number of gradient
queries are the same. And indeed, in the past years, local update methods have been extensively
investigated, see e.g. [19] and references therein.
We can roughly divide the research on FL into two scenarios: the homogeneous case, where it is
assumed that the data on each machine is drawn from the same distribution; and to the more realistic
heterogeneous case where it is assumed that data distributions may vary between machines.
For the homogeneous case it was shown in [36, 13] that the standard Local-SGD method is not superior to Minibatch-SGD. Nevertheless, [39] have designed an accelerated variant of Local-SGD that
provably benefits over the Minibatch baseline. These results are established for the fundamental
Stochastic Convex Optimization (SCO) setting, which assumes that the learning objective is convex.
1

Heterogeneous here refers to the data of each client, and we assume that its statistical properties may vary
between different clients.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

