Fair and Welfare-Efficient
Constrained Multi-matchings under Uncertainty

Elita Lobo∗, Justin Payan∗, Cyrus Cousins, and Yair Zick
University of Massachusetts Amherst
{elobo, jpayan, cbcousins, yzick}@umass.edu

Abstract
We study fair allocation of constrained resources, where a market designer optimizes overall welfare while maintaining group fairness. In many large-scale settings, utilities are not known in advance, but are instead observed after realizing
the allocation. We therefore estimate agent utilities using machine learning. Optimizing over estimates requires trading-off between mean utilities and their predictive variances. We discuss these trade-offs under two paradigms for preference
modeling – in the stochastic optimization regime, the market designer has access
to a probability distribution over utilities, and in the robust optimization regime
they have access to an uncertainty set containing the true utilities with high probability. We discuss utilitarian and egalitarian welfare objectives, and we explore
how to optimize for them under stochastic and robust paradigms. We demonstrate
the efficacy of our approaches on three publicly available conference reviewer assignment datasets. The approaches presented enable scalable constrained resource
allocation under uncertainty for many combinations of objectives and preference
models.

1

Introduction

Constrained resource allocation without money underpins many important systems, including reviewer assignment for peer review (our primary example throughout the paper) [4, 16, 31, 45, 54],
assigning resources to homeless populations [5, 34, 49], distributing emergency response resources
[51, 56, 57], and more [1, 44, 53]. In these settings, we assign resources to agents. Agents and resources are constrained; each agent has bounds on the minimum or maximum number of items they
receive from different categories, and each item has required minimums and limited total capacity.
Each agent has a valuation for every item, and we optimize a welfare function of the agent-item
valuations. In the case of reviewer assignment, the reviewer-paper valuations measure the alignment
between reviewers and papers, papers must receive a certain number of reviews from unique reviewers, reviewers have upper limits on the number of papers they can review, and conflicts of interest
prevent some reviewers from being assigned to certain papers.
A crucial factor in all of the above settings is the presence of uncertainty. Uncertainty often stems
from the fact that agents’ valuations for resources depend on future outcomes. In reviewer assignment, a reviewer-paper pair’s match quality is observed only after the reviewer submits his or her
review.Uncertainty may also stem from our limited ability to collect data; for example, in deciding
where to target lead pipe mitigation projects based on number of school-aged children per neighborhood, we may have access to imperfect school enrollment records, allowing only an approximate
model of the impacts of mitigation on children in each neighborhood [53]. We adopt two possible
stances towards uncertainty, depending on the information available. When we have access to a
∗

Authors contributed equally.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

