Corruption-Robust Linear Bandits: Minimax
Optimality and Gap-Dependent Misspecification

Haolin Liu∗
University of Virginia
srs8rh@virginia.edu

Artin Tajdini
University of Washington
artin@cs.washington.edu

Andrew Wagenmaker
University of California, Berkeley
ajwagen@berkeley.edu

Chen-Yu Wei
University of Virginia
chenyu.wei@virginia.edu

Abstract
In linear bandits, how can a learner effectively learn when facing corrupted rewards? While significant work has explored this question, a holistic understanding
across different adversarial models and corruption measures is lacking, as is a full
characterization of the minimax regret bounds. In this work, we compare two types
of corruptions commonly considered: strong corruption, where the corruption level
depends on the learner’s chosen action, and weak corruption, where the corruption level does not depend on the learner’s chosen action. We provide a unified
framework to analyze these corruptions. For stochastic linear bandits, we fully
characterize the gap between the minimax regret under strong and weak corruptions.
We also initiate the study of corrupted adversarial linear bandits, obtaining upper
and lower bounds with matching dependencies on the corruption level.
Next, we reveal a connection between corruption-robust learning and learning with
gap-dependent misspecification—a setting first studied by Liu et al. (2023a), where
the misspecification level of an action or policy is proportional to its suboptimality.
We present a general reduction that enables any corruption-robust algorithm to
handle gap-dependent misspecification. This allows us to recover the results of Liu
et al. (2023a) in a black-box manner and significantly generalize them to settings
like linear MDPs, yielding the first results for gap-dependent misspecification in
reinforcement learning. However, this general reduction does not attain the optimal
rate for gap-dependent misspecification. Motivated by this, we develop a specialized algorithm that achieves optimal bounds for gap-dependent misspecification in
linear bandits, thus answering an open question posed by Liu et al. (2023a).

1

Introduction

The real world is rarely truly stochastic—in practice, our observations are often corrupted—and
furthermore, rarely are the modeling assumption typically made in theory—that the true datagenerating process lives in our model class—met in reality. Therefore, robustly handling these
deviations from idealized assumptions is crucial. These challenges are particularly pronounced
in interactive decision-making settings, where deviations from idealized assumptions could lead
an algorithm to take unsafe or severely suboptimal actions. In this work, we seek to address
these challenges, and develop a unified understanding for robust learning in corruption-robust and
misspecified settings.
∗

Authors are listed in alphabetical order by last name.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

