Fair GLASSO: Estimating Fair Graphical Models
with Unbiased Statistical Behavior
Madeline Navarro
Rice University
nav@rice.edu

Samuel Rey
King Juan Carlos University
samuel.rey.escudero@urjc.es

Antonio G. Marques
King Juan Carlos University
antonio.garcia.marques@urjc.es

Andrei Buciulea
King Juan Carlos University
andrei.buciulea@urjc.es
Santiago Segarra
Rice University
segarra@rice.edu

Abstract
We propose estimating Gaussian graphical models (GGMs) that are fair with
respect to sensitive nodal attributes. Many real-world models exhibit unfair discriminatory behavior due to biases in data. Such discrimination is known to be
exacerbated when data is equipped with pairwise relationships encoded in a graph.
Additionally, the effect of biased data on graphical models is largely underexplored.
We thus introduce fairness for graphical models in the form of two bias metrics
to promote balance in statistical similarities across nodal groups with different
sensitive attributes. Leveraging these metrics, we present Fair GLASSO, a regularized graphical lasso approach to obtain sparse Gaussian precision matrices
with unbiased statistical dependencies across groups. We also propose an efficient
proximal gradient algorithm to obtain the estimates. Theoretically, we express
the tradeoff between fair and accurate estimated precision matrices. Critically,
this includes demonstrating when accuracy can be preserved in the presence of
a fairness regularizer. On top of this, we study the complexity of Fair GLASSO
and demonstrate that our algorithm enjoys a fast convergence rate. Our empirical
validation includes synthetic and real-world simulations that illustrate the value
and effectiveness of our proposed optimization problem and iterative algorithm.

1

Introduction

Data analysis frequently requires estimating complex dyadic relationships, which can be conveniently
encoded in graphical representations such as Gaussian graphical models (GGMs) [1–3]. Myriad
real-world applications model structure in data by obtaining graphs from observations, in fields
including neuroscience, genomics, finance, and more [4–6]. However, it is known that real-world data
can encode historical biases which models ought not to consider, such as discriminatory biases against
sensitive populations [7, 8]. For example, social networks often exhibit preferential relationships that
may unfairly discriminate against sensitive communities [9–11]. Moreover, the use of unfair graphs
for downstream tasks is known to exacerbate existing biases [12–14]. While accurate graphical
representations are critical for applications and analyses, the propagation of undesirable bias in graph
data necessitates learning models that balance both fairness and accuracy.
The long-standing popularity of GGMs for several applications, many of them high-stakes, warrants
care in how we estimate them from potentially biased data. However, there is no formal definition of
fairness for graphical models, and existing definitions for graph-based machine learning may not be
applicable for obtaining fair statistical relationships. Indeed, while fairness for graph data has recently
received copious attention, the study of biased graphs in statistics and graph signal processing (GSP)
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

