Beyond accuracy: Tracking more like Human via
Visual Search
Dailing Zhang1,2 Shiyu Hu5 Xiaokun Feng1,2
Xuchen Li1,2 Meiqi Wu3 Jing Zhang2 Kaiqi Huang1,2,4
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University
zhangdailing2023@ia.ac.cn, shiyu.hu@ntu.edu.sg, fengxiaokun2022@ia.ac.cn,
wumeiqi18@mails.ucas.ac.cn, {lixuchen2024, jing_zhang, kqhuang}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Human visual search ability enables efficient and accurate tracking of an arbitrary
moving target, which is a significant research interest in cognitive neuroscience.
The recently proposed Central-Peripheral Dichotomy (CPD) theory sheds light on
how humans effectively process visual information and track moving targets in
complex environments. However, existing visual object tracking algorithms still
fall short of matching human performance in maintaining tracking over time, particularly in complex scenarios requiring robust visual search skills. These scenarios
often involve Spatio-Temporal Discontinuities (i.e., STDChallenge), prevalent in
long-term tracking and global instance tracking. To address this issue, we conduct
research from a human-like modeling perspective: (1) Inspired by the CPD, we propose a new tracker named CPDTrack to achieve human-like visual search ability.
The central vision of CPDTrack leverages the spatio-temporal continuity of videos
to introduce priors and enhance localization precision, while the peripheral vision
improves global awareness and detects object movements. (2) To further evaluate
and analyze STDChallenge, we create the STDChallenge Benchmark. Besides,
by incorporating human subjects, we establish a human baseline, creating a highquality environment specifically designed to assess trackers’ visual search abilities
in videos across STDChallenge. (3) Our extensive experiments demonstrate that the
proposed CPDTrack not only achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance in this
challenge but also narrows the behavioral differences with humans. Additionally,
CPDTrack exhibits strong generalizability across various challenging benchmarks.
In summary, our research underscores the importance of human-like modeling and
offers strategic insights for advancing intelligent visual target tracking. Code and
models are available at https://github.com/ZhangDailing8/CPDTrack.

1

Introduction

In the real world, humans excel at locating an arbitrary moving target within complex backgrounds
and can resume tracking it even after temporary loss. This enduring question in cognitive neuroscience
has recently been explained to some extent by the Central-Peripheral Dichotomy (CPD) theory, which
suggests that the human eyes processes all visual inputs by sorting them into central and peripheral
visions [1, 2]. Central vision, decoded and understood by higher brain areas, focuses on interpreting
details and minimizing distractions; while peripheral vision, processed in the primary visual cortex
(V1), swiftly detects dynamic changes.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

