Online Estimation via Offline Estimation:
An Information-Theoretic Framework
Dylan J. Foster

Yanjun Han

Jian Qian

Alexander Rakhlin

dylanfoster@microsoft.com

yanjunhan@nyu.edu

jianqian@mit.edu

rakhlin@mit.edu

Abstract
The classical theory of statistical estimation aims to estimate a parameter of interest
under data generated from a fixed design (“offline estimation”), while the contemporary theory of online learning provides algorithms for estimation under adaptively
chosen covariates (“online estimation”). Motivated by connections between estimation and interactive decision making, we ask: is it possible to convert offline
estimation algorithms into online estimation algorithms in a black-box fashion? We
investigate this question from an information-theoretic perspective by introducing a
new framework, Oracle-Efficient Online Estimation (OEOE), where the learner can
only interact with the data stream indirectly through a sequence of offline estimators
produced by a black-box algorithm operating on the stream. Our main results settle
the statistical and computational complexity of online estimation in this framework.
1. Statistical complexity. We show that information-theoretically, there exist
algorithms that achieve near-optimal online estimation error via black-box
offline estimation oracles, and give a nearly-tight characterization for minimax
rates in the OEOE framework.
2. Computational complexity. We show that the guarantees above cannot
be achieved in a computationally efficient fashion in general, but give a
refined characterization for the special case of conditional density estimation:
computationally efficient online estimation via black-box offline estimation
is possible whenever it is possible via unrestricted algorithms.
Finally, we apply our results to give offline oracle-efficient algorithms for
interactive decision making.

1

Introduction

Consider a general framework for statistical estimation specified by a tuple (X , Y, Z, K, F), which
we will show encompasses classification, regression, and conditional density estimation. The learner
is given a parameter space F (typically a function class), where each parameter f ∈ F is a map
from the space of covariates X to the space of values Z. For an integer T ≥ 1, the learner is
given a dataset (x1 , y 1 ), . . . , (xT , y T ), where x1 , . . . , xT are covariates and y 1 , . . . , y T are outcomes
generated via y t ∼ K(· | f ⋆ (xt )), where f ⋆ ∈ F is an unknown target parameter that the learner
wishes to estimate; here K is a probability kernel that assigns to each value z ∈ Z a distribution
K(· | z) on the space of outcomes Y. We adopt the shorthand K(z) = K(· | z) throughout.
The classical theory of statistical estimation typically assumes that the covariates x1 , . . . , xT are an arbitrary fixed design, and is concerned with estimating the target parameter f ⋆ ∈ F well in-distribution
[64, 40, 62]. Formally, for a loss function D : Z × Z → R≥0 on the space of values Z, the goal of the
learner is to output an estimator fb based on (x1 , y 1 ), . . . , (xT , y T ) such that the in-distribution error
XT

EstOff
D fb(xt ), f ⋆ (xt )
(1)
D (T ) :=
t=1

is small; we refer to this as an offline estimation guarantee. Canonical examples include:
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

