Constant Acceleration Flow
Dogyun Park
Korea University
gg933@korea.ac.kr

Sojin Lee
Korea University
sojin_lee@korea.ac.kr

Taehoon Lee
Korea University
98hoon@korea.ac.kr

Youngjoon Hong∗
KAIST
hongyj@kaist.ac.kr

Sihyeon Kim
Korea University
sh_bs15@korea.ac.kr
Hyunwoo J. Kim∗
Korea University
hyunwoojkim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Rectified flow and reflow procedures have significantly advanced fast generation
by progressively straightening ordinary differential equation (ODE) flows. They
operate under the assumption that image and noise pairs, known as couplings,
can be approximated by straight trajectories with constant velocity. However, we
observe that modeling with constant velocity and using reflow procedures have
limitations in accurately learning straight trajectories between pairs, resulting in
suboptimal performance in few-step generation. To address these limitations,
we introduce Constant Acceleration Flow (CAF), a novel framework based on a
simple constant acceleration equation. CAF introduces acceleration as an additional
learnable variable, allowing for more expressive and accurate estimation of the ODE
flow. Moreover, we propose two techniques to further improve estimation accuracy:
initial velocity conditioning for the acceleration model and a reflow process for
the initial velocity. Our comprehensive studies on toy datasets, CIFAR-10, and
ImageNet 64×64 demonstrate that CAF outperforms state-of-the-art baselines for
one-step generation. We also show that CAF dramatically improves few-step
coupling preservation and inversion over Rectified flow. Code is available at
https://github.com/mlvlab/CAF.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [1, 2] learn the probability flow between a target data distribution and a simple
Gaussian distribution through an iterative process. Starting from Gaussian noise, they gradually
denoise to approximate the target distribution via a series of learned local transformations. Due to their
superior generative capabilities compared to other models such as GANs and VAEs, diffusion models
have become the go-to choice for high-quality image generation. However, their multi-step generation
process entails slow generation and imposes a significant computational burden. To address this issue,
two main approaches have been proposed: distillation models [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] and methods that
simplify the flow trajectories [10, 11, 12, 13, 14] to achieve fewer-step generation. An example of
the latter is rectified flow [10, 11, 13], which focuses on straightening ordinary differential equation
(ODE) trajectories. Through repeated applications of the rectification process, called reflow, the
trajectories become progressively straighter by addressing the flow crossing problem. Straighter
flows reduce discretization errors, enabling fewer steps in the numerical solution and, thus, faster
generation.
Rectified flow [10, 13] defines the straight ODE flow over time t with a drift force v, where each
sample xt transforms from x0 ∼ π0 to x1 ∼ π1 under a constant velocity v = x1 − x0 . It
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

