Probabilistic Conformal Distillation for Enhancing
Missing Modality Robustness

Mengxi Chen1,3

Fei Zhang1 Zihua Zhao1 Jiangchao Yao1,3† Ya Zhang2,3 , Yanfeng Wang2,3
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{mxchen_mc, ferenas, sjtuszzh, Sunarker, ya_zhang, wangyanfeng}@sjtu.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Multimodal models trained on modality-complete data are plagued with severe
performance degradation when encountering modality-missing data. Prevalent
cross-modal knowledge distillation-based methods precisely align the representation of modality-missing data and that of its modality-complete counterpart to
enhance robustness. However, due to the irreparable information asymmetry, this
determinate alignment is too stringent, easily inducing modality-missing features
to capture spurious factors erroneously. In this paper, a novel multimodal Probabilistic Conformal Distillation (PCD) method is proposed, which considers the
inherent indeterminacy in this alignment. Given a modality-missing input, our
goal is to learn the unknown Probability Density Function (PDF) of the mapped
variables in the modality-complete space, rather than relying on the brute-force
point alignment. Specifically, PCD models the modality-missing feature as a probabilistic distribution, enabling it to satisfy two characteristics of the PDF. One is
the extremes of probabilities of modality-complete feature points on the PDF, and
the other is the geometric consistency between the modeled distributions and the
peak points of different PDFs. Extensive experiments on a range of benchmark
datasets demonstrate the superiority of PCD over state-of-the-art methods. Code is
available at: https://github.com/mxchen-mc/PCD.

1

Introduction

Classical multimodal learning [29, 20, 36, 3] typically pre-supposes that the modalities of all data
are complete throughout both the training and testing. However, due to collection constraints such
as device limitations, budget constraints, and restrained working conditions, it is challenging to
guarantee such a perfect condition [47]. When modalities are partially available, the performance of
models trained on modality-complete data will deteriorate remarkably. This thereby attracts a range
of explorations contributed recently, given that multimodal learning is playing an increasing role.
The existing approaches to address this problem generally fall into two paradigms, i.e., independent
modeling [11, 39, 7] and unified modeling [9, 13, 46] for different modality-missing combinations, of
which the latter is preferred due to the merits of low-storage cost and flexibility. As one prevalent line
of unified modeling, cross-modal knowledge distillation (KD) has achieved persistent advancements
in recent years [40, 51, 47, 46]. It attempts to guide the modality-missing representation to align
with its modality-complete counterpart, facilitating the training under the guidance of privileged
modality-complete information. However, these methods fail to consider that once a modality is
missing, it is impossible to recover its personalized information via a brute-force alignment, which
†

The corresponding author is Jiangchao Yao (Sunarker@sjtu.edu.cn).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

