ProSST: Protein Language Modeling with Quantized
Structure and Disentangled Attention

Mingchen Li2,3,5∗ Yang Tan2,3,5,∗ Xinzhu Ma2,4 Bozitao Zhong1,4 Huiqun Yu3
Ziyi Zhou1 Wanli Ouyang2,4 Bingxin Zhou1 Pan Tan1,2 Liang Hong1,2,5
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{zy-zhou,bingxin.zhou,hongl3liang}@sjtu.edu.cn, tpan1039@gmail.com,
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, China
{ouyang-wanli,maxinzhu}@pjlab.org.cn
3
East China University of Science and Technology, China
{lmc,tyang}@mail.ecust.edu.cn, yhq@ecust.edu.cn
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, China
zbztzhz@gmail.com;
5
Chongqing Artificial Intelligence Research Institute of Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China

Abstract
Protein language models (PLMs) have shown remarkable capabilities in various
protein function prediction tasks. However, while protein function is intricately tied
to structure, most existing PLMs do not incorporate protein structure information.
To address this issue, we introduce ProSST, a Transformer-based protein language
model that seamlessly integrates both protein sequences and structures. ProSST
incorporates a structure quantization module and a Transformer architecture with
disentangled attention. The structure quantization module translates a 3D protein
structure into a sequence of discrete tokens by first serializing the protein structure
into residue-level local structures and then embeds them into dense vector space.
These vectors are then quantized into discrete structure tokens by a pre-trained
clustering model. These tokens serve as an effective protein structure representation.
Furthermore, ProSST explicitly learns the relationship between protein residue
token sequences and structure token sequences through the sequence-structure
disentangled attention. We pre-train ProSST on millions of protein structures using
a masked language model objective, enabling it to learn comprehensive contextual
representations of proteins. To evaluate the proposed ProSST, we conduct extensive
experiments on the zero-shot mutation effect prediction and several supervised
downstream tasks, where ProSST achieves the state-of-the-art performance among
all baselines. Our code and pre-trained models are publicly available 2 .

1

Introduction

Predicting the functions of proteins is one of the most critical areas in life sciences [1]. In recent
decades, protein sequence databases have experienced exponential growth [2], making it possible
to learn the fundamental representations of protein sequences with large-scale models in a datadriven manner. Inspired by pre-trained language models in natural language processing [3, 4],
many pre-trained Protein Language Models (PLMs) have emerged [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. Benefiting from
∗
These authors contributed equally to this work, and this work was done during their internship at the Shanghai
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. Corresponding authors: Bingxin Zhou (bingxin.zhou@sjtu.edu.cn), Pan
Tan (tpan1039@gmail.com) and Liang Hong (hongl3liang@sjtu.edu.cn)
2
https://github.com/ai4protein/ProSST

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

