REDUCR: Robust Data Downsampling using Class
Priority Reweighting

William Bankes
Department of Computer Science
University College London
william.bankes.21@ucl.ac.uk
Ilija Bogunovic∗
Department of Electrical Engineering
University College London
i.bogunovic@ucl.ac.uk

George Hughes
Department of Computer Science
University College London

Zi Wang∗
Google DeepMind
wangzi@google.com

Abstract
Modern machine learning models are becoming increasingly expensive to train
for real-world image and text classification tasks, where massive web-scale data is
collected in a streaming fashion. To reduce the training cost, online batch selection
techniques have been developed to choose the most informative datapoints. However, many existing techniques are not robust to class imbalance and distributional
shifts, and can suffer from poor worst-class generalization performance. This work
introduces REDUCR, a robust and efficient data downsampling method that uses
class priority reweighting. REDUCR reduces the training data while preserving
worst-class generalization performance. REDUCR assigns priority weights to
datapoints in a class-aware manner using an online learning algorithm. We demonstrate the data efficiency and robust performance of REDUCR on vision and text
classification tasks. On web-scraped datasets with imbalanced class distributions,
REDUCR significantly improves worst-class test accuracy (and average accuracy),
surpassing state-of-the-art methods by around 15%.

1

Introduction

The abundance of data has had a profound impact on machine learning (ML), both positive and
negative. On the one hand, it has enabled ML models to achieve unprecedented performance on a
wide range of tasks, such as image and text classification [Kuznetsova et al., 2020, He et al., 2015,
Brown et al., 2020, Tran et al., 2022, Anil et al., 2023]. On the other hand, training models on such
large datasets can demand significant computational resources [Kaddour et al., 2023], making it
unsustainable in some situations [Bender et al., 2021, Patterson et al., 2021]. Additionally, the high
speed at which streaming data is collected can make it infeasible to train on all of the data before
deployment. To tackle these issues, various methods have emerged to selectively choose training data,
either through pre-training data pruning [Sorscher et al., 2022, Bachem et al., 2017] or online batch selection techniques [Loshchilov and Hutter, 2016, Mindermann et al., 2022], ultimately reducing data
requirements and enabling ML models to handle otherwise unmanageable large and complex datasets.
In real-world settings, a variety of factors can affect the selection of datapoints, such as noise [Xiao
et al., 2015, Cao et al., 2021, Wei et al., 2021] and class-imbalance in the data [Van Horn et al.,
2018, Philip and Chan, 1998, Radivojac et al., 2004]. Online selection methods can exacerbate
∗

Co-senior authors. Code available at: https://github.com/williambankes/REDUCR.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

