Muharaf: Manuscripts of Handwritten Arabic Dataset
for Cursive Text Recognition
Mehreen Saeed1 Adrian Chan1 Anupam Mijar1 Joseph Moukarzel2
Georges Habchi2 Carlos Younes2 Amin Elias3 Chau-Wai Wong1 Akram Khater1
1
North Carolina State University, 2 Holy Spirit University of Kaslik
3
Lebanese Association for History
{mehreen.mehreen,adrian27513,aamijar230}@gmail.com
{josephmoukarzel,georgeshabchi,carlosyounes}@usek.edu.lb
a.elias@lahlebanon.org
{chauwai.wong,akhater}@ncsu.edu

Abstract
We present the Manuscripts of Handwritten Arabic (Muharaf) dataset, which is
a machine learning dataset consisting of more than 1,600 historic handwritten
page images transcribed by experts in archival Arabic. Each document image is
accompanied by spatial polygonal coordinates of its text lines as well as basic page
elements. This dataset was compiled to advance the state of the art in handwritten
text recognition (HTR), not only for Arabic manuscripts but also for cursive text
in general. The Muharaf dataset includes diverse handwriting styles and a wide
range of document types, including personal letters, diaries, notes, poems, church
records, and legal correspondences. In this paper, we describe the data acquisition
pipeline, notable dataset features, and statistics. We also provide a preliminary
baseline result achieved by training convolutional neural networks using this data.

1

Introduction

Modern standard Arabic has more than 400 million native speakers worldwide and is the official
language of 24 sovereign countries as of 2024 [36]. Arabic is not only widely spoken but also has
a vast collection of historical manuscripts spanning rich literary traditions, poetry, philosophy, and
scientific writings. The British Library alone has a massive collection of almost 15,000 works in
14,000 volumes of Arabic manuscripts [33]. A highly accurate optical character recognition (OCR)
system for handwritten historic Arabic manuscripts will make these documents accessible to a global
community of researchers, historians, literary scholars, linguists, and genealogists.
In the past decade, handwritten text recognition (HTR) has made significant progress through the use
of deep neural networks [35, 34, 5, 17, 22]. Unlike traditional HTR systems that employ handcrafted
features, these networks are data-hungry and require significant amounts of training data to learn,
generalize, and be deployed in real-world scenarios. For Arabic HTR, there are unique challenges
involved. The Arabic script is cursive and involves varying letter shapes depending on their positions
within a word. Moreover, the harakat and diacritics of the Arabic script add to the difficulty of the
task. The scarcity of public datasets, compounded by their relatively small sizes, further exacerbates
the challenges.
We created the Manuscripts of Handwritten Arabic (Muharaf1 ) dataset of fully annotated and
transcribed 1,644 images to train and evaluate an HTR system for Arabic handwritten historical
manuscripts. The document images for this dataset were acquired from the archives of the Phoenix
1

“Muharaf” is Arabic for “typeface”.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

