InterControl: Zero-shot Human Interaction
Generation by Controlling Every Joint

Zhenzhi Wang1 , Jingbo Wang2 , Yixuan Li1 , Dahua Lin1,2 , Bo Dai3,2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,
3
The University of Hong Kong
{wz122,ly122,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, wangjingbo@pjlab.org.cn
bdai@hku.hk
1

Abstract
Text-conditioned motion synthesis has made remarkable progress with the emergence of diffusion models. However, the majority of these motion diffusion models
are primarily designed for a single character and overlook multi-human interactions.
In our approach, we strive to explore this problem by synthesizing human motion
with interactions for a group of characters of any size in a zero-shot manner. The
key aspect of our approach is the adaptation of human-wise interactions as pairs of
human joints that can be either in contact or separated by a desired distance. In
contrast to existing methods that necessitate training motion generation models on
multi-human motion datasets with a fixed number of characters, our approach inherently possesses the flexibility to model human interactions involving an arbitrary
number of individuals, thereby transcending the limitations imposed by the training
data. We introduce a novel controllable motion generation method, InterControl,
to encourage the synthesized motions maintaining the desired distance between
joint pairs. It consists of a motion controller and an inverse kinematics guidance
module that realistically and accurately aligns the joints of synthesized characters
to the desired location. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the distance between
joint pairs for human-wise interactions can be generated using an off-the-shelf
Large Language Model (LLM). Experimental results highlight the capability of
our framework to generate interactions with multiple human characters and its
potential to work with off-the-shelf physics-based character simulators. Code is
available at https://github.com/zhenzhiwang/intercontrol.

1

Introduction

Generating realistic and diverse human motions is a vital task in computer vision, as it has diverse
applications in VR/AR, games, and films. In recent years, great progress has been achieved in
human motion generation by introducing VAE [31], Diffusion Model [23, 53] and large language
models [5]. These methods commonly investigated single-person motion generation given texts or
action classes [15, 14, 46, 71, 55, 6, 13, 45], part of motion [10, 19, 55], or other related modalities [35,
34, 56, 3, 18], yet overlooked multi-person interactions. By naively putting their generated singleperson motions in a shared global space, such motions could easily penetrate each other. They cannot
even perform simple interactions like handshaking due to lack of the ability to control two people’s
hands to reach the same location at the same time. Many multi-person datasets [1, 16, 42, 59] lacks
text annotations and focus on motion completion given prefix motions. Recently, InterGen [36]
collected a two-person interaction generation dataset, and let model to learn two-person motions
from data. It is limited by the fixed number of characters and cannot generalize to arbitrary numbers.
Previous methods commonly ignore a good design for general interaction modeling.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

