Text2CAD: Generating Sequential CAD Designs from
Beginner-to-Expert Level Text Prompts

Mohammad Sadil Khan∗†1,2,3
Didier Stricker1,2,3
1

DFKI

2

Sankalp Sinha∗1,2,3
Sk Aziz Ali1,4

RPTU Kaiserslautern-Landau

Talha Uddin Sheikh1,2,3

Muhammad Zeshan Afzal1,2,3
3

MindGarage

4

BITS Pilani, Hyderabad

Abstract
Prototyping complex computer-aided design (CAD) models in modern softwares
can be very time-consuming. This is due to the lack of intelligent systems that
can quickly generate simpler intermediate parts. We propose Text2CAD, the
first AI framework for generating text-to-parametric CAD models using designerfriendly instructions for all skill levels. Furthermore, we introduce a data annotation
pipeline for generating text prompts based on natural language instructions for
the DeepCAD dataset using Mistral and LLaVA-NeXT. The dataset contains ∼
170K models and ∼ 660K text annotations, from abstract CAD descriptions (e.g.,
generate two concentric cylinders) to detailed specifications (e.g., draw two circles
with center (x, y) and radius r1 , r2 , and extrude along the normal by d...). Within
the Text2CAD framework, we propose an end-to-end transformer-based autoregressive network to generate parametric CAD models from input texts. We
evaluate the performance of our model through a mixture of metrics, including
visual quality, parametric precision, and geometrical accuracy. Our proposed
framework shows great potential in AI-aided design applications. Project page is
available at https://sadilkhan.github.io/text2cad-project/.

1

Introduction

Computer-Aided Design (CAD) plays a crucial role in industrial design and additive manufacturing (AM), revolutionizing the way products are prototyped [7]. This type of
prototyping requires feature-based part modeling [7], precision measurements [40], and creative part editing [60] at
different design stages [40, 60]. While CAD software saves
the final model as a boundary representation (B-Rep) [22],
the design process often involves a chain of 2D sketches
(e.g., circles, lines, splines) and 3D operations (e.g., extrusion, loft, fillet) [56, 58, 59, 19]. This representation allows
the designers to control the design history and iteratively
refine the final models.
Despite their capabilities, modern CAD tools lack the AIassisted design integration [37]. In Figure 1, we illustrate
how an intelligent system capable of generating parametric
CAD models from textual descriptions can be utilized to assemble a complex 3D model. Although tools like FreeCAD
[1], SolidWorks [46], and Para-Solid [45] offer 3D CAD
models from catalogs like McMaster-Carr [2] for the reuse
*
†

A ring shape is created by drawing
two concentric circles on the XY
plane and scaled by 1 and unit 1.2
respectively, and extruding it along
the Z-axis 0.1 unit to form a 3D
model with a hollow center.

A long rectangular shape.
A simple rectangular base
of length 0.05 unit, width
0.05 unit and height 1 unit

Figure 1: Designers can efficiently generate parametric CAD models from text
prompts. The prompts can vary from
abstract shape descriptions to detailed
parametric instructions.

Equal Contributions.
Corresponding author (mohammad.khan@dfki.de)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

