Beyond Euclidean: Dual-Space Representation
Learning for Weakly Supervised Video Violence
Detection
Jiaxu Leng1,2 ,

Zhanjie Wu1,2 , Mingpi Tan1,2 , Yiran Liu1 , Ji Gan1,2 ,
Haosheng Chen1,2 , Xinbo Gao 1,2 ∗
1
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China
2
Chongqing Institute for Brain and Intelligence, Guangyang Bay Laboratory, Chongqing, China
gaoxb@cqupt.edu.cn

Abstract
While numerous Video Violence Detection (VVD) methods have focused on representation learning in Euclidean space, they struggle to learn sufficiently discriminative features, leading to weaknesses in recognizing normal events that are
visually similar to violent events (i.e., ambiguous violence). In contrast, hyperbolic
representation learning, renowned for its ability to model hierarchical and complex
relationships between events, has the potential to amplify the discrimination between visually similar events. Inspired by these, we develop a novel Dual-Space
Representation Learning (DSRL) method for weakly supervised VVD to utilize
the strength of both Euclidean and hyperbolic geometries, capturing the visual features of events while also exploring the intrinsic relations between events, thereby
enhancing the discriminative capacity of the features. DSRL employs a novel
information aggregation strategy to progressively learn event context in hyperbolic
spaces, which selects aggregation nodes through layer-sensitive hyperbolic association degrees constrained by hyperbolic Dirichlet energy. Furthermore, DSRL
attempts to break the cyber-balkanization of different spaces, utilizing cross-space
attention to facilitate information interactions between Euclidean and hyperbolic
space to capture better discriminative features for final violence detection. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed DSRL.

1

Introduction

Compared with manually checking out violent events in surveillance videos which is time-consuming
and laborious, Video Violence Detection (VVD), which focuses on identifying violent events in
videos and provides automatic and instantaneous responses, has gained significant research attention
due to its potential applications. However, it is expensive to annotate each frame in a video so that
we can train a VVD model with supervised learning. To address this, current methods often utilize
weakly supervised settings to formulate the problem as a multiple-instance learning (MIL)[19] task.
These methods treat a video as a bag of instances (i.e., snippets or segments), and predict their labels
based on the video-level annotations.
According to the modality type of the input data, existing weakly supervised VVD methods can be
roughly divided into two categories, unimodal with only vision input and multimodal with vision and
audio input. The unimodal methods [29, 36, 8, 10, 20] learn the different distributions of normal and
violent events through video-level labels, focus on finding valuable visual cues that are distinct from
non-violent events and use them to detect violent events, i.e., fighting. However, relying on visual cues
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

