S ET L EX S EM C HALLENGE: Using Set Operations to
Evaluate the Lexical and Semantic Robustness of
Language Models

Bardiya Akhbari
Amazon
bardiyaa@amazon.com

Manish Gawali
Amazon
mdgawali@amazon.com

Nicholas A. Dronen
Amazon
ndronen@amazon.com

Abstract
Set theory is foundational to mathematics and, when sets are finite, to reasoning
about the world. An intelligent system should perform set operations consistently, regardless of superficial variations in the operands. Initially designed for
semantically-oriented NLP tasks, large language models (LLMs) are now being
evaluated on algorithmic tasks. Because sets are comprised of arbitrary symbols
(e.g. numbers, words), they provide an opportunity to test, systematically, the invariance of LLMs’ algorithmic abilities under simple lexical or semantic variations.
To this end, we present the S ET L EX S EM C HALLENGE, a synthetic benchmark
that evaluates the performance of LLMs on set operations. S ET L EX S EM assesses
the robustness of LLMs’ instruction-following abilities under various conditions,
focusing on the set operations and the nature and construction of the set members.
Evaluating seven LLMs with S ET L EX S EM, we find that they exhibit poor robustness to variation in both operation and operands. We show – via the framework’s
systematic sampling of set members along lexical and semantic dimensions – that
LLMs are not only not robust to variation along these dimensions but demonstrate unique failure modes in particular, easy-to-create semantic groupings of
"deceptive" sets. We find that rigorously measuring language model robustness
to variation in frequency and length is challenging and present an analysis that
measures them independently. The code for reproducing the results of this paper, and for generating the S ET L EX S EM C HALLENGE dataset, is available at
https://github.com/amazon-science/SetLexSem-Challenge.

1

Introduction

Transformer models (Vaswani et al. [2017]) were initially devised and used for traditional natural
language processing tasks, such as machine translation, natural language inference, or question
answering (Vaswani et al. [2017], Devlin et al. [2019], Wang et al. [2018], Rajpurkar et al. [2018]).
More recently, auto-regressive Transformers pre-trained on Internet-scale datasets and fine-tuned to
conform to human preferences on a curated set of instructions (Ouyang et al. [2022]) – colloquially,
large language models (LLMs) – have been shown to exhibit impressive performance on some
analytical tasks, such as mathematics (Cobbe et al. [2021], Hendrycks et al. [2021a]), reasoning (Dua
et al. [2019]), and computer programming (Chen et al. [2021]). The increasing adoption of these
models requires that we carefully interpret and interrogate their behaviors and the datasets on which
they are evaluated. Careful evaluation exposes weaknesses and irregularities that inform users about
the quality of models they may adopt. It can also inform model designers about the limitations of
current architectures and requirements of future ones.
We should be clear-eyed about the limitations of existing datasets. Multiple choice tasks are not
uncommon among them. A multiple-choice task setup constrains the complexity of the problem
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

