CharXiv: Charting Gaps in Realistic Chart
Understanding in Multimodal LLMs

Zirui Wang
Mengzhou Xia
Luxi He
Howard Chen
Yitao Liu
Richard Zhu
Kaiqu Liang
Xindi Wu
Haotian Liu Sadhika Malladi
Alexis Chevalier
Sanjeev Arora
Danqi Chen
Princeton Language and Intelligence (PLI), Princeton University
University of Wisconsin, Madison
The University of Hong Kong
{zwcolin, mengzhou, luxihe, howardchen}@cs.princeton.edu
https://charxiv.github.io/

Abstract
Chart understanding plays a pivotal role when applying Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) to real-world tasks such as analyzing scientific papers
or financial reports. However, existing datasets often focus on oversimplified and
homogeneous charts with template-based questions, leading to an overly optimistic
measure of progress. We demonstrate that although open-source models can appear
to outperform strong proprietary models on these benchmarks, a simple stress test
with slightly different charts or questions can deteriorate performance by up to
34.5%. In this work, we propose CharXiv, a comprehensive evaluation suite involving 2,323 natural, challenging, and diverse charts from arXiv papers. CharXiv
includes two types of questions: 1) descriptive questions about examining basic
chart elements and 2) reasoning questions that require synthesizing information
across complex visual elements in the chart. To ensure quality, all charts and
questions are handpicked, curated, and verified by human experts. Our results
reveal a substantial, previously underestimated gap between the reasoning skills of
the strongest proprietary model (i.e., GPT-4o), which achieves 47.1% accuracy, and
the strongest open-source model (i.e., InternVL Chat V1.5), which achieves 29.2%.
All models lag far behind human performance of 80.5%, underscoring weaknesses
in the chart understanding capabilities of existing MLLMs. We hope that CharXiv
facilitates future research on MLLM chart understanding by providing a more
realistic and faithful measure of progress.

1

Introduction

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [4, 56, 14, 82, 54, 16, 17, 12, 40, 41, 7, 2, 5, 73, 78,
49] are highly versatile and effective for a wide range of real-world applications [64, 69, 20, 57, 92,
61, 68, 60, 93]. Within these applications, chart understanding is a highly desired capability as charts
are ubiquitous in scientific papers, financial reports, and news articles. It also poses unique challenges
where models need to perform complex reasoning over numerical data, textual labels, and complex
visual elements to answer difficult questions (see Fig. 1), thus making chart understanding a suitable
measure of progress for MLLMs. Many benchmarks in the popular MathVista evaluation suite [60] are
designed to test chart understanding. However, these benchmarks lack diversity in both the types and
complexity of the charts and the often template-based questions (§2.1). For example, FigureQA [36]
and DVQA [35] rely on procedurally generated question templates. While ChartQA [64] includes
a mixture of handwritten and machine-generated questions, the charts lack visual diversity due to
the homogeneous appearance of the charts from a limited number of sources. Regardless, many
proprietary models [2, 78, 5, 73] and open-source models [12, 17, 16, 41, 31, 49, 55, 21] are evaluated
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

