SequentialAttention++ for Block Sparsification:
Differentiable Pruning Meets Combinatorial
Optimization

Taisuke Yasuda*†
Voleon Group
yasuda.taisuke1@gmail.com
Gang Fu†
Google Research
thomasfu@google.com

Kyriakos Axiotis†
Google Research
axiotis@google.com

MohammadHossein Bateni
Google Research
bateni@google.com

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research
mirrokni@google.com

Abstract
Neural network pruning is a key technique towards engineering large yet scalable,
interpretable, and generalizable models. Prior work on the subject has developed
largely along two orthogonal directions: (1) differentiable pruning for efficiently
and accurately scoring the importance of parameters, and (2) combinatorial optimization for efficiently searching over the space of sparse models. We unite
the two approaches, both theoretically and empirically, to produce a coherent
framework for structured neural network pruning in which differentiable pruning
guides combinatorial optimization algorithms to select the most important sparse
set of parameters. Theoretically, we show how many existing differentiable pruning techniques can be understood as nonconvex regularization for group sparse
optimization, and prove that for a wide class of nonconvex regularizers, the global
optimum is unique, group-sparse, and provably yields an approximate solution to
a sparse convex optimization problem. The resulting algorithm that we propose,
SequentialAttention++, advances the state of the art in large-scale neural network
block-wise pruning tasks on the ImageNet and Criteo datasets.

1

Introduction

Pruning methods for neural networks [LeCun et al., 1989] replace dense weight matrices by sparse
approximations, which offer improved generalization and inference efficiency in terms of storage,
energy consumption, and other computational resources. In various common formulations, the
problem of computing the best sparse approximation to a dense weight matrix is intractable as it
generalizes the sparse linear regression problem, which is known to be NP-hard even to approximate
[Natarajan, 1995, Foster et al., 2015, Gupte and Vaikuntanathan, 2021, Price et al., 2022]. Despite
this fact, a wide variety of techniques have proven to be quite successful in practice. This includes
magnitude pruning, ℓ1 regularization, greedy coordinate descent, sampling, among others.
While earlier works have focused on unstructured (i.e., entrywise) sparsity, which has been an active
and fruitful area, researchers have rapidly recognized the importance of structured sparsity, which
enforces that the sparse approximation respects certain patterns, such as block structure. These
structural constraints often lead to further efficiency gains due to improved hardware utilization
*
†

Work done while at Google Research.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

