Exploring and Exploiting the Asymmetric Valley of
Deep Neural Networks

Xin-Chun Li1,2 , Jin-Lin Tang1,2 , Bo Zhang1,2 , Lan Li1,2 , De-Chuan Zhan1,2
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
{lixc, tangjl, zhangb, lil}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, zhandc@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Exploring the loss landscape offers insights into the inherent principles of deep
neural networks (DNNs). Recent work suggests an additional asymmetry of the
valley beyond the flat and sharp ones, yet without thoroughly examining its causes
or implications. Our study methodically explores the factors affecting the symmetry
of DNN valleys, encompassing (1) the dataset, network architecture, initialization,
and hyperparameters that influence the convergence point; and (2) the magnitude
and direction of the noise for 1D visualization. Our major observation shows that
the degree of sign consistency between the noise and the convergence point is a
critical indicator of valley symmetry. Theoretical insights from the aspects of ReLU
activation and softmax function could explain the interesting phenomenon. Our
discovery propels novel understanding and applications in the scenario of Model
Fusion: (1) the efficacy of interpolating separate models significantly correlates
with their sign consistency ratio, and (2) imposing sign alignment during federated
learning emerges as an innovative approach for model parameter alignment.

1

Introduction

The massive number of parameters and complex structure of deep neural networks (DNNs) have
catalyzed extensive research to mine their underlying mechanics [55, 34, 42, 62, 71]. Visualizing
and exploring the loss surfaces of DNNs is the most intuitive way [43, 18], which has ignited
many interesting findings, such as the monotonic linear interpolation [22, 19, 66] and linear mode
connectivity [22, 14, 21, 15, 65, 2]. Loss landscape visualization has also been applied to show the
optimization trajectory [53, 33, 35], understand the effectiveness of Batch Normalization [32, 61],
BERT [11, 23], deep ensemble [17, 30, 21], and so on.
Perturbation analysis around the local minima of DNNs [7, 63], i.e., the shape of the valleys they
reside in, is a very popular research topic. The concept of flat minima was originally proposed by [28],
who defines the size of the connected region around the minima where the loss remains relatively
unchanged as flatness. Subsequent studies debate whether the flat or sharp minima could reflect the
generalization ability [38, 43, 36, 57, 16, 12, 41, 3]. The previous works constrain the valley shape to
be symmetric, while recent work points out that not all DNN valleys are flat or sharp, and there also
exist asymmetric valleys [25], which has not been systematically studied as far as we know.
This paper in-depth analyzes the factors that may affect the valley symmetry of DNNs. Previous
work’s analysis of valley shape primarily utilizes the 1D interpolation of θf + λ, where θf represents
the minima solution and  denotes a random noise. As shown in Fig. 1, we believe that the valley
symmetry depends both on the convergence solution and noise, with each of them being influenced
by some factors. The most significant innovation in our research is considering the effect of noise
direction on valley visualization, as previous work has simply taken the Gaussian noise.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

