CODE: Contrasting Self-generated Description to
Combat Hallucination in Large Multi-modal Models
Junho Kim∗

Hyun Jun Kim∗

Yeon Ju Kim

Yong Man Ro†

Integrated Vision and Language Lab, KAIST, South Korea
{arkimjh, kimhj709, yeonju7.kim, ymro}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Large Multi-modal Models (LMMs) have recently demonstrated remarkable abilities in visual context understanding and coherent response generation. However,
alongside these advancements, the issue of hallucinations has emerged as a significant challenge, producing erroneous responses that are unrelated to the visual
contents. In this paper, we introduce a novel contrastive-based decoding method,
COuntering DEscription Contrastive Decoding (CODE), which leverages selfgenerated descriptions as contrasting references during the decoding phase of
LMMs to address hallucination issues. CODE utilizes the comprehensive descriptions from model itself as visual counterpart to correct and improve response
alignment with actual visual content. By dynamically adjusting the information
flow and distribution of next-token predictions in the LMM’s vocabulary, CODE
enhances the coherence and informativeness of generated responses. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our method significantly reduces hallucinations and
improves cross-modal consistency across various benchmarks and cutting-edge
LMMs. Our method provides a simple yet effective decoding strategy that can be
integrated to existing LMM frameworks without additional training.

1

Introduction

With recent advancements of Large Language Models (LLMs) [18, 4, 54, 11, 46], Large Multi-modal
Models (LMMs), sometimes referred as Large Vision-Language Models [24, 63, 32, 31], have been
drawn great attention for their natural multi-modal interaction with users through back-and-forth
conversations. Leveraging their robust generation capabilities, various pioneering tasks in pre-LMM
era such as image captioning [7, 58, 27], visual question answering [1, 2], object detection [17],
etc., have been integrated into a single task rather than treated as sub-tasks and achieved significant
milestones [21, 59, 44]. However, at the same time, the hallucination issue [49, 67] has become one
of the emerging problems when adopting LMMs into real-world applications due to their potential
spurious generation in critical areas.
Here, unlike hallucination studies in LLMs [22] mainly focusing on factuality hallucination originated
from the language knowledge, the hallucination problem in LMMs refers cross-modal inconsistency
between the given visual contents and the generated responses for the user instructions. After the
seminal works [13, 42, 68] giving eyes to LLMs to understand visual contents with visual instruction
tuning, numerous cutting-edge LMMs [61, 9, 41, 36] actively have been proposed. Albeit the scaling
laws following more stronger versatile vision models [37, 29, 33], higher resolution [41, 8], deeper
alignment layers [5, 45, 8], larger model sizes, etc., LMMs still suffer from generating responses that
seem plausible but are factually incorrect for the given visual contents.
∗
Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.
Code is available at https://ivy-lvlm.github.io/CODE

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

