Categorical Flow Matching on Statistical Manifolds
Chaoran Cheng∗
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
chaoran7@illinois.edu
Jian Peng
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
jianpeng@illinois.edu

Jiahan Li∗
Peking University
lijiahanypc@pku.edu.cn
Ge Liu
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
geliu@illinois.edu

Abstract
We introduce Statistical Flow Matching (SFM), a novel and mathematically rigorous ﬂow-matching framework on the manifold of parameterized probability
measures inspired by the results from information geometry. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method on the discrete generation problem by instantiating SFM on the manifold of categorical distributions whose geometric properties
remain unexplored in previous discrete generative models. Utilizing the Fisher
information metric, we equip the manifold with a Riemannian structure whose
intrinsic geometries are effectively leveraged by following the shortest paths of
geodesics. We develop an efﬁcient training and sampling algorithm that overcomes numerical stability issues with a diffeomorphism between manifolds. Our
distinctive geometric perspective of statistical manifolds allows us to apply optimal transport during training and interpret SFM as following the steepest direction of the natural gradient. Unlike previous models that rely on variational
bounds for likelihood estimation, SFM enjoys the exact likelihood calculation for
arbitrary probability measures. We manifest that SFM can learn more complex
patterns on the statistical manifold where existing models often fail due to strong
prior assumptions. Comprehensive experiments on real-world generative tasks
ranging from image, text to biological domains further demonstrate that SFM
achieves higher sampling quality and likelihood than other discrete diffusion or
ﬂow-based models. Our code is available at https://github.com/ccr-cheng/
statistical-flow-matching.

1

Introduction

Recently, conditional ﬂow matching (CFM) models [38] have achieved remarkable success in various generative domains including image generation [38, 17, 29], molecule [59, 58, 31] and protein
design [68, 10, 36], and sequence generation [60, 39, 12]. While attempts to generalize CFM and
diffusion models to discrete categorical data have been made, they typically exert ad hoc assumptions on the structure of the discrete distribution. One group of work relies on stochastic jumps of
Markov chains in either the discrete-time [6, 39, 1] or continuous-time setting [11, 55, 12] that discards the continuous nature of the underlying categorical distributions. Other work directly works
with the probability simplex [7, 60] or the corresponding logit space [28, 40, 24] with potentially
imperfect assumptions that fail to capture the underlying true geometry of the statistical manifold.
Furthermore, likelihood is often approximated by variational bounds in previous discrete generative
models due to the lack of tractable exact likelihood.
* Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

