Identifying Latent State-Transition Processes for
Individualized Reinforcement Learning

Yuewen Sun1,2 , Biwei Huang3 , Yu Yao4 , Donghuo Zeng5 , Xinshuai Dong2 , Songyao Jin3 ,
Boyang Sun1 , Roberto Legaspi5 , Kazushi Ikeda5 , Peter Spirtes2 , Kun Zhang1,2
1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, 2 Carnegie Mellon University,
3
University of California San Diego, 4 The University of Sydney, 5 KDDI Research

Abstract
The application of reinforcement learning (RL) involving interactions with individuals has grown significantly in recent years. These interactions, influenced
by factors such as personal preferences and physiological differences, causally
influence state transitions, ranging from health conditions in healthcare to learning
progress in education. As a result, different individuals may exhibit different
state-transition processes. Understanding individualized state-transition processes
is essential for optimizing individualized policies. In practice, however, identifying these state-transition processes is challenging, as individual-specific factors
often remain latent. In this paper, we establish the identifiability of these latent
factors and introduce a practical method that effectively learns these processes
from observed state-action trajectories. Experiments on various datasets show that
the proposed method can effectively identify latent state-transition processes and
facilitate the learning of individualized RL policies.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) [44] involves training agents to make decisions by interacting with the
environment. The agent observes its current state, takes an action, and transitions to a new state with
a reward. Such a sequence of moving from one state to another is known as a state-transition process.
Individualized RL focuses on adapting the policy for each individual. It has recently seen increasing application in various sectors, including healthcare [86, 55, 19], education [66, 2, 12], and
e-commerce [51, 84, 1]. The individual-specific factors [58], which capture the unique characteristics
of each individual, play an important role in causally influencing the transitions between states. These
factors cover a range of aspects, including individual preferences, past experiences, and physiological differences. For example, in education, different learning styles can influence how students
with the same prior knowledge benefit from a tutorial. In healthcare, genetic differences can affect
how patients with hypertension respond to the same treatments. Understanding individual-specific
factors is essential for designing better RL systems that provide more individualized and effective
decisions [39, 26, 3, 63]. By understanding learning styles in education, RL agents can recommend personalized tutorials, such as animated content for visual learners or hands-on exercises for
kinesthetic learners. Similarly, in healthcare, knowledge of genetic makeup can help agents suggest
treatment plans tailored to individual needs, leading to improved health outcomes.
However, these individual-specific factors are not always observable, making it challenging to
understand the Latent Individualized State-Transition (LIST) processes, as illustrated in Figure 1(a).
These latent factors, such as learning styles and genetic makeup, are unique to each individual and
have a time-invariant influence on the state-transition process. This raises the question: can the
identifiability of these latent factors be guaranteed?
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

