Searching for Efficient Linear Layers over a
Continuous Space of Structured Matrices

Andres Potapczynski∗
New York University
Christopher Ferri
Capital One

Shikai Qiu∗
New York University

Zixi Chen
New York University

Marc Finzi
Carnegie Mellon University

Micah Goldblum
Columbia University

Christopher De Sa
Cornell University

C. Bayan Bruss
Capital One

Andrew Gordon Wilson
New York University

Abstract
Dense linear layers are the dominant computational bottleneck in large neural
networks, presenting a critical need for more efficient alternatives. Previous efforts
focused on a small number of hand-crafted structured matrices and neglected to
investigate whether these structures can surpass dense layers in terms of computeoptimal scaling laws when both the model size and training examples are optimally
allocated. In this work, we present a unifying framework that enables searching
among all linear operators expressible via an Einstein summation. This framework
encompasses many previously proposed structures, such as low-rank, Kronecker,
Tensor-Train, Block Tensor-Train (BTT), and Monarch, along with many novel
structures. To analyze the framework, we develop a taxonomy of all such operators
based on their computational and algebraic properties and show that differences
in the compute-optimal scaling laws are mostly governed by a small number
of variables that we introduce. Namely, a small ω (which measures parameter
sharing) and large ψ (which measures the rank) reliably led to better scaling laws.
Guided by the insight that full-rank structures that maximize parameters per unit
of compute perform the best, we propose BTT-MoE, a novel Mixture-of-Experts
(MoE) architecture obtained by sparsifying computation in the BTT structure.
In contrast to the standard sparse MoE for each entire feed-forward network,
BTT-MoE learns an MoE in every single linear layer of the model, including
the projection matrices in the attention blocks. We find BTT-MoE provides a
substantial compute-efficiency gain over dense layers and standard MoE.

1

Introduction

Neural networks primarily consist of interleaved linear layers and simple non-linearities. In large
foundation models such as GPT-3 [4], these linear layers consume the vast majority of the parameters
and computation [13], and are commonly represented by dense matrices. Substituting these dense
matrices with structured matrices with fast matrix-vector multiplies (MVMs) has the potential to
significantly improve the computational efficiency of these models.
Recent work by Dao et al. [6], Fu et al. [8], and Qiu et al. [19] demonstrated that incorporating
certain structured matrices into neural network architectures, including transformers, can improve
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to ap6604@nyu.edu, sq2129@nyu.edu, andrewgw@cims.nyu.edu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

