Fast Proxy Experiment Design
for Causal Effect Identification
Sepehr Elahi∗
EPFL, Switzerland
sepehr.elahi@epfl.ch

Sina Akbari∗
EPFL, Switzerland
sina.akbari@epfl.ch

Negar Kiyavash
EPFL, Switzerland
negar.kiyavash@epfl.ch

Jalal Etesami
TUM, Germany
j.etesami@tum.de

Patrick Thiran
EPFL, Switzerland
patrick.thiran@epfl.ch

Abstract
Identifying causal effects is a key problem of interest across many disciplines.
The two long-standing approaches to estimate causal effects are observational
and experimental (randomized) studies. Observational studies can suffer from
unmeasured confounding, which may render the causal effects unidentifiable. On
the other hand, direct experiments on the target variable may be too costly or even
infeasible to conduct. A middle ground between these two approaches is to estimate
the causal effect of interest through proxy experiments, which are conducted on
variables with a lower cost to intervene on compared to the main target. In an earlier
work, we studied this setting and demonstrated that the problem of designing the
optimal (minimum-cost) experiment for causal effect identification is NP-complete
and provided a naive algorithm that may require solving exponentially many NPhard problems as a sub-routine in the worst case. In this work, we provide a few
reformulations of the problem that allow for designing significantly more efficient
algorithms to solve it as witnessed by our extensive simulations. Additionally,
we study the closely-related problem of designing experiments that enable us to
identify a given effect through valid adjustments sets.

1

Introduction

Duration (s)

10
Identifying causal effects is a central problem of
interest across many fields, ranging from epidemi8
Ours
ology all the way to economics and social sciences.
6
S.O.T.A
While conducting randomized (controlled) trials
4
provides a framework to analyze and estimate the
2
causal effects of interest, such experiments are of0
ten impractical due to various limitations, including
financial, logistical, and ethical constraints. Even
20
40
60
80
100
when they are practical, gathering sufficient data
Number of variables
to draw statistically significant conclusions is often
challenging due to the high costs.
Figure 1: The average runtime of our approach
Costs can arise in multiple forms: financial costs compared with the state-of-the-art (S.O.T.A)
(e.g., implementing costly interventions), time re- from Akbari et al. [2022].
sources (e.g., upgrading infrastructure), and other
∗

Authors contributed equally.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

