Understanding and Minimising
Outlier Features in Transformer Training

Bobby He1∗

Lorenzo Noci1
Daniele Paliotta2
Imanol Schlag1†
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
2
Machine Learning Group, University of Geneva

Thomas Hofmann1

Abstract
Outlier Features (OFs) are neurons whose activation magnitudes significantly
exceed the average over a neural network’s (NN) width. They are well known to
emerge during standard transformer training and have the undesirable effect of
hindering quantisation in afflicted models. Despite their practical importance, little
is known behind why OFs emerge during training, nor how one can minimise them.
Our work focuses on the above questions, first identifying several quantitative
metrics, such as the kurtosis over neuron activation norms, to measure OFs. With
these metrics, we study how architectural and optimisation choices influence OFs,
and provide practical insights to minimise OFs during training. As highlights, we
introduce a novel unnormalised transformer block, the Outlier Protected block, and
present a previously unknown benefit of non-diagonal preconditioning optimisers,
finding both approaches to significantly reduce OFs and improve quantisation without compromising convergence speed, at scales of up to 7B parameters. Notably,
our combination of OP block and non-diagonal preconditioner (SOAP) achieves
14.87 weight-and-activation int8 perplexity (from 14.71 in standard precision), compared to 63.4 int8 perplexity (from 16.00) with a default OF-prone combination of
Pre-Norm model and Adam, when quantising OPT-125m models post-training.

1

Introduction

Despite their widespread use, our understanding of deep neural networks (NNs) and their training dynamics is very much incomplete. This, in part, reflects the complexity of traversing high-dimensional
non-convex loss landscapes but is also symptomatic of the myriad design choices, such as NN
architecture and optimiser hyperparameters, that a practitioner must take before training. While
standard choices of architecture and optimiser exist, it is often unclear how these choices affect model
performance or the emergence of various empirically observed phenomena during NN training.
Outlier Features (OF) are one such training phenomenon. OFs are neurons whose activation magnitudes are significantly larger than average in the same layer, i.e. across NN width [1–3]. They have
been widely observed in the popular transformer NN architecture [4–6], as we verify in Fig 1, and
are of practical interest because their existence hinders quantisation [3, 7–12]. In particular, OFs
cause large dynamic ranges in activations across NN width, leading to high quantisation errors in low
precision matrix multiplications. As such, Outlier Feature Emergence (OFE) during training hinders
low-precision training and inference, and minimising OFE could yield significant efficiency gains.
In this paper, we tackle OFE from two related angles: by (1) proposing interventions to minimise
OFE without affecting model convergence or training stability, using insights motivated through (2)
enhancing our understanding of why OFs appear during training. We argue that it is important to first
understand why OFs appear during standard NN training dynamics in order to identify which design
∗
†

Correspondence to bobby.he@inf.ethz.ch
ETH AI Center

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

