Antigen-Specific Antibody Design via
Direct Energy-based Preference Optimization

Xiangxin Zhou1,2,4,∗
Zaixiang Zheng4

Dongyu Xue4,∗
Liang Wang1,2

Ruizhe Chen3,4,∗
Quanquan Gu4,†

1

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
New Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR),
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University
4
ByteDance Research

Abstract
Antibody design, a crucial task with significant implications across various disciplines such as therapeutics and biology, presents considerable challenges due to
its intricate nature. In this paper, we tackle antigen-specific antibody sequencestructure co-design as an optimization problem towards specific preferences, considering both rationality and functionality. Leveraging a pre-trained conditional
diffusion model that jointly models sequences and structures of antibodies with
equivariant neural networks, we propose direct energy-based preference optimization to guide the generation of antibodies with both rational structures and considerable binding affinities to given antigens. Our method involves fine-tuning the
pre-trained diffusion model using a residue-level decomposed energy preference.
Additionally, we employ gradient surgery to address conflicts between various
types of energy, such as attraction and repulsion. Experiments on RAbD benchmark
show that our approach effectively optimizes the energy of generated antibodies
and achieves state-of-the-art performance in designing high-quality antibodies
with low total energy and high binding affinity simultaneously, demonstrating the
superiority of our approach.

1

Introduction

Antibodies, vital proteins with an inherent Y-shaped structure in the immune system, are produced
in response to an immunological challenge. Their primary function is to discern and neutralize
specific pathogens, typically referred to as antigens, with a significant degree of specificity [39]. The
specificity mainly comes from the Complementarity Determining Regions (CDRs), which accounts
for most binding affinity to specific antigens [24, 15, 49, 2]. Hence, the design of CDRs is a crucial
step in developing potent therapeutic antibodies, which plays an important role in drug discovery.
Traditional in silico antibody design methods rely on sampling or searching protein sequences over a
large search space to optimize the physical and chemical energy, which is inefficient and easily trapped
in bad local minima [1, 31, 47]. Recently, deep generative models have been employed to model protein sequences in nature for antibody design [5, 17]. Following the fundamental biological principle
∗
†

Equal contribution (this work was done during Xiangxin and Ruizhe’s internship at ByteDance Research).
Correspondence to: Quanquan Gu <quanquan.gu@bytedance.com>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

