Scaling Laws in Linear Regression:
Compute, Parameters, and Data

Licong Lin
UC Berkeley
liconglin@berkeley.edu

Jingfeng Wu
UC Berkeley
uuujf@berkeley.edu

Peter L. Bartlett
UC Berkeley and Google DeepMind
peter@berkeley.edu

Sham M. Kakade
Harvard University
sham@seas.harvard.edu

Jason D. Lee
Princeton University
jasonlee@princeton.edu

Abstract
Empirically, large-scale deep learning models often satisfy a neural scaling law:
the test error of the trained model improves polynomially as the model size and
data size grow. However, conventional wisdom suggests the test error consists of
approximation, bias, and variance errors, where the variance error increases with
model size. This disagrees with the general form of neural scaling laws, which
predict that increasing model size monotonically improves performance.
We study the theory of scaling laws in an infinite dimensional linear regression
setup. Specifically, we consider a model with M parameters as a linear function of
sketched covariates. The model is trained by one-pass stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) using N data. Assuming the optimal parameter satisfies a Gaussian prior
and the data covariance matrix has a power-law spectrum of degree a > 1, we show
that the reducible part of the test error is Θ(M −(a−1) + N −(a−1)/a ). The variance
error, which increases with M , is dominated by the other errors due to the implicit
regularization of SGD, thus disappearing from the bound. Our theory is consistent
with the empirical neural scaling laws and verified by numerical simulation.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models, particularly those on a large scale, are pivotal in advancing the state-of-theart across various fields. Recent empirical studies have shed light on the so-called neural scaling
laws [see 26, 21, for example], which suggest that the generalization performance of these models
improves polynomially as both model size, denoted by M , and data size, denoted by N , increase.
The neural scaling law quantitatively describes the population risk as:
R(M, N ) ≈ R∗ +

c1
c2
+ a2 ,
a
1
M
N

(1)

where R∗ is a positive irreducible risk and c1 , c2 , a1 , a2 are positive constants independent of M and
N . For instance, by fitting the above formula with empirical measurements in standard large-scale
language benchmarks, Hoffmann et al. [21] estimated a1 ≈ 0.34 and a2 ≈ 0.28, while Besiroglu
et al. [7] estimated that a1 ≈ 0.35 and a2 ≈ 0.37. Though the exact exponents depend on the tasks,
neural scaling laws in (1) are observed consistently in practice and are used as principled guidance to
build state-of-the-art models, especially under a compute budget [21].
From the perspective of statistical learning theory, (1) is rather intriguing. Standard statistical learning
bounds [see 30, 41, for example] often decompose the population risk into the sum of irreducible
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

