Don’t Look Twice: Faster Video Transformers with
Run-Length Tokenization

Rohan Choudhury 1

Guanglei Zhu 1

Sihan Liu 1

Koichiro Niinuma 2

Kris M. Kitani 1 László A. Jeni 1
1

Carnegie Mellon University

2

Fujitsu Research

rchoudhu@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Transformers are slow to train on videos due to extremely large numbers of input
tokens, even though many video tokens are repeated over time. Existing methods
to remove such uninformative tokens either have significant overhead, negating
any speedup, or require tuning for different datasets and examples. We present
Run-Length Tokenization (RLT), a simple approach to speed up video transformers
inspired by run-length encoding for data compression. RLT efficiently finds and
removes ‘runs’ of patches that are repeated over time prior to model inference,
then replaces them with a single patch and a positional encoding to represent
the resulting token’s new length. Our method is content-aware, requiring no
tuning for different datasets, and fast, incurring negligible overhead. RLT yields
a large speedup in training, reducing the wall-clock time to fine-tune a video
transformer by 30% while matching baseline model performance. RLT also works
without any training, increasing model throughput by 35% with only 0.1% drop
in accuracy. RLT speeds up training at 30 FPS by more than 100%, and on longer
video datasets, can reduce the token count by up to 80%. Our project page is at
https://rccchoudhury.github.io/projects/rlt/.

1

Introduction

Vision transformers [11] have enjoyed enormous success in modeling images and videos due to their
scaling properties and minimal inductive bias. Unfortunately, training these models on videos, which
generally have orders of magnitude more tokens than images, is significantly more expensive. One
contributing factor is that video transformers tokenize videos by splitting them into uniformly sized
spatiotemporal patches [2, 3], then embed them into a latent token space. As a result, the number of
tokens depends only on the video’s length and resolution. Researchers are thus forced to work with
very short videos (<10s), as well as significantly downsample them to low frames-per-second (FPS)
and low spatial resolution.
One promising solution to this problem is to reduce the number of input tokens. Compared to
language input, videos are significantly less dense in information; many works observe that videos
consist mostly of redundant or uninformative tokens [15, 39, 43]. However, existing methods that aim
to reduce input tokens to vision transformers have had limited adoption. Learned pruning methods
[34, 52] reduce model complexity measured by GFLOPS, but either incur significant overhead during
training, or require padding to handle changing numbers of tokens, negating any speed-up during
training. Random masking [1, 27], though fast, decreases accuracy and thus requires more training
time to match performance. Moreover, although methods like random masking and Token Merging
[5] do lead to wall-clock speedups, they are not content-aware: they only remove a fixed number of
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

