Selective Attention: Enhancing Transformer through
Principled Context Control

Xuechen Zhang
University of Michigan
zxuechen@umich.edu

Xiangyu Chang
University of California, Riverside
cxian008@ucr.edu

Amit Roy-Chowdhury
University of California, Riverside
amitrc@ece.ucr.edu

Jiasi Chen
University of Michigan
jiasi@umich.edu

Mingchen Li
University of Michigan
milii@umich.edu
Samet Oymak
University of Michigan
oymak@umich.edu

Abstract
The attention mechanism within the transformer architecture enables the model
to weigh and combine tokens based on their relevance to the query. While selfattention has enjoyed major success, it notably treats all queries q in the same
way by applying the mapping V ⊤ softmax(Kq), where V, K are the value and key
embeddings respectively. In this work, we argue that this uniform treatment hinders
the ability to control contextual sparsity and relevance. As a solution, we introduce
the “Selective Self-Attention” (SSA) layer that augments the softmax nonlinearity
with a principled temperature scaling strategy. By controlling temperature, SSA
adapts the contextual sparsity of the attention map to the query embedding and its
position in the context window. Through theory and experiments, we demonstrate
that this alleviates attention dilution, aids the optimization process, and enhances
the model’s ability to control softmax spikiness of individual queries. We also
incorporate temperature scaling for value embeddings and show that it boosts the
model’s ability to suppress irrelevant/noisy tokens. Notably, SSA is a lightweight
method which introduces less than 0.5% new parameters through a weight-sharing
strategy and can be fine-tuned on existing LLMs. Extensive empirical evaluations demonstrate that SSA-equipped models achieve a noticeable and consistent
accuracy improvement on language modeling benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Attention is a pivotal mechanism in modern machine learning that allows the model to focus on and
retrieve different parts of the data, enhancing its ability to capture contextual relationships across time
and space. While it was originally developed for NLP tasks through the transformer architecture, it
has enjoyed widespread success in other domains such as computer vision, sequence modeling, and
reinforcement learning [45, 35, 5, 9, 39].
The canonical self-attention mechanism is a sequence-to-sequence map that outputs X → S(QK ⊤ )V
where S(·) denotes the row-wise softmax nonlinearity and Q, K, V are the query, key, and value
embeddings obtained through linear projections of the input sequence X. Through this process, for
each query, the model creates a query-dependent composition of the input context. Importantly, the
model has to accomplish two objectives: namely, capturing semantic similarity between tokens and
also adjusting the contextual sparsity. Here, semantic similarity can be quantified through the angle
between key-query embeddings and the contextual sparsity through the spikiness of the attention
map. While the importance of the former is clear, the latter is equally important given the fact that
attention maps tend to be sparse in practice [8, 43, 37, 6].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

