UniBias: Unveiling and Mitigating LLM Bias through
Internal Attention and FFN Manipulation

Hanzhang Zhou1,2 , Zijian Feng1,2 , Zixiao Zhu1,2 , Junlang Qian1 , Kezhi Mao1,2
1
2
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore-ETH Centre
{hanzhang001, feng0119, zixiao001, junlang001}@e.ntu.edu.sg
ekzmao@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities in
various tasks using the in-context learning (ICL) paradigm. However, their effectiveness is often compromised by inherent bias, leading to prompt brittleness—sensitivity to design settings such as example selection, order, and prompt
formatting. Previous studies have addressed LLM bias through external adjustment of model outputs, but the internal mechanisms that lead to such bias remain
unexplored. Our work delves into these mechanisms, particularly investigating
how feedforward neural networks (FFNs) and attention heads result in the bias of
LLMs. By Interpreting the contribution of individual FFN vectors and attention
heads, we identify the biased LLM components that skew LLMs’ prediction toward
specific labels. To mitigate these biases, we introduce UniBias, an inference-only
method that effectively identifies and eliminates biased FFN vectors and attention
heads. Extensive experiments across 12 NLP datasets demonstrate that UniBias
significantly enhances ICL performance and alleviates prompt brittleness of LLMs.
The code is available at https://github.com/hzzhou01/UniBias.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have shown exceptional capabilities in various natural language
processing (NLP) tasks, employing the in-context learning (ICL) paradigm. This paradigm conditions
LLMs on a context prompt comprising of a few example-label pairs [Brown et al., 2020, Wei et al.,
2022, Dong et al., 2023, Zhou et al., 2024].
Despite their impressive performance, LLMs are prone to prompt brittleness, characterized by high
sensitivity to the choice [Zhao et al., 2021] and order [Lu et al., 2022] of examples, and prompt
formatting [Min et al., 2022], as demonstrated in Figure 1. Such prompt brittleness is found to be
arise from the bias in LLMs towards predicting certain answers [Zhao et al., 2021]. The presence of
the LLM bias undermines the robustness and adaptability of LLMs in diverse applications.
Extensive research has focused on identifying factors that lead to LLM bias and strategies for
mitigation. For instance, vanilla label bias [Fei et al., 2023] and recency bias [Zhao et al., 2021]
demonstrate the LLM’s inherent non-contextual preference for certain labels and contextual preference
for specific positions, respectively. Additionally, several calibration methods [Fei et al., 2023, Han
et al., 2023, Zhao et al., 2021] are proposed to counteract the bias by adjusting decision boundaries
of model output probabilities. However, these approaches are derived from external observations or
adjustments of LLM outputs, leaving the internal mechanisms within LLMs that cause such bias
poorly understood.
In this work, we investigate the internal mechanism of LLM bias, specifically how feedforward neural
networks (FFNs) and attention heads contribute to such bias. Building on findings in mechanistic
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

