Scene Graph Generation with Role-Playing Large
Language Models

Guikun Chen1∗ ,

Jin Li3∗ ,

Wenguan Wang1,2†

1

Zhejiang University
2
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
Changsha University of Science & Technology
https://github.com/guikunchen/SDSGG

Abstract
Current approaches for open-vocabulary scene graph generation (OVSGG) use
vision-language models such as CLIP and follow a standard zero-shot pipeline –
computing similarity between the query image and the text embeddings for each
category (i.e., text classifiers). In this work, we argue that the text classifiers
adopted by existing OVSGG methods, i.e., category-/part-level prompts, are sceneagnostic as they remain unchanged across contexts. Using such fixed text classifiers
not only struggles to model visual relations with high variance, but also falls short
in adapting to distinct contexts. To plug these intrinsic shortcomings, we devise
SDSGG, a scene-specific description based OVSGG framework where the weights
of text classifiers are adaptively adjusted according to the visual content. In
particular, to generate comprehensive and diverse descriptions oriented to the
scene, an LLM is asked to play different roles (e.g., biologist and engineer) to
analyze and discuss the descriptive features of a given scene from different views.
Unlike previous efforts simply treating the generated descriptions as mutually
equivalent text classifiers, SDSGG is equipped with an advanced renormalization
mechanism to adjust the influence of each text classifier based on its relevance
to the presented scene (this is what the term “specific” means). Furthermore, to
capture the complicated interplay between subjects and objects, we propose a
new lightweight module called mutual visual adapter. It refines CLIP’s ability to
recognize relations by learning an interaction-aware semantic space. Extensive
experiments on prevalent benchmarks show that SDSGG outperforms top-leading
methods by a clear margin.

1

Introduction

SGG [1] aims to create a structured representation of an image by identifying objects as nodes and
their relations as edges within a graph. The emerging field of OVSGG [2, 3], which broadens the scope
of SGG to identify and associate objects beyond a predefined set of categories, has become a research
hotspot for its prospective to amplify the practicality of SGG in diverse real-world applications.
OVSGG has achieved notable progress due to the success of vision-language models (VLMs) [4, 5]
and prompt learning [6, 7]. Existing OVSGG methods adopt a standard zero-shot pipeline [4], which
computes similarity between the visual embedding from query image and the text embedding from
pre-defined text classifiers (c.f . Fig. 1a). One straightforward direction for OVSGG is to use only
the category name (e.g., “riding”) [2, 8, 9, 3, 10] as the text classifier and perform vision-language
* The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
† Corresponding Author: Wenguan Wang.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

