DHA: Learning Decoupled-Head Attention from
Transformer Checkpoints via Adaptive Heads Fusion

Yilong Chen1,2∗, Linhao Zhang3∗ , Junyuan Shang3‡ , Zhenyu Zhang3 ,
Tingwen Liu1,2† , Shuohuan Wang3 , Yu Sun3
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Baidu Inc.
{chenyilong, liutingwen}@iie.ac.cn
{zhanglinhao, shangjunyuan, zhangzhenyu07, wangshuohuan, sunyu02}@baidu.com

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) with billions of parameters demonstrate impressive performance. However, the widely used Multi-Head Attention (MHA) in
LLMs incurs substantial computational and memory costs during inference. While
some efforts have optimized attention mechanisms by pruning heads or sharing
parameters among heads, these methods often lead to performance degradation or
necessitate substantial continued pre-training costs to restore performance. Based
on the analysis of attention redundancy, we design a Decoupled-Head Attention
(DHA) mechanism. DHA adaptively configures group sharing for key heads and
value heads across various layers, achieving a better balance between performance
and efficiency. Inspired by the observation of clustering similar heads, we propose
to progressively transform the MHA checkpoint into the DHA model through linear
fusion of similar head parameters step by step, retaining the parametric knowledge
of the MHA checkpoint. We construct DHA models by transforming various
scales of MHA checkpoints given target head budgets. Our experiments show that
DHA remarkably requires only 2.5% of the original model’s pre-training budgets
to achieve 96.1% of performance while saving 75% of KV cache. Compared
to Group-Query Attention (GQA), DHA achieves a 5× training acceleration, a
maximum of 13.93% performance improvement under 0.01% pre-training budget,
and 5% relative improvement under 0.05% pre-training budget.

1

Introduction

Transformer-based large language models (LLMs) shine in various natural language tasks due to
their powerful understanding and generation capabilities [1, 2, 3]. Multi-Head Attention (MHA)
is widely used in LLMs, with the number of heads increasing as the model size grows. However,
MHA inference overhead increases linearly with the expansion of the context and model sizes,
due to the surprisingly large memory consumption of the KV Cache mechanism. For instance, a 7
billion-parameter model with 32 heads and 32 layers, an input batch size of 4, and a sequence length
of 32k results in 64GB of KV cache, which is 4.7× larger than the model weights.
To reduce computational and memory overhead during inference, a widely used approach involves
adapting the MHA model to a more efficient structure through the reuse of parameters across multiple
heads [4, 5, 6] , such as Multi-Query Attention (MQA) [4] and Grouped-Query Attention (GQA) [5].
These methods utilize a portion of the original training computation which avoid information loss
∗

denotes equal contribution. † denotes corresponding author. ‡ denotes project lead.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

