HyperPrism: An Adaptive Non-linear Aggregation
Framework for Distributed Machine Learning over
non-IID Data and Time-varying Communication Links

Haizhou Du ∗
Shanghai University
of Electric Power
Shanghai, China
Ryan Yang ∗
Massachusetts Institute
of Technology
MA, USA

Yijian Chen
Shanghai University
of Electric Power
Shanghai, China
Yuchen Li
Shanghai Jiao Tong
University
Shanghai, China

Linghe Kong
Shanghai Jiao Tong
University
Shanghai, China

Abstract
While Distributed Machine Learning (DML) has been widely used to achieve
decent performance, it is still challenging to take full advantage of data and devices
distributed at multiple vantage points to adapt and learn; this is because the current
linear aggregation paradigm cannot solve inter-model divergence caused by (1)
heterogeneous learning data at different devices (i.e., non-IID data) and (2) in
the case of time-varying communication links, the limited ability for devices to
reconcile model divergence. In this paper, we present a non-linear class aggregation
framework HyperPrism that leverages Kolmogorov Means to conduct distributed
mirror descent with the averaging occurring within the mirror descent dual space;
HyperPrism selects the degree for a Weighted Power Mean (WPM), a subset of the
Kolmogorov Means, each round. Moreover, HyperPrism can adaptively choose
different mapping for different layers of the local model with a dedicated hypernetwork per device, achieving automatic optimization of DML in high divergence
settings. We perform rigorous analysis and experimental evaluations to demonstrate
the effectiveness of adaptive, mirror-mapping DML. In particular, we extend the
generalizability of existing related works and position them as special cases within
HyperPrism. For practitioners, the strength of HyperPrism is in making feasible the
possibility of distributed asynchronous training with minimal communication. Our
experimental results show HyperPrism can improve the convergence speed up to
98.63% and scale well to more devices compared with the state-of-the-art, all with
little additional computation overhead compared to traditional linear aggregation.

1

Introduction

The proliferation of edge devices, such as mobile phones, wearable devices and unmanned aerial
vehicles, has resulted in an exponential growth in diverse data types (e.g., images, sound and text).
Addressing this surge necessitates advanced techniques capable of accurately, quickly, and practically
processing vast amounts of data through efficient and scalable algorithms. Distributed Machine
Learning (DML) has gained significant traction in recent years as a strategy to minimize data transfer
∗
Email: duhaizhou@shiep.edu.cn
∗ These authors are the same contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

