T2Vs Meet VLMs: A Scalable Multimodal Dataset for
Visual Harmfulness Recognition

1

Chen Yeh1∗ You-Ming Chang1∗ Wei-Chen Chiu1 Ning Yu2
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University 2 Netflix Eyeline Studios
{denny3388.cs11, thisismiiiing.11}@nycu.edu.tw
walon@nctu.edu.tw, ningyu.hust@gmail.com

Abstract
Warning: This paper contains inappropriate/harmful visual contents.
While widespread access to the Internet and the rapid advancement of generative models boost people’s creativity and productivity, the risk of encountering
inappropriate or harmful content also increases. To address the aforementioned
issue, researchers managed to incorporate several harmful contents datasets with
machine learning methods to detect harmful concepts. However, existing harmful
datasets are curated by the presence of a narrow range of harmful objects, and
only cover real harmful content sources. This restricts the generalizability of
methods based on such datasets and leads to the potential misjudgment in certain
cases. Therefore, we propose a comprehensive and extensive harmful dataset,
VHD11K, consisting of 10,000 images and 1,000 videos, crawled from the Internet
and generated by 4 generative models, across a total of 10 harmful categories
covering a full spectrum of harmful concepts with non-trival definition. We also
propose a novel annotation framework by formulating the annotation process as
a multi-agent Visual Question Answering (VQA) task, having 3 different VLMs
“debate” about whether the given image/video is harmful, and incorporating the
in-context learning strategy in the debating process. Therefore, we can ensure that
the VLMs consider the context of the given image/video and both sides of the
arguments thoroughly before making decisions, further reducing the likelihood
of misjudgments in edge cases. Evaluation and experimental results demonstrate
that (1) the great alignment between the annotation from our novel annotation
framework and those from human, ensuring the reliability of VHD11K; (2) our
full-spectrum harmful dataset successfully identifies the inability of existing harmful content detection methods to detect extensive harmful contents and improves
the performance of existing harmfulness recognition methods; (3) our dataset
outperforms the baseline dataset, SMID, as evidenced by the superior improvement in harmfulness recognition methods. The entire dataset is publicly available
:https://huggingface.co/datasets/denny3388/VHD11K

1

Introduction

Nowadays, visual data counts for more than 82% of the Internet traffic.2 However, this widespread
access also increases the risk that underage children encounter harmful or inappropriate content,
highlighting the urgent need for effective recognition methods. Furthermore, the rapid advancement
of generative models has made it easier to create and spread harmful contents, underscoring the
critical importance of developing methods to detect such synthesized harmful materials.
∗
2

Both authors contribute equally
https://www.synthesia.io/post/video-statistics

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

