Exploring Behavior-Relevant and Disentangled Neural
Dynamics with Generative Diffusion Models

Yule Wang
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA, 30332 USA
yulewang@gatech.edu

Chengrui Li
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA, 30332 USA
cnlichengrui@gatech.edu

Weihan Li
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA, 30332 USA
weihanli@gatech.edu

Anqi Wu
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA, 30332 USA
anqiwu@gatech.edu

Abstract
Understanding the neural basis of behavior is a fundamental goal in neuroscience.
Current research in large-scale neuro-behavioral data analysis often relies on
decoding models, which quantify behavioral information in neural data but lack
details on behavior encoding. This raises an intriguing scientific question: “how
can we enable in-depth exploration of neural representations in behavioral tasks,
revealing interpretable neural dynamics associated with behaviors”. However,
addressing this issue is challenging due to the varied behavioral encoding across
different brain regions and mixed selectivity at the population level. To tackle this
limitation, our approach, named “BeNeDiff”, first identifies a fine-grained and
disentangled neural subspace using a behavior-informed latent variable model. It
then employs state-of-the-art generative diffusion models to synthesize behavior
videos that interpret the neural dynamics of each latent factor. We validate the
method on multi-session datasets containing wide-field calcium imaging recordings
across multiple brain regions of the dorsal cortex. By guiding the diffusion model to
activate individual latent factors, we verify that the neural dynamics of latent factors
in the disentangled neural subspace provide interpretable quantifications of the
behaviors of interest across multiple brain regions. Meanwhile, the neural subspace
in BeNeDiff demonstrates high disentanglement and neural reconstruction quality.
Our codes are available at https://github.com/BRAINML-GT/BeNeDiff.

1

Introduction

Understanding and elucidating the complex interrelationships between behavioral data and neural
population activity is a long-standing goal in systems neuroscience [Batty et al., 2019; GomezMarin et al., 2014; Krakauer et al., 2017; Berman, 2018]. Exploring the neural basis of behavior
not only deepens our basic knowledge of brain functions but also establishes a foundation for
developing improved treatments for psychiatric and neurological conditions [Vieira et al., 2017;
Ibáñez et al., 2018]. Significant progress has been achieved in developing computational toolkits for
neuro-behavioral decoding by using behavior video data [Whiteway et al., 2021; Batty et al., 2019;
Musall et al., 2019; Stringer et al., 2019]. These methods perform region-based behavior decoding
to map neural activity across multiple brain regions of the dorsal cortex to the behaviors from the
videos. However, these methods only quantify how much behavioral information is encoded in neural
populations, but do not reveal the details of such encoding. There has been markedly less focus,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

