Information-Theoretic Generalization Analysis for
Expected Calibration Error

Futoshi Futami∗
Osaka University / RIKEN AIP
futami.futoshi.es@osaka-u.ac.jp

Masahiro Fujisawa∗†
RIKEN AIP
masahiro.fujisawa@riken.jp

Abstract
While the expected calibration error (ECE), which employs binning, is widely
adopted to evaluate the calibration performance of machine learning models, theoretical understanding of its estimation bias is limited. In this paper, we present
the first comprehensive analysis of the estimation bias in the two common binning
strategies, uniform mass and uniform width binning. Our analysis establishes upper bounds on the bias, achieving an improved convergence rate. Moreover, our
bounds reveal, for the first time, the optimal number of bins to minimize the estimation bias. We further extend our bias analysis to generalization error analysis
based on the information-theoretic approach, deriving upper bounds that enable
the numerical evaluation of how small the ECE is for unknown data. Experiments
using deep learning models show that our bounds are nonvacuous thanks to this
information-theoretic generalization analysis approach.

1

Introduction

Ensuring reliable predictions from machine learning models holds paramount importance in risksensitive applications such as medical diagnosis [18]. To achieve this, it is essential not only to
evaluate the accuracy of the point predictions of models but also to precisely quantify the associated
uncertainty. One effective approach to accomplishing this is to leverage the concept of calibration.
In the classification context, the calibration performance is evaluated by how well predictive probabilities of a model align with the actual frequency of true labels, and a close correspondence between
them indicates that the model is well calibrated [7, 42]. Unfortunately, machine learning models are
often not well calibrated [11, 24], prompting extensive research on their calibration performance
both theoretically and numerically. In this paper, we assume a binary classification problem.
To evaluate the calibration performance, we often use the calibration error or true calibration error
(TCE) [12, 31, 10]. This evaluates the disparity between the predicted probability of a model and the
conditional expectation of the label given the model prediction, instead of the true label frequency.
However, analytically computing the TCE is challenging, primarily due to the intractability of the
conditional expectation. One way to address this issue is by using the binning method [48]. This
method enables the estimation of conditional expectations by dividing the probability range [0, 1]
into B small intervals called bins and comparing the empirical mean of predictive probabilities
and label frequencies within each bin, utilizing the finite test dataset denoted as Ste . The obtained
estimator of the TCE is termed the (binned) expected calibration error (ECE).
Given that the ECE estimates the TCE, it is crucial to theoretically explore the bias between them,
termed total bias in this paper, to confirm the accuracy of calibration evaluation using the ECE. Furthermore, it is vital to identify the conditions under which our training algorithm achieves a low ECE
or TCE for unknown test datasets. This can be paraphrased as the importance of conducting generalization error analysis under the ECE and TCE. Nevertheless, research on these aspects remains
∗

Equal contribution.

†

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

