An Efficient High-Dimensional Gradient Estimator
for Stochastic Differential Equations

Shengbo Wang
MS&E
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
shengbo.wang@stanford.edu

Jose Blanchet
MS&E
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
jose.blanchet@stanford.edu

Peter Glynn
MS&E
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
glynn@stanford.edu

Abstract
Overparameterized stochastic differential equation (SDE) models have achieved
remarkable success in various complex environments, such as PDE-constrained
optimization, stochastic control and reinforcement learning, financial engineering,
and neural SDEs. These models often feature system evolution coefficients that
are parameterized by a high-dimensional vector θ ∈ Rn , aiming to optimize expectations of the SDE, such as a value function, through stochastic gradient ascent.
Consequently, designing efficient gradient estimators for which the computational
complexity scales well with n is of significant interest. This paper introduces a
novel unbiased stochastic gradient estimator–the generator gradient estimator–for
which the computation time remains stable in n. In addition to establishing the
validity of our methodology for general SDEs with jumps, we also perform numerical experiments that test our estimator in linear-quadratic control problems
parameterized by high-dimensional neural networks. The results show a significant
improvement in efficiency compared to the widely used pathwise differentiation
method: Our estimator achieves near-constant computation times, increasingly
outperforms its counterpart as n increases, and does so without compromising estimation variance. These empirical findings highlight the potential of our proposed
methodology for optimizing SDEs in contemporary applications.

1

Introduction


We consider a family of jump diffusions Xθx (t, s) ∈ Rd : s ∈ [t, T ] that are generated by stochastic
differential equations (SDEs) and indexed by the initial condition x ∈ Rd at time s and a parameter
θ ∈ Θ ⊂ Rn . In modern applications, the parameter θ, encoding characteristics of an engineering
model, often represents the weights of a deep neural network. This paper focuses particularly on
scenarios where the dimension n of θ is significantly greater than the dimension d of the space. This
setting naturally arises in the implementation of large AI architectures in modern applications.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

