A Motion-aware Spatio-temporal Graph for Video
Salient Object Ranking
Hao Chen1,2 , Yufei Zhu1,2 , and Yongjian Deng3
2

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary
Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China.
3
College of Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China
{haochen303, 220232213}@seu.edu.cn, yjdeng@bjut.edu.cn

Abstract
Video salient object ranking aims to simulate the human attention mechanism
by dynamically prioritizing the visual attraction of objects in a scene over time.
Despite its numerous practical applications, this area remains underexplored. In
this work, we propose a graph model for video salient object ranking. This
graph simultaneously explores multi-scale spatial contrasts and intra-/inter-instance
temporal correlations across frames to extract diverse spatio-temporal saliency
cues. It has two advantages: 1. Unlike previous methods that only perform global
inter-frame contrast or compare all proposals across frames globally, we explicitly
model the motion of each instance by comparing its features with those in the same
spatial region in adjacent frames, thus obtaining more accurate motion saliency
cues. 2. We synchronize the spatio-temporal saliency cues in a single graph for
joint optimization, which exhibits better dynamics compared to the previous stagewise methods that prioritize spatial cues followed by temporal cues. Additionally,
we propose a simple yet effective video retargeting method based on video saliency
ranking. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our model in video
salient object ranking and the effectiveness of the video retargeting method. Our
codes/models are released at https://github.com/zyf-815/VSOR/tree/main.

1

Introduction

Figure 1: Previous methods (e.g., [1]) in video SOR primarily focus on capturing temporal correlations
between global features across frames, resulting in limited ability to effectively model temporal
saliency. These methods tend to emphasize objects with prominent static saliency cues (i.e., the man
right), whereas our proposed model places greater emphasis on instance-wise temporal correlation,
resulting in more accurate results (i.e., the walking woman left).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

