Unity by Diversity: Improved Representation
Learning for Multimodal VAEs

Thomas M. Sutter1∗, Yang Meng3 , Andrea Agostini1 , Daphné Chopard1,2 ,
Norbert Fortin4 , Julia E. Vogt1 , Babak Shahbaba3 , Stephan Mandt3,5
1

2

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
Department of Intensive Care and Neonatology, University Children’s Hospital Zurich
3
Department of Statistics, UC Irvine
4
Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, UC Irvine
5
Department of Computer Science, UC Irvine

Abstract
Variational Autoencoders for multimodal data hold promise for many tasks in data
analysis, such as representation learning, conditional generation, and imputation.
Current architectures either share the encoder output, decoder input, or both across
modalities to learn a shared representation. Such architectures impose hard constraints on the model. In this work, we show that a better latent representation can
be obtained by replacing these hard constraints with a soft constraint. We propose
a new mixture-of-experts prior, softly guiding each modality’s latent representation
towards a shared aggregate posterior. This approach results in a superior latent
representation and allows each encoding to preserve information better from its
uncompressed original features. In extensive experiments on multiple benchmark
datasets and two challenging real-world datasets, we show improved learned latent
representations and imputation of missing data modalities compared to existing
methods.

1

Introduction

The fusion of diverse modalities and data types is transforming our understanding of complex
phenomena, enabling more nuanced and comprehensive insights through the integration of varied
information sources. Consider, for instance, the role of a medical practitioner who synthesizes
multiple tests and measurements during diagnosis and treatment. This process involves merging
shared information across different tests and identifying test-specific details, both of which are critical
for optimal patient care and medical decision-making.
Among the existing methods, multimodal Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) have emerged as a
promising approach for jointly modeling and learning from weakly-supervised heterogeneous data
sources. While scalable multimodal VAEs utilizing a single shared latent space efficiently handle
multiple modalities [Wu and Goodman, 2018, Shi et al., 2019, Sutter et al., 2021], finding an optimal
method to aggregate these modalities remains challenging. The aggregation methods and resulting
joint representations are often suboptimal and overly restrictive [Daunhawer et al., 2022, Sutter,
2023], leading to inferior latent representations and generative quality. This trade-off between shared
and modality-specific information in the latent representations of multimodal VAEs results in limited
quality or coherence in generated samples, even in relatively simple scenarios.
∗

Corresponding author: thomas.sutter@inf.ethz.ch

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

