Adaptive Proximal Gradient Method for Convex
Optimization

Yura Malitsky
Faculty of Mathematics
University of Vienna, Austria
yurii.malitskyi@univie.ac.at

Konstantin Mishchenko
Samsung AI Center, UK
konsta.mish@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we explore two fundamental first-order algorithms in convex optimization, namely, gradient descent (GD) and proximal gradient method (ProxGD).
Our focus is on making these algorithms entirely adaptive by leveraging local curvature information of smooth functions. We propose adaptive versions of GD and
ProxGD that are based on observed gradient differences and, thus, have no added
computational costs. Moreover, we prove convergence of our methods assuming
only local Lipschitzness of the gradient. In addition, the proposed versions allow
for even larger stepsizes than those initially suggested in [MM20].

1

Intro

In this paper, we address a convex minimization problem
min F (x).
x∈

R

d

We are interested in the cases when either F is differentiable and then we will use notation F = f , or
it has a composite additive structure as F = f + g. Here, f represents a convex and differentiable
function, while g is convex, lower semi-continuous (lsc), and prox-friendly. Throughout the paper,
we will interchangeably refer to the smoothness of f and the Lipschitzness of ∇f , occasionally with
the adjective "locally," indicating that it is restricted to a bounded set. We will refer to this property
as smoothness, without mentioning the Lipschitzness of f , so we hope there will be no confusion in
this regard.
For simplicity, in most of the introduction, we consider only the simpler problem minx f (x). We
study one of the most classical optimization algorithms — gradient descent —
xk+1 = xk − αk ∇f (xk ).

(1)

Its simplicity and the sole prerequisite of knowing the gradient of f make it appealing for diverse
applications. This method is central in modern continuous optimization, forming the bedrock for
numerous extensions.
Given the initial point x0 , the only thing we need to implement (1) is to choose a stepsize αk (also
known as a learning rate in machine learning literature). This seemingly tiny detail is crucial for the
method convergence and performance. When a user invokes GD as a solver, the standard approach
would be to pick an arbitrary value for αk , run the algorithm, and observe its behavior. If it diverges at
some point, the user would try a smaller stepsize and repeat the same procedure. If, on the other hand,
the method takes too much time to converge, the user might try to increase the stepsize. In practice,
this approach is not very efficient, as we have no theoretical guarantees for a randomly guessed
stepsize, and the divergence may occur after a long time. Both underestimating and overestimating
the stepsize can, thus, lead to a large overhead.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

