Geometric-Averaged Preference Optimization
for Soft Preference Labels
Hiroki Furuta1,2∗
Kuang-Huei Lee1
Shixiang Shane Gu1
Yutaka Matsuo2
1
1
1
Aleksandra Faust
Heiga Zen
Izzeddin Gur
1
2
Google DeepMind
The University of Tokyo
furuta@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Many algorithms for aligning LLMs with human preferences assume that human
preferences are binary and deterministic. However, human preferences can vary
across individuals, and therefore should be represented distributionally. In this
work, we introduce the distributional soft preference labels and improve Direct
Preference Optimization (DPO) with a weighted geometric average of the LLM output likelihood in the loss function. This approach adjusts the scale of learning loss
based on the soft labels such that the loss would approach zero when the responses
are closer to equally preferred. This simple modification can be easily applied to
any DPO-based methods and mitigate over-optimization and objective mismatch,
which prior works suffer from. Our experiments simulate the soft preference labels
with AI feedback from LLMs and demonstrate that geometric averaging consistently improves performance on standard benchmarks for alignment research. In
particular, we observe more preferable responses than binary labels and significant
improvements where modestly-confident labels are in the majority.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) [1, 7, 33] capture a wide range of behaviors and values from training
data. However, we would usually prefer these models to focus on useful and safe expressions and
abide by social norms. To solve these problems, preference optimization approaches have been
popular, either way through reinforcement learning from feedback (RLHF) [12, 34, 4] or direct
preference optimization (DPO) methods [41, 52]. These methods usually finetune supervised models
on preference data and labels generated by human raters with a wide variety of priorities, backgrounds,
knowledge, and skill sets. Nevertheless, existing RLHF and direct preference optimization methods
usually assume binary preferences, which ignore the subtle relationship and amplify the bias in the
preference labels.
To address this issue, we introduce the concept of distributional soft preference labels and improve
DPO and its algorithmic families by incorporating a weighted geometric average of LLM output
likelihood into the loss function. This approach adjusts the scale of learning loss based on the soft
labels and effectively minimizes the loss when presented with equally preferred responses.
In the experiments, we simulate the soft preference labels with AI feedback from LLMs [4, 24] and
show that soft preference labels and weighted geometric averaging achieve consistent improvement to
the baselines on popular benchmarks for the alignment research literature, such as Reddit TL;DR [49],
and Anthropic Helpful and Harmless [3], as well as original natural language planning dataset based
on Plasma [6]. In particular, our results highlight that the proposed methods significantly improve
the performance with the data dominated by modestly-confident labels, while conservative DPO
∗

Work done as a Student Researcher at Google.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

