Achieving Domain-Independent
Certified Robustness via Knowledge Continuity

Alan Sun1,2 , Chiyu Ma2 , Kenneth Ge1 , Soroush Vosoughi2
1 Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Dartmouth College
{alansun, kkge}@andrew.cmu.edu,
{chiyu.ma.gr, soroush.vosoughi}@dartmouth.edu

Abstract
We present knowledge continuity, a novel definition inspired by Lipschitz continuity
which aims to certify the robustness of neural networks across input domains (such
as continuous and discrete domains in vision and language, respectively). Most
existing approaches that seek to certify robustness, especially Lipschitz continuity,
lie within the continuous domain with norm and distribution-dependent guarantees.
In contrast, our proposed definition yields certification guarantees that depend only
on the loss function and the intermediate learned metric spaces of the neural network. These bounds are independent of domain modality, norms, and distribution.
We further demonstrate that the expressiveness of a model class is not at odds with
its knowledge continuity. This implies that achieving robustness by maximizing
knowledge continuity should not theoretically hinder inferential performance. Finally, to complement our theoretical results, we present several applications of
knowledge continuity such as regularization, a certification algorithm, and show
that knowledge continuity can be used to localize vulnerable components of a neural
network1 .

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated remarkable generalization capabilities. Their robustness, however, has been considerably more difficult to achieve. Robustness refers to the preservation of
model performance under natural or adversarial alterations of the input [18]. DNNs’ lack of robustness,
highlighted by seminal works such as [24, 66] and recently [7, 5], poses significant challenges to their
adoption in critical applications, underscoring concerns for AI safety and trustworthiness [20, 30, 9, 7].
Though issues of robustness emerged from computer vision applications, they have since spanned
multiple domains [1, 35, 72, 75, 7]. This research trajectory has not only prompted significant advancements in robustness improvements through architectural, training, and dataset augmentations, but
also unveiled the sophistication of adversarial attacks—the process through which counterexamples
to robustness are generated [1, 35, 72, 75, 7]. Along the progress made in these parallel directions, a
great deal of work has gone into certified robustness which seeks to provide theoretical robustness
guarantees. Certification is desirable as it generally transcends any particular task, dataset, or model.
As a result, Lipschitz continuity has emerged, promising certified robustness by essentially bounding
the derivative of a neural network’s output with respect to its input. In this way, Lipschitz continuity
directly captures the volatility of a model’s performance, getting at the heart of robustness. Such an
approach has proven its merit in computer vision, facilitating robustness under norm and distributional
assumptions [29, 59, 78, 76]. Its inherent ease and interpretability has lead to widespread adoption as
a means to measure and regulate robustness among practitioners as well [71, 12, 21, 68, 54].
1

Codebase for our experiments can be found at https://github.com/alansun17904/kc

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

