Improved Regret for Bandit Convex Optimization
with Delayed Feedback

Yuanyu Wan1,2,3 , Chang Yao1,2,3 , Mingli Song2,3 , Lijun Zhang4,2
1
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University, Ningbo, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security, Hangzhou, China
4
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
{wanyy,changy,brooksong}@zju.edu.cn, zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
We investigate bandit convex optimization (BCO) with delayed feedback, where
only the loss value of the action is revealed under an arbitrary delay. Let n, T, d¯
denote the dimensionality, time
average delay, respectively. Previous
√ horizon, and
¯ 1/3 T 2/3 ) regret bound for this problem,
studies have achieved an O( nT 3/4 +(nd)
whose delay-independent part matches the regret of the classical non-delayed
bandit gradient descent algorithm. However, there is a large√gap between its delaydependent part, i.e., O((n ¯
d)1/3 T 2/3 ), and an existing Ω( ¯
dT ) lower bound. In
this paper, we illustrate that this gap can be filled in the worst case, where d¯ is very
close to the maximum delay d. Specifically, we first develop
a novel algorithm, and
√
√
prove that it enjoys a regret bound of O( nT 3/4 + dT ) in general. Compared
¯ 2/3 T 1/3 ), and
with the previous result, our regret bound is better for d = O((nd)
the delay-dependent part is tight in the worst case. The primary idea is to decouple
the joint effect of the delays and the bandit feedback on the regret by carefully
incorporating the delayed bandit feedback with a blocking update mechanism.
Furthermore, we show that the proposed algorithm can improve the regret bound to
O((nT )2/3 log1/3 T + d log T ) for strongly convex functions. Finally, if the action
sets are
√ unconstrained, we demonstrate that it can be simply extended to achieve an
O(n T log T + d log T ) regret bound for strongly convex and smooth functions.

1

Introduction

Online convex optimization (OCO) with delayed feedback [Joulani et al., 2013, Quanrud and
Khashabi, 2015] has become a popular paradigm for modeling streaming applications without
immediate reactions to actions, such as online advertisement [McMahan et al., 2013] and online
routing [Awerbuch and Kleinberg, 2008]. Formally, it is defined as a repeated game between a player
and an adversary. At each round t, the player first selects an action xt from a convex set K ⊆ Rn .
Then, the adversary chooses a convex function ft (·) : Rn 7→ R, which causes the player a loss ft (xt )
but is revealed at the end of round t + dt − 1, where dt ≥ 1 denotes an arbitrary delay. The goal
PT
PT
of the player is to minimize the regret Reg(T ) = t=1 ft (xt ) − minx∈K t=1 ft (x), i.e., the gap
between the cumulative loss of the player and that of an optimal fixed action, where T is the number
of total rounds.
Over the past decades, plenty of algorithms and theoretical guarantees have been proposed for this
problem [Weinberger and Ordentlich, 2002, Langford et al., 2009, Joulani et al., 2013, Quanrud and
Khashabi, 2015, Joulani et al., 2016, Héliou et al., 2020, Flaspohler et al., 2021, Wan et al., 2022a,b,
Bistritz et al., 2022]. However, the vast majority of them assume that the full information or gradients
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

