The Closeness of In-Context Learning and Weight
Shifting for Softmax Regression

Shuai Li
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
shuaili8@sjtu.edu.cn

Zhao Song
Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing, UC Berkeley
magic.linuxkde@gmail.com

Yu Xia
University of California, San Diego
yux078@ucsd.edu

Tong Yu
Adobe Research
tyu@adobe.com

Tianyi Zhou
University of Southern California
tzhou029@usc.edu

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) are known for their exceptional performance in
natural language processing, making them highly effective in many human liferelated tasks. The attention mechanism in the Transformer architecture is a critical
component of LLMs, as it allows the model to selectively focus on specific input
parts. The softmax unit, which is a key part of the attention mechanism, normalizes
the attention scores. Hence, the performance of LLMs in various NLP tasks
depends significantly on the crucial role played by the attention mechanism with
the softmax unit.
In-context learning is one of the celebrated abilities of recent LLMs. Without further parameter updates, Transformers can learn to predict based on few in-context
examples. However, the reason why Transformers becomes in-context learners
is not well understood. Recently, in-context learning has been studied from a
mathematical perspective with simplified linear self-attention without softmax unit.
Based on a linear regression formulation minx ∥Ax − b∥2 , existing works show
linear Transformers’ capability of learning linear functions in context. The capability of Transformers with softmax unit approaching full Transformers, however,
remains unexplored.
In this work, we study the in-context learning based on a softmax regression
formulation minx ∥⟨exp(Ax), 1n ⟩−1 exp(Ax) − b∥2 . We show the upper bounds
of the data transformations induced by a single self-attention layer with softmax
unit and by gradient-descent on a ℓ2 regression loss for softmax prediction function.
Our theoretical results imply that when training self-attention-only Transformers
for fundamental regression tasks, the models learned by gradient-descent and
Transformers show great similarity.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been a significant increase in research and development in the field of
Artificial Intelligence, with large language models (LLMs) emerging as an effective way to tackle
complex tasks. Transformers have achieved state-of-the-art results in various NLP tasks, such as
machine translation [PCR19, GHG+ 20] and text generation [LSX+ 22]. As a result, they have become
the preferred architecture for NLP, where BERT [DCLT18], GPT-3 [BMR+ 20], PaLM [CND+ 22]
were proposed. They have demonstrated remarkable learning and reasoning capabilities and have
proven to be more efficient than traditional models when processing natural language.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

