Tri-Level Navigator: LLM-Empowered Tri-Level
Learning for Time Series OOD Generalization

Chengtao Jian
Tongji University, Shanghai, China
jct@tongji.edu.cn

Kai Yang∗
Tongji University, Shanghai, China
kaiyang@tongji.edu.cn

Yang Jiao
Tongji University, Shanghai, China
yangjiao@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
Out-of-Distribution (OOD) generalization in machine learning is a burgeoning
area of study. Its primary goal is to enhance the adaptability and resilience of
machine learning models when faced with new, unseen, and potentially adversarial
data that significantly diverges from their original training datasets. In this paper,
we investigate time series OOD generalization via pre-trained Large Language
Models (LLMs). We first propose a novel Tri-level learning framework for Time
Series OOD generalization, termed TTSO, which considers both sample-level and
group-level uncertainties. This formula offers a fresh theoretic perspective for
formulating and analyzing OOD generalization problem. In addition, we provide
a theoretical analysis to justify this method is well motivated. We then develop
a stratified localization algorithm tailored for this tri-level optimization problem,
theoretically demonstrating the guaranteed convergence of the proposed algorithm.
Our analysis also reveals that the iteration complexity to obtain an ϵ-stationary
point is bounded by O( ϵ12 ). Extensive experiments on real-world datasets have
been conducted to elucidate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1

Introduction

In machine learning, a common challenge arises when the distributions of training and test sets
differ significantly [Quiñonero-Candela et al., 2009]. This mismatch demands that models, trained
on specific distribution data, should generalize well on unseen distribution data, known as OOD
generalization [Shen et al., 2021, Zhou et al., 2022]. Despite a vast amount of research on the OOD
generalization [Zhang et al., 2017, Sagawa et al., 2019, Huang et al., 2020, Arjovsky et al., 2019],
the field of OOD generalization in time series is relatively limited and presents more significant
challenges. This is primarily due to the inherent temporal dependencies and dynamic changes
characteristic of time series data [Hamilton, 2020]. Therefore, a critical aspect of improving time
series OOD generalization is to learn robust representations that remain stable despite shifts in
distributions.
Recently, the field of machine learning has witnessed remarkable advancements in pre-trained
foundation models, with notable examples including Large Language Models (LLMs) such as GPT
[Radford et al., 2018], LLaMA [Touvron et al., 2023] and CLIP [Radford et al., 2021]. These models
have been instrumental in capturing and leveraging complex patterns across various domains. In
addition, using foundation models, especially LLMs, in processing non-linguistic data, e.g., time
series is increasingly drawing attention. By fine-tuning only a few handful of parameters, these
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

