Near-Minimax-Optimal Distributional Reinforcement
Learning with a Generative Model

Mark Rowland
Google DeepMind∗
Clare Lyle
Google DeepMind

Li Kevin Wenliang
Google DeepMind
Yunhao Tang
Google DeepMind

Rémi Munos
FAIR, Meta†
Will Dabney
Google DeepMind

Abstract
We propose a new algorithm for model-based distributional reinforcement learning
(RL), and prove that it is minimax-optimal for approximating return distributions
in the generative model regime (up to logarithmic factors), the first result of
this kind for any distributional RL algorithm. Our analysis also provides new
theoretical perspectives on categorical approaches to distributional RL, as well
as introducing a new distributional Bellman equation, the stochastic categorical
CDF Bellman equation, which we expect to be of independent interest. Finally, we
provide an experimental study comparing a variety of model-based distributional
RL algorithms, with several key takeaways for practitioners.

1

Introduction

In distributional reinforcement learning, the aim is to predict the full probability distribution of
possible returns at each state, rather than just the mean return (Morimura et al., 2010a; Bellemare
et al., 2017, 2023). Applications of distributional reinforcement learning range from dopamine
response modelling in neuroscience (Dabney et al., 2020), to driving risk-sensitive decision-making
and exploration in domains such as robotics (Bodnar et al., 2020), healthcare (Böck et al., 2022),
and algorithm discovery (Fawzi et al., 2022), as well as forming a core component of many deep
reinforcement learning architectures (Bellemare et al., 2017; Dabney et al., 2018b,a; Yang et al.,
2019; Bellemare et al., 2020; Shahriari et al., 2022; Wurman et al., 2022).
The full distribution of returns is a much richer signal than the expectation to predict. A foundational,
as-yet-unanswered problem is how many sampled transitions are required to accurately estimate
return distributions, and in particular, whether this task is statistically harder than estimating just
the value function. We study these questions in the setting where sampled transitions are given by a
generative model (Kearns et al., 2002; Kakade, 2003; Azar et al., 2013).
We provide a new distributional RL algorithm, the direct categorical fixed-point algorithm (DCFP),
and prove that the number of samples required by this algorithm for accurate return distribution
estimation matches the lower bound established by Zhang et al. (2023), up to logarithmic factors.
This resolves the foundational question above, and, perhaps surprisingly, shows that in this setting,
distributional RL is essentially no harder, statistically speaking, than learning a value function.
In addition to this central result, our analysis provides new perspectives on categorical approaches
to distributional RL (Bellemare et al., 2017), including a new distributional Bellman equation, the
stochastic categorical CDF Bellman equation (see Section 5.2), which we expect to be of broad
use in future work on categorical distributional RL. We also provide an empirical study, comparing
∗

Correspondence to markrowland@google.com.

†

Work done while at Google DeepMind.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

