Your Diffusion Model is Secretly a Noise Classifier and
Benefits from Contrastive Training
Yunshu Wu1 , Yingtao Luo2 , Xianghao Kong1 , Evangelos E. Papalexakis1 , Greg Ver Steeg1
1
University of California Riverside, 2 Carnegie Mellon University
{ywu380,xkong016,epapalex,gregoryv}@ucr.edu, yingtaol@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Diffusion models learn to denoise data and the trained denoiser is then used to
generate new samples from the data distribution. In this paper, we revisit the
diffusion sampling process and identify a fundamental cause of sample quality
degradation: the denoiser is poorly estimated in regions that are far Outside Of the
training Distribution (OOD), and the sampling process inevitably evaluates in these
OOD regions. This can become problematic for all sampling methods, especially
when we move to parallel sampling which requires us to initialize and update the
entire sample trajectory of dynamics in parallel, leading to many OOD evaluations.
To address this problem, we introduce a new self-supervised training objective
that differentiates the levels of noise added to a sample, leading to improved OOD
denoising performance. The approach is based on our observation that diffusion
models implicitly define a log-likelihood ratio that distinguishes distributions with
different amounts of noise, and this expression depends on denoiser performance
outside the standard training distribution. We show by diverse experiments that
the proposed contrastive diffusion training is effective for both sequential and
parallel settings, and it improves the performance and speed of parallel samplers
significantly. 1

1

Introduction

Denoising diffusion models [29] achieve state-of-the-art performance on various unsupervised
learning tasks and have intriguing theoretical connections to methods like denoising autoencoders [37],
VAEs [6], stochastic differential equations [20, 34], information theory [13], and score matching [31,
32]. Diffusion models are presented with data samples corrupted by a forward dynamical process that
progressively adds more Gaussian noise and trained to reverse this dynamics or denoise the corrupted
samples. Samples are then generated by applying the reverse dynamics on images of pure Gaussian
noise to produce high-quality samples from the target distribution.
The key to the success of diffusion models is the dynamics that gradually bridges the source and
a target distribution, but it suffers from slow sampling, as sequentially simulating these dynamics
can take thousands of denoising steps for one sample. Most recent works attempt to expedite the
sequential dynamics by taking fewer, larger steps [30, 11, 18, 22]. However, the complexity of these
samplers and the need for expensive sampling hyper-parameter grid searches tailored to specific
datasets makes them difficult to generalize.
Shih et al. 2024 suggests a different approach by randomly initializing the entire path of the reverse
dynamics and then updating all the steps in the path in parallel. The parallel sampling approach
promises to drastically reduce wall-clock time at the cost of increased parallel computation. However,
it encounters a problem that has largely gone unnoticed in the sequential sampling literature: while
1

Code can be found at https://github.com/yunshuwu/ContrastiveDiffusionLoss.git

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

