Orchid: Flexible and Data-Dependent Convolution
for Sequence Modeling

Mahdi Karami
Google Research
mahdika@google.com

Ali Ghodsi
School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo, ON, Canada
ali.ghodsi@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
In the rapidly evolving field of deep learning, the demand for models that are both
expressive and computationally efficient has never been more critical. This paper
introduces Orchid, a novel architecture designed to address the quadratic complexity of traditional attention mechanisms without compromising the ability to
capture long-range dependencies and in-context learning. At the core of this architecture lies a new data-dependent global convolution layer, which contextually
adapts its kernel conditioned on input sequence using a dedicated conditioning
neural network. We design two simple conditioning networks that maintain shift
equivariance in our data-dependent convolution operation. The dynamic nature of
the proposed convolution kernel grants Orchid high expressivity while maintaining quasilinear scalability for long sequences. We evaluate the proposed model
across multiple domains, including language modeling and image classification,
to highlight its performance and generality. Our experiments demonstrate that this
architecture not only outperforms traditional attention-based architectures such as
BERT and Vision Transformers with smaller model sizes, but also extends the
feasible sequence length beyond the limitations of the dense attention layers. This
achievement represents a significant step towards more efficient and scalable deep
learning models for sequence modeling.

1

Introduction

In modern deep neural networks, attention mechanisms have emerged as a gold standard, pivotal
in domains such as natural language processing, image, and audio processing, and even complex
fields like biology [Vaswani et al., 2017, Dosovitskiy et al., 2020, Dwivedi and Bresson, 2020].
However, despite their strong sequence analysis capabilities, these sequence modeling mechanisms
suffer from their high computational complexity, which scales quadratically with sequence length,
hindering their application to long-context tasks. This complexity has driven a shift towards innovative solutions to overcome this computational barrier, enabling analysis of long sequences in areas
like genomics, DNA sequencing, and the creation of long musical compositions.
In the past years, researchers have explored various strategies to tackle the computational bottleneck
of traditional dense attention layers [Tay et al., 2022]. One key strategy involves sparsifying the
dense attention matrix. Instead of calculating the entire matrix, Qiu et al. [2019], Parmar et al. [2018]
focus on specific local blocks of the receptive fields of sequences by chunking them into fixed-size
blocks. Moreover, Sparse Transformer [Child et al., 2019], Longformer [Beltagy et al., 2020] and
BigBird [Zaheer et al., 2020] use strided attention patterns combined with local sliding windows to
reduce computation. In contrast to using pre-determined patterns, other techniques include learning to cluster/sort tokens based on a similarity function, thereby enhancing the global view of the
sequence, as seen in Reformer [Kitaev et al., 2020], Routing Transformer [Roy et al., 2020] Sparse
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

