Towards a “universal translator” for neural dynamics
at single-cell, single-spike resolution

Yizi Zhang1 Yanchen Wang1 Donato M. Jiménez-Benetó2 Zixuan Wang1,3
Mehdi Azabou4 Blake Richards5 Renee Tung1 Olivier Winter6
The International Brain Laboratory7 Eva Dyer4 Liam Paninski1 Cole Hurwitz1
1

3

Columbia University 2 Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
Zhejiang University 4 Georgia Institute of Technology 5 Mila, McGill University
6
Champalimaud Foundation 7 The International Brain Laboratory

Abstract
Neuroscience research has made immense progress over the last decade, but our
understanding of the brain remains fragmented and piecemeal: the dream of probing
an arbitrary brain region and automatically reading out the information encoded
in its neural activity remains out of reach. In this work, we build towards a first
foundation model for neural spiking data that can solve a diverse set of tasks across
multiple brain areas. We introduce a novel self-supervised modeling approach
for population activity in which the model alternates between masking out and
reconstructing neural activity across different time steps, neurons, and brain regions.
To evaluate our approach, we design unsupervised and supervised prediction
tasks using the International Brain Laboratory repeated site dataset, which is
comprised of Neuropixels recordings targeting the same brain locations across 48
animals and experimental sessions. The prediction tasks include single-neuron and
region-level activity prediction, forward prediction, and behavior decoding. We
demonstrate that our multi-task-masking (MtM) approach significantly improves
the performance of current state-of-the-art population models and enables multitask learning. We also show that by training on multiple animals, we can improve
the generalization ability of the model to unseen animals, paving the way for a
foundation model of the brain at single-cell, single-spike resolution. Project page
and code: https://ibl-mtm.github.io/

1

Introduction

Recent studies in experimental neuroscience suggest that neural computation is highly distributed
across the brain and sparse in nature [34, 23]. Much of our current understanding of the brain, however,
originates from studying small circuits of neurons in hand-selected brain areas during stereotyped
behaviors. This has resulted in the development of neural population models that are often brain
region-specific and narrowly crafted for particular experimental contexts, limiting their broader
applicability and insights into distributed brain function [38]. The arrival of multi-animal neural
datasets that span hundreds of interconnected brain regions [18, 17] necessitates the development of
a more general approach for building neural population models.
To address these challenges, recent efforts have been directed towards building models that can be
trained on neural data collected across multiple sessions and animals [3, 42]. These models are
pre-trained on large corpuses of neural population data and then fine-tuned for downstream tasks
such as behavior decoding and brain-computer interface (BCI) control [42], leading to improved
performance and generalization to novel sessions and animals. While these models are a promising
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

