Stacking Your Transformers: A Closer Look at Model
Growth for Efficient LLM Pre-Training

Wenyu Du1∗ Tongxu Luo2,3∗† Zihan Qiu4 Zeyu Huang5 Yikang Shen6
Reynold Cheng1 Yike Guo2 Jie Fu2‡
1
School of Computing and Data Science, The University of Hong Kong 2 HKUST
3
USTB 4 Tsinghua University 5 University of Edinburgh 6 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
wydu@cs.hku.hk
tongxuluo@gmail.com
jiefu@ust.hk

Abstract
LLMs are computationally expensive to pre-train due to their large scale. Model
growth emerges as a promising approach by leveraging smaller models to accelerate
the training of larger ones. However, the viability of these model growth methods
in efficient LLM pre-training remains underexplored. This work identifies three
critical Obstacles: (O1) lack of comprehensive evaluation, (O2) untested viability
for scaling, and (O3) lack of empirical guidelines. To tackle O1, we summarize
existing approaches into four atomic growth operators and systematically evaluate
them in a standardized LLM pre-training setting. Our findings reveal that a depthwise stacking operator, called Gstack , exhibits remarkable acceleration in training,
leading to decreased loss and improved overall performance on eight standard
NLP benchmarks compared to strong baselines. Motivated by these promising
results, we conduct extensive experiments to delve deeper into Gstack to address
O2 and O3. For O2 (untested scalability), our study shows that Gstack is scalable
and consistently performs well, with experiments up to 7B LLMs after growth and
pre-training LLMs with 750B tokens. For example, compared to a conventionally
trained 7B model using 300B tokens, our Gstack model converges to the same loss
with 194B tokens, resulting in a 54.6% speedup. We further address O3 (lack of
empirical guidelines) by formalizing guidelines to determine growth timing and
growth factor for Gstack , making it practical in general LLM pre-training. We also
provide in-depth discussions and comprehensive ablation studies of Gstack . Our
code and pre-trained model are available at https://llm-stacking.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Emergent abilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) rely on scaling-up [1, 2]. Empirical evidence
from scaling laws [3–5] fuels the development of increasingly larger models, pushing the boundaries
of LLMs capabilities. However, pre-training these gigantic models comes at a significant cost in
terms of energy consumption and environmental impact [6] (e.g., pre-training Llama-3 [7] consumes
a total of 7.7M GPU hours and generates 2290 tons of carbon dioxide equivalent of carbon emissions).
The efficient pre-training of LLMs is thus crucial, both from a scientific and a societal perspective, to
ensure the continual growth and adoption of AI [8, 9].
One promising research direction to accelerate model training involves leveraging trained smaller
(base) models to expedite the training of larger (target) models, a technique known as model growth.
∗

Equal Contributions.
Work done during interning at HKUST.
‡
Corresponding Author.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

