Fine-Grained Dynamic Framework for Bias-Variance
Joint Optimization on Data Missing Not at Random

Mingming Ha
MYbank, Ant Group
Beijing, China
hamingming.hmm@mybank.cn
Qiongxu Ma
MYbank, Ant Group
Shanghai, China
qiongxu.mqx@mybank.cn

Xuewen Tao
MYbank, Ant Group
Shanghai, China
xuewen.txw@mybank.cn

Wenfang Lin
MYbank, Ant Group
Hangzhou, China
moxi.lwf@mybank.cn

Wujiang Xu
MYbank, Ant Group
Shanghai, China
xuwujiang.xwj@mybank.cn

Linxun Chen
MYbank, Ant Group
Beijing, China
linxun.clx@mybank.cn

Abstract
In most practical applications such as recommendation systems, display advertising,
and so forth, the collected data often contains missing values and those missing
values are generally missing-not-at-random, which deteriorates the prediction
performance of models. Some existing estimators and regularizers attempt to
achieve unbiased estimation to improve the predictive performance. However,
variances and generalization bound of these methods are generally unbounded when
the propensity scores tend to zero, compromising their stability and robustness. In
this paper, we first theoretically reveal that limitations of regularization techniques.
Besides, we further illustrate that, for more general estimators, unbiasedness
will inevitably lead to unbounded variance. These general laws inspire us that
the estimator designs is not merely about eliminating bias, reducing variance,
or simply achieve a bias-variance trade-off. Instead, it involves a quantitative
joint optimization of bias and variance. Then, we develop a systematic finegrained dynamic learning framework to jointly optimize bias and variance, which
adaptively selects an appropriate estimator for each user-item pair according to the
predefined objective function. With this operation, the generalization bounds and
variances of models are reduced and bounded with theoretical guarantees. Extensive
experiments are conducted to verify the theoretical results and the effectiveness of
the proposed dynamic learning framework.

1

Introduction

In virtually all real-world applications, the pieces of data we collected are partially missing with
certain probabilities. A special case with the identical missing probability is known as missing at
random (MAR) [1]. However, in online recommendation, search, and display advertising, there are
lots of missing-not-at-random (MNAR) click, conversion, and rating records [2, 3, 4], which are
missing with different probabilities, i.e., propensities. For example, in recommendation systems,
a user usually clicks the items that she/he is likely to purchase and ignores other items with a low
willingness to buy. Therefore, the observed click and conversion data is MNAR, which are not
representative samples of all the events [5]. When the MNAR data is used to train a model, the
prediction performance of this model on the MAR data is generally unacceptable. This is because
MNAR data introduces sample selection bias [3, 6] into the prediction model. To eliminate sample
selection bias, lots of debiasing estimators [3, 6, 7, 8, 9] have been developed, e.g., Error-Imputation38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

