Non-parametric classification via expand-and-sparsify
representation

Kaushik Sinha
School of Computing
Wichita State University
Wichita, KS 67260
kaushik.sinha@wichita.edu

Abstract
In expand-and-sparsify (EaS) representation, a data point in S d−1 is first randomly
mapped to higher dimension Rm , where m > d, followed by a sparsification
operation where the informative k ≪ m of the m coordinates are set to one and the
rest are set to zero. We propose two algorithms for non-parametric classification
using such EaS representation. For our first algorithm, we use winners-take-all
operation for the sparsification step and show that the proposed classifier admits
the form of a locally weighted average classifier and establish its consistency
via Stone’s Theorem. Further, assuming that the conditional probability function
P (y = 1|x) = η(x) is Hölder continuous and for optimal choice of m, we show
that the convergence rate of this classifier is minimax-optimal. For our second
algorithm, we use empirical k-thresholding operation for the sparsification step,
and under the assumption that data lie on a low dimensional manifold of dimension
d0 ≪ d, we show that the convergence rate of this classifier depends only on d0
and is again minimax-optimal. Empirical evaluations performed on real-world
datasets corroborate our theoretical results.

1

Introduction

Given a training set x1 , . . . , xn of size n and a test point x sampled i.i.d. from a distribution
µ over some sample space X ⊂ Rd , the basic idea of non-parametric estimation (e.g., density
estimation, regression or classification) is to construct a function x 7→ fn (x) = fn (x, x1 , . . . , xn )
that approximates the true function f (which could be a density/regression/classification function as
appropriate) as n → ∞ Tsybakov [2008]. For any x ∈ X , fn (x) typically depends on a small subset
of the training set lying within a small neighborhood of (thus close to) x. For example, in case of
k-nearest neighbor, fn (x) depends on the k points from the training set that are closest to x; in case
of random forest, for each tree constituting the forest, fn (x) depends on the points from the training
set that are routed to the same leaf node to which x is also routed to; in case of kernel methods, fn (x)
depends on the points from training set defined by an appropriate kernel. In this paper, we propose a
new non-parametric classification method where, for any x ∈ S d−1 , the appropriate neighborhoods
are obtained using expand-and sparsify (EaS) representation of x.
On a high level, expand-and-sparsify representation is essentially a transformation from a lowdimensional dense representation of sensory inputs to a much higher-dimensional, sparse representation. Such representation has been found, for instance, in the olfactory system of the fly (Wilson
[2013]) and mouse (Stettler and Axel [2009]), the visual system of the cat (Olshausen and Field
[2004]), and the electrosensory system of the electric fish (Chacron et al. [2011]). For example, in
the olfactory system of Drosophila (Turner et al. [2008], Masse et al. [2009], Wilson [2013], Caron
et al. [2013]), the primary sense receptors of the fly are the roughly 2,500 odor receptor neurons
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

