Do’s and Don’ts:
Learning Desirable Skills with Instruction Videos

Hyunseung Kim1,2 Byungkun Lee1 Hojoon Lee1
Dongyoon Hwang1 Donghu Kim1 Jaegul Choo1
1
KAIST, 2 KRAFTON
{mynsng,byungkun.lee,joonleesky,godnpeter,quagmire,jchoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Unsupervised skill discovery is a learning paradigm that aims to acquire diverse behaviors without explicit rewards. However, it faces challenges in learning complex
behaviors and often leads to learning unsafe or undesirable behaviors. For instance,
in various continuous control tasks, current unsupervised skill discovery methods
succeed in learning basic locomotions like standing but struggle with learning more
complex movements such as walking and running. Moreover, they may acquire
unsafe behaviors like tripping and rolling or navigate to undesirable locations such
as pitfalls or hazardous areas. In response, we present DoDont (Do’s and Dont’s),
an instruction-based skill discovery algorithm composed of two stages. First, in
instruction learning stage, DoDont leverages action-free instruction videos to train
an instruction network to distinguish desirable transitions from undesirable ones.
Then, in the skill learning stage, the instruction network adjusts the reward function
of the skill discovery algorithm to weight the desired behaviors. Specifically, we
integrate the instruction network into a distance-maximizing skill discovery algorithm, where the instruction network serves as the distance function. Empirically,
with less than 8 instruction videos, DoDont effectively learns desirable behaviors
and avoids undesirable ones across complex continuous control tasks. Code and
videos are available at https://mynsng.github.io/dodont/

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in unsupervised pre-training methodologies have led to the creation of largescale foundational models across diverse domains, including computer vision [3, 41] and natural
language processing [7, 11, 22]. These methodologies exploit self-supervised learning objectives to
extract meaningful representations without using explicit, supervised learning signals. In attempts to
expand this paradigm to reinforcement learning, researchers have explored crafting self-supervised
objectives to develop foundational policies capable of learning diverse behaviors without predefined
reward signals, termed unsupervised skill discovery (USD) [1, 14, 9, 21, 43, 31, 24, 23, 27, 35, 38, 39].
Despite notable advancements in USD methodologies, acquiring foundational policies in environments with large state and action spaces (e.g., multi-jointed quadrupeds) remains a significant
challenge. Two major issues arise when training agents with USD in these complex environments.
First, the vast state and action spaces allow the agent to acquire a wide variety of behaviors. While
learning simple behaviors like standing may be feasible, acquiring complex behaviors that require
intricate joint movements, such as walking or running, can take an exceedingly long time. Second,
agents can develop undesirable and risky behaviors during training, such as tripping, rolling, or navigating hazardous areas like pitfalls. These challenges raise a key question: Is the purely unsupervised
assumption of USD ideal for learning foundational policies in the real-world?
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

