Satformer: Accurate and Robust Traffic Data
Estimation for Satellite Networks
Liang Qin
Xidian University
liangqin@stu.xidian.edu.cn
Wenting Wei
Xidian University
wtwei@xidian.edu.cn

Xiyuan Liu∗
Xidian University
markliu225@stu.xidian.edu.cn

Chengbin Liang
Xidian University
chengbin@stu.xidian.edu.cn

Huaxi Gu†
Xidian University
hxgu@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
The operations and maintenance of satellite networks heavily depend on traffic measurements. Due to the large-scale and highly dynamic nature of satellite networks,
global measurement encounters significant challenges in terms of complexity and
overhead. Estimating global network traffic data from partial traffic measurements
is a promising solution. However, the majority of current estimation methods concentrate on low-rank linear decomposition, which is unable to accurately estimate.
The reason lies in its inability to capture the intricate nonlinear spatio-temporal
relationship found in large-scale, highly dynamic traffic data. This paper proposes
Satformer, an accurate and robust method for estimating traffic data in satellite
networks. In Satformer, we innovatively incorporate an adaptive sparse spatiotemporal attention mechanism. In the mechanism, more attention is paid to specific
local regions of the input tensor to improve the model’s sensitivity on details and
patterns. This method enhances its capability to capture nonlinear spatio-temporal
relationships. Experiments on small, medium, and large-scale satellite networks
datasets demonstrate that Satformer outperforms mathematical and neural baseline
methods notably. It provides substantial improvements in reducing errors and maintaining robustness, especially for larger networks. The approach shows promise for
deployment in actual systems.

1

Introduction

As a potential complement to terrestrial networks, satellite networks are envisioned to provide
broadband connectivity with seamless coverage and in a cost-effective manner. Internet service and
content providers are interested in satellite networks due to their wide international coverage and
lower entry costs in rural and underdeveloped areas [1].
Traffic engineering [2, 3, 4] and topology engineering [5] of satellite networks, such as access control,
routing and congestion control, are key to achieve efficient control of satellite networks, which rely
on real-time perception of global traffic data [6]. Timely and accurate traffic measurements beyond
basic metrics are undoubtedly beneficial for such applications.
However, it is troublesome and costly to collect massive traffic data by measuring all transmission
pairs directly [7], since traffic data is naturally distributed throughout the entire network. In order
to support the network operation of the emerging mega-constellations, there is an urgent need to
∗
†

First Author and Second Author contribute equally to this work
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

