Bootstrapping Top-down Information for
Self-modulating Slot Attention

Dongwon Kim1
Seoyeon Kim1
Suha Kwak1,2
1
Dept. of CSE, POSTECH
Graduate School of AI, POSTECH2
{kdwon, syeonkim07, suha.kwak}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Object-centric learning (OCL) aims to learn representations of individual objects
within visual scenes without manual supervision, facilitating efficient and effective visual reasoning. Traditional OCL methods primarily employ bottom-up
approaches that aggregate homogeneous visual features to represent objects. However, in complex visual environments, these methods often fall short due to the
heterogeneous nature of visual features within an object. To address this, we
propose a novel OCL framework incorporating a top-down pathway. This pathway
first bootstraps the semantics of individual objects and then modulates the model
to prioritize features relevant to these semantics. By dynamically modulating the
model based on its own output, our top-down pathway enhances the representational quality of objects. Our framework achieves state-of-the-art performance
across multiple synthetic and real-world object-discovery benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Object-centric learning (OCL) is the task of learning representations of individual objects from
visual scenes without manual labels. The task draws inspiration from the human perception which
naturally decomposes a scene into individual entities for comprehending and interacting with the
real world visual environment. Object-centric representations provides improved generalization
and robustness [9], and have been proven to be useful for diverse downstream tasks such as visual
reasoning [44], simulation [45], and multi-modal learning [24]. In this context, OCL which learns
such representations without labeled data has gained increasing attention.
A successful line of OCL builds upon slot attention [30]. This method decomposes an image into
a set of representations, called slots, that iteratively compete with each other to aggregate image
features. Reconstructing the original image from the slots, they are encouraged to capture entities
constituting the scene. This simple yet effective method has been further advanced by novel encoder
or decoder architectures [33, 19, 46, 42], optimization technique [18, 6], and new query initialization
strategies [18, 24].
It is worth noting that all these methods are fundamentally considered bottom-up models, as they
rely on aggregating visual features without incorporating high-level semantic information from the
beginning. This bottom-up approach assumes that visual features within an object are homogeneous
and can be clustered in the feature space, which only holds for simplistic objects that can be identified
using low-level cues such as color [20]. In complex real-world scenarios where visual entities of
the same semantics exhibit diverse appearances, this homogeneity often breaks down, leading to
suboptimal object representations [22, 47]. Thus, we take an approach different from the previous
line of research: introducing top-down information into slot attention, such as object categories and
semantic attributes.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

