LAMBDA: Learning Matchable Prior For Entity
Alignment with Unlabeled Dangling Cases

Hang Yin, Liyao Xiang∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
{yinhang_SJTU, xiangliyao08}@sjtu.edu.cn

Dong Ding
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
18916162516@sjtu.edu.cn

Yuheng He, Yihan Wu, Pengzhi Chu, Xinbing Wang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
{heyuheng, caracalla, pzchu, xwang8}@sjtu.edu.cn

Chenghu Zhou
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China
zhouchsjtu@gmail.com

Abstract
We investigate the entity alignment (EA) problem with unlabeled dangling cases,
meaning that partial entities have no counterparts in the other knowledge graph
(KG), yet these entities are unlabeled. The problem arises when the source and target graphs are of different scales, and it is much cheaper to label the matchable pairs
than the dangling entities. To address this challenge, we propose the framework
Lambda for dangling detection and entity alignment. Lambda features a GNNbased encoder called KEESA with a spectral contrastive learning loss for EA and a
positive-unlabeled learning algorithm called iPULE for dangling detection. Our
dangling detection module offers theoretical guarantees of unbiasedness, uniform
deviation bounds, and convergence. Experimental results demonstrate that each
component contributes to overall performances that are superior to baselines, even
when baselines additionally exploit 30% of dangling entities labeled for training.

1

Introduction

Entity alignment is a problem that seeks entities referring to the same real-world identity across
different knowledge graphs (KGs), and is widely deployed in fields such as knowledge fusion,
question-answering, web mining, etc. To address the issue, embedding-based methods have been
proposed to capture entity similarity in the embedding space through translation-based [24, 42, 20]
or graph neural network (GNN)-based [41, 37, 27, 26, 35] models. Particularly, if the entities do not
have counterparts on another KG, the entities are referred to as dangling entities, as shown in Fig. 1.
In many real-world scenarios, the labels for the dangling entities on KGs are often missing, as those
labels are much harder to acquire. For example, in KG plagiarism detection, it is relatively easy to
align entity pairs that both exist in KGs, but one would have to traverse all possible pairs to conclude
an entity is not paired. Hence EA with unlabeled dangling entities is a hard but realistic problem.
The problem even worsens in EA on KGs of different scales where the dangling entities take a large
proportion of all nodes.
Despite that many works have been investigating the EA problem with dangling entities, few have
focused on EA with unlabeled dangling cases. We list closely related works in Table 1. The work of
[33] extends the conventional EA methods MTransE [5] and AliNet [37] to the case with dangling
∗

Corresponding author: Liyao Xiang, xiangliyao08@sjtu.edu.cn.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

