Seek Commonality but Preserve Differences: Dissected
Dynamics Modeling for Multi-modal Visual RL

Yangru Huang1 , Peixi Peng2,3∗, Yifan Zhao4 , Guangyao Chen1 , Yonghong Tian1,2,3∗
1

2

School of Computer Science, Peking University
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University,
yrhuang@stu.pku.edu.cn,
{pxpeng, gy.chen, yhtian}@pku.edu.cn, zhaoyf@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Accurate environment dynamics modeling is crucial for obtaining effective state
representations in visual reinforcement learning (RL) applications. However, when
facing multiple input modalities, existing dynamics modeling methods (e.g., DeepMDP) usually stumble in addressing the complex and volatile relationship between
different modalities. In this paper, we study the problem of efficient dynamics
modeling for multi-modal visual RL. We find that under the existence of modality
heterogeneity, modality-correlated and distinct features are equally important but
play different roles in reflecting the evolution of environmental dynamics. Motivated by this fact, we propose Dissected Dynamics Modeling (DDM), a novel
multi-modal dynamics modeling method for visual RL. Unlike existing methods,
DDM explicitly distinguishes consistent and inconsistent information across modalities and treats them separately with a divide-and-conquer strategy. This is done by
dispatching the features carrying different information into distinct dynamics modeling pathways, which naturally form a series of implicit regularizations along the
learning trajectories. In addition, a reward predictive function is further introduced
to filter task-irrelevant information in both modality-consistent and inconsistent
features, ensuring information integrity while avoiding potential distractions. Extensive experiments show that DDM consistently achieves competitive performance
in challenging multi-modal visual environments. The code is available in this link:
https://github.com/Yara-HYR/DDM

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed a growing interest in visual reinforcement learning (RL). By leveraging
raw pixel inputs directly from sensory data, visual RL allows agents to navigate and interpret their
environments with unprecedented precision and adaptability [33, 24, 51]. Since raw pixels are usually
redundant and suffer from expanded data dimensionality, a key aspect of visual RL is to acquire
efficient and compact state representations. A typical approach involves modeling environmental
dynamics in an abstracted state space [1], where the state representations are supposed to mimic the
actual environmental changes but operate on a sufficiently low dimension. One classical solution is
DeepMDP [9], which leverages neural networks to compress high-dimensional input data. Given
consecutive observations, DeepMDP predicts reward and state transitions within the deep latent space,
enabling more effective policy optimization over complex, dynamic environments.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

