Honor Among Bandits:
No-Regret Learning for Online Fair Division

Ariel D. Procaccia∗

Benjamin Schiffer†

Shirley Zhang‡

Abstract
We consider the problem of online fair division of indivisible goods to players
when there are a finite number of types of goods and player values are drawn from
distributions with unknown means. Our goal is to maximize social welfare subject
to allocating the goods fairly in expectation. When a player’s value for an item is
unknown at the time of allocation, we show that this problem reduces to a variant
of (stochastic) multi-armed bandits, where there exists an arm for each player’s
value for each type of good. At each time step, we choose a distribution over arms
which determines how the next item is allocated. We consider two sets of fairness
constraints for this problem: envy-freeness in expectation and proportionality in
expectation. Our main result is the design of an explore-then-commit algorithm
that achieves Õ(T 2/3 ) regret while maintaining either fairness constraint. This
result relies on unique properties fundamental to fair-division constraints that allow
faster rates of learning, despite the restricted action space. We also prove a lower
bound of Ω̃(T 2/3 ) regret for our setting, showing that our results are tight.

1

Introduction

Fair allocation of indivisible goods is a fundamental problem with a wide range of applications;
implemented algorithms for this task have been widely used in practice [14]. We consider the online
fair division setting, which introduces additional complexities as items arrive one by one and each
item must be immediately and irrevocably allocated at its time of arrival. Crucially, this allocation
must be done without knowledge of future items [5]. One motivating example for this setting is
a food bank that receives donations for a region and then allocates these donations among many
different food pantries and soup kitchens in that region. Donations are often perishable, and therefore
must be immediately allocated. Furthermore, donations can be unpredictable, and hence knowledge
of future items is limited.
Two standard notions of fairness are envy-freeness and proportionality. Envy-freeness implies that
every player is at least as happy with their own allocation as with any other player’s allocation.
Intuitively, envy-freeness guarantees that no player will want to trade their allocation for that of
another player. Proportionality is a slightly weaker notion, which requires only that each of the n
players receive at least a 1/n fraction of their total value for all items. Finding a solution which is
envy-free or proportional is often interesting in and of itself, as can be seen from many previous
results in fair division [7, 30, 12, 3]. In cases where there may exist multiple envy-free or proportional
allocations, however, a natural goal is then to find the best solution among such allocations [13]. In
our work, we evaluate the quality of a fair solution by its (utilitarian) social welfare, which is defined
as the sum over all players of each player’s value for their own allocation.
We take a probabilistic approach to analyzing online fair division. In particular, we assume that
there are a finite number of item types, and each player’s value for each type of item is drawn from
∗
Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University | E-mail: arielpro@seas.harvard.edu.
†
Department of Statistics, Harvard University | E-mail: bschiffer1@g.harvard.edu.
‡
Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University | E-mail: szhang2@g.harvard.edu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

