Credit Attribution and Stable Compression

Roi Livni∗

Shay Moran†

Kobbi Nissim‡

Chirag Pabbaraju§

Abstract
Credit attribution is crucial across various fields. In academic research, proper
citation acknowledges prior work and establishes original contributions. Similarly, in generative models, such as those trained on existing artworks or music,
it is important to ensure that any generated content influenced by these works
appropriately credits the original creators.
We study credit attribution by machine learning algorithms. We propose new
definitions–relaxations of Differential Privacy–that weaken the stability guarantees
for a designated subset of 𝑘 datapoints. These 𝑘 datapoints can be used non-stably
with permission from their owners, potentially in exchange for compensation.
Meanwhile, each of the remaining datapoints is guaranteed to have no significant
influence on the algorithm’s output.
Our framework extends well-studied notions of stability, including Differential
Privacy (𝑘 = 0), differentially private learning with public data (where the 𝑘
public datapoints are fixed in advance), and stable sample compression (where the
𝑘 datapoints are selected adaptively by the algorithm). We examine the expressive
power of these stability notions within the PAC learning framework, provide a
comprehensive characterization of learnability for algorithms adhering to these
principles, and propose directions and questions for future research.

1

Introduction

Many tasks that use machine learning algorithms require proper credit attribution. For example,
consider a model trained on scientific papers that needs to reason about facts and figures based on
existing literature. Most academic literature is protected under copyright licenses such as CC-BY 4.0
which allows adapting, remixing, transforming, and to copy and redistribute in any medium or
format, as long as attribution is given to the creator. In another setting, a learner generating content,
such as images or music, may benefit from creating derivative works from copyrighted materials
without violating the creator’s rights (either through proper attribution or monetary compensation,
depending on the context and licensing).
The increasing use of ML algorithms and the need for greater transparency is reflected by the recently
implemented EU AI Act, which mandates the disclosure of training data [14]. However, disclosure of
training data and proper attribution are not necessarily equivalent. In particular, mere transparency
of the dataset does not reveal whether certain elements of certain content have been derived, nor
does it provide proper attribution when particular content is heavily built upon. Therefore, there is a
need to develop more nuanced notions and definitions that enable learning under the constraint that
works are properly attributed. This paper focuses on this challenge, exploring theoretical models of
credit attribution to provide rigorous and meaningful definitions for the task.
∗ Tel Aviv University. rlivni@tauex.tau.ac.il.
† Technion and Google Research. smoran@technion.ac.il.
‡ Georgetown University and Google Research. kobbi.nissim@georgetown.edu.
§ Stanford University. cpabbara@cs.stanford.edu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

