Enhancing In-Context Learning Performance with just
SVD-Based Weight Pruning: A Theoretical Perspective

Xinhao Yao1 , Xiaolin Hu1 , Shenzhi Yang1 , Yong Liu1∗
1
Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
{yaoxinhao021978, xiaolinhu, yangshenzhi2003, liuyonggsai}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Pre-trained large language models (LLMs) based on Transformer have demonstrated striking in-context learning (ICL) abilities. With a few demonstration
input-label pairs, they can predict the label for an unseen input without any parameter updates. In this paper, we show an exciting phenomenon that SVD-based weight
pruning can enhance ICL performance, and more surprising, pruning weights in
deep layers often results in more stable performance improvements than in shallow
layers. However, the underlying mechanism of those findings still remains an open
question. To reveal those findings, we conduct an in-depth theoretical analysis
by presenting the implicit gradient descent (GD) trajectories of ICL and giving
the mutual information based generalization bounds of ICL via full implicit GD
trajectories. This helps us reasonably explain the surprising experimental findings.
Besides, based on all our experimental and theoretical insights, we intuitively propose a simple, model-compression and derivative-free algorithm for downstream
tasks in enhancing ICL inference. Experiments on benchmark datasets and open
source LLMs display the method effectiveness2 .

1

Introduction

Recently, large language models (LLMs) based on the Transformer architecture [43] have emerged
striking in-context learning (ICL) capabilities: Given a prompt containing demonstration sample
and a test data, the model can make a prediction for the test data and achieve excellent performance
without any parameter updates [7, 26, 34, 6]. This leads considerable works that aim to shed light on
it [54, 21, 59, 3, 10, 16, 2, 46, 35] .
In this paper, we show our surprising findings in ICL inference by experimentally analyzing the
effect of singular value decomposition (SVD)-based pruning on the model performance at different depth layers. As demonstrated in Figure 1: (i) SVD-based weight pruning can enhance ICL
performance. Across all cases, it is evident that SVD-based weight pruning can generally enhance
model performance at various depth layers, compared to the baseline performance without weight
pruning (indicated by the dashed lines); (ii) Pruning weights in deep layers often results in more
stable performance improvements than in shallow layers. Specially, deep layers weight matrices
can be drastically reduced without much degradation in model performance, and may even get large
improvements on it, while the model performance collapses after a sharp reduction at the shallow
layers (see Section 2 for details). A similar case in Sharma et al. [38] notes that a large portion of
singular values can be removed from linear layers in large language models without affecting or even
improving reasoning performance. However, the underlying mechanism of this phenomenon still
remains a mystery, and this paper seeks to explore the issue from the following two aspects.
∗
2

Corresponding author.
The code is available at https://github.com/chen123CtrlS/EnhancingICL_SVDPruning.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

