Unleashing Multispectral Video’s Potential in
Semantic Segmentation: A Semi-supervised Viewpoint
and New UAV-View Benchmark
Wei Ji∗1,2 , Jingjing Li∗1 , Wenbo Li†3 , Yilin Shen3 , Li Cheng1 , Hongxia Jin3
Project website: https://jiwei0921.github.io/MVUAV

Abstract
Thanks to the rapid progress in RGB & thermal imaging, also known as multispectral imaging, the task of multispectral video semantic segmentation, or MVSS in
short, has recently drawn significant attentions. Noticeably, it offers new opportunities in improving segmentation performance under unfavorable visual conditions
such as poor light or overexposure. Unfortunately, there are currently very few
datasets available, including for example MVSeg dataset that focuses purely toward
eye-level view; and it features the sparse annotation nature due to the intensive
demands of labeling process. To address these key challenges of the MVSS task,
this paper presents two major contributions: the introduction of MVUAV, a new
MVSS benchmark dataset, and the development of a dedicated semi-supervised
MVSS baseline - SemiMV. Our MVUAV dataset is captured via Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (UAV), which offers a unique oblique bird’s-eye view complementary
to the existing MVSS datasets; it also encompasses a broad range of day/night
lighting conditions and over 30 semantic categories. In the meantime, to better leverage the sparse annotations and extra unlabeled RGB-Thermal videos, a
semi-supervised learning baseline, SemiMV, is proposed to enforce consistency
regularization through a dedicated Cross-collaborative Consistency Learning (C3L)
module and a denoised temporal aggregation strategy. Comprehensive empirical
evaluations on both MVSeg and MVUAV benchmark datasets have showcased the
efficacy of our SemiMV baseline.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation is the process of categorizing each pixel in an image/video to a specific class
label, which plays a vital role in visual scene understanding [1, 2]. Remarkable progresses has been
made in the past several years, particularly in RGB-based semantic segmentation [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11]. With the increasing accessibility of thermal sensors in capturing thermal radiation of objects with
temperature above absolute zero, multispectral semantic segmentation (MSS) [12, 13, 14, 15], where
both RGB and infrared thermal cameras are engaged, starts to gain notable traction. An exemplar
illustration is shown in Fig. 1. This multispectral imaging setup excels specifically in scenes with
unfavorable visual conditions, such as low-light or overexposure. On the other hand, the dynamic and
ever-changing nature of real-world scenarios has propelled interests in video semantic segmentation
(VSS) [16, 17, 18, 19, 20] with impressive segmentation performance. The task of multispectral
(aka RGB-Thermal or RGB-T) video semantic segmentation (MVSS)[21] has emerged recently as a
promising visual segmentation setup that has the best of both worlds.
Nevertheless, as being a relatively new task, there are still a number of hurdles in MVSS research.
The most prominent one is the lack of quality datasets. One major MVSS benchmark presently
1
∗

University of Alberta 2 Yale University 3 Samsung AI Center-Mountain View (work done here). † Intern mentor.
Equal contribution. Corresponding author: Jingjing Li <jingjin1@ualberta.ca>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

