DeiSAM: Segment Anything with Deictic Prompting

Hikaru Shindo1∗ Manuel Brack1,2 Gopika Sudhakaran1,3
Devendra Singh Dhami4 Patrick Schramowski1,2,3,5 Kristian Kersting1,2,3
1
Technical University of Darmstadt 2 German Research Center for AI (DFKI)
3
Hessian Center for AI (hessian.AI) 4 Eindhoven University of Technology
5
Center for European Research in Trusted Artificial Intelligence (CERTAIN)

Abstract
Large-scale, pre-trained neural networks have demonstrated strong capabilities
in various tasks, including zero-shot image segmentation. To identify concrete
objects in complex scenes, humans instinctively rely on deictic descriptions in
natural language, i.e., referring to something depending on the context, such as
“The object that is on the desk and behind the cup”. However, deep learning approaches cannot reliably interpret such deictic representations as they have limited
reasoning capabilities, particularly in complex scenarios. Therefore, we propose
DeiSAM—a combination of large pre-trained neural networks with differentiable
logic reasoners—for deictic promptable segmentation. Given a complex, textual
segmentation description, DeiSAM leverages Large Language Models (LLMs)
to generate first-order logic rules and performs differentiable forward reasoning
on generated scene graphs. Subsequently, DeiSAM segments objects by matching them to the logically inferred image regions. As part of our evaluation, we
propose the Deictic Visual Genome (DeiVG) dataset, containing paired visual
input and complex, deictic textual prompts. Our empirical results demonstrate that
DeiSAM is a substantial improvement over purely data-driven baselines for deictic
promptable segmentation.

1

Introduction

Recently, large-scale neural networks have substantially advanced various tasks at the intersection of
vision and language. One such challenge is grounded image segmentation, wherein objects within a
scene are identified through textual descriptions. For instance, Grounding Dino (Liu et al., 2023c),
combined with the Segment Anything Model (SAM) (Kirillov et al., 2023), excels at this task if
provided with appropriate prompts. However, a well-documented limitation of data-driven neural
approaches is their lack of reasoning capabilities (Shi et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2024a). Consequently,
they often fail to understand complex prompts that require high-level reasoning on relations and
attributes of multiple objects, as demonstrated in Fig. 1.
In contrast, humans identify objects through structured descriptions of complex scenes referring
to an object, e.g., “An object that is on the boat and holding an umbrella”. These descriptions are
referred to as deictic representations and were introduced to artificial intelligence research motivated
by linguistics (Agre & Chapman, 1987), and subsequently applied in reinforcement learning (Finney
et al., 2002). A deictic expression refers to an object depending on the agent using it and the overall
context. Although deictic representations play a central role in human comprehension of scenes,
current approaches fail to interpret them faithfully due to their poor reasoning capabilities.
To remedy these issues, we propose DeiSAM, which is a combination of large pre-trained neural
networks with differentiable logic reasoners for deictic promptable object detection and segmentation.
∗

corresponding author: hikaru.shindo@tu-darmstadt.de

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

