Erasing Undesirable Concepts in Diffusion Models
with Adversarial Preservation
Anh Bui1

Long Vuong1 Khanh Doan2 Trung Le1
Tamas Abraham3 Dinh Phung1

Paul Montague3

1

Monash University
2
VinAI Research
3
Defence Science and Technology Group, Australia

Abstract
Diffusion models excel at generating visually striking content from text but can inadvertently produce undesirable or harmful content when trained on unfiltered internet
data. A practical solution is to selectively removing target concepts from the model,
but this may impact the remaining concepts. Prior approaches have tried to balance
this by introducing a loss term to preserve neutral content or a regularization term to
minimize changes in the model parameters, yet resolving this trade-off remains challenging. In this work, we propose to identify and preserving concepts most affected
by parameter changes, termed as adversarial concepts. This approach ensures
stable erasure with minimal impact on the other concepts. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method using the Stable Diffusion model, showing that it outperforms state-of-the-art erasure methods in eliminating unwanted content while maintaining the integrity of other unrelated elements. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/tuananhbui89/Erasing-Adversarial-Preservation.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in text-to-image diffusion models (Rombach et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2021, 2022)
have captured significant attention thanks to their outstanding image quality and boundless creative
potential. These models undergo training on extensive internet datasets, enabling them to capture a
wide range of concepts, which inevitably include undesirable concepts such as racism, sexism, and
violence. Hence, these models can be exploited by users to generate harmful content, contributing to
the proliferation of fake news, hate speech, and disinformation (Rando et al., 2022; Qu et al., 2023;
Westerlund, 2019). Removing these undesirable contents from the model’s output is thus a critical
step in ensuring the safety and usefulness of these models.
Addressing this challenge, several methods have been proposed to erase undesirable concepts from
pretrained text-to-image models, such as TIME (Orgad et al., 2023), UCE (Zhang et al., 2023),
Concept Ablation (Kumari et al., 2023), and ESD (Gandikota et al., 2023). Despite differing
approaches, these methods reach a common finding: removing even one concept can significantly
reduce the model’s ability to generate other concepts. This is because large-scale generative models
G : C → X , such as Stable Diffusion (StabilityAI, 2022), are trained on billions of image-text pairs
(x, c), where x is an image and c is its caption, implicitly containing a set of concepts. The concept
space is thus vast and intricately entangled within the model’s parameters, meaning no specific part
of the model’s weights is solely responsible for a single concept. Consequently, the removal of one
concept alters the entire model’s parameters, causing a decline in overall performance. To address
this degradation, existing methods typically select a neutral concept, such as "a photo" or an empty
string, as an anchor to preserve while erasing the target concept, expecting that maintaining the
neutral concept should help retain other concepts as well Orgad et al. (2023); Gandikota et al. (2024).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

