Time Makes Space:
Emergence of Place Fields in Networks Encoding
Temporally Continuous Sensory Experiences

Zhaoze Wang1∗

Ronald W. Di Tullio2∗

Spencer Rooke3

Vijay Balasubramanian3,4,5

1

Department of Computer and Information Science, 2 Neuroscience, and 3 Physics,
University of Pennsylvania; 4 Rudolf Peierls Centre for Theoretical Physics, University of Oxford;
and 5 Santa Fe Institute
∗: Equal contribution
zhaoze@seas.upenn.edu
srooke@sas.upenn.edu

ron.w.ditullio@gmail.com
vijay@physics.upenn.edu

Abstract
The vertebrate hippocampus is believed to use recurrent connectivity in area CA3
to support episodic memory recall from partial cues. This brain area also contains place cells, whose location-selective firing fields implement maps supporting
spatial memory. Here we show that place cells emerge in networks trained to
remember temporally continuous sensory episodes. We model CA3 as a recurrent autoencoder that recalls and reconstructs sensory experiences from noisy
and partially occluded observations by agents traversing simulated arenas. The
agents move in realistic trajectories modeled from rodents and environments are
modeled as continuously varying, high-dimensional, sensory experience maps (spatially smoothed Gaussian random fields). Training our autoencoder to accurately
pattern-complete and reconstruct sensory experiences with a constraint on total
activity causes spatially localized firing fields, i.e., place cells, to emerge in the
encoding layer. The emergent place fields reproduce key aspects of hippocampal
phenomenology: a) remapping (maintenance of and reversion to distinct learned
maps in different environments), implemented via repositioning of experience
manifolds in the network’s hidden layer, b) orthogonality of spatial representations
in different arenas, c) robust place field emergence in differently shaped rooms,
with single units showing multiple place fields in large or complex spaces, and d)
slow representational drift of place fields. We argue that these results arise because
continuous traversal of space makes sensory experience temporally continuous. We
make testable predictions: a) rapidly changing sensory context will disrupt place
fields, b) place fields will form even if recurrent connections are blocked, but reversion to previously learned representations upon remapping will be abolished, c) the
dimension of temporally smooth experience sets the dimensionality of place fields,
including during virtual navigation of abstract spaces. Code for our experiments is
available at1 .

1

Introduction

The hippocampus is a brain region that plays a critical role in both spatial navigation [1, 2, 3]
and episodic memory [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. Researchers have therefore sought to understand the neural
1

https://zhaozewang.github.io/projects/time_makes_space

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

