MultiPull: Detailing Signed Distance Functions by
Pulling Multi-Level Queries at Multi-Step

Takeshi Noda1∗

Chao Chen1∗
Weiqi Zhang1
Xinhai Liu2
1†
3
Yu-Shen Liu
Zhizhong Han
1
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Tencent, Hunyuan, Beijing, China
3
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA
yeth21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn chenchao19@tsinghua.org.cn
zwq23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn adlerxhliu@tencent.com
liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn h312h@wayne.edu

Abstract
Reconstructing a continuous surface from a raw 3D point cloud is a challenging
task. Recent methods usually train neural networks to overfit on single point
clouds to infer signed distance functions (SDFs). However, neural networks tend
to smooth local details due to the lack of ground truth signed distances or normals,
which limits the performance of overfitting-based methods in reconstruction tasks.
To resolve this issue, we propose a novel method, named MultiPull, to learn
multi-scale implicit fields from raw point clouds by optimizing accurate SDFs
from coarse to fine. We achieve this by mapping 3D query points into a set
of frequency features, which makes it possible to leverage multi-level features
during optimization. Meanwhile, we introduce optimization constraints from the
perspective of spatial distance and normal consistency, which play a key role
in point cloud reconstruction based on multi-scale optimization strategies. Our
experiments on widely used object and scene benchmarks demonstrate that our
method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in surface reconstruction. Project
page: https://takeshie.github.io/MultiPull

1

Introduction

Reconstructing surfaces from 3D point clouds is an important task in computer vision. It is widely
used in various real-world scenarios such as autonomous driving, 3D scanning and other downstream
applications. Recently, using neural networks to learn signed distance functions from 3D point
clouds has made huge progress [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. An SDF represents a surface as the zero-level
set of a 3D continuous field, and the surface can be further extracted using the marching cubes
algorithm [9]. In supervised methods [10, 11, 12, 13], a continuous field is learned using signed
distance supervision. Some methods employ multi-level representations [14, 15], such as Fourier
layers and level of detail (LOD) [16, 17], to learn detailed geometry. However, these methods require
3D supervision, including ground truth signed distances or point normals, calculated on a watertight
manifold. To address this issue, several unsupervised methods [18, 19, 20, 21, 22] were proposed to
directly infer an SDF by overfitting neural networks on a single point cloud without requiring ground
truth signed distances and point normals. They usually need various strategies, such as geometric
constraints [18, 19, 20] and consistency constraints [22, 23], for smoother and more completed signed
distance field. However, the raw point cloud is a highly discrete approximation of the surface, learning
∗

Equal contribution. † The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

