Mitigating Biases in Blackbox Feature Extractors
for Image Classification Tasks

Abhipsa Basu

Saswat Subhajyoti Mallick ∗ R. Venkatesh Babu

Vision and AI Lab, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore

Abstract
In image classification, it is common to utilize a pretrained model to extract
meaningful features of the input images, and then to train a classifier on top of
it to make predictions for any downstream task. Trained on enormous amounts
of data, these models have been shown to contain harmful biases which can hurt
their performance when adapted for a downstream classification task. Further, very
often they may be blackbox, either due to scale, or because of unavailability of
model weights or architecture. Thus, during a downstream task, we cannot debias
such models by updating the weights of the feature encoder, as only the classifier
can be finetuned. In this regard, we investigate the suitability of some existing
debiasing techniques and thereby motivate the need for more focused research
towards this problem setting. Furthermore, we propose a simple method consisting
of a clustering-based adaptive margin loss with a blackbox feature encoder, with no
knowledge of the bias attribute. Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method across multiple benchmarks. The code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/abhipsabasu/blackbox_bias_mitigation.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models are to known to inherit harmful stereotypical biases with respect to the different
genders, races, cultures, from the datasets they are trained on [1, 2, 3]. For example, a model trained
on a gender-biased dataset with images of people having blond and non-blond hair may wrongly learn
a correlation between the label ‘blond hair’ and the gender of the person in the image. Thus the model
fails to classify images belonging to minority groups (in this case blond males and non-blond females).
These biases can affect the performance of AI systems handling job recruitment, e-commerce, health
care, face detection and recognition [4, 5, 6]. Models can also learn spurious correlations between
irrelevant training features and the target labels, instead of focusing on the relevant ones [7, 8].
Several works focus on mitigating such biases from trained models in a variety of tasks [9, 10, 11].
In recent times, large-scale models, pretrained on enormous amounts of data, are being used by
machine learning practitioners as feature encoders for numerous downstream applications, as their
features are shown to be semantically rich [12, 13]. However, do these powerful pretrained features
themselves exude the harmful stereotypical biases that are known to affect traditional deep learning
systems? A previous work [14] sheds light on these questions (when the pretrained model can be fully
finetuned on the downstream dataset) – the downstream models finetuned on top of pretrained models
can inherit their biases and such biases can be mitigated simply by manipulating the finetuning data.
In this paper, we investigate a more constrained yet practical problem setting. With billion-parameter
models gaining impetus in today’s world, it may not be feasible to finetune/retrain such models due to
scarcity of resources or unavailability of model weights for privacy concerns [13, 12, 15, 16, 17, 18].
∗

Work done while working as a project assistant at the Indian Institute of Science

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

