M INI -S EQUENCE T RANSFORMER: Optimizing
Intermediate Memory for Long Sequences Training

Cheng Luo
California Institute of Technology
chengluo@caltech.edu
Beidi Chen
Carnegie Mellon University
beidic@andrew.cmu.edu

Jiawei Zhao
Meta FAIR
jwzhao@meta.com

Zhuoming Chen
Carnegie Mellon University
zhuominc@andrew.cmu.edu

Anima Anandkumar
California Institute of Technology
anima@caltech.edu

Abstract
We introduce M INI -S EQUENCE T RANSFORMER (M S T), a simple and effective
methodology for highly efficient and accurate LLM training with extremely long sequences. M S T partitions input sequences and iteratively processes mini-sequences
to reduce intermediate memory usage. Integrated with activation recomputation,
it enables significant memory savings in both forward and backward passes. In
experiments with the Llama3-8B model, with M S T, we measure no degradation in
throughput or convergence even with 12x longer sequences than standard implementations. M S T is fully general, implementation-agnostic, and requires minimal
code changes to integrate with existing LLM training frameworks. Integrated with
the huggingface library, M S T successfully extends the maximum context length of
Qwen, Mistral, and Gemma-2 by 12-24x.

1

Introduction

The development of Transformer [56] has been a remarkable journey, with each iteration pushing
the boundaries of what is possible regarding model size, performance, and efficiency. One of the
critical challenges in this journey has been managing the memory requirements of these models,
particularly during training. As Transformers have significantly grown in size[10] and complexity
[44], the memory demand has increased exponentially, necessitating innovative solutions to optimize
memory usage while maintaining performance.
A significant milestone in this journey was the introduction of multi-query attention [50]. This
technique dramatically reduced the size of the KV-cache during inference, which uses multiple query
heads but single key and value heads. The idea was first adopted in the large-scale training of PaLM
[12], then adopted and empirically tested in LLaMA [55]. As the field progressed, multi-query
attention evolved into grouped query attention (GQA) [2], which relaxes the single key and value
head restriction to multiple heads, and each head is coupled with a group of queries. It significantly
improves the quality and is adopted by Llama2-70B [55] and Mistral-7B [24].
To further improve model quality, Llama3 [36] introduced a tokenizer with a vocabulary of 128K
tokens, enabling more efficient language encoding than Llama2’s 32K vocabulary. Additionally,
Llama3 increased its MLP intermediate size from 11k to 14k. These changes reflect a trend toward
more extensive vocabulary and intermediate sizes for better quality. Meanwhile, Llama3 maintains its
hidden size of 4k for inference efficiency. This trend is also reflected in the Microsoft development of
Phi-3 [1] compared with Phi-2 [23].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

