SocialGPT: Prompting LLMs for Social Relation
Reasoning via Greedy Segment Optimization

Wanhua Li∗,1 Zibin Meng∗,1,2 Jiawei Zhou3 Donglai Wei4 Chuang Gan5,6 Hanspeter Pfister1
1
Harvard University 2 Tsinghua University 3 Stony Brook University
4
Boston College 5 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 6 UMass Amherst

Abstract
Social relation reasoning aims to identify relation categories such as friends,
spouses, and colleagues from images. While current methods adopt the paradigm
of training a dedicated network end-to-end using labeled image data, they are
limited in terms of generalizability and interpretability. To address these issues,
we first present a simple yet well-crafted framework named SocialGPT, which
combines the perception capability of Vision Foundation Models (VFMs) and the
reasoning capability of Large Language Models (LLMs) within a modular framework, providing a strong baseline for social relation recognition. Specifically, we
instruct VFMs to translate image content into a textual social story, and then utilize
LLMs for text-based reasoning. SocialGPT introduces systematic design principles
to adapt VFMs and LLMs separately and bridge their gaps. Without additional
model training, it achieves competitive zero-shot results on two databases while
offering interpretable answers, as LLMs can generate language-based explanations
for the decisions. The manual prompt design process for LLMs at the reasoning
phase is tedious and an automated prompt optimization method is desired. As
we essentially convert a visual classification task into a generative task of LLMs,
automatic prompt optimization encounters a unique long prompt optimization issue.
To address this issue, we further propose the Greedy Segment Prompt Optimization (GSPO), which performs a greedy search by utilizing gradient information at
the segment level. Experimental results show that GSPO significantly improves
performance, and our method also generalizes to different image styles. The code
is available at https://github.com/Mengzibin/SocialGPT.

1

Introduction

Social relationships are of paramount importance in our lives, as they significantly impact our
emotional, psychological, and physical well-being. Social relationship recognition aims to categorize
the relationships such as friends, colleagues, band members, and so on, that exist between individuals
given an input image and the bounding boxes of the two persons of interest [1]. In recent years, social
relationship recognition has garnered significant attention [1–4] due to its wide range of applications,
including product recommendation [5], autonomous systems [6], and more.
Over the past decade, the field of computer vision has witnessed tremendous success [7–12] in the
end-to-end learning framework, which trains a dedicated neural network end-to-end on a customized
dataset. Research in social relationship recognition has also followed a similar trajectory [1, 13, 2].
As social relationship reasoning represents a cognitive function that operates at a higher level than
visual perception, many methods [6, 3] incorporate rich prior knowledge of social relations into
the models. For example, GRM [6] integrated a knowledge graph into its model to leverage the
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

