4-bit Shampoo for Memory-Efficient Network Training

Sike Wang
Beijing Normal University
sikewang@mail.bnu.edu.cn

Pan Zhou
Singapore Management University
panzhou@smu.edu.sg

Jia Li†
Beijing Normal University
jiali@bnu.edu.cn

Hua Huang
Beijing Normal University
huahuang@bnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Second-order optimizers, maintaining a matrix termed a preconditioner, are superior to first-order optimizers in both theory and practice. The states forming the
preconditioner and its inverse root restrict the maximum size of models trained by
second-order optimizers. To address this, compressing 32-bit optimizer states to
lower bitwidths has shown promise in reducing memory usage. However, current
approaches only pertain to first-order optimizers. In this paper, we propose the
first 4-bit second-order optimizers, exemplified by 4-bit Shampoo, maintaining
performance similar to that of 32-bit ones. We show that quantizing the eigenvector
matrix of the preconditioner in 4-bit Shampoo is remarkably better than quantizing
the preconditioner itself both theoretically and experimentally. By rectifying the
orthogonality of the quantized eigenvector matrix, we enhance the approximation
of the preconditioner’s eigenvector matrix, which also benefits the computation
of its inverse 4-th root. Besides, we find that linear square quantization slightly
outperforms dynamic tree quantization when quantizing second-order optimizer
states. Evaluation on various networks for image classification and natural language
modeling demonstrates that our 4-bit Shampoo achieves comparable performance
to its 32-bit counterpart while being more memory-efficient* .

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great success in numerous fields, e.g., computer
vision [20], natural language processing [38], and speech recognition [16]. A significant part of such
success is attributed to first-order optimizers such as stochastic gradient descent with momentum
(SGDM) [31] and AdamW [29]. Second-order optimizers, including K-FAC [30], Shampoo [18],
AdaBK [41], CASPR [13], and Sophia [27], show great convergence properties, but often involve
noticeable computation and memory costs. Anil et al. [2] provided several practical techniques
for second-order optimizers to achieve substantial wall-clock time improvements over traditional
first-order optimizers. The fast convergence property of second-order optimizers benefits from
preconditioning the gradient with a matrix known as a preconditioner. The optimizer states for
constructing the preconditioner and its inverse root can speed up optimization compared to first-order
optimizers, but consume memory that could be used for model parameters, limiting the maximum
model size trained within a given memory budget. With the increase in model size, the memory
utilized by optimizer states can become a predominant factor in memory usage. This is the primary
obstacle hindering the widespread use of second-order optimizers in the era of large models.
There are two main attempts to reduce memory consumed by optimizer states. Factorization uses lowrank approximation to optimizer states. This strategy has been applied to first-order optimizers [35, 3]
* Code is available at https://github.com/Sike-Wang/low-bit-Shampoo.
†

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

