TAIA: Large Language Models are
Out-of-Distribution Data Learners
Shuyang Jiang∗
Fudan University
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
shuyangjiang23@m.fudan.edu.cn

Yusheng Liao∗
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
liao20160907@sjtu.edu.cn

Ya Zhang†, Yanfeng Wang, Yu Wang†
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{ya_zhang, wangyanfeng622, yuwangsjtu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Fine-tuning on task-specific question-answer pairs is a predominant method for
enhancing the performance of instruction-tuned large language models (LLMs) on
downstream tasks. However, in certain specialized domains, such as healthcare
or harmless content generation, it is nearly impossible to obtain a large volume
of high-quality data that matches the downstream distribution. To improve the
performance of LLMs in data-scarce domains with domain-mismatched data, we
re-evaluated the Transformer architecture and discovered that not all parameter
updates during fine-tuning contribute positively to downstream performance. Our
analysis reveals that within the self-attention and feed-forward networks, only
the fine-tuned attention parameters are particularly beneficial when the training
set’s distribution does not fully align with the test set. Based on this insight, we
propose an effective inference-time intervention method: Training All parameters
but Inferring with only Attention (TAIA). We empirically validate TAIA using
two general instruction-tuning datasets and evaluate it on seven downstream tasks
involving math, reasoning, and knowledge understanding across LLMs of different parameter sizes and fine-tuning techniques. Our comprehensive experiments
demonstrate that TAIA achieves superior improvements compared to both the fully
fine-tuned model and the base model in most scenarios, with significant performance gains. The high tolerance of TAIA to data mismatches makes it resistant
to jailbreaking tuning and enhances specialized tasks using general data. Code is
available in https://github.com/pixas/TAIA_LLM.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have revolutionized Natural Language Processing (NLP), where
LLMs have been pretrained on a massive textual corpus and encoded massive world knowledge [1, 8].
These models achieve remarkable zero-shot and few-shot performance across a wide range of tasks [2,
6, 45, 65, 66]. The innovation of instruction tuning, also known as supervised fine-tuning (SFT), has
∗
†

Equal contribution, alphabetical order.
Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

