LLM Circuit Analyses Are Consistent Across Training
and Scale
Curt Tigges
EleutherAI
curt@eleuther.ai

Michael Hanna
ILLC, University of Amsterdam
m.w.hanna@uva.nl

Qinan Yu
Brown University
qinan_yu@brown.edu

Stella Biderman
EleutherAI
stella@eleuther.ai

Abstract
Most currently deployed LLMs undergo continuous training or additional finetuning. By contrast, most research into LLMs’ internal mechanisms focuses on models
at one snapshot in time (the end of pre-training), raising the question of whether
their results generalize to real-world settings. Existing studies of mechanisms over
time focus on encoder-only or toy models, which differ significantly from most
deployed models. In this study, we track how model mechanisms, operationalized
as circuits, emerge and evolve across 300 billion tokens of training in decoder-only
LLMs, in models ranging from 70 million to 2.8 billion parameters. We find that
task abilities and the functional components that support them emerge consistently
at similar token counts across scale. Moreover, although such components may
be implemented by different attention heads over time, the overarching algorithm
that they implement remains. Surprisingly, both these algorithms and the types of
components involved therein tend to replicate across model scale. Finally, we find
that circuit size correlates with model size and can fluctuate considerably over time
even when the same algorithm is implemented. These results suggest that circuit
analyses conducted on small models at the end of pre-training can provide insights
that still apply after additional training and over model scale.

1

Introduction

As LLMs’ capabilities have grown, so has interest in characterizing their mechanisms. Recent work
in mechanistic interpretability often seeks to do so via circuits: computational subgraphs that explain
task-solving mechanisms [71, 32, 48, 40]. Circuits can be found and verified using a variety of
methods, [20, 65, 33, 38, 23] with the aim of reverse-engineering models’ task-solving algorithms.
Though much circuits research is motivated by LLMs’ capabilities, the setting in which such research
is performed often differs from that of currently deployed models. Crucially, while most LLM circuits
work [71, 32, 48, 40, 67] studies models at the end of pre-training, currently deployed models often
undergo continuous training [55, 2, 66] or are fine-tuned for specific tasks [17, 34]. More generally,
models are trained with varying amounts of data and circuits can be sampled at any checkpoint; to
what extent do those circuits hold as training continues? Other subfields of interpretability have
studied model development during training [35, 13, 72, 16, 12], but similar work on LLM mechanisms
is scarce. Existing mechanistic work over training has studied syntactic attention structures and
induction heads [54, 14, 63], but has focused on small encoder or toy models. Prakash et al. [56]
examines circuits in 7-billion-parameter models post-finetuning, but the evolution of circuits during
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

