Learning Equilibria in Adversarial Team Markov
Games: A Nonconvex-Hidden-Concave Min-Max
Optimization Problem

Fivos Kalogiannis⋆
University of California, Irvine
Archimedes/Athena RC, Greece

Jingming Yan⋆
University of California, Irvine

Ioannis Panageas
University of California, Irvine
Archimedes/Athena RC, Greece

Abstract
We study the problem of learning a Nash equilibrium (NE) in Markov games which
is a cornerstone in multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). In particular,
we focus on infinite-horizon adversarial team Markov games (ATMGs) in which
agents that share a common reward function compete against a single opponent,
the adversary. These games unify two-player zero-sum Markov games and Markov
potential games, resulting in a setting that encompasses both collaboration and
competition. [65] provided an efficient equilibrium computation algorithm for
ATMGs which presumes knowledge of the reward and transition functions and
has no sample complexity guarantees. We contribute a learning algorithm that
utilizes MARL policy gradient methods with iteration and sample complexity that
is polynomial in the approximation error ϵ and the natural parameters of the ATMG,
resolving the main caveats of the solution by [65]. It is worth noting that previously,
the existence of learning algorithms for NE was known for Markov two-player
zero-sum and potential games but not for ATMGs.
Seen through the lens of min-max optimization, computing a NE in these games
consists a nonconvex–nonconcave saddle-point problem. Min-max optimization
has received extensive study. Nevertheless, the case of nonconvex-nonconcave
landscapes remains elusive: in full generality, finding saddle-points is computationally intractable [33]. We circumvent the aforementioned intractability by
developing techniques that exploit the hidden structure of the objective function via
a nonconvex–concave reformulation. However, this introduces the challenge of a
feasibility set with coupled constraints. We tackle these challenges by establishing
novel techniques for optimizing weakly-smooth nonconvex functions, extending
the framework of [35].

1

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) investigates behaviors of multiple interacting agents
within a dynamic, shared environment where the actions of each agent not only impact their individual
rewards but also the overall state of the system. MARL has introduced several practical techniques
that have justifiably captured public interest in recent years, particularly in skill-intensive games like
starcraft, go, chess, and poker [12, 97, 101, 79, 16, 15, 14, 86], where its empirical methods have
⋆

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

