Lower Bounds and Optimal Algorithms for
Non-Smooth Convex Decentralized Optimization over
Time-Varying Networks

Dmitry Kovalev
Yandex Researh
dakovalev1@gmail.com

Ekaterina Borodich
MIPT∗
borodich.ed@phystech.edu

Alexander Gasnikov
Innopolis University, MIPT*, Skoltech†
gasnikov@yandex.ru

Dmitrii Feoktistov
Innopolis University‡, MSU§
feoktistovdd@my.msu.ru

Abstract
We consider the task of minimizing the sum of convex functions stored in a
decentralized manner across the nodes of a communication network. This problem
is relatively well-studied in the scenario when the objective functions are smooth,
or the links of the network are fixed in time, or both. In particular, lower bounds
on the number of decentralized communications and (sub)gradient computations
required to solve the problem have been established, along with matching optimal
algorithms. However, the remaining and most challenging setting of non-smooth
decentralized optimization over time-varying networks is largely underexplored, as
neither lower bounds nor optimal algorithms are known in the literature. We resolve
this fundamental gap with the following contributions: (i) we establish the first
lower bounds on the communication and subgradient computation complexities of
solving non-smooth convex decentralized optimization problems over time-varying
networks; (ii) we develop the first optimal algorithm that matches these lower
bounds and offers substantially improved theoretical performance compared to the
existing state of the art.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we study the decentralized optimization problem. Specifically, given a set of n compute
nodes connected through a communication network, our goal is to solve the following finite-sum
optimization problem with quadratic regularization:
"
#
n
1X
r
2
min p(x) =
fi (x) + ∥x∥ ,
(1)
n i=1
2
x∈Rd
where r ≥ 0 is a regularization parameter, and each function fi (x) : Rd → R is stored on the
corresponding node i ∈ {1, . . . , n}. Each node i can perform computations based on its local state
and data, and can directly communicate with other nodes through the links in the communication
network.
∗

Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
‡
Research Center for Artificial Intelligence, Innopolis University, Innopolis, Russia
§
Moscow State University
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

