Efficient Large Multi-modal Models
via Visual Context Compression

Jieneng Chen∗, Luoxin Ye∗, Ju He∗, Zhao-Yang Wang, Daniel Khashabi†, Alan Yuille†
Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
While significant advancements have been made in compressed representations
for text embeddings in large language models (LLMs), the compression of visual
tokens in multi-modal LLMs (MLLMs) has remained a largely overlooked area. In
this work, we present the study on the analysis of redundancy concerning visual
tokens and efficient training within these models. Our initial experiments show
that eliminating up to 70% of visual tokens at the testing stage by simply average
pooling only leads to a minimal 3% reduction in visual question answering accuracy on the GQA benchmark, indicating significant redundancy in visual context.
Addressing this, we introduce Visual Context Compressor, which reduces the number of visual tokens to enhance training and inference efficiency without sacrificing
performance. To minimize information loss caused by the compression on visual
tokens while maintaining training efficiency, we develop LLaVolta as a light and
staged training scheme that incorporates stage-wise visual context compression
to progressively compress the visual tokens from heavily to lightly compression
during training, yielding no loss of information when testing. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach enhances the performance of MLLMs in both
image-language and video-language understanding, while also significantly cutting
training costs and improving inference efficiency.
Website
Code

1

https://beckschen.github.io/llavolta.html
https://github.com/Beckschen/LLaVolta

Introduction

The advent of LLMs [33, 34, 44] has marked a new era in the field of artificial intelligence and
natural language processing. LLMs can play a role as a universal interface for a general-purpose
assistant, where various task instructions can be explicitly represented in language and guide the
end-to-end trained neural assistant to solve a task of interest. For example, the recent success of
ChatGPT [33] and GPT-4 [34] have demonstrated the power of aligned LLMs in following human
instructions, and have stimulated tremendous interest in developing open-source LLMs [41, 43]. As
the horizon of LLM applications broadens and the availability of open-source LLMs increases, the
integration of multi-modality into these models presents a new frontier in expanding their capabilities.
Multi-modal LLMs [1, 28, 40, 54] (MLLMs), which can process and understand not just text but also
visual information, stand at the cutting edge of this evolution.
While MLLMs have made significant strides, a crucial aspect that remains relatively unexplored is
the efficient representation and processing of visual information within these models. Substantial
efforts [18, 35, 53] have been dedicated to optimizing the efficient representation of text tokens
through various compression techniques [18, 35, 53], aimed at enhancing inference efficiency by
∗
†

Contributed equally.
Advised equally.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

