Uncovering, Explaining, and Mitigating the Superficial
Safety of Backdoor Defense

1

Rui Min1* , Zeyu Qin1* , Nevin L. Zhang1 , Li Shen, Minhao Cheng2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 2 Pennsylvania State University
{rminaa, zeyu.qin}@connect.ust.hk, lzhang@cse.ust.hk
mathshenli@gmail.com, minhaocheng@ust.hk

Abstract
Backdoor attacks pose a significant threat to Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) as
they allow attackers to manipulate model predictions with backdoor triggers. To
address these security vulnerabilities, various backdoor purification methods have
been proposed to purify compromised models. Typically, these purified models
exhibit low Attack Success Rates (ASR), rendering them resistant to backdoored
inputs. However, Does achieving a low ASR through current safety purification
methods truly eliminate learned backdoor features from the pretraining phase?
In this paper, we provide an affirmative answer to this question by thoroughly
investigating the Post-Purification Robustness of current backdoor purification
methods. We find that current safety purification methods are vulnerable to the
rapid re-learning of backdoor behavior, even when further fine-tuning of purified
models is performed using a very small number of poisoned samples. Based on this,
we further propose the practical Query-based Reactivation Attack (QRA) which
could effectively reactivate the backdoor by merely querying purified models. We
find the failure to achieve satisfactory post-purification robustness stems from
the insufficient deviation of purified models from the backdoored model along
the backdoor-connected path. To improve the post-purification robustness, we
propose a straightforward tuning defense, Path-Aware Minimization (PAM), which
promotes deviation along backdoor-connected paths with extra model updates. Extensive experiments demonstrate that PAM significantly improves post-purification
robustness while maintaining a good clean accuracy and low ASR. Our work
provides a new perspective on understanding the effectiveness of backdoor safety
tuning and highlights the importance of faithfully assessing the model’s safety.

1

Introduction

Backdoor attacks [2, 7, 16] have emerged as one of the most significant concerns [4, 5, 20, 25] in
deep learning. These attacks involve the insertion of malicious backdoor triggers into the training set,
which can be further exploited to manipulate the behavior of the model during the inference stage. To
defend against these threats, researchers have proposed various safety tuning methods [20, 27, 32,
44, 49, 50, 55] to purify well-trained backdoored models. These methods can be easily incorporated
into the existing model deployment pipeline and have demonstrated state-of-the-art effectiveness in
reducing the Attack Success Rate (ASR) of backdoored models [32, 48].
However, a critical question arises: does achieving a low Attack Success Rate (ASR) through current
safety tuning methods genuinely indicate the complete removal of learned backdoor features from the
pretraining phase? If the answer is no, this means that the adversary may still easily reactivate the
* Equal contribution. Correspondence to: Zeyu Qin (zeyu.qin@connect.ust.hk), Li Shen, Minhao Cheng.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

