Variational Multi-scale Representation for Estimating
Uncertainty in 3D Gaussian Splatting

Ruiqi Li, Yiu-ming Cheung∗
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
{csrqli, ymc}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract
Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has become popular in reconstructing
dense 3D representations of appearance and geometry. However, the learning
pipeline in 3DGS inherently lacks the ability to quantify uncertainty, which is
an important factor in applications like robotics mapping and navigation. In this
paper, we propose an uncertainty estimation method built upon the Bayesian
inference framework. Specifically, we propose a method to build variational
multi-scale 3D Gaussians, where we leverage explicit scale information in 3DGS
parameters to construct diversified parameter space samples. We develop an
offset table technique to draw local multi-scale samples efficiently by offsetting
selected attributes and sharing other base attributes. Then, the offset table is learned
by variational inference with multi-scale prior. The learned offset posterior can
quantify the uncertainty of each individual Gaussian component, and be used in the
forward pass to infer the predictive uncertainty. Extensive experimental results on
various benchmark datasets show that the proposed method provides well-aligned
calibration performance on estimated uncertainty and better rendering quality
compared with the previous methods that enable uncertainty quantification with
view synthesis. Besides, by leveraging the model parameter uncertainty estimated
by our method, we can remove noisy Gaussians automatically, thereby obtaining a
high-fidelity part of the reconstructed scene, which is of great help in improving
the visual quality. 1

1

Introduction

The radiance field methods [1] for view synthesis have received increasing attention in the past
few years due to their capability of achieving photorealistic results. Among them, the recently
proposed 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) algorithm [2] has pushed the boundary of real-time view
synthesis with prominent quality and efficiency. However, a major functionality deficiency of 3DGS
is that it cannot provide uncertainty information regarding the reconstructed model and predictions.
Such uncertainty information would be useful in removing the noisy components in the model
and providing confidence maps to assess the quality view synthesis results, which is important in
applications such as autonomous driving simulation and robotics navigation.
Previous works in view synthesis made attempts to quantify the uncertainty in Neural Radiance Field
(NeRF) models via ensemble, variational inference or Laplace’s approximation methods [3, 4, 5, 6].
Although these works demonstrate the ability to quantify the uncertainty with NeRF models, they
cannot be directly applied to 3DGS models, due to the intrinsic difference between the implicit
NeRF representation and explicit 3DGS. Furthermore, some prior works deal with the uncertainty in
learning models with methods such as Monte-Carlo dropout [7], Deep Ensemble [8] and Subnetwork
∗
1

Corresponding author is Yiu-ming Cheung (ymc@comp.hkbu.edu.hk).
Code is available at https://github.com/csrqli/variational-3dgs.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

