On Softmax Direct Preference Optimization for
Recommendation
Yuxin Chen1∗ Junfei Tan2∗ An Zhang1†
Zhengyi Yang2 Leheng Sheng1 Enzhi Zhang3
Xiang Wang2 Tat-Seng Chua1
1
National University of Singapore
2
University of Science and Technology of China
3
Hokkaido University
yuxin.chen@u.nus.edu, sober_clever@mail.ustc.edu.cn, anzhang@u.nus.edu
leheng.sheng@u.nus.edu, enzhi.zhang.n6@elms.hokudai.ac.jp
yangzhy1998@gmail.com, xiangwang1223@gmail.com, dcscts@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Recommender systems aim to predict personalized rankings based on user preference data. With the rise of Language Models (LMs), LM-based recommenders
have been widely explored due to their extensive world knowledge and powerful
reasoning abilities. Most of the LM-based recommenders convert historical interactions into language prompts, pairing with a positive item as the target response
and fine-tuning LM with a language modeling loss. However, the current objective
fails to fully leverage preference data and is not optimized for personalized ranking tasks, which hinders the performance of LM-based recommenders. Inspired
by the current advancement of Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) in human
preference alignment and the success of softmax loss in recommendations, we
propose Softmax-DPO (S-DPO) to instill ranking information into the LM to
help LM-based recommenders distinguish preferred items from negatives, rather
than solely focusing on positives. Specifically, we incorporate multiple negatives
in user preference data and devise an alternative version of DPO loss tailored
for LM-based recommenders, which is extended from the traditional full-ranking
Plackett-Luce (PL) model to partial rankings and connected to softmax sampling
strategies. Theoretically, we bridge S-DPO with the softmax loss over negative
sampling and find that it has an inherent benefit of mining hard negatives, which
assures its exceptional capabilities in recommendation tasks. Empirically, extensive
experiments conducted on three real-world datasets demonstrate the superiority
of S-DPO to effectively model user preference and further boost recommendation
performance while providing better rewards for preferred items. Our codes are
available at https://github.com/chenyuxin1999/S-DPO.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems aim to predict personalized rankings based on user preference data, i.e.,
historical interactions such as purchases, clicks, and ratings [1, 2]. Recently, leveraging the extensive
world knowledge and powerful reasoning abilities of language models (LMs) [3–6], LM-based recommenders have been broadly explored [7–9]. These recommenders convert historical interaction data
into language prompts and either perform in-context learning or fine-tune LMs, demonstrating notable
∗
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
An Zhang is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

