Advancing Spiking Neural Networks for Sequential
Modeling with Central Pattern Generators

Changze Lv1∗ Dongqi Han2† Yansen Wang2† Xiaoqing Zheng1†
Xuanjing Huang1 Dongsheng Li2
1
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Microsoft Research Asia
{czlv22}@m.fudan.edu.cn, {zhengxq,xjhuang}@fudan.edu.cn,
{yansenwang,dongqihan,dongsli}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) represent a promising approach to developing
artificial neural networks that are both energy-efficient and biologically plausible. However, applying SNNs to sequential tasks, such as text classification and
time-series forecasting, has been hindered by the challenge of creating an effective
and hardware-friendly spike-form positional encoding (PE) strategy. Drawing
inspiration from the central pattern generators (CPGs) in the human brain, which
produce rhythmic patterned outputs without requiring rhythmic inputs, we propose
a novel PE technique for SNNs, termed CPG-PE. We demonstrate that the commonly used sinusoidal PE is mathematically a specific solution to the membrane
potential dynamics of a particular CPG. Moreover, extensive experiments across
various domains, including time-series forecasting, natural language processing,
and image classification, show that SNNs with CPG-PE outperform their conventional counterparts. Additionally, we perform analysis experiments to elucidate the
mechanism through which SNNs encode positional information and to explore the
function of CPGs in the human brain. This investigation may offer valuable insights
into the fundamental principles of neural computation. Our code is available at
https://github.com/microsoft/SeqSNN.

1

Introduction

Spiking neural network (SNN) [1] has increasingly attracted research interests in recent years,
primarily due to its energy efficiency, event-driven paradigm, biological plausibility, and other
distinctive properties. The spiking neurons in SNN are dynamical systems that generate binary
signals (spike or non-spike) and communicate these signals like artificial neural networks (ANNs)
for computation [2–9]. Many advanced architectures and methodologies developed for ANNs are
also applicable to SNNs, enhancing their capabilities. Notable among these are backpropagation [10],
batch normalization [11, 12], and Transformer architecture [4, 13, 5, 6], which collectively broaden
the functional scope of SNNs.
Despite the promising advances in SNNs, several challenges persist when adapting them to diverse
tasks. A fundamental challenge is that SNNs, which are event-triggered, lack robust and effective
mechanisms to capture indexing information, rhythmic patterns, and periodic data. This limitation
can adversely affect SNNs’ ability to process and analyze different data modalities, including natural
language, and time series. Meanwhile, while SNNs aim to emulate the neural circuits of the brain,
* The work was conducted during the internship of Changze Lv at Microsoft Research Asia.
†

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

