TEG-DB: A Comprehensive Dataset and Benchmark
of Textual-Edge Graphs
Zhuofeng Li∗△ Zixing Gou∗▽ Xiangnan Zhang♢ Zhongyuan Liu◦ Sirui Li†
Yuntong Hu† Chen Ling† Zheng Zhang† Liang Zhao†
△
Shanghai University ▽ Shandong University ♢ Johns Hopkins University ◦ China
University of Petroleum (East China) † Emory University

Abstract
Text-Attributed Graphs (TAGs) augment graph structures with natural language
descriptions, facilitating detailed depictions of data and their interconnections
across various real-world settings. However, existing TAG datasets predominantly
feature textual information only at the nodes, with edges typically represented by
mere binary or categorical attributes. This lack of rich textual edge annotations
significantly limits the exploration of contextual relationships between entities,
hindering deeper insights into graph-structured data. To address this gap, we
introduce Textual-Edge Graphs Datasets and Benchmark (TEG-DB), a comprehensive and diverse collection of benchmark textual-edge datasets featuring rich
textual descriptions on nodes and edges. The TEG-DB datasets are large-scale and
encompass a wide range of domains, from citation networks to social networks.
In addition, we conduct extensive benchmark experiments on TEG-DB to assess
the extent to which current techniques, including pre-trained language models
(PLMs), graph neural networks (GNNs), proposed novel entangled GNNs and
their combinations, can utilize textual node and edge information. Our goal is
to elicit advancements in textual-edge graph research, specifically in developing
methodologies that exploit rich textual node and edge descriptions to enhance graph
analysis and provide deeper insights into complex real-world networks. The entire
TEG-DB project is publicly accessible as an open-source repository on Github,
accessible at https://github.com/Zhuofeng-Li/TEG-Benchmark.

1

Introduction

Text-attributed graphs (TAGs) are graph structures in which nodes are equipped with rich textual
information, allowing for deeper analysis and interpretation of complex relationships [50, 18, 16].
TAGs are widely utilized in a variety of real-world applications, including social networks [33, 32],
citation networks [26], and recommendation systems [44, 15]. Due to the universal representational
capabilities of language, TAGs have emerged as a promising format for potentially unifying a wide
range of existing graph datasets. This field has recently garnered rapidly growing interest, particularly
in the development of foundational models for graph data [24, 16, 46].
Unfortunately, a central issue in designing the TAG foundation model is the lack of comprehensive
datasets with rich textual information on both nodes and edges. Most traditional graph datasets solely
offer node attribute embeddings, devoid of the original textual sentences, which results in a significant
loss of context and limits the application of advanced techniques such as large language models
(LLMs) [25]. Despite some TAG datasets being present recently [46], their data usually only have text
information on nodes where the edges are usually represented as binary or categorical. However, the
textual information of edges in TAGs is crucial for elucidating the meaning of individual documents
and their semantic correlations. For instance, as shown in Figure 1, this scientific article network
illustrates the citation patterns of articles authored by Einstein and Planck in the field of quantum
mechanics. When we need to conclude that ’Planck endorsed the probabilistic nature of quantum
mechanics while Einstein opposed this view,’ and if we consider it in terms of a TAG view, focusing
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.
* These two authors contribute equally to this paper.

