Binding in hippocampal-entorhinal circuits
enables compositionality in cognitive maps
Christopher J. Kymn1* , Sonia Mazelet1,2 , Anthony Thomas1,3 , Denis Kleyko4,5 , E. Paxon
Frady6 , Friedrich T. Sommer1,6 , and Bruno A. Olshausen1,7
1

Redwood Center for Theoretical Neuroscience, Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, UC Berkeley, Berkeley,
USA
2
Université Paris-Saclay, ENS Paris-Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, UC Davis, Davis, USA
4
Centre for Applied Autonomous Sensor Systems, Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden
5
Intelligent Systems Lab, Research Institutes of Sweden, Kista, Sweden
6
Intel Labs, Santa Clara, USA
7
Herbert Wertheim School of Optometry & Vision Science, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, USA
*
cjkymn@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We propose a normative model for spatial representation in the hippocampal
formation that combines optimality principles, such as maximizing coding range
and spatial information per neuron, with an algebraic framework for computing in
distributed representation. Spatial position is encoded in a residue number system,
with individual residues represented by high-dimensional, complex-valued vectors.
These are composed into a single vector representing position by a similaritypreserving, conjunctive vector-binding operation. Self-consistency between the
representations of the overall position and of the individual residues is enforced by
a modular attractor network whose modules correspond to the grid cell modules in
entorhinal cortex. The vector binding operation can also associate different contexts
to spatial representations, yielding a model for entorhinal cortex and hippocampus.
We show that the model achieves normative desiderata including superlinear scaling
of patterns with dimension, robust error correction, and hexagonal, carry-free
encoding of spatial position. These properties in turn enable robust path integration
and association with sensory inputs. More generally, the model formalizes how
compositional computations could occur in the hippocampal formation and leads
to testable experimental predictions.1

1

Introduction

The hippocampal formation (HF), consisting of hippocampus (HC) and the medial and lateral
part of the neighboring entorhinal cortex, (MEC) and (LEC), is critical for forming memories
and representing variables such as spatial position [1, 2]. Recent work has provided evidence of
compositional structure in HF representations, enabling complex representations to be composed by
simpler building blocks and their formation rules. Examples include novel recombinations of past
experience occurring in replay [3], or the exponential expressivity of the grid cell code [4, 5]. In
particular, compositional representations afford high expressivity with lower dimensional storage
requirements [6], less complexity in latent state inference, and generalization to novel scenes with
familiar parts.
To gain insight into the possible computational principles and neural mechanisms at play in the HF,
we take a normative modeling approach. That is, we seek to construct a model built from a set of
1

Code is available at https://github.com/SoniaMaz8/Hippocampal_enthorinal_circuit

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

