Autoregressive Policy Optimization for Constrained
Allocation Tasks
David Winkel∗ Niklas Strauß∗
Maximilian Bernhard Zongyue Li Thomas Seidl Matthias Schubert
Munich Center for Machine Learning, LMU Munich
{winkel,strauss,bernhard,li,seidl,schubert}@dbs.ifi.lmu.de

Abstract
Allocation tasks represent a class of problems where a limited amount of resources
must be allocated to a set of entities at each time step. Prominent examples of
this task include portfolio optimization or distributing computational workloads
across servers. Allocation tasks are typically bound by linear constraints describing
practical requirements that have to be strictly fulfilled at all times. In portfolio
optimization, for example, investors may be obligated to allocate less than 30% of
the funds into a certain industrial sector in any investment period. Such constraints
restrict the action space of allowed allocations in intricate ways, which makes
learning a policy that avoids constraint violations difficult. In this paper, we propose
a new method for constrained allocation tasks based on an autoregressive process
to sequentially sample allocations for each entity. In addition, we introduce a novel
de-biasing mechanism to counter the initial bias caused by sequential sampling.
We demonstrate the superior performance of our approach compared to a variety of
Constrained Reinforcement Learning (CRL) methods on three distinct constrained
allocation tasks: portfolio optimization, computational workload distribution, and a
synthetic allocation benchmark. Our code is available at: https://github.com/
niklasdbs/paspo.

1

Introduction

Continuous allocation tasks are a class of problems where an agent needs to distribute a limited amount
of resources over a set of entities at each time step. Many complex real-world problems are formulated
as allocation tasks, and state-of-the-art solutions rely on using Reinforcement Learning (RL) to learn
effective policies [6, 26, 3, 20, 27]. Notable examples include portfolio allocation tasks, where
portfolio managers must allocate the available financial resources among various assets [27], or
allocation tasks of computational workloads to a set of compute instances in data centers [3]. In many
cases, allocation tasks come with allocation constraints [6, 20, 27, 26], such as investing at most 30 %
of the portfolio into a specific subset of the assets or to restrict the maximum workload to certain
servers in a data center. Formally, allocation constraints are expressed as linear constraints and form a
system of linear inequalities, geometrically describing a convex polytope. Each point in this polytope
describes a possible allocation and each dimension corresponds to one of the entities. Allocation
tasks often require hard constraints, i.e., constraints that are explicitly given and must be satisfied
at any point in time. However, most of the existing CRL literature focuses on soft constraints that
are not explicitly given [2, 29, 31, 14, 25]. These approaches typically cannot guarantee constraint
satisfaction and tend to have many constraint violations during training. The majority of these
methods approximate the cumulative costs of constraint violations and optimize the cumulative
reward while trying to adhere to the maximum cumulative costs. While less explored, there exist
∗

Both authors contributed equally.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

