From Similarity to Superiority: Channel Clustering
for Time Series Forecasting

Jialin Chen1 , Jan Eric Lenssen2,3 , Aosong Feng1 , Weihua Hu2 ,
Matthias Fey2 , Leandros Tassiulas1 , Jure Leskovec2,4 , Rex Ying1
1
Yale University, 2 Kumo.AI,
3
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, 4 Stanford University

Abstract
Time series forecasting has attracted significant attention in recent decades. Previous studies have demonstrated that the Channel-Independent (CI) strategy improves
forecasting performance by treating different channels individually, while it leads
to poor generalization on unseen instances and ignores potentially necessary interactions between channels. Conversely, the Channel-Dependent (CD) strategy
mixes all channels with even irrelevant and indiscriminate information, which,
however, results in oversmoothing issues and limits forecasting accuracy. There is
a lack of channel strategy that effectively balances individual channel treatment
for improved forecasting performance without overlooking essential interactions
between channels. Motivated by our observation of a correlation between the
time series model’s performance boost against channel mixing and the intrinsic
similarity on a pair of channels, we developed a novel and adaptable Channel
Clustering Module (CCM). CCM dynamically groups channels characterized by
intrinsic similarities and leverages cluster information instead of individual channel
identities, combining the best of CD and CI worlds. Extensive experiments on
real-world datasets demonstrate that CCM can (1) boost the performance of CI and
CD models by an average margin of 2.4% and 7.2% on long-term and short-term
forecasting, respectively; (2) enable zero-shot forecasting with mainstream time
series forecasting models; (3) uncover intrinsic time series patterns among channels
and improve interpretability of complex time series models 1 .

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting has attracted a surge of interest across diverse fields, ranging from economics,
energy [1, 2], weather [3, 4], to transportation planning [5, 6]. The complexity of the task is heightened
by factors including seasonality, trend, noise in the data, and potential cross-channel information.
Despite the numerous deep learning time series models proposed recently [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14],
an unresolved challenge persists in the effective management of channel interaction within the
forecasting framework [15, 16]. Previous works have explored two primary channel strategies:
Channel-Independent (CI) and Channel-Dependent (CD) strategies. The Channel-Independent
(CI) strategy has shown promise in better forecasting performance by having individual models
for each channel. However, a critical drawback is its limited generalizability and robustness on
unseen channels [17]. Besides, it tends to overlook potential interactions between various channels.
Conversely, the Channel-Dependent (CD) strategy models all channels as a whole and captures
intricate channel relations, while they tend to show oversmoothing and have trouble fitting to
individual channels, especially when the similarity between channels is very low. Moreover, existing
1

The code is available at https://github.com/Graph-and-Geometric-Learning/TimeSeriesCCM

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

