Exogenous Matching: Learning Good Proposals for
Tractable Counterfactual Estimation
Yikang Chen1 , Dehui Du1,* , Lili Tian1
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Trustworthy Computing, East China Normal University

Abstract
We propose an importance sampling method for tractable and efficient estimation
of counterfactual expressions in general settings, named Exogenous Matching. By
minimizing a common upper bound of counterfactual estimators, we transform the
variance minimization problem into a conditional distribution learning problem,
enabling its integration with existing conditional distribution modeling approaches.
We validate the theoretical results through experiments under various types and
settings of Structural Causal Models (SCMs) and demonstrate the outperformance
on counterfactual estimation tasks compared to other existing importance sampling
methods. We also explore the impact of injecting structural prior knowledge
(counterfactual Markov boundaries) on the results. Finally, we apply this method
to identifiable proxy SCMs and demonstrate the unbiasedness of the estimates,
empirically illustrating the applicability of the method to practical scenarios.1

1

Introduction

Counterfactual reasoning, considered one of the
Variables: , ,
Observations: , ,
Interventions: , ,
The submodel of SCM M under intervention : M
advanced cognitive abilities of humans, aims
to address questions about hypothetical worlds
Observational Interventinal Counterfactual
SCM M
that have not been observed. Answering these
Human
questions, typically in the form of "what-if" or
Behavior
"why," is crucial for attribution and explanation,
if were
thus counterfactual reasoning is widely applied
Natural
would be
under ,
is ?
Language
under ?
would be
in generating explanations [48, 47, 94, 63], makunder ?
ing decisions [71, 37, 95, 58], and evaluating
Formal
P( = )
P( = ) P( = | = )
Language
fairness [56, 113, 105, 78, 117]. A class of genL
L2
L3
PCH
1
erative models called Structural Causal Models
(SCMs) provides a semantic characterization of
M ,M
M
SCM
M
counterfactuals, consisting of a set of endogenous mechanisms and an exogenous distribu- Figure 1: A brief illustration of SCM, PCH and
tion, from which a collection of distributions counterfactual concepts.
described by specific formal languages is induced. These languages are organized into a progressively refined hierarchical structure, and each
is associated with human activities: language L1 is about seeing (observational), L2 is about doing
(interventional), and L3 is about imagining (counterfactual). This hierarchy is referred to as the
causal ladder [77] or the Pearl Causal Hierarchy (PCH) [5]. Fig. 1 provides a brief illustration of the
relevant concepts. As the highest level of the PCH, counterfactuals entail the most subtle information
*
1

Corresponding author (dhdu@sei.ecnu.edu.cn)
Code is available at: https://github.com/cyisk/exom

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

