SEEV: Synthesis with Efficient Exact Verification for
ReLU Neural Barrier Functions
Hongchao Zhang∗
Electrical & Systems Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
hongchao@wustl.edu

Zhizhen Qin∗
Computer Science & Engineering
University of California, San Diego
zhizhenqin@ucsd.edu

Sicun Gao
Computer Science & Engineering
University of California, San Diego
scungao@ucsd.edu

Andrew Clark
Electrical & Systems Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
andrewclark@wustl.edu

Abstract
Neural Control Barrier Functions (NCBFs) have shown significant promise in enforcing safety constraints on nonlinear autonomous systems. State-of-the-art exact
approaches to verifying safety of NCBF-based controllers exploit the piecewiselinear structure of ReLU neural networks, however, such approaches still rely on
enumerating all of the activation regions of the network near the safety boundary,
thus incurring high computation cost. In this paper, we propose a framework for
Synthesis with Efficient Exact Verification (SEEV). Our framework consists of two
components, namely (i) an NCBF synthesis algorithm that introduces a novel regularizer to reduce the number of activation regions at the safety boundary, and (ii) a
verification algorithm that exploits tight over-approximations of the safety conditions to reduce the cost of verifying each piecewise-linear segment. Our simulations
show that SEEV significantly improves verification efficiency while maintaining
the CBF quality across various benchmark systems and neural network structures.
Our code is available at https://github.com/HongchaoZhang-HZ/SEEV.

1

Introduction

Safety is a crucial property for autonomous systems that interact with humans and critical infrastructures in applications including medicine, energy, and robotics [1, 2], which has motivated recent
research into safe control [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Control Barrier Functions (CBFs), which apply a constraint on
the control input at each time in order to ensure that safety constraints are not violated, have attracted
significant research attention due to their ease of implementation and compatibility with a variety of
safety and performance criteria [8]. Recently, CBFs that are defined by neural networks, denoted
as Neural Control Barrier Functions (NCBFs), have been proposed to leverage the expressiveness
of NNs for safe control of nonlinear systems [9, 10, 11]. NCBFs have shown substantial promise in
applications including robotic manipulation [10], navigation [12, 13], and flight control [14].
A key challenge in NCBF-based control is safety verification, which amounts to ensuring that the
constraints on the control can be satisfied throughout the state space under actuation limits. The
NCBF safety verification problem effectively combines two problems that are known to be difficult,
namely, input-output verification of neural networks (VNN) [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20] and reachability
verification of nonlinear systems. While sound and complete verifiers such as dReal can be applied to
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

