RA-PbRL: Provably Efficient Risk-Aware
Preference-Based Reinforcement Learning

1

Yujie Zhao1 , Jose Efraim Aguilar Escamill2 , Weyl Lu3 , Huazheng Wang2
University of California, San Diego, 2 Oregon State University, 3 University of California, Davis
yuz285@ucsd.edu, aguijose@oregonstate.edu,
adslu@ucdavis.edu, huazheng.wang@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) has recently surged in
popularity, particularly for aligning large language models and other AI systems with human intentions. At its core, RLHF can be viewed as a specialized instance of Preference-based Reinforcement Learning (PbRL), where the
preferences specifically originate from human judgments rather than arbitrary
evaluators. Despite this connection, most existing approaches in both RLHF
and PbRL primarily focus on optimizing a mean reward objective, neglecting
scenarios that necessitate risk-awareness, such as AI safety, healthcare, and autonomous driving. These scenarios often operate under a one-episode-reward
setting, which makes conventional risk-sensitive objectives inapplicable. To address this, we explore and prove the applicability of two risk-aware objectives to
PbRL: nested and static quantile risk objectives. We also introduce Risk-AwarePbRL (RA-PbRL), an algorithm designed to optimize both nested and static objectives. Additionally, we provide a theoretical analysis of the regret upper bounds,
demonstrating that they are sublinear with respect to the number of episodes,
and present empirical results to support our findings. Our code is available in
https://github.com/aguilarjose11/PbRLNeurips.

1

INTRODUCTION

Reinforcement Learning (RL) [Russell and Norvig, 2010] is a fundamental framework for sequential
decision-making, enabling intelligent agents to interact with and learn from unknown environments.
This framework utilizes a reward signal to guide the selection of policies, where optimal policies
maximize this signal. RL has demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in various domains, including
clinical trials [Coronato et al., 2020], gaming [Silver et al., 2017], and autonomous driving [Basu
et al., 2017].
Despite its performance, a significant limitation of the standard RL paradigm is the selection of a
state-action reward function. In many real-world scenarios, constructing an explicit reward function
is often a complex or unfeasible task. As a compelling alternative, Preference-based Reinforcement
Learning (PbRL) [Busa-Fekete et al., 2014, Wirth et al., 2016] addresses this challenge by deviating
from traditional quantifiable rewards for each step. Instead, PbRL employs binary preference feedback
on trajectory pairs generated by two policies, which can be provided directly by human subjects. This
method is increasingly recognized as a more intuitive and direct approach in fields involving human
interaction and assessment, such as autonomous driving [Basu et al., 2017], healthcare [Coronato
et al., 2020], and language models [Bai et al., 2022].A specialized and increasingly popular variant
of PbRL is Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)Bai et al. [2022], which has
garnered considerable attention for aligning AI systems with human intentions—particularly in the
domain of large-scale language models.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

