Parallel Backpropagation for Shared-Feature
Visualization
Alexander Lappe1,2 Anna Bognár3 Ghazaleh Ghamkhari Nejad3
Albert Mukovskiy1 Lucas Martini1,2 Martin A. Giese1 Rufin Vogels3
1
Hertie Institute, University Clinics Tübingen 2 IMPRS-IS 3 KU Leuven
alexander.lappe@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
High-level visual brain regions contain subareas in which neurons appear to respond more strongly to examples of a particular semantic category, like faces
or bodies, rather than objects. However, recent work has shown that while this
finding holds on average, some out-of-category stimuli also activate neurons in
these regions. This may be due to visual features common among the preferred
class also being present in other images. Here, we propose a deep-learning-based
approach for visualizing these features. For each neuron, we identify relevant
visual features driving its selectivity by modelling responses to images based on
latent activations of a deep neural network. Given an out-of-category image which
strongly activates the neuron, our method first identifies a reference image from
the preferred category yielding a similar feature activation pattern. We then backpropagate latent activations of both images to the pixel level, while enhancing the
identified shared dimensions and attenuating non-shared features. The procedure
highlights image regions containing shared features driving responses of the model
neuron. We apply the algorithm to novel recordings from body-selective regions in
macaque IT cortex in order to understand why some images of objects excite these
neurons. Visualizations reveal object parts which resemble parts of a macaque
body, shedding light on neural preference of these objects.
within-category
drivers of neuron

CNN

CNN

image
similarity

arg max

parallel
backprop

out-of-category
driver of neuron

Figure 1: Why does this object image activate IT neurons that are selective for bodies? Our
goal is to visually explain responses of category-selective neurons to outside-of-category (ooc.)
stimuli. We start with an ooc. stimulus (object), that strongly activates a neuron which primarily
fires for a specific category (bodies). We compute latent CNN activations for the image, as well as
for a set of within-category reference images. A neuron-specific similarity metric operating on the
latent activations finds the reference image most similar to the ooc. stimulus. The proposed parallel
backpropagation method then highlights the shared features driving the neural response.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

