Language-Driven Interactive Traffic Trajectory
Generation
Junkai Xia1,3∗

Chenxin Xu1,3∗
1

Qingyao Xu1,3

Yanfeng Wang1,2

Siheng Chen1,2,3†

2

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
Multi-Agent Governance & Intelligence Crew (MAGIC)

Abstract
Realistic trajectory generation with natural language control is pivotal for advancing
autonomous vehicle technology. However, previous methods focus on individual
traffic participant trajectory generation, thus failing to account for the complexity
of interactive traffic dynamics. In this work, we propose InteractTraj, the first
language-driven traffic trajectory generator that can generate interactive traffic
trajectories. InteractTraj interprets abstract trajectory descriptions into concrete
formatted interaction-aware numerical codes and learns a mapping between these
formatted codes and the final interactive trajectories. To interpret language
descriptions, we propose a language-to-code encoder with a novel interaction-aware
encoding strategy. To produce interactive traffic trajectories, we propose a codeto-trajectory decoder with interaction-aware feature aggregation that synergizes
vehicle interactions with the environmental map and the vehicle moves. Extensive
experiments show our method demonstrates superior performance over previous
SoTA methods, offering a more realistic generation of interactive traffic trajectories
with high controllability via diverse natural language commands. Our code is
available at https://github.com/X1a-jk/InteractTraj

1

Introduction

Driving simulations are increasingly vital in the development of autonomous driving [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. By
projecting real-world scenarios into virtual environments, driving simulation enables the generation of
driving data in diverse conditions at a significantly reduced cost, especially in safety-critical scenarios.
Trajectory data, representing the driving behaviors of traffic vehicles, serves as a key part of the
driving simulation. This paper focuses on the generation of traffic trajectories.
One of the most critical aspects of trajectory generation is controllability, which involves generating
highly realistic trajectory data tailored to specific user needs. Several works have been proposed to
prompt a controllable traffic trajectory generation. TrafficGen [4] enables the generation of traffic
scenarios conditioned on a blank map with controllable vehicle numbers. CTG [6] allows users to
control desired properties of trajectories using signal temporal logic at test time like reaching a goal
or following a speed limit by a guide sampling in the diffusion process. However, given that these
control signals are pre-defined, their flexibility is inherently limited.
With the rise of large language models, researchers have begun to use human natural language to
achieve a more flexible and user-friendly control. A representative work is LCTGen [7], which
leverages a large language model to transform text descriptions into structured representations,
followed by a transformer-based decoder to generate corresponding scenarios. However, this work
exclusively focuses on individual traffic participant trajectory generation, disregarding the interactions
between multiple trajectories. Such interactions, crucial for replicating the dynamic, involve the
*
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

