MoGU: A Framework for Enhancing Safety of
LLMs While Preserving Their Usability
∗

Yanrui Du1 , Sendong Zhao1 , Danyang Zhao1 , Ming Ma1 , Yuhan Chen1 , Liangyu Huo2 , Qing Yang2 ,
Dongliang Xu2 , and Bing Qin1
1

Harbin Institute of Technology, {yrdu, sdzhao, qinb}@ir.hit.edu.cn
2
Du Xiaoman Financial

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly deployed in various applications.
As their usage grows, concerns regarding their safety are rising, especially in
maintaining harmless responses when faced with malicious instructions. Many
defense strategies have been developed to enhance the safety of LLMs. However,
our research finds that existing defense strategies lead LLMs to predominantly adopt
a rejection-oriented stance, thereby diminishing the usability of their responses to
benign instructions. To solve this problem, we introduce the MoGU framework,
designed to enhance LLMs’ safety while preserving their usability. Our MoGU
framework transforms the base LLM into two variants: the usable LLM and the
safe LLM, and further employs dynamic routing to balance their contribution.
When encountering malicious instructions, the router will assign a higher weight
to the safe LLM to ensure that responses are harmless. Conversely, for benign
instructions, the router prioritizes the usable LLM, facilitating usable and helpful
responses. On various LLMs, we compare multiple defense strategies to verify
the superiority of our MoGU framework. Besides, our analysis provides key
insights into the effectiveness of MoGU and verifies that our designed routing
mechanism can effectively balance the contribution of each variant by assigning
weights. Our work released the safer Llama27B , Vicuna7B , Falcon7B , Dolphin7B ,
and Baichuan27B at github2 . Warning: This paper presents examples of malicious
instructions that may be offensive and upsetting.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) exhibit significant potential across various domains, yet they also
face considerable safety vulnerabilities [28, 34, 43].To explore these vulnerabilities, several studies
have conducted red-team evaluations with malicious instructions that could encourage harmful behaviors [45, 27]. Others have developed jailbreak attacks [10, 9, 42, 33, 6] aimed at provoking harmful
responses from LLMs by using carefully crafted adversarial prompts. These safety vulnerabilities
may lead to severe consequences, including the promotion of racial discrimination, breaches of ethical
standards, and violations of human rights [9, 40].
In response to LLMs’ safety vulnerabilities, some studies have pursued aligning LLMs with human
values through SFT and RLHF techniques. Despite these advancements, recent work [45, 36]
indicates that even aligned LLMs are still susceptible to jailbreak attacks. To further enhance LLMs’
safety, various defense strategies have been proposed, including input and output detection [26, 21],
∗
2

Corresponding author
https://github.com/DYR1/MoGU

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

