On f -Divergence Principled Domain Adaptation: An
Improved Framework

Ziqiao Wang
Tongji University
Shanghai, China
ziqiaowang@tongji.edu.cn

Yongyi Mao
University of Ottawa
Ottawa, Canada
ymao@uottawa.ca

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) plays a crucial role in addressing distribution shifts in machine learning. In this work, we improve the theoretical foundations of UDA proposed in Acuna et al. (2021) by refining their f -divergence-based
discrepancy and additionally introducing a new measure, f -domain discrepancy
(f -DD). By removing the absolute value function and incorporating a scaling parameter, f -DD obtains novel target error and sample complexity bounds, allowing
us to recover previous KL-based results and bridging the gap between algorithms
and theory presented in Acuna et al. (2021). Using a localization technique, we
also develop a fast-rate generalization bound. Empirical results demonstrate the
superior performance of f -DD-based learning algorithms over previous works in
popular UDA benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Machine learning often faces the daunting challenge of domain shift, where the distribution of data in
the testing environment differs from that used in training. Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA)
arises as a solution to this problem. In UDA, models are allowed to access to labelled source domain
data and unlabelled target domain data, while the ultimate goal is to find a model that performs well
on the target domain. The mainstream theoretical foundations of UDA, and more broadly, domain
adaptation [2], primarily rely on the seminal works of discrepancy-based theory [3, 4]. In particular,
[3, 4] characterize the error gap between two domains using a hypothesis class-specified discrepancy
measure e.g., H∆H-divergence. While these works initially focus on binary classification tasks and
zero-one loss, [5] extend the theory to a more general setting. Subsequently, this kind of theoretical
framework was extended by various works [6–10, 1, 11], all sharing some common properties such
as the ability to estimate the proposed discrepancy from finite unlabeled samples. Importantly, these
theoretical results often inspire the design of new algorithms, such as domain-adversarial training of
neural networks (DANN) [12] and Margin Disparity Discrepancy (MDD) [9], directly motivated by
H∆H-divergence.
Recently, [1] proposes an f -divergence-based domain learning framework, which generalizes various
previous frameworks (e.g., those based on H∆H-divergence) and have demonstrated great empirical
successes. However, we argue that this framework has potential limitations, at least in three aspects.
First, their discrepancy measure is based on the variational representation of f -divergence in [13]
(cf. Lemma 2.1). Although this variational formula is commonly adopted, its weakness has been
pointed out in several works [14, 15]. For example, from this formula, one cannot recover the
well-known Donsker and Varadhan’s (DV) representation of KL divergence [16]. This reveals
a second limitation: some existing domain adaptation or transfer learning theories are based on
the DV representation of KL, such as [17–20], and the framework by [1], although including KL
as a special case of f -divergence, fail to unify those theories. Furthermore and more critically,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

