1

Differentially Private Set Representations

Sarvar Patel∗
Google
sarvar@google.com

Giuseppe Persiano∗
Università di Salerno
giuper@gmail.com

Joon Young Seo∗
Google
jyseo@google.com

Kevin Yeo∗
Columbia University, Google
kwlyeo@google.com

Abstract
We study the problem of differentially private (DP) mechanisms for representing
sets of size k from a large universe. Our first construction creates (ϵ, δ)-DP
representations with error probability of 1/(eϵ + 1) using space at most 1.05kϵ ·
log(e) bits where the time to construct a representation is O(k log(1/δ)) while
decoding time is O(log(1/δ)). We also present a second algorithm for pure ϵ-DP
representations with the same error using space at most kϵ·log(e) bits, but requiring
large decoding times. Our algorithms match our lower bounds on privacy-utility
trade-offs (including constants but ignoring δ factors) and we also present a new
space lower bound matching our constructions up to small constant factors. To
obtain our results, we design a new approach embedding sets into random linear
systems deviating from most prior approaches that inject noise into non-private
solutions.

1

Introduction

Consider the problem of releasing a set S of elements from a potentially very large universe U
in a differentially privately manner. The goal is to construct a differentially private representation
of S, denoted by Ŝ. The representation Ŝ can be used to try and determine whether an element
u ∈ U belongs to the original input set S. Ŝ may err in two ways. For any u ∈ S, Ŝ may report a
false negative stating that u is not in S. Also, for u ∈
/ S, Ŝ may report a false negative claiming u
appears in S. Ideally, we should minimize the error probability for maximal utility while obtaining
strong privacy for S. This problem is useful for applications where users wish to privately disclose
information such as sets of bookmarked websites, visited IP addresses, installed mobile apps, etc.
One particularly important application is training machine learning models using the above examples
as feature vectors while maintaining user privacy. As some concrete examples, good solutions to
our problem could enable privately training models for web traffic forecasting using user’s visited
webpages [26], app install predictions with user’s installed apps sets [5] and detecting shared IP
addresses from user’s visited IP addresses [17].
A naive approach is to interpret the universe U as a bit vector where each element corresponds to
a unique entry of the vector v ∈ {0, 1}|U | . Encoding S ⊆ U works by setting the corresponding
coordinates of S to 1 and the rest to 0. Then, we can apply randomized response [33] to each entry
of v. The noisy vector v is then released as the encoding of S. Accessing an element proceeds by
reading the value at the corresponding coordinate of the noisy vector v. With this approach, the
1∗

The authors are listed in alphabetical order.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

