Empowering and Assessing the Utility of Large
Language Models in Crop Science

Hang Zhang1∗ Jiawei Sun1∗ Renqi Chen1∗ Wei Liu1 Zhonghang Yuan1
Xinzhe Zheng1 Zhefan Wang1 Zhiyuan Yang4 Hang Yan1 Hansen Zhong1
Xiqing Wang3 Wanli Ouyang1 Fan Yang2† Nanqing Dong1†
1
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 2 Yazhouwan National Laboratory
3
China Agricultural University 4 Hangzhou Dianzi University

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable efficacy across
knowledge-intensive tasks. Nevertheless, their untapped potential in crop science
presents an opportunity for advancement. To narrow this gap, we introduce CROP3 ,
which includes a novel instruction tuning dataset specifically designed to enhance
LLMs’ professional capabilities in the crop science sector, along with a benchmark
that serves as a comprehensive evaluation of LLMs’ understanding of the domain
knowledge. The CROP dataset is curated through a task-oriented and LLM-human
integrated pipeline, comprising 210,038 single-turn and 1,871 multi-turn dialogues
related to crop science scenarios. The CROP benchmark includes 5,045 multiplechoice questions covering three difficulty levels. Our experiments based on the
CROP benchmark demonstrate notable enhancements in crop science-related tasks
when LLMs are fine-tuned with the CROP dataset. To the best of our knowledge,
CROP dataset is the first-ever instruction tuning dataset in the crop science domain.
We anticipate that CROP will accelerate the adoption of LLMs in the domain of
crop science, ultimately contributing to global food production.

1

Introduction

Crop cultivation has posed a consistent and enduring challenge throughout human history. Nevertheless, the ability to guarantee an ample harvest remains uncertain due to various factors, such as
weather conditions, regional disparities, and the prevalence of pests and diseases [59, 64]. Without
prompt measures, these factors can result in reduced agricultural output, food shortages, and even
widespread hunger, particularly in underdeveloped nations [24]. Consequently, it is essential to
leverage technological advancements for grain practitioners to enhance production to combat hunger
and achieve global food security [25, 26].
Recently, the field of artificial intelligence and natural language processing (NLP) has witnessed
rapid advancements in large language models (LLMs) [7, 10, 8]. With instructions, LLMs can
generate contexts with professional knowledge regarding users’ enquires [34], leading to notable
achievements and practical applications in various sectors, including legal consulting [18, 23], clinical
management [58, 40], etc. In the realm of crop science, LLMs have been investigated in addressing
agricultural-related exam questions [55], rendering the opportunity to harness LLMs to improve grain
production. Despite the overall acceptable outcomes, LLMs struggle to perform well in specific crop
science scenarios, such as pest management [66]. In addition, the agriculture-related exam datasets
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding authors.
3
The dataset and code are available at website https://open-sciencelab.github.io/Crop/.

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

