Towards a theory of how the structure of language is
acquired by deep neural networks

Francesco Cagnetta
Institute of Physics
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
francesco.cagnetta@epfl.ch

Matthieu Wyart
Institute of Physics
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
matthieu.wyart@epfl.ch

Abstract
How much data is required to learn the structure of a language via next-token prediction? We study this question for synthetic datasets generated via a Probabilistic
Context-Free Grammar (PCFG)—a tree-like generative model that captures many
of the hierarchical structures found in natural languages. We determine token-token
correlations analytically in our model and show that they can be used to build a
representation of the grammar’s hidden variables, the longer the range the deeper
the variable. In addition, a finite training set limits the resolution of correlations
to an effective range, whose size grows with that of the training set. As a result, a
Language Model trained with increasingly many examples can build a deeper representation of the grammar’s structure, thus reaching good performance despite the
high dimensionality of the problem. We conjecture that the relationship between
training set size and effective range of correlations holds beyond our synthetic
datasets. In particular, our conjecture predicts how the scaling law for the test
loss behaviour with training set size depends on the length of the context window,
which we confirm empirically in Shakespeare’s plays and Wikipedia articles.

1

Introduction

Two central foci of linguistics are the language structure and how humans acquire it. Formal language
theory, for instance, describes languages with hierarchical generative models of grammar, classified
in different levels of complexity [1, 2]. In this context, the ‘poverty of the stimulus’ argument [3]—
stating that the data children receive is insufficient to uniquely determine the grammatical structure of
their language—led to the hypothesis that linguistic faculties are largely innate. By contrast, statistical
learning theory [4, 5] posits that the statistics of the input data can be used to deduce the language
structure. This assumption is supported by empirical evidence concerning a broad range of tasks,
including word segmentation [6] and reconstruction of the hierarchical phrase structure [7].
Large Language Models (LLMs) offer an interesting perspective on the subject. For instance, the
success of LLMs trained for next-token prediction [8, 9] establishes that a language can be acquired
from examples alone—albeit with a training set much larger than what humans are exposed to. Furthermore, empirical studies of LLMs’ representations showed that they learn a hierarchy of contextual
information, including notions of linguistics such as word classes and syntactic structure [10, 11, 12].
Recent studies have begun revealing the inner workings of LLMs by using synthetic data generated
via context-free grammars [13, 14], determining, in particular, the algorithm that these models follow
when predicting the next token. However, there is no consensus on the mechanisms behind language
acquisition by LLMs [15, 16]. As a result, empirical phenomena such as the scaling of the test
loss with dataset size and number of parameters [17] and the emergence of specific skills at certain
scales [18, 19] remain unexplained. In this work, we use hierarchical generative models of data to
describe how the structure of a language is learnt as the training set grows.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

