Offline Oracle-Efficient Learning for Contextual MDPs
via Layerwise Exploration-Exploitation Tradeoff

Jian Qian
MIT EECS
jianqian@mit.edu

Haichen Hu
MIT LIDS
huhc@mit.edu

David Simchi-Levi
MIT IDSS
dslevi@mit.edu

Abstract
Motivated by the recent discovery of a statistical and computational reduction from
contextual bandits to offline regression [36], we address the general (stochastic)
Contextual Markov Decision Process (CMDP) problem with horizon H (as known
as CMDP with H layers). In this paper, we introduce a reduction from CMDPs
to offline density estimation under the realizability assumption, i.e., a model class
M containing the true underlying CMDP is provided in advance. We develop an
efficient, statistically near-optimal algorithm requiring only O(H log T ) calls to an
offline density estimation algorithm (or oracle) across all T rounds of interaction.
This number can be further reduced to O(H log log T ) if T is known in advance.
Our results mark the first efficient and near-optimal reduction from CMDPs to
offline density estimation without imposing any structural assumptions on the
model class. A notable feature of our algorithm is the design of a layerwise
exploration-exploitation tradeoff tailored to address the layerwise structure of
CMDPs. Additionally, our algorithm is versatile and applicable to pure exploration
tasks in reward-free reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) model the long-term interaction between a learner and the
environment and are used in diverse areas such as inventory management, recommendation systems,
advertising, and healthcare [35, 37]. The Contextual MDP (CMDP) extends MDPs by incorporating
external factors, known as contexts, such as gender, age, location, or device in customer interactions,
or lab data and medical history in healthcare [19, 33]. In an H-layer CMDP, the learner receives an
instantaneous reward at each step over H steps and aims to maximize the cumulative reward (return).
For T rounds of interaction, the learner’s performance is measured by regret, which is the difference
between the total return obtained and that of an optimal policy.
In the special case of contextual bandits (one-layer CMDPs), a decade of research has led to algorithms
with optimal regret bounds and efficient implementations with access to an offline regression algorithm
(also termed as an offline regression oracle) [13, 2, 3, 15, 14, 36, 40]. Most notably, Simchi-Levi and
Xu [36] demonstrates an offline-oracle-based algorithm FALCON that achieves optimal regret for
general (stochastic) contextual bandits with access to an offline regression oracle (e.g., the Empirical
Risk Minimization (ERM) oracle). Moreover, the algorithm is efficient given the output of the offline
oracle (also referred to as offline oracle-efficient) and requires only O(log log T ) calls to the oracle
across all T rounds if T is known. These properties are highly desirable in practice since they reduce
the computational problem of contextual bandits to the classical problem of offline regression with
little overhead. However, to the best of our knowledge, no algorithm with these properties is available
in the literature for general (stochastic) CMDPs. So, in this paper, we study the following question:
Is there an offline-oracle-efficient algorithm that achieves the optimal regret for general (stochastic)
CMDPs with only O(H log log T ) number of oracle calls?

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

