SELECT: A Large-Scale Benchmark of Data Curation
Strategies for Image Classification

Benjamin Feuer∗ 1 , Jiawei Xu∗1 , Niv Cohen1 ,
Patrick Yubeaton1 , Govind Mittal1 , Chinmay Hegde1
1

NYU

Abstract
Data curation is the problem of how to collect and organize samples into a dataset
that supports efficient learning. Despite the centrality of the task, little work has
been devoted towards a large-scale, systematic comparison of various curation
methods. In this work, we take steps towards a formal evaluation of data curation
strategies and introduce S ELECT , the first large-scale benchmark of curation
strategies for image classification.
In order to generate baseline methods for the S ELECT benchmark, we create a
new dataset, I MAGE N ET ++ , which constitutes the largest superset of ImageNet1K to date. Our dataset extends ImageNet with 5 new training-data shifts, each
approximately the size of ImageNet-1K itself, and each assembled using a distinct
curation strategy. We evaluate our data curation baselines in two ways: (i) using
each training-data shift to train identical image classification models from scratch
(ii) using it to inspect a fixed pretrained self-supervised representation.
Our findings show interesting trends, particularly pertaining to recent methods for data curation such as synthetic data generation and lookup based on
CLIP embeddings. We show that although these strategies are highly competitive for certain tasks, the curation strategy used to assemble the original
ImageNet-1K dataset remains the gold standard. We anticipate that our benchmark can illuminate the path for new methods to further reduce the gap. We
release our checkpoints, code, documentation, and a link to our dataset at
https://github.com/jimmyxu123/SELECT.

1

Introduction

Data curation is the process of collecting and organizing a corpus of data into a dataset that supports
efficient learning. Until recently, data curation was an implicit consideration in most of the academic
discourse on machine learning, and the vast majority of research works were oriented towards
introducing novel methods, theories, or architectures.
However, data curation has begun to gain prominence as a research topic in its own right; several recent
works have contended that labeling errors pervade commonly used benchmark datasets, with error
rate estimates varying from 3% to 50% on the most popular ones [32, 5, 22, 28]. Group imbalances
are often inadvertently introduced during the curation process, biasing model predictions [21, 10].
The work of [33] created a standard, now widely adopted, for reporting on the process for creating
new datasets. Unfortunately, despite growing attention of the centrality of the data curation problem
to model performance, many works in the literature do not adhere to best practices, reporting very
little about the data on which they are trained, or how that data was curated [34, 24, 6]. To address
∗

First two authors contributed equally. Correspondence to: bf996@nyu.edu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

