A Label is Worth a Thousand Images
in Dataset Distillation
Tian Qin
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA
tqin@g.harvard.edu

Zhiwei Deng
Google DeepMind
Mountain View, CA
zhiweideng@google.com

David Alvarez-Melis
Harvard University & MSR
Cambridge, MA
dam@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Data quality is a crucial factor in the performance of machine learning models, a
principle that dataset distillation methods exploit by compressing training datasets
into much smaller counterparts that maintain similar downstream performance.
Understanding how and why data distillation methods work is vital not only for
improving these methods but also for revealing fundamental characteristics of
“good” training data. However, a major challenge in achieving this goal is the
observation that distillation approaches, which rely on sophisticated but mostly
disparate methods to generate synthetic data, have little in common with each
other. In this work, we highlight a largely overlooked aspect common to most of
these methods: the use of soft (probabilistic) labels. Through a series of ablation
experiments, we study the role of soft labels in depth. Our results reveal that the
main factor explaining the performance of state-of-the-art distillation methods
is not the specific techniques used to generate synthetic data but rather the use
of soft labels. Furthermore, we demonstrate that not all soft labels are created
equal; they must contain structured information to be beneficial. We also provide
empirical scaling laws that characterize the effectiveness of soft labels as a function
of images-per-class in the distilled dataset and establish an empirical Pareto frontier
for data-efficient learning. Combined, our findings challenge conventional wisdom
in dataset distillation, underscore the importance of soft labels in learning, and
suggest new directions for improving distillation methods. Code for all experiments
is available at https://github.com/sunnytqin/no-distillation.

1

Introduction

Data is central to the success of modern machine learning models, and there is increasing evidence
that data quality trumps quantity in many settings. For example, in the context of large language
models (LLM), Abdin et al. [1], Gunasekar et al. [11], and Hughes [14] show that training LLMs in a
“data-optimal" regime allows for significant reductions in model size without sacrificing performance
and capabilities. In other words, when trained on high-quality data, small models can rival the
performance of their much larger counterparts. Despite its obvious importance, there is no clear
answer to what characteristics define “good data." Data distillation offers one approach to answering
this question. First introduced by Wang et al. [29], the goal of dataset distillation is to condense
a dataset into a smaller (synthetic) counterpart, such that training on this distilled dataset achieves
performance comparable to training on the original dataset. By studying the distillation process, we
can thus investigate what information is preserved in the data (features, symmetries, and information),
which in turn may shed light on fundamental characteristics that make for “good” training data.
The success of dataset distillation raises two key questions. First, what aspects of the training data
best facilitate “data-efficient" learning? Second, what distillation procedure better captures the aspects
of the dataset relevant for prediction? So far, dataset distillation work has focused almost exclusively
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

