Monte Carlo Tree Search based Space Transfer
for Black-box Optimization

Shukuan Wang1,2∗, Ke Xue1,2∗, Lei Song1,2 , Xiaobin Huang1,2 , Chao Qian1,2†
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University
{wangsk, xuek, huangxb, songl, qianc}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a popular method for computationally expensive
black-box optimization. However, traditional BO methods need to solve new problems from scratch, leading to slow convergence. Recent studies try to extend BO to
a transfer learning setup to speed up the optimization, where search space transfer
is one of the most promising approaches and has shown impressive performance
on many tasks. However, existing search space transfer methods either lack an
adaptive mechanism or are not flexible enough, making it difficult to efficiently
identify promising search space during the optimization process. In this paper,
we propose a search space transfer learning method based on Monte Carlo tree
search (MCTS), called MCTS-transfer, to iteratively divide, select, and optimize in
a learned subspace. MCTS-transfer can not only provide a well-performing search
space for warm-start but also adaptively identify and leverage the information of
similar source tasks to reconstruct the search space during the optimization process.
Experiments on synthetic functions, real-world problems, Design-Bench and hyperparameter optimization show that MCTS-transfer can demonstrate superior performance compared to other search space transfer methods under different settings.
Our code is available at https://github.com/lamda-bbo/mcts-transfer.

1

Introduction

In many real-world tasks such as neural architecture search [56, 41, 42], hyper-parameter optimization [55, 4], and integrated circuit design [19, 30], we often need to solve black-box optimization
(BBO) problems, where the objective function has no analytical form and can only be evaluated
by different inputs, regarded as a “black-box” function. BBO problems are often accompanied by
expensive computational costs of the evaluations, requiring a BBO algorithm to find a good solution
with a small number of objective function evaluations.
Bayesian optimization (BO) [29, 8] is a widely used sample-efficient method for such problems.
At each iteration, BO fits a surrogate model, typically Gaussian process (GP) [26], to approximate
the objective function, and maximizes an acquisition function to determine the next query point.
Under the limited evaluation budget, traditional BO methods only have a few observations, which
are, however, insufficient for constructing a precise surrogate model, leading to slow convergence.
Thus, traditional BO methods struggle to effectively solve expensive BBO problems, preventing their
broader applications.
To tackle this issue, recent research tries to apply transfer learning methods for BO [2]. Transfer
BO methods operate under the assumption that similar tasks may share common characteristics, and
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

