Identifying Functionally Important Features with
End-to-End Sparse Dictionary Learning

Dan Braun∗ Jordan Taylor† Nicholas Goldowsky-Dill∗
Lee Sharkey∗

Abstract
Identifying the features learned by neural networks is a core challenge in
mechanistic interpretability. Sparse autoencoders (SAEs), which learn a sparse,
overcomplete dictionary that reconstructs a network’s internal activations, have
been used to identify these features. However, SAEs may learn more about the
structure of the dataset than the computational structure of the network. There
is therefore only indirect reason to believe that the directions found in these
dictionaries are functionally important to the network. We propose end-to-end
(e2e) sparse dictionary learning, a method for training SAEs that ensures the
features learned are functionally important by minimizing the KL divergence
between the output distributions of the original model and the model with SAE
activations inserted. Compared to standard SAEs, e2e SAEs offer a Pareto
improvement: They explain more network performance, require fewer total features,
and require fewer simultaneously active features per datapoint, all with no cost
to interpretability. We explore geometric and qualitative differences between
e2e SAE features and standard SAE features. E2e dictionary learning brings us
closer to methods that can explain network behavior concisely and accurately.
We release our library for training e2e SAEs and reproducing our analysis at
https://github.com/ApolloResearch/e2e_sae.

1

Introduction

Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs) are a popular method in mechanistic interpretability [Sharkey et al.,
2022, Cunningham et al., 2023, Bricken et al., 2023]. They have been proposed as a solution to
the problem of superposition, the phenomenon by which networks represent more ‘features’ than
they have neurons. ‘Features’ are directions in neural activation space that are considered to be the
basic units of computation in neural networks. SAE dictionary elements (or ‘SAE features’) are
thought to approximate the features used by the network. SAEs are typically trained to reconstruct
the activations of an individual layer of a neural network using a sparsely activating, overcomplete
set of dictionary elements (directions). It has been shown that this procedure identifies ground truth
features in toy models [Sharkey et al., 2022].
However, current SAEs focus on the wrong goal: They are trained to minimize mean squared
reconstruction error (MSE) of activations (in addition to minimizing their sparsity penalty). The issue
is that the importance of a feature as measured by its effect on MSE may not strongly correlate with
how important the feature is for explaining the network’s performance. This would not be a problem
if the network’s activations used a small, finite set of ground truth features – the SAE would simply
identify those features, and thus optimizing MSE would have led the SAE to learn the functionally
∗
†

Apollo Research
ML Alignment & Theory Scholars (MATS), University of Queensland

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

