Transfer Q⋆: Principled Decoding for LLM Alignment

Souradip Chakraborty1∗ Soumya Suvra Ghosal1∗ Ming Yin2 Dinesh Manocha1
Mengdi Wang2 Amrit Singh Bedi3† Furong Huang1†
1
University of Maryland-College Park; 2 Princeton University;
3
University of Central Florida

Abstract
Aligning foundation models is essential for their safe and trustworthy deployment.
However, traditional fine-tuning methods are computationally intensive and require
updating billions of model parameters. A promising alternative, alignment via decoding, adjusts the response distribution directly without model updates to maximize
a target reward r, thus providing a lightweight and adaptable framework for alignment. However, principled decoding methods rely on oracle access to an optimal
Q-function (Q∗ ), which is often unavailable in practice. Hence, prior SoTA methods either approximate this Q∗ using Qπsft (derived from the reference SFT model)
or rely on short-term rewards, resulting in sub-optimal decoding performance. In
this work, we propose Transfer Q⋆ , which implicitly estimates the optimal value
function for a target reward r through a baseline model ρBL aligned with a baseline
reward rBL (which can be different from the target reward r). Theoretical analyses
of Transfer Q⋆ provide a rigorous characterization of its optimality, deriving an
upper bound on the sub-optimality gap and identifying a hyperparameter to control
the deviation from the pre-trained reference SFT model based on user needs. Our approach significantly reduces the sub-optimality gap observed in prior SoTA methods
and demonstrates superior empirical performance across key metrics such as coherence, diversity, and quality in extensive tests on several synthetic and real datasets.
The code is available at https://github.com/umd-huang-lab/Transfer-Q.

1

Introduction

As artificial intelligence (AI) systems continue to demonstrate super-human performance across
various tasks, it is becoming increasingly critical to ensure that such AI systems align well with human
preferences, goals, and ethical standards. Alignment via fine-tuning with reinforcement learning from
human feedback (RLHF) [38, 34, 9], has proven highly effective [36, 44]. However, aligning LLMs
by fine-tuning the model parameters requires gradient updates across several billion parameters (size
of LLMs) which require vast computational resources [31, 25] and have a significant environmental
impact [15]. Additionally, many SoTA models are not fully open-sourced [44, 36], offering limited
access only to certain components like logits, making fine-tuning impossible.
As an alternative to fine-tuning, decoding for alignment has recently emerged as a potential solution [33,
26]. Decoding aims to alter the LLM’s response distribution at the token level to align with target
reward r without updating the parameters of the LLM. Decoding facilitates alignment by accessing
the token-level optimal value function, Q∗ , which corresponds to the target reward r. Tokens are then
sampled based on Q∗ . This approach ensures rapid, efficient, and cost-effective alignment. A detailed
discussion of related work is provided in Appendix E.
∗
†

denotes equal contribution
denotes equal advising

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

