TALoS: Enhancing Semantic Scene Completion via
Test-time Adaptation on the Line of Sight

Hyun-Kurl Jang∗
Visual Intelligence Lab.
KAIST
jhg0001@kaist.ac.kr

Jihun Kim∗
Visual Intelligence Lab.
KAIST
jihun1998@kaist.ac.kr

Hyeokjun Kweon∗
Visual Intelligence Lab.
KAIST
0327june@kaist.ac.kr

Kuk-Jin Yoon
Visual Intelligence Lab.
KAIST
kjyoon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) aims to perform geometric completion and
semantic segmentation simultaneously. Despite the promising results achieved
by existing studies, the inherently ill-posed nature of the task presents significant
challenges in diverse driving scenarios. This paper introduces TALoS, a novel
test-time adaptation approach for SSC that excavates the information available
in driving environments. Specifically, we focus on that observations made at a
certain moment can serve as Ground Truth (GT) for scene completion at another
moment. Given the characteristics of the LiDAR sensor, an observation of an
object at a certain location confirms both 1) the occupation of that location and
2) the absence of obstacles along the line of sight from the LiDAR to that point.
TALoS utilizes these observations to obtain self-supervision about occupancy and
emptiness, guiding the model to adapt to the scene in test time. In a similar manner,
we aggregate reliable SSC predictions among multiple moments and leverage them
as semantic pseudo-GT for adaptation. Further, to leverage future observations that
are not accessible at the current time, we present a dual optimization scheme using
the model in which the update is delayed until the future observation is available.
Evaluations on the SemanticKITTI validation and test sets demonstrate that TALoS
significantly improves the performance of the pre-trained SSC model. Our code is
available at https://github.com/blue-531/TALoS.

1

Introduction

LiDAR is a predominant 3D sensor in autonomous vehicles, effectively capturing the 3D geometry
of the surroundings as a point cloud. However, LiDAR inherently records the surface of objects,
leaving the areas behind initial contact points empty. Therefore, it is crucial for safety and driving
planning to predict the state of these hidden regions using only the limited information available.
Addressing these challenges, Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) has emerged as a pivotal research
topic, enabling simultaneous geometric completion and semantic segmentation of the surroundings.
Existing SSC studies have focused on tackling both tasks [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9], mainly from an
architectural perspective. By amalgamating the models specialized for each task, these approaches
have shown promising results over the last few years. Nevertheless, the nature of the completion
∗

denotes equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

