Mind the Graph When Balancing Data for Fairness
or Robustness
Jessica Schrouff
Google DeepMind
schrouff@google.com
Isabela Albuquerque
Google DeepMind

Alexis Bellot
Google DeepMind

Arthur Gretton
Google DeepMind
Gatsby, UCL

Amal Rannen-Triki
Google DeepMind

Alan Malek
Google DeepMind

Alexander D’Amour
Google DeepMind

Silvia Chiappa
Google DeepMind

Abstract
Failures of fairness or robustness in machine learning predictive settings can be
due to undesired dependencies between covariates, outcomes and auxiliary factors
of variation. A common strategy to mitigate these failures is data balancing,
which attempts to remove those undesired dependencies. In this work, we define
conditions on the training distribution for data balancing to lead to fair or robust
models. Our results display that, in many cases, the balanced distribution does
not correspond to selectively removing the undesired dependencies in a causal
graph of the task, leading to multiple failure modes and even interference with
other mitigation techniques such as regularization. Overall, our results highlight
the importance of taking the causal graph into account before performing data
balancing.

1

Introduction

When training prediction models, practitioners often desire that the model’s outputs display safety
properties in addition to high performance, such as being fair across demographic subgroups [29, 51]
or being robust to distribution shifts [e.g. 19, 59]. These objectives can be difficult to attain if there
are undesired dependencies between covariates X, labels Y , and auxiliary factors of variation Z,
such as confounding factors or hidden stratification [26, 27]. A commonly referenced example is that
of an animal classification task from wildlife pictures [e.g. 64]: the model might identify patterns in
the background of the images that are indicative of the type of animal (e.g. the presence of snow for
polar bears or grass for cows), which might lead to the model failing to recognize the same animal
when it is on another background. When the auxiliary factors relate to demographic attributes, the
deployment of such models can have societal implications, e.g. patients not being assigned medical
resources due to factors related to race [54].
Multiple mitigation strategies have been proposed to remove undesired dependencies pre-, in- or
post-processing. Amongst them, balancing the training data is typically considered a straightforward
approach and has been used or researched in various settings [e.g. 37, 39, 60, 8, 33, 40, 2]. This
approach modifies the training distribution, indicated with P t (X, Y, Z), into a new, balanced distribution (which we refer to as Q(X, Y, Z)) that aims to approximate an ‘idealized’ training distribution
in which the undesired dependencies are absent [48, 14, 77]. Models are then trained on this balanced
distribution to attain different fairness or robustness criteria. A popular approach to construct a
balanced distribution is by balancing classes (resp. groups), leading to a uniform distribution over
Y (resp. Z). While successful for addressing failures of robustness [e.g. 33] or of fairness due to
under-representation of certain groups [e.g. 75], this approach does not induce independence between
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

