3DCoMPaT200: Language-Grounded Compositional
Understanding of Parts and Materials of 3D Shapes

Mahmoud Ahmed1
Xiang Li1
Arpit Prajapati2
Mohamed Elhoseiny1
1
KAUST (King Abdullah University of Science and Technology)
2
Poly9
{mahmoud.ahmed, xiang.li.1, mohamed.elhoseiny}@kaust.edu.sa
arpit@polynine.com

Abstract
Understanding objects in 3D at the part level is essential for humans and robots to
navigate and interact with the environment. Current datasets for part-level 3D object
understanding encompass a limited range of categories. For instance, the ShapeNetPart and PartNet datasets only include 16, and 24 object categories respectively. The
3DCoMPaT dataset, specifically designed for compositional understanding of parts
and materials, contains only 42 object categories. To foster richer and fine-grained
part-level 3D understanding, we introduce 3DCoMPaT200, a large-scale dataset tailored for compositional understanding of object parts and materials, with 200 object
categories with ≈5 times larger object vocabulary compared to 3DCoMPaT and ≈
4 times larger part categories. Concretely, 3DCoMPaT200 significantly expands
upon 3DCoMPaT, featuring 1,031 fine-grained part categories and 293 distinct
material classes for compositional application to 3D object parts. Additionally, to
address the complexities of compositional 3D modeling, we propose a novel task of
Compositional Part Shape Retrieval using ULIP to provide a strong 3D foundational
model for 3D Compositional Understanding. This method evaluates the model
shape retrieval performance given one, three, or six parts described in text format.
These results show that the model’s performance improves with an increasing number of style compositions, highlighting the critical role of the compositional dataset.
Such results underscore the dataset’s effectiveness in enhancing models’ capability
to understand complex 3D shapes from a compositional perspective. Code and
Data can be found here: https://github.com/3DCoMPaT200/3DCoMPaT200/

1

Introduction

Part-level 3D object understanding is a fundamental aspect of machine perception, enabling systems
to interpret and interact with the three-dimensional world in a manner akin to human cognition.
Humans intuitively recognize, categorize, and manipulate objects based on their constituent parts and
the materials from which they are made. This level of understanding underpins everyday actions such
as opening doors or using tools, which rely on recognizing parts (e.g., doorknobs, handles) and their
properties. In computational terms, imparting machines with similar capabilities is essential for a
host of applications in computer vision, robotics, and interactive simulation. Despite its importance,
part-level 3D understanding remains a challenging domain due to the complexity of objects and the
intricacies of their materials and shapes.
Recent advancements have seen the development of comprehensive datasets aimed at fostering 3D
visual understanding. Notably, datasets like ShapeNet [1], ModelNet [2], have provided valuable
resources for analyzing the geometric shapes of objects. Subsequently, 3D-FUTURE [3] introduced
a collection focused on industrial 3D CAD shapes of furniture, enriched with textures designed by
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

