Learning to Shape In-distribution Feature Space for
Out-of-distribution Detection
Yonggang Zhang1 , Jie Lu2 , Bo Peng2 , Zhen Fang2 , Yiu-ming Cheung1∗
1
Hong Kong Baptist University
2
Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute, University of Technology Sydney

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is critical for deploying machine learning
models in the open world. To design scoring functions that discern OOD data from
the in-distribution (ID) cases from a pre-trained discriminative model, existing
methods tend to make rigorous distributional assumptions either explicitly or
implicitly due to the lack of knowledge about the learned feature space in advance.
The mismatch between the learned and assumed distributions motivates us to
raise a fundamental yet under-explored question: Is it possible to deterministically
model the feature distribution while pre-training a discriminative model? This
paper gives an affirmative answer to this question by presenting a Distributional
Representation Learning (DRL) framework for OOD detection. In particular, DRL
explicitly enforces the underlying feature space to conform to a pre-defined mixture
distribution, together with an online approximation of normalization constants
to enable end-to-end training. Furthermore, we formulate DRL into a provably
convergent Expectation-Maximization algorithm to avoid trivial solutions and
rearrange the sequential sampling to guide the training consistency. Extensive
evaluations across mainstream OOD detection benchmarks empirically manifest
the superiority of the proposed DRL over its advanced counterparts.

1

Introduction

Despite the significant progress in machine learning that has facilitated a broad spectrum of classification tasks [45, 81, 42], models often operate under a closed-world scenario, where test data stems
from the same distribution as the training data. However, real-world applications often entail scenarios
in which deployed models may encounter unseen classes of samples during training, giving rise to
what is known as out-of-distribution (OOD) data. These OOD instances can potentially undermine
a model’s stability and, in certain cases, inflict severe damage on its performance. Accordingly, a
reliable discriminative model should not only correctly classify known In-Distribution (ID) samples
but also flag any OOD input as “unknown”. This directly motivates OOD detection [31, 56, 74],
which makes significant differences in ensuring the safety of decision-critical applications, e.g.,
autonomous driving [26], medical diagnosis [85], and cyber-security [51].
Up to now, a plethora of OOD detection algorithms have been developed recently by leveraging
post-hoc analysis on the pre-trained model. The seminal work [22] leverages the maximum softmax
probability (MSP), also known as the softmax confidence score, for OOD detection, which is built
upon the hypothesis that OOD data should trigger relatively lower softmax confidence than that of ID
data. ODIN [35] extends MSP by using temperature scaling and input perturbation to amplify the
ID/OOD separability. Approaches of this category, albeit intuitive, are challenged by the observation
that deep neural networks are prone to produce over-confident predictions, i.e., abnormally high
softmax confidences, even though the inputs are far away from the training data [50]. As a result,
∗

Correspondence to Yiu-ming Cheung (ymc@comp.hkbu.edu.hk)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

