Unifying Generation and Prediction on Graphs with
Latent Graph Diffusion

Cai Zhou1,2 , Xiyuan Wang3,4 , Muhan Zhang3∗
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
4
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
caiz428@mit.edu, {wangxiyuan,muhan}@pku.edu.cn
1

Abstract
In this paper, we propose the first framework that enables solving graph learning
tasks of all levels (node, edge and graph) and all types (generation, regression
and classification) using one formulation. We first formulate prediction tasks
including regression and classification into a generic (conditional) generation
framework, which enables diffusion models to perform deterministic tasks with
provable guarantees. We then propose Latent Graph Diffusion (LGD), a generative
model that can generate node, edge, and graph-level features of all categories
simultaneously. We achieve this goal by embedding the graph structures and
features into a latent space leveraging a powerful encoder and decoder, then training
a diffusion model in the latent space. LGD is also capable of conditional generation
through a specifically designed cross-attention mechanism. Leveraging LGD and
the “all tasks as generation” formulation, our framework is capable of solving graph
tasks of various levels and types. We verify the effectiveness of our framework
with extensive experiments, where our models achieve state-of-the-art or highly
competitive results across a wide range of generation and regression tasks.

1

Introduction

Graph generation has become of great importance in recent years, with important applications in
many fields, including drug design [Li et al., 2018] and social network analysis [Grover et al., 2019].
However, compared with the huge success of generative models in natural language processing [Touvron et al., 2023] and computer vision [Rombach et al., 2021], graph generation is faced with many
difficulties due to the underlying non-Euclidean topological structures. Existing models fail to
generate structures and features simultaneously [Niu et al., 2020, Jo et al., 2022], or model arbitrary
attributes [Vignac et al., 2022].
Moreover, while general purpose foundation models are built in NLP [Bommasani et al., 2021]
which can solve all types of tasks through the generative framework, there are no such general
purpose models for graph data, since current graph generative models cannot address regression or
classification tasks. People also have to train separate models for different levels (node, edge, and
graph) of graph learning tasks. Therefore, it is beneficial and necessary to build a framework that can
solve (a) tasks of all types, including generation, classification and regression; (b) tasks of all levels,
including node, edge, and graph-level.
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

