ContextCite: Attributing Model Generation to Context

Benjamin Cohen-Wang∗, Harshay Shah∗, Kristian Georgiev∗, Aleksander M ˛
adry
MIT
{bencw,harshay,krisgrg,madry}@mit.edu

Abstract
How do language models use information provided as context when generating
a response? Can we infer whether a particular generated statement is actually
grounded in the context, a misinterpretation, or fabricated? To help answer these
questions, we introduce the problem of context attribution: pinpointing the parts of
the context (if any) that led a model to generate a particular statement. We then
present C ONTEXT C ITE, a simple and scalable method for context attribution that
can be applied on top of any existing language model. Finally, we showcase the
utility of C ONTEXT C ITE through three applications: (1) helping verify generated
statements (2) improving response quality by pruning the context and (3) detecting
poisoning attacks. We provide code for C ONTEXT C ITE at https://github.
com/MadryLab/context-cite.

1

Introduction

Suppose that we would like to use a language model to learn about recent news. We would first
need to provide it with relevant articles as context2 . We would then expect the language model to
interact with this context to answer questions. Upon seeing a generated response, we might ask: is
everything accurate? Did the model misinterpret any of the context or fabricate anything? Is the
response actually grounded in the provided context?
Answering these questions manually could be tedious—we would need to first read the articles
ourselves and then verify the statements. To automate this process, prior work has focused on
teaching models to generate citations: references to parts of the context that support a response [1–5].
They typically do so by explicitly training or prompting language models to produce citations.
In this work, we explore a different type of citation: instead of teaching a language model to cite its
sources, can we directly identify the pieces of information that it actually uses? Specifically, we ask:
Can we pinpoint the parts of the context (if any) that led to a particular generated statement?
We refer to this problem as context attribution. Suppose, for example, that a language model
misinterprets a piece of information and generates an inaccurate statement. In this case, context
attribution would surface the misinterpreted part of the context. On the other hand, suppose that a
language model uses knowledge that it learned from pre-training to generate a statement, rather than
the context. In this case, context attribution would indicate this by not attributing the statement to any
part of the context.
Unlike citations generated by language models, which can be difficult to validate [6, 7], in principle
it is easy to evaluate the efficacy of context attributions. Specifically, if a part of the context actually
led to a particular generated response, then removing it should substantially affect this response.
*
2

Equal contribution.
Assistants like ChatGPT automatically retrieve such information as needed behind the scenes [1–3].

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

