Dimension-free deterministic equivalents and scaling
laws for random feature regression

Leonardo Defilippis
Département d’Informatique
École Normale Supérieure - PSL & CNRS
leonardo.defilippis@ens.psl.eu

Bruno Loureiro
Département d’Informatique
École Normale Supérieure - PSL & CNRS
bruno.loureiro@ens.psl.eu

Theodor Misiakiewicz
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Yale University
theodor.misiakiewicz@yale.edu

Abstract
In this work we investigate the generalization performance of random feature ridge
regression (RFRR). Our main contribution is a general deterministic equivalent
for the test error of RFRR. Specifically, under a certain concentration property, we
show that the test error is well approximated by a closed-form expression that only
depends on the feature map eigenvalues. Notably, our approximation guarantee is
non-asymptotic, multiplicative, and independent of the feature map dimension—
allowing for infinite-dimensional features. We expect this deterministic equivalent
to hold broadly beyond our theoretical analysis, and we empirically validate its
predictions on various real and synthetic datasets. As an application, we derive
sharp excess error rates under standard power-law assumptions of the spectrum
and target decay. In particular, we provide a tight result for the smallest number of
features achieving optimal minimax error rate.

1

Introduction

At odds with classical statistical intuition, overparametrized neural networks are able to generalize
while perfectly interpolating the training data. This observation, which defies the canonical mathematical understanding of generalization based on complexity measures and uniform convergence, appears
surprising at first [Zhang et al., 2017]. However, recent progress in our mathematical understanding of
generalization has taught us that this benign overfitting property of overparametrized neural networks
is shared by a plethora of simpler learning tasks [Bartlett et al., 2021, Belkin, 2021]. Among them,
the investigation of the following class of random feature models has been at the forefront of this
progress:
o
n
1 X
aj φ(x, wj ) : a = (aj )j∈[p] ∈ Rp .
(1)
FRF = fˆ(x; a) = √
p
j∈[p]

Here x ∈ X denotes the inputs and W = (wj )j∈[p] a set of weight vectors which are taken to
be random wj ∈ W ⊆ Rd ∼iid µw . Hence, as the name suggests the feature map φ : X ×
W → R defines a random function. A few examples of random feature maps include the fully
connected neural network features φ(x, w) = σ(⟨w, x⟩), σ : R → R, and the convolutional
Pd
features with global average pooling φ(x, w) = 1/d ℓ=1 σ(⟨w, gℓ · x⟩) where σ : R → R and
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

