TreeVI: Reparameterizable Tree-structured
Variational Inference for Instance-level
Correlation Capturing

1

Junxi Xiao1
Qinliang Su1,2∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou, China
xiaojx7@mail2.sysu.edu.cn suqliang@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Mean-field variational inference (VI) is computationally scalable, but its highlydemanding independence requirement hinders it from being applied to wider
scenarios. Although many VI methods that take correlation into account have
been proposed, these methods generally are not scalable enough to capture the
correlation among data instances, which often arises in applications involving
graphs or explicit constraints among instances. In this paper, we developed the
Tree-structured Variational Inference (TreeVI)2 , which uses a tree to capture the
correlation among latent variables in the posterior. We show that samples from the
tree-structured posterior can be reparameterized efficiently and parallelly, making
its training cost just 2 or 3 times that of VI under the mean-field assumption. To
capture correlation with more complicated structure, the TreeVI is further extended
to the multiple-tree case. Furthermore, we show that the underlying tree structure
can be automatically learned from training data. With experiments on synthetic
datasets, constrained clustering, user matching and link prediction, we demonstrate
the efficacy of TreeVI in capturing instance-level correlation in posteriors and
enhancing the performance of downstream applications.

1

Introduction

Variational inference is a probabilistic method that is widely used for approximating the exact
posterior in latent-variable models p(X, Z) = p(X|Z)p(Z), with X and Z being the observed
data and latent variable, respectively. When not considering the existence
Qof any relation among
instances, we can write the model into a factorized form as p(X, Z) = i p(xi |zi )p(zi ), where
xi and zi denote the i-th data instance and latent variable.
Thanks to the factorized form, we can
Q
reasonably use the mean-field posterior q(Z|X) = i q(zi |xi ) for model inference and training.
However, there are also many circumstances, under which complex relations among instances exist.
For instances, in graph-structured data, VGAE [19] uses two instances’ latent representations to
model the probability of existing an edge eij between them via p(eij |zi , zj ), which, obviously,
makes all instances coupled together. Also, in the constrained clustering, DC-GMM [24] designs
a prior p(c; W) to specifyQ
the assignment constraints and then uses it to construct the prior distribution p(Z, c) = p(c; W) i p(zi |ci ), which will also cause all zi to be correlated with each other.
Obviously, under these circumstances, due to the existence of correlation among instances, it is
unreasonable to assume a factorized form for the posterior anymore.
∗
2

Corresponding author.
Code is available at: https://github.com/Mephestopheles/TreeVI.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

