Mind the Gap Between Prototypes and Images in
Cross-domain Finetuning

Hongduan Tian1 , Feng Liu2 , Zhanke Zhou1 , Tongliang Liu3 , Chengqi Zhang4 , Bo Han1†
1
TMLR Group, Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
2
TMLR Group, University of Melbourne 3 Sydney AI Center, The University of Sydney
4
Department of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{cshdtian, cszkzhou, bhanml}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk,
fengliu.ml@gmail.com, tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au, chengqi.zhang@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
In cross-domain few-shot classification (CFC), recent works mainly focus on
adapting a simple transformation head on top of a frozen pre-trained backbone
with few labeled data to project embeddings into a task-specific metric space
where classification can be performed by measuring similarities between image
instance and prototype representations. Technically, an assumption implicitly
adopted in such a framework is that the prototype and image instance embeddings
share the same representation transformation. However, in this paper, we find
that there naturally exists a gap, which resembles the modality gap, between the
prototype and image instance embeddings extracted from the frozen pre-trained
backbone, and simply applying the same transformation during the adaptation
phase constrains exploring the optimal representations and shrinks the gap between
prototype and image representations. To solve this problem, we propose a simple
yet effective method, contrastive prototype-image adaptation (CoPA), to adapt
different transformations respectively for prototypes and images similarly to CLIP
by treating prototypes as text prompts. Extensive experiments on Meta-Dataset
demonstrate that CoPA achieves the state-of-the-art performance more efficiently.
Meanwhile, further analyses also indicate that CoPA can learn better representation
clusters, enlarge the gap, and achieve minimal validation loss at the enlarged gap.
The project repository of CoPA is available at:https://github.com/tmlr-group/CoPA.

1

Introduction

Cross-domain few-shot classification [49] (a.k.a. CFC) aims at learning to perform classification
on tasks sampled from previously unseen domains with only a few labeled data. Recent works [12,
34, 29, 30], which aims at fast adapting a light model on top of the frozen pre-trained backbones for
feature selection or transformation, has shown impressive generalization capability on CFC tasks.
Typically, URL [29], a representative work of this genre, proposes to fast fine-tune a linear transformation head on top of a frozen pre-trained backbone with the nearest centroid classifier loss [47]. The
ultimate goal of URL is to project embeddings into a space where classification can be performed via
measuring the similarity between representations of prototypes and image instances. Technically, an
assumption implicitly adopted in URL is that the prototype and image instance embeddings share the
same representation transformation (see the upper subfigure of Fig. 2) during the adaptation phase.
Intuitively, however, prototype and image instance embeddings depict different levels of information.
Specifically, the embeddings of an image instance encode the instance-level information from the
given image, while the embeddings of a prototype contain some abstract and higher-level information
that is commonly shared among image instances within the corresponding class yet discriminative
from other classes. Thus, applying the same representation transformation as URL might constrain
models from exploring the optimal representations respectively for prototypes and image instances.
†

Correspondence to Bo Han (bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

