Unified Lexical Representation for
Interpretable Visual-Language Alignment

Yifan Li1∗ Yikai Wang1† Yanwei Fu1‡ Dongyu Ru2
Zheng Zhang2 Tong He2†
1
Fudan University 2 Amazon Web Services
yifanli23@m.fudan.edu.cn, yi-kai.wang@outlook.com,
yanweifu@fudan.edu.cn, {rudongyu, zhaz, htong}@amazon.com

Abstract
Visual-Language Alignment (VLA) has gained a lot of attention since CLIP’s
groundbreaking work. Although CLIP performs well, the typical direct latent
feature alignment lacks clarity in its representation and similarity scores. On the
other hand, lexical representation, a vector whose element represents the similarity
between the sample and a word from the vocabulary, is a natural sparse representation and interpretable, providing exact matches for individual words. However,
lexical representations are difficult to learn due to no ground-truth supervision and
false-discovery issues, and thus requires complex design to train effectively. In this
paper, we introduce LexVLA, a more interpretable VLA framework by learning
a unified lexical representation for both modalities without complex design. We
use DINOv2 as our visual model for its local-inclined features and Llama 2, a
generative language model, to leverage its in-context lexical prediction ability. To
avoid the false discovery, we propose an overuse penalty to refrain the lexical representation from falsely frequently activating meaningless words. We demonstrate
that these two pre-trained uni-modal models can be well-aligned by fine-tuning
on the modest multi-modal dataset and avoid intricate training configurations. On
cross-modal retrieval benchmarks, LexVLA, trained on the CC-12M multi-modal
dataset, outperforms baselines fine-tuned on larger datasets (e.g., YFCC15M) and
those trained from scratch on even bigger datasets (e.g., 1.1B data, including CC12M). We conduct extensive experiments to analyze LexVLA. Codes are available
at https://github.com/Clementine24/LexVLA.

1

Introduction

The development of Vision-Language Alignment (VLA) models has made great progress [43, 48,
22, 26, 6] since the innovative CLIP [34] effectively learns a shared latent space where text and
image are well-aligned. This progress has also boosted related fields like vision-language foundation
models [20], multi-modal understanding [18], and text-conditional generation [35]. However, CLIP’s
latent features pose challenges of interpretability issue for analyzing individual factors’ impact.
Additionally, CLIP’s visual model struggles to learn patch-level features, and its text model are
trained based on incomplete and biased captions. These challenges reduces its overall effectiveness.
∗

Work completed during internship at AWS Shanghai AI Lab.
Corresponding authors.
‡
Dr. Fu is with School of Data Science in Fudan, Fudan ISTBI-ZJNU Algorithm Center for Brain-inspired
Intelligence, Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and Technology Innovation Center of
Calligraphy and Painting Digital Generation. Ministry of Culture and Tourism. China.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

