Extracting Training Data from Molecular Pre-trained
Models
Renhong Huang1,2† , Jiarong Xu2∗ , Zhiming Yang2 , Xiang Si2 ,
Xin Jiang3 , Hanyang Yuan1 , Chunping Wang4 , Yang Yang1
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Fudan University, 3 Lehigh University, 4 Finvolution Group
{renh2, yuanhanyang, yangya}@zju.edu.cn,
{jiarongxu, zmyang20}@fudan.edu.cn, xsi21@m.fudan.edu.cn
xjiang@lehigh.edu, wangchunping02@xinye.com

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have significantly advanced the field of drug
discovery, enhancing the speed and efficiency of molecular identification. However,
training these GNNs demands vast amounts of molecular data, which has spurred
the emergence of collaborative model-sharing initiatives. These initiatives facilitate
the sharing of molecular pre-trained models among organizations without exposing
proprietary training data. Despite the benefits, these molecular pre-trained models
may still pose privacy risks. For example, malicious adversaries could perform data
extraction attack to recover private training data, thereby threatening commercial
secrets and collaborative trust. This work, for the first time, explores the risks
of extracting private training molecular data from molecular pre-trained models.
This task is nontrivial as the molecular pre-trained models are non-generative
and exhibit a diversity of model architectures, which differs significantly from
language and image models. To address these issues, we introduce a molecule
generation approach and propose a novel, model-independent scoring function for
selecting promising molecules. To efficiently reduce the search space of potential
molecules, we further introduce a Molecule Extraction Policy Network for molecule
extraction. Our experiments demonstrate that even with only query access to
molecular pre-trained models, there is a considerable risk of extracting training
data, challenging the assumption that model sharing alone provides adequate
protection against data extraction attacks. Our codes are publicly available at:
https://github.com/renH2/Molextract.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has revolutionized various scientific disciplines, inspiring researchers to adopt these
advanced techniques in drug discovery to accelerate molecule identification while reducing costs.
Molecules are commonly represented by molecular graphs, capturing essential structural information.
Consequently, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have demonstrated effectiveness in tasks like property
prediction [13, 59], drug discovery [53, 32], and drug design [34]. However, training these GNNs
faces a significant challenge known as “data hunger” [17]; that is, a substantial amount of molecular
data is required for training. For instance, developing a new drug often involves understanding
intricate molecular behaviors and responses, which can only be achieved through the analysis of
extensive molecular data.
†

This work was done when the author was a visiting student at Fudan University.

* Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

