Improving Sparse Decomposition of Language Model
Activations with Gated Sparse Autoencoders

Senthooran Rajamanoharan∗ Arthur Conmy∗
Google DeepMind
Google DeepMind
Vikrant Varma†
Google DeepMind

János Kramár
Google DeepMind

Lewis Smith
Google DeepMind

Rohin Shah
Google DeepMind

Tom Lieberum†
Google DeepMind
Neel Nanda
Google DeepMind

Abstract
Recent work has found that sparse autoencoders (SAEs) are an effective technique
for unsupervised discovery of interpretable features in language models’ (LMs)
activations, by finding sparse, linear reconstructions of those activations. We introduce the Gated Sparse Autoencoder (Gated SAE), which achieves a Pareto improvement over training with prevailing methods. In SAEs, the L1 penalty used to
encourage sparsity introduces many undesirable biases, such as shrinkage – systematic underestimation of feature activations. The key insight of Gated SAEs is
to separate the functionality of (a) determining which directions to use and (b) estimating the magnitudes of those directions: this enables us to apply the L1 penalty
only to the former, limiting the scope of undesirable side effects. Through training SAEs on LMs of up to 7B parameters we find that, in typical hyper-parameter
ranges, Gated SAEs solve shrinkage, are similarly interpretable, and require half
as many firing features to achieve comparable reconstruction fidelity.

1

Introduction

Mechanistic interpretability aims to explain how neural networks produce outputs in terms of the
learned algorithms executed during a forward pass [33, 34]. Much work makes use of the fact
that many concept representations appear to be linear [14, 19, 34, 39], i.e. that they correspond to
interpretable directions in activation space. However, finding the set of all interpretable directions
is a highly non-trivial problem. Classic approaches, like interpreting neurons (i.e. directions in
the standard basis) are insufficient, as many are polysemantic and tend to activate for a range of
different seemingly unrelated concepts [7, 15, 16]. Within the field, there has recently been much
interest [8, 11, 21, 22, 4] in using sparse autoencoders (SAEs; [32]) as an unsupervised method for
finding causally relevant, and ideally interpretable, directions in a language model’s activations.
Although SAEs show promise in this regard [26, 31], the L1 penalty used in the prevailing training
method to encourage sparsity also introduces biases that harm the accuracy of SAE reconstructions,
as the loss can be decreased by trading-off some reconstruction accuracy for lower L1. In this paper, we introduce a modification to the baseline SAE architecture – a Gated SAE – along with an
accompanying loss function, which partially overcomes these limitations. Our key insight is to use
separate affine transformations for (a) determining which dictionary elements to use in a reconstruction and (b) estimating the coefficients of active elements, and to apply the sparsity penalty only to
the former task. We share a subset of weights between these transformations to avoid significantly
∗

: Joint contribution. † : Core infrastructure contributor. Correspondence: srajamanoharan@google.com
and neelnanda@google.com.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

