Learning Macroscopic Dynamics from Partial
Microscopic Observations

Mengyi Chen1 , Qianxiao Li1, 2
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore1 ,
Institute for Functional Intelligent Materials, National University of Singapore2
chenmengyi@u.nus.edu, qianxiao@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Macroscopic observables of a system are of keen interest in real applications such
as the design of novel materials. Current methods rely on microscopic trajectory
simulations, where the forces on all microscopic coordinates need to be computed
or measured. However, this can be computationally prohibitive for realistic systems.
In this paper, we propose a method to learn macroscopic dynamics requiring only
force computations on a subset of the microscopic coordinates. Our method relies
on a sparsity assumption: the force on each microscopic coordinate relies only on
a small number of other coordinates. The main idea of our approach is to map
the training procedure on the macroscopic coordinates back to the microscopic
coordinates, on which partial force computations can be used as stochastic estimation to update model parameters. We provide a theoretical justification of
this under suitable conditions. We demonstrate the accuracy, force computation
efficiency, and robustness of our method on learning macroscopic closure models
from a variety of microscopic systems, including those modeled by partial differential equations or molecular dynamics simulations. Our code is available at
https://github.com/MLDS-NUS/Learn-Partial.git.

1

Introduction

Macroscopic properties, including thestructural and dynamical properties, provide a way to describe
and understand the collective behaviors of complex systems. In a wide range of real applications,
researchers focus mainly on the macroscopic properties of a system, e.g., the viscosity and ionic
diffusivity of liquid electrolytes for Li-ion batteries (Dajnowicz et al., 2022). Macroscopic observables
usually depend on the whole microscopic system, e.g., the calculation of mean squared displacement
requires all microscopic coordinates during the simulation. With growing simulation and experimental
data, data-driven learning of macroscopic properties from microscopic observations has become an
active area of research (Zhang et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019; Husic et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2020; Fu
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024).
Accurate calculation of macroscopic properties requires large-scale microscopic simulation. However, accurate force computations on all microscopic coordinates for large systems are extremely
expensive (Jia et al., 2020; Musaelian et al., 2023). For example, in ab initio molecular simulations,
accurate forces need to be calculated from density functional theory (DFT). The computational cost of
DFT limits its application to relatively small systems, typically ranging from a few hundred atoms to
several thousand atoms, depending on the level of accuracy and computation resources (Hafner et al.,
2006; Luo et al., 2020). This poses a dilemma: Accurate macroscopic properties are obtained from
large-scale microscopic simulation, but the computation of forces on all the microscopic coordinates
is extremely challenging.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

