Dispelling the Mirage of Progress in Offline MARL
through Standardised Baselines and Evaluation

Claude Formanek1,2∗

Callum Rhys Tilbury1

Jonathan Shock2,3,4
1

InstaDeep

2

Louise Beyers1

Arnu Pretorius1

University of Cape Town

3

INRS, Montreal

4

NITheCS, Stellenbosch

Abstract
Offline multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is an emerging field with great
promise for real-world applications. Unfortunately, the current state of research
in offline MARL is plagued by inconsistencies in baselines and evaluation protocols, which ultimately makes it difficult to accurately assess progress, trust newly
proposed innovations, and allow researchers to easily build upon prior work. In
this paper, we firstly identify significant shortcomings in existing methodologies
for measuring the performance of novel algorithms through a representative study
of published offline MARL work. Secondly, by directly comparing to this prior
work, we demonstrate that simple, well-implemented baselines can achieve stateof-the-art (SOTA) results across a wide range of tasks. Specifically, we show that
on 35 out of 47 datasets used in prior work (almost 75% of cases), we match or
surpass the performance of the current purported SOTA. Strikingly, our baselines
often substantially outperform these more sophisticated algorithms. Finally, we
correct for the shortcomings highlighted from this prior work by introducing a
straightforward standardised methodology for evaluation and by providing our
baseline implementations with statistically robust results across several scenarios,
useful for comparisons in future work. Our proposal includes simple and sensible
steps that are easy to adopt, which in combination with solid baselines and comparative results, could substantially improve the overall rigour of empirical science in
offline MARL moving forward.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) attempts to derive optimal sequential control policies from static
data alone, without access to online interactions (e.g. a simulator). Though the single-agent variant
has received fairly widespread research attention (Prudencio et al., 2023), progress in the multi-agent
context has been slower, due to a variety reasons. For one, multi-agent problems are fundamentally
more difficult, and bring a host of new challenges—including difficulties in coordination (Barde et al.,
2024), large joint-action spaces (Yang et al., 2021), heterogeneous agents (Zhong et al., 2024) and
non-stationarity (Papoudakis et al., 2019), which are absent in single-agent situations.
Nonetheless, some progress has been made in offline multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) in
recent years. In particular, in better understanding the aforementioned difficulties of offline learning
in the multi-agent setting and proposing certain remedies for them (Jiang and Lu, 2021; Yang et al.,
2021; Pan et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023; Shao et al., 2023; Tian et al., 2023; Meng et al., 2023).
∗

Corresponding author: c.formanek@instadeep.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

