Identifiability Guarantees for Causal Disentanglement
from Purely Observational Data

Ryan Welch∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard

Jiaqi Zhang∗
LIDS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard

Caroline Uhler
LIDS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard

Abstract
Causal disentanglement aims to learn about latent causal factors behind data, holding the promise to augment existing representation learning methods in terms of
interpretability and extrapolation. Recent advances establish identifiability results
assuming that interventions on (single) latent factors are available; however, it remains debatable whether such assumptions are reasonable due to the inherent nature
of intervening on latent variables. Accordingly, we reconsider the fundamentals
and ask what can be learned using just observational data.
We provide a precise characterization of latent factors that can be identified in
nonlinear causal models with additive Gaussian noise and linear mixing, without
any interventions or graphical restrictions. In particular, we show that the causal
variables can be identified up to a layer-wise transformation and that further disentanglement is not possible. We transform these theoretical results into a practical
algorithm consisting of solving a quadratic program over the score estimation of the
observed data. We provide simulation results to support our theoretical guarantees
and demonstrate that our algorithm can derive meaningful causal representations
from purely observational data.

1

Introduction

Advances in representation learning play a pivotal role in the application of machine learning across
various fields, including natural language processing, computer vision, and life sciences (c.f., [6, 52]).
The emerging field of causal disentanglement holds the promise to augment such advances by
identifying and learning some aspects about the latent causal factors behind data [39, 18]. These
latent causal factors have been shown to improve the interpretability of high-level concepts behind
complex high-dimensional data [23, 32, 60, 53] and enable extrapolation to predict how novel
interventions will affect the data [57, 59, 36].
In pursuit of causal disentanglement, two critical questions are: (1) to theoretically understand to what
extent the latent causal factors are identifiable, and (2) to algorithmically design efficient methods
to learn these factors with finite samples. Despite the recent surge of interest in this area, these
questions remain difficult given the inherent challenges of both disentanglement and causal discovery.
In the disentanglement literature, the latent factors are assumed to be independent, and it is known
that identifying them is not possible without further knowledge on the data-generating process [15].
Relaxing the independence assumption, causal disentanglement considers potentially related latent
∗

Equal contributions.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

