Boosting Semi-Supervised Scene Text Recognition via
Viewing and Summarizing

Yadong Qu, Yuxin Wang∗, Bangbang Zhou, Zixiao Wang, Hongtao Xie, Yongdong Zhang
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
{qqqyd, bangzhou01, wzx99}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{wangyx58, htxie, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing scene text recognition (STR) methods struggle to recognize challenging
texts, especially for artistic and severely distorted characters. The limitation lies in
the insufficient exploration of character morphologies, including the monotonousness of widely used synthetic training data and the sensitivity of the model to
character morphologies. To address these issues, inspired by the human learning
process of viewing and summarizing, we facilitate the contrastive learning-based
STR framework in a self-motivated manner by leveraging synthetic and real unlabeled data without any human cost. In the viewing process, to compensate for
the simplicity of synthetic data and enrich character morphology diversity, we
propose an Online Generation Strategy to generate background-free samples with
diverse character styles. By excluding background noise distractions, the model
is encouraged to focus on character morphology and generalize the ability to recognize complex samples when trained with only simple synthetic data. To boost
the summarizing process, we theoretically demonstrate the derivation error in the
previous character contrastive loss, which mistakenly causes the sparsity in the
intra-class distribution and exacerbates ambiguity on challenging samples. Therefore, a new Character Unidirectional Alignment Loss is proposed to correct this
error and unify the representation of the same characters in all samples by aligning the character features in the student model with the reference features in the
teacher model. Extensive experiment results show that our method achieves SOTA
performance (94.7% and 70.9% average accuracy on common benchmarks and
Union14M-Benchmark). Code will be available at https://github.com/qqqyd/ViSu.

1

Introduction

Scene text recognition (STR) aims to recognize text in cropped text images. As a fundamental task,
STR can provide auxiliary information for understanding natural scenes and has wide applications
in financial systems, virtual reality, and autonomous driving. Because of the expensive and timeconsuming annotation process, most STR methods turn to two commonly used synthetic datasets,
MJSynth [14] and SynthText [12]. Despite achieving satisfactory recognition results, they still
struggle to perform well in challenging real-world scenarios. We attribute the limitations to insufficient
exploration of character morphologies. First, as shown in Fig. 1(a, b, c), synthetic data are almost
simple samples, whose character morphologies are significantly different from the artistic and
distorted real-world characters. The limitations exhibited by training models using only synthetic
data are further amplified on the challenging benchmarks WordArt [45] and Union14M-Benchmark
(Union-B) [15]. For example, equipped with a language model, ABINet [10] only reaches 67.4%
and 46.0% accuracy on WordArt and Union-B. Second, the model is not robust to the morphological
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

