Progressive Exploration-Conformal Learning for
Sparsely Annotated Object Detection in Aerial Images

Zihan Lu1 , Chenxu Wang1 , Chunyan Xu1,∗ , Xiangwei Zheng2 , Zhen Cui1,∗
1. PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional
Information of Ministry of Education, School of Computer Science and
Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China.
2. Shandong Normal University, Jinan, China.
{zihanlu, chenxuwang, cyx, zhen.cui}@njust.edu.cn, xwzhengcn@163.com

Abstract
The ability to detect aerial objects with limited annotation is pivotal to the development of real-world aerial intelligence systems. In this work, we focus on
a demanding but practical sparsely annotated object detection (SAOD) in aerial
images, which encompasses a wider variety of aerial scenes with the same number of annotated objects. Although most existing SAOD methods rely on fixed
thresholding to filter pseudo-labels for enhancing detector performance, adapting
to aerial objects proves challenging due to the imbalanced probabilities/confidences
associated with predicted aerial objects. To address this problem, we propose
a novel Progressive Exploration-Conformal Learning (PECL) framework to address the SAOD task, which can adaptively perform the selection of high-quality
pseudo-labels in aerial images. Specifically, the pseudo-label exploration can be
formulated as a decision-making paradigm by adopting a conformal pseudo-label
explorer and a multi-clue selection evaluator. The conformal pseudo-label explorer learns an adaptive policy by maximizing the cumulative reward, which can
decide how to select these high-quality candidates by leveraging their essential
characteristics and inter-instance contextual information. The multi-clue selection
evaluator is designed to evaluate the explorer-guided pseudo-label selections by
providing an instructive feedback for policy optimization. Finally, the explored
pseudo-labels can be adopted to guide the optimization of aerial object detector in a
closed-loop progressive fashion. Comprehensive evaluations on two public datasets
demonstrate the superiority of our PECL when compared with other state-of-the-art
methods in the sparsely annotated aerial object detection task. The code will be
available at: https://github.com/SAOD-research/PECL.

1

Introduction

Recently, object detection has gained widespread attention, but the demand for a large amount of
labeled data is time-consuming and labor-intensive. To address this challenge, semi-supervised object
detection (SSOD) has been proposed to enhance detection performance by utilizing limited labeled
samples and a large number of unlabeled samples. SSOD methods (14; 30; 23; 36) mainly focus on
general images, and cannot consider the unique characteristics of objects in aerial images, such as
dense arrangements, rich contextual relationships, and large complex scenes. As shown in Figure 1(a),
objects in aerial images are more dense and similar compared to general images. For example, the
average objects per image are 68.4 vs 7.7 in the DOTA (27) and COCO (13) datasets, respectively.
Therefore, we address the sparsely annotated object detection (SAOD) task in aerial images, which
∗

Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

