Variational Flow Matching for Graph Generation

Floor Eijkelboom∗
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab
University of Amsterdam
Christian A. Naesseth
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab
University of Amsterdam

Grigory Bartosh∗
AMLab
University of Amsterdam

Max Welling
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab
University of Amsterdam

Jan-Willem van de Meent
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab
University of Amsterdam

Abstract
We present a formulation of flow matching as variational inference, which we
refer to as variational flow matching (VFM). Based on this formulation we develop
CatFlow, a flow matching method for categorical data. CatFlow is easy to implement, computationally efficient, and achieves strong results on graph generation
tasks. The key observation in VFM is that we can parameterize the vector field of
the flow in terms of a variational approximation of the posterior probability path,
which is the distribution over possible end points of a trajectory. We show that this
variational interpretation admits both the CatFlow objective and the original flow
matching objective as special cases. We also relate VFM to score-based models, in
which the dynamics are stochastic rather than deterministic, and derive a bound on
the model likelihood based on a reweighted VFM objective. We evaluate CatFlow
on one abstract graph generation task and two molecular generation tasks. In all
cases, CatFlow exceeds or matches performance of the current state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the field of generative modeling has seen notable advancements. In image generation
[41, 45], the development and refinement of diffusion-based approaches — specifically those using
denoising score matching [59] — have proven effective for generation at scale [15, 54]. However,
while training can be done effectively, the constrained space of sampling probability paths in a
diffusion requires tailored techniques to work [52, 64]. This is in contrast to more flexible approaches
such as continuous normalizing flows (CNFs) [8], that are able to learn a more general set of
probability paths than diffusion models [53], at the expense of being expensive to train as they require
one to solve an ODE during each training step (see e.g. [5, 46, 14]).
Recently, Lipman and collaborators [27] proposed flow matching (FM), an efficient and simulationfree approach to training CNFs. Concretely, they use a per-sample interpolation to derive a simpler
objective for learning the marginal vector field that generates a desired probability path in a CNF. This
formulation provides equivalent gradients without explicit knowledge of the (generally intractable)
marginal vector field. This work has been extended to different geometries [7, 23] and various
applications [60, 9, 13, 24]. Similar work has been proposed concurrently in [32, 1].
This paper identifies a reformulation of flow matching that we refer to as variational flow matching
(VFM). In flow matching, the vector field at any point can be understood as the expected continuation
toward the data distribution. In VFM, we explicitly parameterize the learned vector field as an
expectation relative to a variational distribution. The objective of VFM is then to minimize the
*

These authors contributed equally to this work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

