Multiple Physics Pretraining for Spatiotemporal
Surrogate Models

Michael McCabe∗,1,2 , Bruno Régaldo-Saint Blancard 1 , Liam Parker 1 , Ruben Ohana 1 ,
Miles Cranmer 3 , Alberto Bietti 1 , Michael Eickenberg 1 ,Siavash Golkar 1 ,
Geraud Krawezik 1 , Francois Lanusse 1,4 , Mariel Pettee 1,5 ,
Tiberiu Tesileanu 1 , Kyunghyun Cho 6,7,8 , Shirley Ho 1,6,9
The Polymathic AI Collaboration
Flatiron Institute, University of Colorado Boulder, 3 University of Cambridge,
4
Université Paris-Saclay, Université Paris Cité, CEA, CNRS, AIM,
5
Physics Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 6 New York University,
7
Prescient Design, Genentech, 8 CIFAR Fellow, 9 Princeton University
1

2

Abstract
We introduce multiple physics pretraining (MPP), an autoregressive task-agnostic
pretraining approach for physical surrogate modeling of spatiotemporal systems
with transformers. In MPP, rather than training one model on a specific physical
system, we train a backbone model to predict the dynamics of multiple heterogeneous physical systems simultaneously in order to learn features that are broadly
useful across systems and facilitate transfer. In order to learn effectively in this
setting, we introduce a shared embedding and normalization strategy that projects
the fields of multiple systems into a shared embedding space. We validate the
efficacy of our approach on both pretraining and downstream tasks over a broad
fluid mechanics-oriented benchmark. We show that a single MPP-pretrained transformer is able to match or outperform task-specific baselines on all pretraining
sub-tasks without the need for finetuning. For downstream tasks, we demonstrate
that finetuning MPP-trained models results in more accurate predictions across
multiple time-steps on systems with previously unseen physical components or
higher dimensional systems compared to training from scratch or finetuning pretrained video foundation models. We open-source our code and model weights
trained at multiple scales for reproducibility.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the fields of natural language processing and computer vision have been revolutionized
by the success of large models pretrained with task-agnostic objectives on massive, diverse datasets
(Chen et al., 2020; Devlin et al., 2018; He et al., 2021). This has, in part, been driven by the
development of self-supervised pretraining methods which allow models to utilize far more training
data than would be accessible with supervised training (Balestriero et al., 2023). These so-called
“foundation models” have enabled transfer learning on entirely new scales. Despite their task-agnostic
pretraining, the features they extract have been leveraged as a basis for task-specific finetuning,
outperforming supervised training alone across numerous problems especially for transfer to settings
that are insufficiently data-rich to train large models from scratch (Bommasani et al., 2021).
∗

Contact: mmccabe@flatironinstitute.org

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

