RWKU: Benchmarking Real-World Knowledge
Unlearning for Large Language Models

Zhuoran jin1,2 , Pengfei Cao1,2 , Chenhao Wang1,2 , Zhitao He1,2 ,
Hongbang Yuan1,2 , Jiachun Li1,2 , Yubo Chen1,2,* , Kang Liu1,2,3 , Jun Zhao1,2
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{zhuoran.jin, pengfei.cao, yubo.chen, kliu, jzhao} @nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) inevitably memorize sensitive, copyrighted, and
harmful knowledge from the training corpus; therefore, it is crucial to erase this
knowledge from the models. Machine unlearning is a promising solution for efficiently removing specific knowledge by post hoc modifying models. In this paper,
we propose a Real-World Knowledge Unlearning benchmark ( RWKU) for
LLM unlearning. RWKU is designed based on the following three key factors:
(1) For the task setting, we consider a more practical and challenging unlearning
setting, where neither the forget corpus nor the retain corpus is accessible. (2) For
the knowledge source, we choose 200 real-world famous people as the unlearning
targets and show that such popular knowledge is widely present in various LLMs.
(3) For the evaluation framework, we design the forget set and the retain set to
evaluate the model’s capabilities across various real-world applications. Regarding the forget set, we provide four membership inference attack (MIA) methods
and nine kinds of adversarial attack probes to rigorously test unlearning efficacy.
Regarding the retain set, we assess locality and utility in terms of neighbor perturbation, general ability, reasoning ability, truthfulness, factuality, and fluency. We
conduct extensive experiments across two unlearning scenarios, two models and six
baseline methods and obtain some meaningful findings. We release our benchmark
and code publicly at http://rwku-bench.github.io for future work.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) [60; 44], trained on massive internet corpora, can encapsulate a vast
amount of knowledge within their parameters, and possess the capability to recall and manipulate this
knowledge during the generation process. However, this capability is dual-use, potentially leading
to privacy problems, copyright concerns, and harmful issues [45; 28]. For instance, LLMs may
memorize personally identifiable information (e.g., social security numbers) or copyrighted material
(e.g., Harry Potter series) from the training data, and emit it verbatim when prompted with adversarial
attacks [10]. Besides, AI assistants for biology could troubleshoot bottlenecks in biological weapons
development, increasing the risk of such attempts. According to regulations such as the European
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) upholding individuals’ “right to be forgotten” (RTBF)
[41], sensitive and toxic knowledge within LLMs should also be erasable. A straightforward solution
is to retrain the model from scratch, ensuring it excludes any data that users have requested to be
removed. However, this is not feasible for LLMs that consume extensive computational resources.
*

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

