Compositional PAC-Bayes:
Generalization of GNNs with persistence and beyond

Kirill Brilliantov
ETH Zürich
kbrilliantov@ethz.ch

Amauri H. Souza
Federal Institute of Ceará
amauriholanda@ifce.edu.br

Vikas Garg
YaiYai Ltd & Aalto University
vgarg@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Heterogeneity, e.g., due to different types of layers or multiple sub-models, poses
key challenges in analyzing the generalization behavior of several modern architectures. For instance, descriptors based on Persistent Homology (PH) are being
increasingly integrated into Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to augment them with
rich topological features; however, the generalization of such PH schemes remains
unexplored. We introduce a novel compositional PAC-Bayes framework that provides a general recipe to analyze a broad spectrum of models including those with
heterogeneous layers. Specifically, we provide the first data-dependent generalization bounds for a widely adopted PH vectorization scheme (that subsumes persistence landscapes, images, and silhouettes) as well as PH-augmented GNNs. Using
our framework, we also obtain bounds for GNNs and neural nets with ease. Our
bounds also inform the design of novel regularizers. Empirical evaluations on several standard real-world datasets demonstrate that our theoretical bounds highly correlate with empirical generalization performance, leading to improved classifier design via our regularizers. Overall, this work bridges a crucial gap in the theoretical
understanding of PH methods and general heterogeneous models, paving the way
for the design of better models for (graph) representation learning. Our code is available at https://github.com/Aalto-QuML/Compositional-PAC-Bayes.

1

Introduction

Topological data analysis (TDA) harnesses tools from algebraic topology to unveil the underlying
shape and structure of data. TDA has recently gained significant traction within machine learning
mainly due to its flagship method: persistent homology (PH) [11], which allows for capturing topological invariants (like connected components and loops) of the input domain at multiple scales. In particular, PH has recently been leveraged as a tool to augment the representational capabilities of graph
neural networks (GNNs) [20, 53, 58], with expressivity gains formally established [22, 44]. Intuitively,
PH furnishes global structural signatures that complement the local nature of GNNs [5, 18, 20, 57].
Understanding the generalization behavior of these models is crucial as it plays a pivotal role in
ensuring their reliability and applicability [41]. In this context, there are two fundamental approaches
to achieving generalization bounds: data-independent and data-dependent [47], each offering unique
insights into the generalization problem. Both these approaches have been investigated to analyze the
generalization ability of GNNs [12, 14, 25, 33, 36, 46, 48, 52, 59]. Data-dependent generalization
bounds evoke particular interest since they are typically much tighter than the agnostic bounds
afforded by, e.g., VC dimension. However, no such bounds have been unearthed for PH methods (i.e.,
learnable vectorization schemes) and, consequently, for GNNs enhanced with PH-based descriptors.
We bridge this gap with the first data-dependent generalization bound for classifiers based on a
versatile and widely used vectorization framework for persistence diagrams, namely, PersLay [5].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

