Preference-based Pure Exploration

Apurv Shukla∗
Department of ECE, Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77840
apurv.shukla@umich.edu

Debabrota Basu
Équipe School, Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS
Centrale Lille, UMR-9189 - CRIStAL, France
debabrota.basu@inria.fr

Abstract
We study the preference-based pure exploration problem for bandits with vectorvalued rewards. The rewards are ordered using a (given) preference cone C and
our goal is to identify the set of Pareto optimal arms. First, to quantify the impact
of preferences, we derive a novel lower bound on sample complexity for identifying the most preferred policy with a confidence level 1 − δ. Our lower bound
elicits the role played by the geometry of the preference cone and punctuates the
difference in hardness compared to existing best-arm identification variants of the
problem. We further explicate this geometry when the rewards follow Gaussian
distributions. We then provide a convex relaxation of the lower bound and leverage
it to design the Preference-based Track and Stop (PreTS) algorithm that identifies
the most preferred policy. Finally, we show that the sample complexity of PreTS is
asymptotically tight by deriving a new concentration inequality for vector-valued
rewards.

1

Introduction

Following COVID-19, the importance of reliable clinical trials and corresponding data acquisition
to design effective drugs has gained wider recognition. However, conducting large-scale clinical
trials is cost and time intensive as it requires working with large number of patients and following
up their medical conditions over time. In the past two decades, this has led to doubling in the cost
to bring a drug to the market, i.e., to $2.6 billion with a 12-year drug development horizon and
90% failure rate during the clinical trial (Mullard, 2014; Sun et al., 2022). However, due to the
rise of systematic data acquisition about biological systems, pharmaceutical firms are interested
in harvesting the collected data for drug discovery (Gaulton et al., 2012; Reker and Schneider,
2015). Thus, machine learning-based methods are increasingly studied and deployed as a promising
avenue for identifying potentially successful drugs with less patient involvement, increasing the
“hit rate”, and speeding up the development process (Jayatunga et al., 2022; Smer-Barreto et al.,
2023; Sadybekov and Katritch, 2023; Hasselgren and Oprea, 2024). But deciding whether a drug
is successful depends on multiple and often conflicting objectives regarding safety, efficacy, and
pharmacokinetic constraints (Lizotte and Laber, 2016). For example, COV-BOOST (Munro et al.,
2021) demonstrates a phase II vaccine clinical trial conducted on 2883 participants to measure the
immunogenicity indicators (e.g. cellular response, anti-spike IgG and NT50 ) of different Covid19 vaccines as a booster (third dose). Experts decide how different indicators are preferred over
one another, and above different thresholds (Jayatunga et al., 2022). This motivates us to study a
sequential decision-making problem, where we aim to conduct minimum number of experiments to
acquire informative data, and to reliably validate a hypothesis with multiple objectives by imposing
preferences over them.
∗

This work was done when the author was at Texas A& M University. The author is currently at the University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

