Generating Code World Models with Large Language
Models Guided by Monte Carlo Tree Search

Nicola Dainese∗
Department of Computer Science
Aalto University
nicola.dainese@aalto.fi

Matteo Merler∗
Department of Computer Science
Aalto University
matteo.merler@aalto.fi

Minttu Alakuijala
Department of Computer Science
Aalto University
minttu.alakuijala@aalto.fi

Pekka Marttinen
Department of Computer Science
Aalto University
pekka.marttinen@aalto.fi

Abstract
In this work we consider Code World Models, world models generated by a Large
Language Model (LLM) in the form of Python code for model-based Reinforcement Learning (RL). Calling code instead of LLMs for planning has potential to
be more precise, reliable, interpretable, and extremely efficient. However, writing
appropriate Code World Models requires the ability to understand complex instructions, to generate exact code with non-trivial logic and to self-debug a long program
with feedback from unit tests and environment trajectories. To address these challenges, we propose Generate, Improve and Fix with Monte Carlo Tree Search
(GIF-MCTS), a new code generation strategy for LLMs. To test our approach in an
offline RL setting, we introduce the Code World Models Benchmark (CWMB), a
suite of program synthesis and planning tasks comprised of 18 diverse RL environments paired with corresponding textual descriptions and curated trajectories.
GIF-MCTS surpasses all baselines on the CWMB and two other benchmarks, and
we show that the Code World Models synthesized with it can be successfully used
for planning, resulting in model-based RL agents with greatly improved sample
efficiency and inference speed.

1

Introduction

The ability to model the world is essential for goal-oriented intelligent agents [Ha and Schmidhuber,
2018]. When faced with a novel environment, the agent must quickly understand its mechanics to
achieve its goal, for example by building an internal representation of the world and planning with it.
In this context, natural language conditioning can be useful for grounding current observations in
past knowledge and improving the agent’s understanding of the world. Therefore, communicating
information about a new task to the agent in natural language is particularly promising, and multiple
works explore instruction-following agents [Jang et al., 2022, Ahn et al., 2022]. However, not all
important information can be communicated in the form of imperative instructions. Many key facts
required to solve a task involve understanding observations, predicting outcomes of different actions
and determining whether those outcomes align with the agent’s goals. Thus, systems capable of
leveraging additional descriptive information, such as model-based Reinforcement Learning (RL)
agents, have a greater potential for fast and efficient adaptation via natural language [Lin et al., 2024].
∗

Asterisk indicates equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

