Chain of Agents: Large Language Models
Collaborating on Long-Context Tasks

Yusen Zhang♣∗, Ruoxi Sun♢ , Yanfei Chen♢ , Tomas Pfister♢ , Rui Zhang♣† , Sercan Ö. Arık♢†
♣
Penn State University, ♢ Google Cloud AI Research
{yfz5488, rmz5227}@psu.edu, {ruoxis, yanfeichen, tpfister, soarik}@google.com

Abstract
Addressing the challenge of effectively processing long contexts has become a
critical issue for Large Language Models (LLMs). Two common strategies have
emerged: 1) reducing the input length, such as retrieving relevant chunks by
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG), and 2) expanding the context window
limit of LLMs. However, both strategies have drawbacks: input reduction has no
guarantee of covering the part with needed information, while window extension
struggles with focusing on the pertinent information for solving the task. To mitigate these limitations, we propose Chain-of-Agents (CoA), a novel framework that
harnesses multi-agent collaboration through natural language to enable information aggregation and context reasoning across various LLMs over long-context
tasks. CoA consists of multiple worker agents who sequentially communicate to
handle different segmented portions of the text, followed by a manager agent who
synthesizes these contributions into a coherent final output. CoA processes the
entire input by interleaving reading and reasoning, and it mitigates long context
focus issues by assigning each agent a short context. We perform a comprehensive
evaluation of CoA on a wide range of long-context tasks in question answering,
summarization, and code completion, demonstrating significant improvements by
up to 10% over strong baselines of RAG, Full-Context, and multi-agent LLMs.

1

Introduction

Despite their impressive performance across a wide range of scenarios, LLMs struggle with tasks that
involve long contexts [8, 63, 57]. Numerous application scenarios demand extremely long contexts,
such as question answering [85, 22, 69], document and dialogue summarization [25, 93, 91, 90, 12],
and code completion [20, 43], where the inputs contain entire books [32, 33] and long articles [16].
To tackle the challenge with long context tasks, two major directions have been explored as shown
in Table 1: input reduction and window extension. Input reduction reduces the length of the input
context before feeding to downstream LLMs. Truncation approaches [1, 67] directly truncate the
input. Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) [81] extends this direction by retrieving the most
relevant chunks through embedding similarity. However, because of low retrieval accuracy, LLMs
could receive an incomplete context for solving the task, hurting performance. Window extension
extends the context window of LLMs via finetuning to consume the whole input [13, 44, 48]. For
example, Claude-3 [5] directly allows reading 200k tokens for each input. However, when the window
becomes longer, LLMs struggle to focus on the needed information to solve the task, suffering from
ineffective context utilization such as the “lost in the middle” issue [37, 3, 42].
∗
†

Work done while the author was a student researcher at Google Cloud AI Research.
Last authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

