Evaluating the design space of diffusion-based
generative models

Yuqing Wang
Simons Institute
University of California, Berkeley
yq.wang@berkeley.edu

Ye He
School of Mathematics
Georgia Institute of Technology
yhe367@gatech.edu

Molei Tao
School of Mathematics
Georgia Institute of Technology
mtao@gatech.edu

Abstract
Most existing theoretical investigations of the accuracy of diffusion models, albeit
significant, assume the score function has been approximated to a certain accuracy,
and then use this a priori bound to control the error of generation. This article
instead provides a first quantitative understanding of the whole generation process,
i.e., both training and sampling. More precisely, it conducts a non-asymptotic convergence analysis of denoising score matching under gradient descent. In addition,
a refined sampling error analysis for variance exploding models is also provided.
The combination of these two results yields a full error analysis, which elucidates
(again, but this time theoretically) how to design the training and sampling processes for effective generation. For instance, our theory implies a preference toward
noise distribution and loss weighting in training that qualitatively agree with the
ones used in Karras et al. [30]. It also provides perspectives on the choices of time
and variance schedules in sampling: when the score is well trained, the design in
Song et al. [46] is more preferable, but when it is less trained, the design in Karras
et al. [30] becomes more preferable.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models became a very popular generative modeling approach in various domains, including
computer vision [20, 7, 27, 28, 38, 51], natural language processing [6, 34, 37], various modeling
tasks [15, 41, 55], and medical, biological, chemical and physical applications [3, 17, 43, 49, 23, 56]
(see more surveys in [53, 11, 14]). Karras et al. [30] provided a unified empirical understanding of
the derivations of model parameters, leading to new state-of-the-art performance. Karras et al. [31]
further upgraded the model design by revamping the network architectures and replacing the weights
of the network with an exponential moving average. As diffusion models gain wider usage, efforts to
understand and enhance their generation capability become increasingly meaningful.
In fact, a rapidly increasing number of theoretical works already analyzed various aspects of diffusion
models [32, 19, 52, 16, 12, 8, 18, 9, 13, 39, 44, 25]. Among them, a majority [32, 19, 52, 16, 12, 8, 18]
focus on sampling/inference; more precisely, they assume the score error is within a certain accuracy
threshold (i.e. the score function is well trained in some sense), and analyze the discrepancy between
the distribution of the generated samples and the true one. Meanwhile, there are a handful of
results [44, 25] that aim at understanding different facets of the training process. See more detailed
discussions of existing theoretical works in Section 1.1.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

