Hints-In-Browser: Benchmarking Language Models
for Programming Feedback Generation

Nachiket Kotalwar
MPI-SWS
nkotalwa@mpi-sws.org

Alkis Gotovos
MPI-SWS
agkotovo@mpi-sws.org

Adish Singla
MPI-SWS
adishs@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
Generative AI and large language models hold great promise in enhancing programming education by generating individualized feedback and hints for learners.
Recent works have primarily focused on improving the quality of generated feedback to achieve human tutors’ quality. While quality is an important performance
criterion, it is not the only criterion to optimize for real-world educational deployments. In this paper, we benchmark language models for programming feedback
generation across several performance criteria, including quality, cost, time, and
data privacy. The key idea is to leverage recent advances in the new paradigm
of in-browser inference that allow running these models directly in the browser,
thereby providing direct benefits across cost and data privacy. To boost the feedback
quality of small models compatible with in-browser inference engines, we develop
a fine-tuning pipeline based on GPT-4 generated synthetic data. We showcase
the efficacy of fine-tuned Llama3-8B and Phi3-3.8B 4-bit quantized models using
WebLLM’s in-browser inference engine on three different Python programming
datasets. We also release the full implementation along with a web app and datasets
to facilitate further research on in-browser language models.

1

Introduction

Generative AI and large language models have the potential to drastically improve the landscape
of computing and programming education by empowering next-generation tutoring systems. In
particular, this potential lies in the advanced capabilities of state-of-the-art models like OpenAI’s
GPT-4 [1] to automatically generate high-quality programming feedback and provide 24/7 digital
assistance to novice learners [2, 3, 4]. A series of recent works have studied these models for
programming feedback generation, including benchmarking the models’ performance with human
tutors in terms of generated feedback quality [5], developing techniques to further improve the
generation quality [6, 7, 8, 9], and deploying feedback generation technologies in classrooms to
measure pedagogical benefits and students’ perception of quality [10, 11, 12].
While quality is an important performance criterion, it is not the only criterion to optimize in realworld educational deployments. Let us look at a typical workflow of existing (pilot) applications
that employ programming feedback techniques (see Figure 1a) [10, 11, 12]: (1) an educator deploys
their technique on a server, which then communicates with state-of-the-art models like OpenAI’s
GPT-4 [1], and then exposes this technique to learners via an app; (2) when a learner requests a hint,
metadata such as the buggy program and the learner’s specific question is sent to the server to be
processed by the technique; (3) once the technique generates the hint, the learner receives it back
via the app. Three key issues emerge with this workflow: (i) the running costs for an educator could
be 0.01–0.1 USD for a single hint request [9, 12], making it infeasible to provide large-scale free
access to such technology; (ii) the waiting times for a learner could be over 30 seconds making the
experience and feedback loop less interactive [9]; (iii) data privacy concerns creep in as the learner’s
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

