GeoPlant: Spatial Plant Species Prediction Dataset

Lukas Picek1 , Christophe Botella1 , Maximilien Servajean2 , César Leblanc1 , Rémi Palard1
Théo Larcher1 , Benjamin Deneu1 , Diego Marcos1,3 , Pierre Bonnet4 , and Alexis Joly1
1
INRIA 2 Université Paul Valéry 3 Université de Montpellier 4 CIRAD, UMR AMAP

5,016 species

{

Test : 4,716 surveys of
Presence-Absence data.
Train : 88,987 surveys of
Presence-Absence data.

5,079,797 Presence-Only
GBIF occurrences (9,709 species).

Climatic time-series
Monthly variables available
from 2000 to 2019.

Satellite images
RGB and NIR images
for each location (Sentinel-2).

Satellite time-series
Multi-spectral variables for
each occurence (Landsat
ARD).

Environmental rasters
Land use, human footprint,
bioclim, soil, and elevation.

10,358 Presence-Absence and Presence-Only species.

Abstract
The difficulty of monitoring biodiversity at fine scales and over large areas limits
ecological knowledge and conservation efforts. To fill this gap, Species Distribution
Models (SDMs) predict species across space from spatially explicit features. Yet,
they face the challenge of integrating the rich but heterogeneous data made available
over the past decade, notably millions of opportunistic species observations and
standardized surveys, as well as multimodal remote sensing data. In light of that,
we have designed and developed a new European-scale dataset for SDMs at high
spatial resolution (10–50m), including more than 10k species (i.e., most of the
European flora). The dataset comprises 5M heterogeneous Presence-Only records
and 90k exhaustive Presence-Absence survey records, all accompanied by diverse
environmental rasters (e.g., elevation, human footprint, and soil) traditionally used
in SDMs. In addition, it provides Sentinel-2 RGB and NIR satellite images with
10 m resolution, a 20-year time series of climatic variables, and satellite time
series from the Landsat program. In addition to the data, we provide an openly
accessible SDM benchmark (hosted on Kaggle), which has already attracted an
active community and a set of strong baselines for single predictor/modality and
multimodal approaches. All resources, e.g., the dataset, pre-trained models, and
baseline methods (in the form of notebooks), are available on Kaggle, allowing one
to start with our dataset literally with two mouse clicks.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

