SSA-Seg: Semantic and Spatial Adaptive Pixel-level
Classifier for Semantic Segmentation

Xiaowen Ma1,2∗ ,
1

Zhenliang Ni1∗,

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

2

Xinghao Chen1†

Zhejiang University

https://github.com/xwmaxwma/SSA-Seg

Abstract
Vanilla pixel-level classifiers for semantic segmentation are based on a certain
paradigm, involving the inner product of fixed prototypes obtained from the training set and pixel features in the test image. This approach, however, encounters
significant limitations, i.e., feature deviation in the semantic domain and information loss in the spatial domain. The former struggles with large intra-class variance
among pixel features from different images, while the latter fails to utilize the
structured information of semantic objects effectively. This leads to blurred mask
boundaries as well as a deficiency of fine-grained recognition capability. In this
paper, we propose a novel Semantic and Spatial Adaptive Classifier (SSA-Seg) to
address the above challenges. Specifically, we employ the coarse masks obtained
from the fixed prototypes as a guide to adjust the fixed prototype towards the center
of the semantic and spatial domains in the test image. The adapted prototypes in
semantic and spatial domains are then simultaneously considered to accomplish
classification decisions. In addition, we propose an online multi-domain distillation
learning strategy to improve the adaption process. Experimental results on three
publicly available benchmarks show that the proposed SSA-Seg significantly improves the segmentation performance of the baseline models with only a minimal
increase in computational cost.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation, as a fundamental task in computer vision, aims at assigning a category label
to each pixel in a given image and is widely used in various domains such as autonomous driving [25],
industrial detection [13], satellite image analysis [60, 27] and smart city [26]. Mainstream methods,
such as FCN [34], DeepLab [5, 6], PSPNet [59], and SegNeXt [17] mainly use parametric softmax to
classify each pixel. In recent developments, transformer-based approaches like MaskFormer [10],
Mask2Former [9], and SegViT [55] classify masks by directly learning query vectors, termed as masklevel classification. However, these mask-level classification models often require heavyweight crossattention decoders, which limit their deployment in resource-constrained scenarios [45, 57, 14, 35, 7].
Vanilla parametric softmax uses the convolutional kernel weights as the fixed semantic prototypes and
obtains segmentation masks by computing the inner product of the pixel features and the prototypes.
However, this pixel-level classification method has two obvious drawbacks: (1) feature deviation in
the semantic domain. Due to complex backgrounds and varying object distributions, pixel features in
the test images tend to have a large intra-class variance with pixel features in the training set. However,
the fixed semantic prototypes, representing the semantic feature distribution on the training set, will be
far away from the pixel features of the corresponding class when applied to the test image, as shown in
Fig. 1(b). (2) information loss in the spatial domain. The vanilla pixel-level classifiers only perform
∗

Equal contribution, † Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

