Dual Cone Gradient Descent for Training
Physics-Informed Neural Networks

Youngsik Hwang
Artificial Intelligence Graduate School
UNIST
hys3835@unist.ac.kr

Dong-Young Lim∗
Department of Industrial Engineering
Artificial Intelligence Graduate School
UNIST
dlim@unist.ac.kr

Abstract
Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) have emerged as a prominent approach
for solving partial differential equations (PDEs) by minimizing a combined loss
function that incorporates both boundary loss and PDE residual loss. Despite their
remarkable empirical performance in various scientific computing tasks, PINNs often fail to generate reasonable solutions, and such pathological behaviors remain difficult to explain and resolve. In this paper, we identify that PINNs can be adversely
trained when gradients of each loss function exhibit a significant imbalance in their
magnitudes and present a negative inner product value. To address these issues, we
propose a novel framework for multi-objective optimization, Dual Cone Gradient
Descent (DCGD), which adjusts the direction of the updated gradient to ensure it
falls within a dual cone region. This region is defined as a set of vectors where the
inner products with both the gradients of the PDE residual loss and the boundary
loss are non-negative. Theoretically, we analyze the convergence properties of
DCGD algorithms in a non-convex setting. On a variety of benchmark equations,
we demonstrate that DCGD outperforms other optimization algorithms in terms of
various evaluation metrics. In particular, DCGD achieves superior predictive accuracy and enhances the stability of training for failure modes of PINNs and complex
PDEs, compared to existing optimally tuned models. Moreover, DCGD can be
further improved by combining it with popular strategies for PINNs, including learning rate annealing and the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK). Codes are available at
https://github.com/youngsikhwang/Dual-Cone-Gradient-Descent.

1

Introduction

Physics-informed Neural Networks (PINNs) proposed in Raissi et al. [1] have created a new paradigm
in deep learning for solving forward and inverse problems involving partial differential equations
(PDEs). The key idea of PINNs is to integrate physical constraints, governed by PDEs, into the loss
function of neural networks. This is in turn equivalent to finding optimal parameters for the neural
network by minimizing a loss function that combines boundary loss and PDE residual loss. Thanks
to their strong approximation ability and mesh-free advantage, PINNs have achieved great success in
a wide range of applications [2–8].
Building upon this success, the applications of PINNs have been extended to solve other functional
equations, including integro-differential equations [9], fractional PDEs [10], and stochastic PDEs
[11]. Moreover, numerous variants of PINNs have been developed to enhance their computational
efficiency and accuracy via domain decomposition methods [12, 13], advanced neural network
architectures [14–18], modified loss functions [19–21], different sampling strategies [22–24], and
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

