Improved off-policy training of diffusion samplers

Marcin Sendera
Mila, Université de Montréal
Jagiellonian University

Minsu Kim
Mila, Université de Montréal
KAIST

Sarthak Mittal
Mila, Université de Montréal

Pablo Lemos
Mila, Université de Montréal
Ciela Institute
Dreamfold

Luca Scimeca
Mila, Université de Montréal

Jarrid Rector-Brooks
Mila, Université de Montréal
Dreamfold

Alexandre Adam
Mila, Université de Montréal
Ciela Institute

Yoshua Bengio
Mila, Université de Montréal
CIFAR

Nikolay Malkin
Mila, Université de Montréal
University of Edinburgh

{marcin.sendera,...,nikolay.malkin}@mila.quebec

Abstract
We study the problem of training diffusion models to sample from a distribution
with a given unnormalized density or energy function. We benchmark several
diffusion-structured inference methods, including simulation-based variational approaches and off-policy methods (continuous generative flow networks). Our results
shed light on the relative advantages of existing algorithms while bringing into question some claims from past work. We also propose a novel exploration strategy for
off-policy methods, based on local search in the target space with the use of a replay
buffer, and show that it improves the quality of samples on a variety of target distributions. Our code for the sampling methods and benchmarks studied is made public
at (link) as a base for future work on diffusion models for amortized inference.

1

Introduction

Approximating and sampling from complex multivariate distributions is a fundamental problem in
probabilistic deep learning [e.g., 27, 35, 26, 48, 57] and in scientific applications [3, 52, 38, 1, 32].
The problem of drawing samples from a distribution given only an unnormalized probability density
or energy is particularly challenging in high-dimensional spaces and when the distribution of interest
has many separated modes [5]. Sampling methods based on Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) –
such as Metropolis-adjusted Langevin [MALA; 24, 65, 64] and Hamiltonian MC [HMC; 20, 31] –
may be slow to mix between modes and have a high cost per sample. While variants such as sequential
MC [SMC; 25, 13, 16] and nested sampling [69, 10, 43] have better mode coverage, their cost may
grow prohibitively with the dimensionality of the problem. This motivates the use of amortized
variational inference, i.e., fitting parametric models that sample the target distribution.
Diffusion models, continuous-time stochastic processes that gradually evolve a simple distribution to
a complex target, are powerful density estimators with proven mode-mixing properties [15]; as such,
they have been widely used in the setting of generative models learned from data [70, 72, 28, 50, 66].
However, the problem of training diffusion models to sample from a distribution with a given blackbox density or energy function has attracted less attention. Recent work has drawn connections
between diffusion (learning the denoising process) and stochastic control (learning the Föllmer
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

