When to Sense and Control?
A Time-adaptive Approach for Continuous-Time RL

Lenart Treven∗, Bhavya Sukhija, Yarden As, Florian Dörfler, Andreas Krause
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) excels in optimizing policies for discrete-time Markov
decision processes (MDP). However, various systems are inherently continuous
in time, making discrete-time MDPs an inexact modeling choice. In many applications, such as greenhouse control or medical treatments, each interaction
(measurement or switching of action) involves manual intervention and thus is
inherently costly. Therefore, we generally prefer a time-adaptive approach with
fewer interactions with the system. In this work, we formalize an RL framework,
Time-adaptive Control & Sensing (TAC O S), that tackles this challenge by optimizing over policies that besides control predict the duration of its application. Our
formulation results in an extended MDP that any standard RL algorithm can solve.
We demonstrate that state-of-the-art RL algorithms trained on TAC O S drastically
reduce the interaction amount over their discrete-time counterpart while retaining
the same or improved performance, and exhibiting robustness over discretization
frequency. Finally, we propose OTAC O S, an efficient model-based algorithm for
our setting. We show that OTAC O S enjoys sublinear regret for systems with sufficiently smooth dynamics and empirically results in further sample-efficiency gains.

1

Introduction

Nearly all state-of-the-art RL algorithms (Schulman et al., 2017; Haarnoja et al., 2018; Lillicrap et al.,
2015; Schulman et al., 2015) were developed for discrete-time MDPs. Nevertheless, continuoustime systems are ubiquitous in nature, ranging from robotics, biology, medicine, environment
and sustainability etc. (cf. Spong et al., 2006; Jones et al., 2009; Lenhart and Workman, 2007;
Panetta and Fister, 2003; Turchetta et al., 2022). Such systems can be naturally modeled with
stochastic differential equations (SDEs), but computational approaches necessitate discretization.
Furthermore, in many applications, obtaining measurements and switching actions is expensive. For
instance, consider a greenhouse of fruits or medical treatment recommendations. In both cases, each
measurement (crop inspection, medical exam) or switching of actions (climate control, treatment
adjustment) typically involves costly human intervention. Hence, minimizing such interactions with
the underlying system is desirable. This underlying challenge is rarely addressed in the RL literature.
In practice, a time-equidistant discretization frequency is set, often manually, adjusted to the underlying system’s characteristic time scale. This is challenging, however, especially for unknown/uncertain
systems, and systems with multiple dominant time scales (Engquist et al., 2007). Therefore, for many
real-world applications having a global frequency of control is inadequate and wasteful. For example,
in medicine, patient monitoring often requires higher frequency interaction during the onset of illness
and lower frequency interactions as the patient recovers (Kaandorp and Koole, 2007).
In this work, we address this limitation of standard RL methods and propose a novel RL framework,
Time-adaptive Control & Sensing (TAC O S). TAC O S reduces a general continuous-time RL problem
with underlying SDE dynamics to an equivalent discrete-time MDP, that can be solved with any
∗

Correspondence to lenart.treven@inf.ethz.ch

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

