Bandits with Abstention under Expert Advice

Stephen Pasteris1∗ Alberto Rumi2,3 Maximilian Thiessen4 Shota Saito5
Atsushi Miyauchi3 Fabio Vitale3 Mark Herbster5
1
The Alan Turing Institute 2 University of Milan 3 CENTAI Institute
4
TU Wien 5 University College London
∗
spasteris@turing.ac.uk

Abstract
We study the classic problem of prediction with expert advice under bandit feedback.
Our model assumes that one action, corresponding to the learner’s abstention from
play, has no reward or loss on every trial. We propose the confidence-rated bandits
with abstentions (CBA) algorithm, which exploits this assumption to obtain reward
bounds that can significantly improve those of the classical E XP 4 algorithm. Our
problem can be construed as the aggregation of confidence-rated predictors, with
the learner having the option to abstain from play. We are the first to achieve bounds
on the expected cumulative reward for general confidence-rated predictors. In the
special case of specialists we achieve a novel reward bound, significantly improving
the previous bounds of S PECIALIST E XP (treating abstention as another action).
We discuss how CBA can be applied to the problem of adversarial contextual
bandits with the option of abstaining from selecting any action. We are able to
leverage a wide range of inductive biases, outperforming previous approaches both
theoretically and in preliminary experimental analysis. Additionally, we achieve a
reduction in runtime from quadratic to almost linear in the number of contexts for
the specific case of metric space contexts.

1

Introduction

We study the classic problem of prediction with expert advice under bandit feedback. The problem
is structured as a sequence of trials. During each trial, each expert recommends a probability
distribution over the set of possible actions. The learner then selects an action and observes and
incurs the (potentially negative) reward associated with that action on that particular trial. In practical
applications, errors often lead to severe consequences, and consistently making predictions is neither
safe nor economically practical. For this reason, the abstention option has gained a lot of interest
in the literature, both in the batch and online setting [Chow, 1957, 1970, Hendrickx et al., 2021,
Cortes et al., 2018]. Similarly to previous works, this paper is based on the assumption that one
of the actions always has zero reward: such an action is equivalent to an abstention of the learner
from play. Besides the rewards being bounded, we make no additional assumptions regarding how
the rewards or expert predictions are generated. In this paper, we present an efficient algorithm
CBA (Confidence-rated Bandits with Abstentions) which exploits the abstention action to get reward
bounds that can be dramatically higher than those of E XP 4 [Auer et al., 2002]. In the worst case, our
reward bound essentially matches that of E XP 4 so that CBA can be seen as a strict improvement,
since the time-complexities of the two algorithms are, up to a factor logarithmic in the time horizon,
identical in the general case.
Our problem can also be seen as that of aggregating confidence-rated predictors [Blum and Mansour,
2007, Gaillard et al., 2014, Luo and Schapire, 2015] when the learner has the option of abstaining
from taking actions. When the problem is phrased in this way, at the start of each trial, each predictor
recommends a probability distribution over the actions (which now may not include an action with
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

