Parsimony or Capability? Decomposition Delivers
Both in Long-term Time Series Forecasting

Jinliang Deng1,2

Feiyang Ye3 Du Yin4 Xuan Song6,2∗ Ivor Tsang5 Hui Xiong7,8∗
Hong Kong Generative AI Research and Development Center
2
Research Institute of Trustworthy Autonomous Systems,
Southern University of Science and Technology (SUSTech),
3
University of Technology Sydney, 4 University of New South Wales,
5
CFAR and IHPC, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore,
6
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University,
7
AI Thrust, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou),
8
CSE, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{dengjinliang, xionghui}@ust.hk, feiyang.ye.uts@gmail.com
du.yin@unsw.edu.au, songxuan@jlu.edu.cn, Ivor_Tsang@cfar.a-star.edu.sg
1

Abstract
Long-term time series forecasting (LTSF) represents a critical frontier in time series
analysis, characterized by extensive input sequences, as opposed to the shorter spans
typical of traditional approaches. While longer sequences inherently offer richer
information for enhanced predictive precision, prevailing studies often respond
by escalating model complexity. These intricate models can inflate into millions
of parameters, resulting in prohibitive parameter scales. Our study demonstrates,
through both analytical and empirical evidence, that decomposition is key to
containing excessive model inflation while achieving uniformly superior and robust
results across various datasets. Remarkably, by tailoring decomposition to the
intrinsic dynamics of time series data, our proposed model outperforms existing
benchmarks, using over 99% fewer parameters than the majority of competing
methods. Through this work, we aim to unleash the power of a restricted set
of parameters by capitalizing on domain characteristics—a timely reminder that
in the realm of LTSF, bigger is not invariably better. The code is available at
https://github.com/JLDeng/SSCNN.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting is a cornerstone in the fields of data mining, machine learning, and statistics,
with wide-ranging applications in finance, meteorology, city management, telecommunications, and
beyond (Jiang et al., 2021; Han et al., 2023a; Zhang et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020, 2019; Cui et al.,
2023; Zhang et al., 2017; Liang et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2024; Fan et al., 2022, 2023). Traditional
univariate time series models, such as Auto-Regressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) and
Exponential Smoothing, fail to capture the intricate complexities present in open, dynamic systems.
Fortunately, the advent of deep learning has marked a significant shift in this domain. Recently, the
utilization of the Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) model has revolutionized time series forecasting,
setting new benchmarks in the accuracy of forecasting models due to its capability of depicting
intricate pairwise dependencies and extracting multi-level representations from sequences.
Inspired by the extraordinary power exhibited by large language models (LLMs), expanding model
scale has increasingly become the dominant direction in the pursuit of improvement for time series
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

