GAVEL: Generating Games Via Evolution and
Language Models

Alexander G. Padula
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
♠
apadula

Matthew Stephenson
Flinders University
Adelaide, Australia
♣
matthew.stephenson

Dennis J.N.J. Soemers
Maastricht University
Maastricht, the Netherlands
†
dennis.soemers

Julian Togelius
New York University Tandon
Brooklyn, New York, USA
♢
julian.togelius

Graham Todd
New York University Tandon
Brooklyn, New York, USA
♢
gdrtodd
Éric Piette
UCLouvain
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
♡
eric.piette

♢

♠

@nyu.edu, @ethz.ch,
♣
♡
†
@flinders.edu.au, @uclouvain.be, @maastrichtuniversity.nl,

Abstract
Automatically generating novel and interesting games is a complex task. Challenges
include representing game rules in a computationally workable form, searching
through the large space of potential games under most such representations, and
accurately evaluating the originality and quality of previously unseen games. Prior
work in automated game generation has largely focused on relatively restricted
rule representations and relied on domain-specific heuristics. In this work, we
explore the generation of novel games in the comparatively expansive Ludii
game description language, which encodes the rules of over 1000 board games in
a variety of styles and modes of play. We draw inspiration from recent advances
in large language models and evolutionary computation in order to train a model
that intelligently mutates and recombines games and mechanics expressed as code.
We demonstrate both quantitatively and qualitatively that our approach is capable
of generating new and interesting games, including in regions of the potential
rules space not covered by existing games in the Ludii dataset. A sample of the
1
generated games are available to play online through the Ludii portal.

1

Introduction

Games have long been used as a test bed for algorithms and approaches in artificial intelligence, with
advances in game-playing ability often serving as some of the most recognizable achievements in the
field [13, 40, 55, 65]. While automated systems have repeatedly demonstrated an ability to match
or surpass humans as game players, they continue to lag significantly in their capacity to generate
the kinds of games that are worth playing. The ability to construct novel and interesting games
is an impressive cognitive challenge, and success would have implications both cultural (with the
1

Play the generated games at: https://ludii.games/details.php?keyword=Havabu,
https://ludii.games/details.php?keyword=HopThrough, and https://ludii.games/
details.php?keyword=YavaGo
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

