From Linear to Linearizable Optimization: A Novel
Framework with Applications to Stationary and
Non-stationary DR-submodular Optimization
Mohammad Pedramfar
McGill University and Mila ∗
mohammad.pedramfar@mila.quebec

Vaneet Aggarwal
Purdue University
vaneet@purdue.edu

Abstract
This paper introduces the notion of upper-linearizable/quadratizable functions, a
class that extends concavity and DR-submodularity in various settings, including
monotone and non-monotone cases over different types of convex sets. A general
meta-algorithm is devised to convert algorithms for linear/quadratic maximization into ones that optimize upper-linearizable/quadratizable functions, offering a
unified approach to tackling concave and DR-submodular optimization problems.
The paper extends these results to multiple feedback settings, facilitating conversions between semi-bandit/first-order feedback and bandit/zeroth-order feedback,
as well as between first/zeroth-order feedback and semi-bandit/bandit feedback.
Leveraging this framework, new algorithms are derived using existing results as
base algorithms for convex optimization, improving upon state-of-the-art results
in various cases. Dynamic and adaptive regret guarantees are obtained for DRsubmodular maximization, marking the first algorithms to achieve such guarantees in these settings. Notably, the paper achieves these advancements with fewer
assumptions compared to existing state-of-the-art results, underscoring its broad
applicability and theoretical contributions to non-convex optimization.

1

Introduction

Overview: The prominence of optimizing continuous adversarial γ-weakly up-concave functions
(with DR-submodular and concave functions as special cases) has surged in recent years, marking a
crucial subset within the realm of non-convex optimization challenges, particularly in the forefront
of machine learning and statistics. This problem has numerous real-world applications, such as
revenue maximization, mean-field inference, recommendation systems [4, 20, 30, 12, 24, 18, 26].
This problem is modeled as a repeated game between an optimizer and an adversary. In each round,
the optimizer selects an action, and the adversary chooses a γ-weakly up-concave reward function.
Depending on the scenario, the optimizer can then query this reward function either at any arbitrary
point within the domain (called full information feedback) or specifically at the chosen action (called
semi-bandit/bandit feedback), where the feedback can be noisy/deterministic. The performance
metric of the algorithm is measured with multiple regret notions - static adversarial regret, dynamic
regret, and adaptive regret. The algorithms for the problem are separated into the ones that use
a projection operator to project the point to the closest point in the domain, and the projectionfree methods that replace the projection with an alternative such as Linear Optimization Oracles
(LOO) or Separation Oracles (SO). This interactive framework introduces a range of significant
challenges, influenced by the characteristics of the up-concave function (monotone/non-monotone),
the constraints imposed, the nature of the queries, projection-free/projection-based algorithms, and
the different regret definitions.
∗

Work done while at Purdue University

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

