Leveraging an ECG Beat Diffusion Model for
Morphological Reconstruction from Indirect Signals

Lisa Bedin*†
Ecole Polytechnique

Gabriel Cardoso†
Ecole Polytechnique, IHU Liryc

Josselin Duchateau
Bordeaux University Hospital, IHU Liryc

Remi Dubois
IHU Liryc

Eric Moulines
Ecole Polytechnique

Abstract
Electrocardiogram (ECG) signals provide essential information about the heart’s
condition and are widely used for diagnosing cardiovascular diseases. The morphology of a single heartbeat over the available leads is a primary biosignal for
monitoring cardiac conditions. However, analyzing heartbeat morphology can be
challenging due to noise and artifacts, missing leads, and a lack of annotated data.
Generative models, such as denoising diffusion generative models (DDMs), have
proven successful in generating complex data. We introduce BeatDiff, a lightweight DDM tailored for the morphology of multiple leads heartbeats. We then
show that many important ECG downstream tasks can be formulated as conditional
generation methods in a Bayesian inverse problem framework using BeatDiff
as priors. We propose EM-BeatDiff, an Expectation-Maximization algorithm, to
solve this conditional generation tasks without fine-tuning. We illustrate our results
with several tasks, such as removal of ECG noise and artifacts (baseline wander,
electrode motion), reconstruction of a 12-lead ECG from a single lead (useful for
ECG reconstruction of smartwatch experiments), and unsupervised explainable
anomaly detection. Experiments show that the combination of BeatDiff and
EM-BeatDiff outperforms SOTA methods for the problems considered in this
work.

1

Introduction

Electrocardiograms (ECG) are essential tools for diagnosing cardiac conditions. Two main types of
diagnostics can be obtained from an ECG signal: rhythm-based and morphology-based. Rhythmbased diagnostics focus on the frequency and regularity of heartbeats, while morphology-based
diagnostics focus on the shape and amplitude of the various waves and segments of the ECG signal;
see [40]. Many critical cardiac conditions can be diagnosed by analyzing the morphology of the
different phases of a single beat ([66, 67, 20, 39]). For example, an increase in the ST segment
suggests a myocardial infarction ([93]), while a long QT syndrome is associated with an increased
risk of sudden death ([92]). In fact, patients who have survived events similar to sudden death often
have abnormal intracardiac signals, even during sinus rhythm; see [34].
Most generative models for ECG literature attempt to accurately represent the rhythm, i.e. the time at
which the individual ECG events occur; see e.g., [30, 99, 79, 23, 104, 100, 3]. We focus in this paper
on the morphology of a single heartbeat.
Code available at https://github.com/LisaBedin/BeatDiff
Pretrained models available at https://huggingface.co/lbedin/BeatDiff
*Correspondence: lisa.bedin@polytechnique.org †Equal contribution.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

