TPC: Test-time Procrustes Calibration for
Diffusion-based Human Image Animation

Sunjae Yoon Gwanhyeong Koo Younghwan Lee Chang D. Yoo∗
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{sunjae.yoon,cd_yoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Human image animation aims to generate a human motion video from the inputs
of a reference human image and a target motion video. Current diffusion-based
image animation systems exhibit high precision in transferring human identity
into targeted motion, yet they still exhibit irregular quality in their outputs. Their
optimal precision is achieved only when the physical compositions (i.e., scale
and rotation) of the human shapes in the reference image and target pose frame
are aligned. In the absence of such alignment, there is a noticeable decline in
fidelity and consistency. Especially, in real-world environments, this compositional
misalignment commonly occurs, posing significant challenges to the practical
usage of current systems. To this end, we propose Test-time Procrustes Calibration (TPC), which enhances the robustness of diffusion-based image animation
systems by maintaining optimal performance even when faced with compositional
misalignment, effectively addressing real-world scenarios. The TPC provides a
calibrated reference image for the diffusion model, enhancing its capability to
understand the correspondence between human shapes in the reference and target
images. Our method is simple and can be applied to any diffusion-based image
animation system in a model-agnostic manner, improving the effectiveness at test
time without additional training.

1

Introduction

Denoising diffusion models [5, 27, 26, 10] have transformed the generative landscape of artificial
intelligence, leading to groundbreaking achievements [17, 20, 41, 39] in image, speech, and video
generation. We explore the application of diffusion model in the specific context of image-to-video
generation, focusing on the task of human image animation. The technology of image animation holds
great promise, enabling immersive and interactive experiences in entertainment, virtual reality, and
digital communication. The human image animation systems [33, 31, 15, 13] are designed to work
with referential human image and target motion video, where they transfer the human identity into the
target motion, ensuring seamless and unobtrusive integration. This process requires understanding
the correspondence between human shapes in the reference image and the target pose frame.
Recent advancements [33, 31] of human image animation systems have demonstrated notable precision in adapting human identity into target motion. Despite advancements, these systems continue to
suffer from irregular quality of image animation when the compositions (i.e., scale and rotation) of
human shapes are not aligned between reference image and target motion. To be specific, Figure 1
(a) presents exploratory experiments on the compositional misalignment of human shapes between
the reference and target. As shown in the left experiments, for a given target pose, adjusting the
composition of the same human in the reference image (i.e., via scaling or rotating) results in inconsistent and low-fidelity output images, especially in terms of clothes and faces of the human.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

