VERIFIED: A Video Corpus Moment Retrieval
Benchmark for Fine-Grained Video Understanding

Houlun Chen1 , Xin Wang1,2∗ , Hong Chen1 , Zeyang Zhang1
Wei Feng1 , Bin Huang1 , Jia Jia1,2∗ , Wenwu Zhu1,2∗
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
BNRIST, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{chenhl23,h-chen20,zy-zhang20,fw22,huangb23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{xin_wang,jjia,wwzhu}@tsinghua.edu.cn
https://verified-neurips.github.io

Abstract
Existing Video Corpus Moment Retrieval (VCMR) is limited to coarse-grained
understanding, which hinders precise video moment localization when given finegrained queries. In this paper, we propose a more challenging fine-grained VCMR
benchmark requiring methods to localize the best-matched moment from the corpus with other partially matched candidates. To improve the dataset construction
efficiency and guarantee high-quality data annotations, we propose VERIFIED,
an automatic VidEo-text annotation pipeline to generate captions with RelIable
FInE-grained statics and Dynamics. Specifically, we resort to large language
models (LLM) and large multimodal models (LMM) with our proposed Statics
and Dynamics Enhanced Captioning modules to generate diverse fine-grained
captions for each video. To filter out the inaccurate annotations caused by the
LLM hallucination, we propose a Fine-Granularity Aware Noise Evaluator where
we fine-tune a video foundation model with disturbed hard-negatives augmented
contrastive and matching losses. With VERIFIED, we construct a more challenging fine-grained VCMR benchmark containing Charades-FIG, DiDeMo-FIG, and
ActivityNet-FIG which demonstrate a high level of annotation quality. We evaluate
several state-of-the-art VCMR models on the proposed dataset, revealing that there
is still significant scope for fine-grained video understanding in VCMR. Code and
Datasets are in https://github.com/hlchen23/VERIFIED.

1

Introduction

Video Corpus Moment Retrieval (VCMR) [1] aims to retrieve a video moment from a large untrimmed
video corpus given a text query. It requires handling two subtasks: Video Retrieval (VR) [2] from a
corpus and Single Video Moment Retreival (SVMR) [3, 4] within a video, which involves grasping
multi-level semantic granularities across video-text and moment-text alignment. However, as shown
in Figure 1(a), in the previous VCMR setting, the queries are usually coarse-grained and thus struggle
to localize a video moment discriminatively, where there exists potentially relevant positive pairs [5–
7] besides the ground truth, which hinders cross-modal retrieval and makes it hard for models to learn
distinctive video features.
To address the problem, we propose a more challenging VCMR scenario in this paper. As shown in
Fig 1(b), a fine-grained distinctive query is provided to retrieve the best-matched moment, requiring
models to precisely understand the details in text descriptions and distinguish the target moments from
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

