Discrete Dictionary-based Decomposition Layer
for Structured Representation Learning

Taewon Park1
Hyun-Chul Kim1
Minho Lee1,2
1
Kyungpook National University, South Korea
2
ALI Co., Ltd., South Korea
ptw7998@gmail.com, hyunchul_kim@knu.ac.kr, mholee@gmail.com

Abstract
Neuro-symbolic neural networks have been extensively studied to integrate symbolic operations with neural networks, thereby improving systematic generalization.
Specifically, Tensor Product Representation (TPR) framework enables neural networks to perform differentiable symbolic operations by encoding the symbolic
structure of data within vector spaces. However, TPR-based neural networks often
struggle to decompose unseen data into structured TPR representations, undermining their symbolic operations. To address this decomposition problem, we propose
a Discrete Dictionary-based Decomposition (D3) layer designed to enhance the
decomposition capabilities of TPR-based models. D3 employs discrete, learnable
key-value dictionaries trained to capture symbolic features essential for decomposition operations. It leverages the prior knowledge acquired during training
to generate structured TPR representations by mapping input data to pre-learned
discrete features within these dictionaries. D3 is a straightforward drop-in layer
that can be seamlessly integrated into any TPR-based model without modifications.
Our experimental results demonstrate that D3 significantly improves the systematic generalization of various TPR-based models while requiring fewer additional
parameters. Notably, D3 outperforms baseline models on the synthetic task that
demands the systematic decomposition of unseen combinatorial data.1

1

Introduction

Compositional generalization, aiming at understanding unseen data by combining known concepts, is
essential for neural networks to handle complex tasks [2, 13, 12, 16, 8, 6]. Tensor Product Representation (TPR) framework [33] facilitates this by embedding the symbolic structure of data within vector
spaces, providing neural networks with compositional capabilities. Within this framework, individual
objects are decomposed at the representation level into distinct symbolic components called role-filler
pairs2 . The TPR framework encodes each object by taking a tensor product of its role vector and
filler vector, represented as T = f iller ⊗ role, and then superimposes them to represent multiple
objects within a single representation. During decoding, the TPR framework retrieves specific
fillers—essential for solving tasks—from the superimposed representation through matrix multiplication using an unbinding operator correlated to a particular role, f iller = T · unbind. This retrieved
filler is then utilized in downstream tasks. Based on this property, TPR-based neural networks
have demonstrated significant generalization and applicability in fields such as associative reasoning
[28, 30], mathematical problem-solving [29], and natural language processing [9, 32, 21, 34].
1

The code of D3 is publicly available at https://github.com/taewonpark/D3
The roles and fillers depend on the task at hand. For example, in a tree structure, the role corresponds to a
position within the tree, while the filler represents the label associated with that position [34]. In associative
memory, the role is analogous to an associative key, and the filler corresponds to the associative value [28, 30].
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

