Taming Generative Diffusion Prior for Universal Blind
Image Restoration

Siwei Tu1 , Weidong Yang1,† , Ben Fei2,†
Fudan University, 2 Chinese University of Hong Kong
24110240079@m.fudan.edu.cn, wdyang@fudan.edu.cn, benfei@cuhk.edu.hk
†
Corresponding Authors
1

Abstract
Diffusion models have been widely utilized for image restoration. However, previous blind image restoration methods still need to assume the type of degradation
model while leaving the parameters to be optimized, limiting their real-world applications. Therefore, we aim to tame generative diffusion prior for universal blind
image restoration dubbed BIR-D, which utilizes an optimizable convolutional
kernel to simulate the degradation model and dynamically update the parameters
of the kernel in the diffusion steps, enabling it to achieve blind image restoration results even in various complex situations. Besides, based on mathematical
reasoning, we have provided an empirical formula for the chosen of adaptive
guidance scale, eliminating the need for a grid search for the optimal parameter.
Experimentally, Our BIR-D has demonstrated superior practicality and versatility
than off-the-shelf unsupervised methods across various tasks both on real-world
and synthetic datasets, qualitatively and quantitatively. BIR-D is able to fulfill
multi-guidance blind image restoration. Moreover, BIR-D can also restore images
that undergo multiple and complicated degradations, demonstrating the practical
applications. The code is available at https://github.com/Tusiwei/BIR-D

1 Introduction

Figure 1: Blind Image Restoration Diffusion Model (BIR-D) can achieve high-quality restoration
for different types of degraded images. BIR-D not only has the capability to restore (a) linear
inverse problems when the degradation function is known. BIR-D can also achieve high-quality
image restoration in (b) blind issues with unknown degradation functions, as well as in (c) mixed
degradation and real degradation scenarios.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

