Reawakening knowledge: Anticipatory recovery from
catastrophic interference via structured training

Yanlai Yang1 , Matt Jones2 , Michael C. Mozer3,2 , and Mengye Ren1
1

New York University, 2 University of Colorado, Boulder, 3 Google DeepMind
{yy2694,mengye}@nyu.edu, mcj@colorado.edu, mcmozer@google.com

Abstract
We explore the training dynamics of neural networks in a structured non-IID setting
where documents are presented cyclically in a fixed, repeated sequence. Typically,
networks suffer from catastrophic interference when training on a sequence of
documents; however, we discover a curious and remarkable property of LLMs
finetuned sequentially in this setting: they exhibit anticipatory behavior, recovering from the forgetting on documents before encountering them again. This
behavior occurs even though the documents are never presented in context together.
The behavior emerges and becomes more robust as the architecture scales up its
number of parameters. Through comprehensive experiments and visualizations,
we demonstrate a new mechanism by which over-parametrized neural networks
can recover from catastrophic interference and uncover new insights into training
over-parameterized networks in cyclically structured environments.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4] have demonstrated remarkable general capabilities in
a wide range of natural language tasks. During the training of LLMs, documents are typically
uniformly sampled at random. Due to the large scale of the training set—in contrast to many other
domains—LLM training typically occurs in an online fashion: each document is used only once for
just one update step without further repetition [5, 6, 7].
Such a training style is in stark contrast with how real world agents like humans acquire new
knowledge. In naturalistic settings, the material we are exposed to is structured in time and often
repeats in predictable, quasi-cyclic patterns (e.g., a person’s everyday morning routine consists of first
taking a shower, then eating breakfast, and finally dressing up). Hence it is important to understand
how existing deep learning methods and architectures perform in this setting.
Toward the goal of investigating more naturalistic training setups, we study a simplistic setting
involving structured training of LLMs: documents are presented cyclically in a fixed sequence and
repeated multiple times, just as we humans go through our daily routines. Moreover, to account for
the cost of switching among documents (analogous to the mental switching cost between different
environments and the waiting cost of obtaining new data), we allow the network to take multiple
gradient steps for each document. Compared to standard task-incremental and class-incremental
continual learning settings [8] which experience each task only once, our cyclic training setting better
approximates the quasi-cyclic temporal structure of real-world environments.
Typically, networks exhibit catastrophic interference (also known as catastrophic forgetting) [9]
when training on a sequence of tasks: the loss on a given document increases as the training
advances to other documents. Curiously, we discover that in a structured training environment,
LLMs exhibit a remarkable anticipatory recovery behavior: they recover from the forgetting of
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

