AttnDreamBooth: Towards Text-Aligned
Personalized Text-to-Image Generation

Lianyu Pang1

Jian Yin1 Baoquan Zhao1 Feize Wu1 Fu Lee Wang2
Qing Li3 Xudong Mao1∗
1
Sun Yat-sen University 2 Hong Kong Metropolitan University
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
https://attndreambooth.github.io

Abstract
Recent advances in text-to-image models have enabled high-quality personalized
image synthesis based on user-provided concepts with flexible textual control.
In this work, we analyze the limitations of two primary techniques in text-toimage personalization: Textual Inversion and DreamBooth. When integrating the
learned concept into new prompts, Textual Inversion tends to overfit the concept,
while DreamBooth often overlooks it. We attribute these issues to the incorrect
learning of the embedding alignment for the concept. To address this, we introduce
AttnDreamBooth, a novel approach that separately learns the embedding alignment,
the attention map, and the subject identity across different training stages. We
also introduce a cross-attention map regularization term to enhance the learning of
the attention map. Our method demonstrates significant improvements in identity
preservation and text alignment compared to the baseline methods.

Input Sample

... as a cowboy draws ... as a knight draped
in armor, riding a
its tiny revolver in a
dusty town showdown, horse and galloping
through the lush
surrounded by cacti
fields
and a saloon

... as an astronaut floats
weightlessly in a zerogravity environment,
An oil painting of ...
surrounded by celestial
dressed as a
bodies and distant
musketeer in an old
galaxies
French town

Cyberpunk style of
... as a robot against
the backdrop of a
futuristic cityscape
at night, illuminated
by neon lights

... in assassin's creed ... as a Jedi casting a ... as Captain America A painting of ... as a
A painting of ... as a
walking on the street of long shadow in a sunlit, standing in the ruins
boatman propping a
vintage steampunk
Venice, surrounded by
empty desert
of the city,
boat in the lake in the automaton, complete
the crowd of merchants
surrounded by smoke
style of Monet
with gears and complex
and tourists
mechanical devices

Figure 1: Our method enables text-aligned text-to-image personalization with complex prompts.
∗

Corresponding author (xudong.xdmao@gmail.com).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

