Unrolled denoising networks provably learn to
perform optimal Bayesian inference

Kulin Shah∗
UT Austin
kulinshah@utexas.edu

Aayush Karan∗
Harvard SEAS
akaran1@g.harvard.edu
Sitan Chen
Harvard SEAS
sitan@seas.harvard.edu

Yonina C. Eldar
Weizmann Institute of Science
yonina.eldar@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
Much of Bayesian inference centers around the design of estimators for inverse
problems which are optimal assuming the data comes from a known prior. But
what do these optimality guarantees mean if the prior is unknown? In recent
years, algorithm unrolling has emerged as deep learning’s answer to this ageold question: design a neural network whose layers can in principle simulate
iterations of inference algorithms and train on data generated by the unknown
prior. Despite its empirical success, however, it has remained unclear whether
this method can provably recover the performance of its optimal, prior-aware
counterparts.
In this work, we prove the first rigorous learning guarantees for neural networks
based on unrolling approximate message passing (AMP). For compressed
sensing, we prove that when trained on data drawn from a product prior,
the layers of the network approximately converge to the same denoisers used in
Bayes AMP. We also provide extensive numerical experiments for compressed
sensing and rank-one matrix estimation demonstrating the advantages of our
unrolled architecture – in addition to being able to obliviously adapt to general
priors, it exhibits improvements over Bayes AMP in more general settings of
low dimensions, non-Gaussian designs, and non-product priors.

1

Introduction

Inverse problems within engineering and the sciences [BBDM21, ST99, Vog02] have inspired
the development of a rich toolbox of algorithms for inferring unknown signals given noisy
measurements. For instance, a classic approach to solving sparse linear inverse problems is
to solve the LASSO using an iterative algorithm like ISTA [DDDM04] or FISTA [BT09]. While
these methods are easy to implement and remarkably performant, they are not designed to
exploit distributional information about the underlying signal, which often comes from domain
knowledge. In contrast, Bayesian methods like message passing and variational inference offer
a natural framework for designing estimators that incorporate this kind of information: the
algorithm designer crafts a prior for the signal, and the measurements they observe naturally
induce a posterior over what the underlying signal could have been.
∗ Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

