UltraMedical: Building Specialized Generalists in
Biomedicine
Kaiyan Zhangα,ε Sihang Zengβ Ermo Huaα,ε Ning Dingα ∗ Zhang-Ren Chenγ
Zhiyuan Maα Haoxin Liα Ganqu Cuiα Biqing Qiα Xuekai Zhuδ Xingtai Lvα,ε
Jin-Fang Huγ Zhiyuan Liuα Bowen Zhouα∗
α
Tsinghua University β University of Washington
γ
The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University
δ
Shanghai Jiao Tong University ε Frontis.AI
zhang-ky22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{dn97, zhoubowen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across
various domains and are moving towards more specialized areas. Recent advanced
proprietary models such as GPT-4 and Gemini have achieved significant advancements in biomedicine, which have also raised privacy and security challenges.
The construction of specialized generalists hinges largely on high-quality datasets,
enhanced by techniques like supervised fine-tuning and reinforcement learning
from human or AI feedback, and direct preference optimization. However, these
leading technologies (e.g., preference learning) are still significantly limited in the
open source community due to the scarcity of specialized data. In this paper, we
present the UltraMedical collections, which consist of high-quality manual and
synthetic datasets in the biomedicine domain, featuring preference annotations
across multiple advanced LLMs. By utilizing these datasets, we fine-tune a suite of
specialized medical models based on Llama-3 series, demonstrating breathtaking
capabilities across various medical benchmarks. Moreover, we develop powerful
reward models skilled in biomedical and general reward benchmark, enhancing
further online preference learning within the biomedical LLM community.
GitHub: https://github.com/TsinghuaC3I/UltraMedical
Huggingface: https://hf.co/collections/TsinghuaC3I

1

Introduction

The advent of Large Language Models (LLMs) has brought forth numerous potential applications
in the field of biomedicine and healthcare, encompassing medical education, clinical practice, and
scientific research. Recent studies suggest that proprietary models such as GPT-4, Med PaLM
2, and MedGemini have the potential to function as integrated medical generalists [46, 59, 76],
even achieving expert-level performance on some medical benchmarks. In the meantime, although
there have been advancements, open-source LLMs fine-tuned on synthetic medical instructions still
significantly lag behind proprietary models [71, 20, 10, 51, 31].
Despite the remarkable capabilities, proprietary models may face security and privacy challenges
due to the sensitive nature of medical data, such as potential data breaches and the risk of exposing
sensitive patient information [35, 80, 40]. On the other hand, open-source LLMs can be customized
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

