Cluster-Learngene: Inheriting Adaptive Clusters for
Vision Transformers
†

†

Qiufeng Wang1,2 , Xu Yang1,2 , Fu Feng1,2 , Jing Wang1,2 , and Xin Geng1,2
1
2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary
Applications, Southeast University, Ministry of Education, China
{qfwang, xuyang_palm, fufeng, wangjing91, xgeng}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
In recent years, the merging of vast datasets with powerful computational resources
has led to the emergence of large pre-trained models in the field of deep learning.
However, the common practices often overgeneralize the applicability of these
models, overlooking the task-specific resource constraints. To mitigate this issue,
we propose Cluster-Learngene, which effectively clusters critical internal modules
from a large ancestry model and then inherits them to initialize descendant models
of elastic scales. Specifically, based on the density characteristics of attention heads,
our method adaptively clusters attention heads of each layer and position-wise
feed-forward networks (FFNs) in the ancestry model as the learngene. Moreover,
we introduce priority weight-sharing and learnable parameter transformations that
expand the learngene to initialize descendant models of elastic scales. Through
extensive experimentation, we demonstrate that Cluster-Learngene not only is more
efficient compared to other initialization methods but also customizes models of
elastic scales according to downstream task resources.

1

Introduction

The evolution of deep learning has been profoundly influenced by the confluence of expansive data
sources and robust computational capabilities. This collaboration has given rise to large pre-trained
foundation models [11, 10, 41, 5], particularly those built upon the Transformer [47, 11], such as
the Vision Transformers (ViTs) [11]. The pre-trained foundation models, being widely deployed in
various devices like smartphones or edge devices, serve as the initialization point [16, 2, 19, 64, 49, 50]
for diverse downstream applications. However, this dominant methodology implicitly assumes that a
one-size-fits-all approach, i.e., the whole foundation model is universally apt for every application,
neglecting the specific resource constraints (e.g., memory, FLOPs, or latency) inherent to certain
downstream tasks. Furthermore, not all tasks demand the full power of these extensive foundation
models. This naturally raises a pivotal question: Can we extract and harness the condensed part of
these foundation models to achieve a harmonious balance between accuracy and resource efficiency?
To achieve the goal of efficiently initializing models, [49, 50] introduce the innovative Learngene
framework inspired by the observation of genes (cf. Fig. 1 (a)). As showcased in Fig. 1 (b), Learngene
framework is designed in two pivotal stages. In the first stage, the significant knowledge is condensed
from a large ancestry model into a more compact part termed as learngene. In the next stage, this
learngene is inherited to initialize the descendant models of elastic scales. * Previous works [49, 50]
†

Corresponding authors.

* The terms "foundation model" and "ancestry model," as well as "downstream model" and "descendant

model," are interchangeably utilized unless distinctions are explicitly mentioned.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

