ReFIR: Grounding Large Restoration Models
with Retrieval Augmentation

Hang Guo1 Tao Dai∗ 2 Zhihao Ouyang3 Taolin Zhang1
Yaohua Zha1 Bin Chen4 Shu-tao Xia1,5
1
Tsinghua University 2 Shenzhen University 3 Aitist.ai
4
Harbin Institute of Technology 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory
https://github.com/csguoh/ReFIR

Abstract
Recent advances in diffusion-based Large Restoration Models (LRMs) have significantly improved photo-realistic image restoration by leveraging the internal
knowledge embedded within model weights. However, existing LRMs often suffer from the hallucination dilemma, i.e., producing incorrect contents or textures
when dealing with severe degradations, due to their heavy reliance on limited
internal knowledge. In this paper, we propose an orthogonal solution called the
Retrieval-augmented Framework for Image Restoration (ReFIR), which incorporates retrieved images as external knowledge to extend the knowledge boundary of
existing LRMs in generating details faithful to the original scene. Specifically, we
first introduce the nearest neighbor lookup to retrieve content-relevant high-quality
images as reference, after which we propose the cross-image injection to modify
existing LRMs to utilize high-quality textures from retrieved images. Thanks
to the additional external knowledge, our ReFIR can well handle the hallucination challenge and facilitate faithfully results. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that ReFIR can achieve not only high-fidelity but also realistic restoration results.
Importantly, our ReFIR requires no training and is adaptable to various LRMs.

1

Introduction

Restoring a high-quality image (HQ) from its low-quality counterpart (LQ) is a well-known ill-posed
problem and has been studied over the years [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. Previous efforts attempt to
handle this problem through employing various neural network architectures, including CNNs, GANs
and Transformers. Recently, diffusion models [10, 11] have emerged as a promising alternative,
delivering noteworthy results in real-world image restoration [12, 13, 14]. In particular, some
works [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20] have successfully leveraged the powerful generative prior of pre-trained
text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models for scaling up, to obtain the Large Restoration Model (LRM)
with billions of parameters, bringing significant progress in restoring photo-realistic images.
Although scaling up restoration models has achieved remarkable success, existing LRMs may not
always produce results that are faithful to the original scene, particularly when faced with heavily
degraded images that surpass the LRMs’ capabilities (see Fig. 1). This issue is similar to the
hallucination problem observed in large language models (LLMs) [21, 22], e.g. ChatGPT might
generate nonsense responses when highly specialized questions exceed its knowledge boundary.
Similarly, if one LRM has never seen a specific scene, it will struggle to restore corresponding images
faithfully. By analogizing LLM to LRM, we define the phenomenon where LRMs generate textures
inconsistent with the original scene when facing hard samples as the hallucination of LRMs.
To address the hallucination problem in LRMs, simply expanding the internal knowledge through
additional training data and parameters might seem straightforward, but it can significantly increase
* Corresponding author: Tao Dai (daitao.edu@gmail.com).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

