Team-Fictitious Play for Reaching Team-Nash
Equilibrium in Multi-team Games

Ahmed Said Donmez
Bilkent University
said.donmez@bilkent.edu.tr

Yuksel Arslantas
Bilkent University
yuksel.arslantas@bilkent.edu.tr

Muhammed O. Sayin
Bilkent University
sayin@ee.bilkent.edu.tr

Abstract
Multi-team games, prevalent in robotics and resource management, involve team
members striving for a joint best response against other teams. Team-Nash equilibrium (TNE) predicts the outcomes of such coordinated interactions. However,
can teams of self-interested agents reach TNE? We introduce Team-Fictitious Play
(Team-FP), a new variant of fictitious play where agents respond to the last actions
of team members and the beliefs formed about other teams with some inertia in
action updates. This design is essential in team coordination beyond the classical
fictitious play dynamics. We focus on zero-sum potential team games (ZSPTGs)
where teams can interact pairwise while the team members do not necessarily have
identical payoffs. We show that Team-FP reaches near TNE in ZSPTGs with a
quantifiable error bound. We extend Team-FP dynamics to multi-team Markov
games for model-based and model-free cases. The convergence analysis tackles
the challenge of non-stationarity induced by evolving opponent strategies based
on the optimal coupling lemma and stochastic differential inclusion approximation methods. Our work strengthens the foundation for using TNE to predict the
behavior of decentralized teams and offers a practical rule for team learning in
multi-team environments. We provide extensive simulations of Team-FP dynamics
and compare its performance with other widely studied dynamics such as smooth
fictitious play and multiplicative weights update. We further explore how different
parameters impact the speed of convergence.

1

Introduction

Multi-team games are increasingly common, e.g., in robotics and resource management [Silva and
Chaimowicz, 2017, Vinyals et al., 2019, Jaderberg et al., 2019]. Unlike non-cooperative multi-agent
settings, team members strive for a joint best response against other teams as if the entire team is
a single decision-maker. Team-Nash equilibrium (TNE), where team members coordinate in the
best team response against other teams, can capture this to predict the outcome of coordinated team
interactions [Farina et al., 2018, Zhang et al., 2021]. Game-theoretical equilibrium is often justified
by its emergence from non-equilibrium adaptation of self-interested learners (e.g., see [Fudenberg
and Levine, 2009]). However, the question of whether the teams of self-interested agents can reach
TNE in multi-team games remains largely unexplored. This paper investigates this very question.
For example, TNE generally can arise if the team members can learn to correlate their actions in the
best team response independent of the opponent. However, the widely studied fictitious play (FP)
dynamics do not necessarily reach the best team outcome even when there are no opponents, e.g., in
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

