On the Adversarial Robustness of Benjamini Hochberg
Louis L Chen∗
Operations Research Department
Naval Postgraduate School
Monterey, CA 93943
louis.chen@nps.edu

Roberto Szechtman
Operations Research Department
Naval Postgraduate School
Monterey, CA 93943
rszechtm@nps.edu

Matan Seri
Operations Research Department
Naval Postgraduate School
Monterey, CA 93943
matan.seri@gmail.com

Abstract
The Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) procedure is widely used to control the false detection rate (FDR) in multiple testing. Applications of this control abound in
drug discovery, forensics, anomaly detection, and, in particular, machine learning,
ranging from nonparametric outlier detection to out-of-distribution detection and
one-class classification methods. Considering this control could be relied upon in
critical safety/security contexts, we investigate its adversarial robustness. More
precisely, we study under what conditions BH does and does not exhibit adversarial
robustness, we present a class of simple and easily implementable adversarial
test-perturbation algorithms, and we perform computational experiments. With our
algorithms, we demonstrate that there are conditions under which BH’s control can
be significantly broken with relatively few (even just one) test score perturbation(s),
and provide non-asymptotic guarantees on the expected adversarial-adjustment
to FDR. Our technical analysis involves a combinatorial reframing of the BH
procedure as a “balls into bins” process, and drawing a connection to generalized ballot problems to facilitate an information-theoretic approach for deriving
non-asymptotic lower bounds.

1

Introduction

Multiple testing has broad applications in drug discovery, forensics, candidate screening, anomaly
detection, and in particular, machine learning. Indeed, recent works [5, 18, 28, 32], in nonparametric
outlier detection, out-of-distribution detection (OOD), and one-class classification have all adopted
multiple testing methodology in developing principled decision rules with statistical guarantees.
In fact, the Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) multiple testing procedure, widely used to control the false
detection rate (FDR), is either used or modified in all these recent methods. Considering this FDR
control could be relied upon in some critical (safety/security) contexts, for which false positives incur
costs, we investigate its adversarial robustness.
Adversarial corruption presents a challenge to statistical methodology, and is a modern-day concern
due to not only the ease with which high volumes of data can now be accessed/processed but
also the increasingly widespread use of statistical procedures. This threat poses vulnerabilities to
machine learning tasks like OOD, which would aim to fortify security systems like fraud detection [5].
∗

website: https://louislchen.github.io/

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

