The Dormant Neuron Phenomenon in Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning Value Factorization

Haoyuan Qinab∗, Chennan Maab∗, Mian Dengab , Zhengzhu Liuab ,
Songzhu Meic , Xinwang Liuc , Cheng Wangab , Siqi Shenab†
a
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities,
School of Informatics, Xiamen University (XMU), China
b
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, XMU, China
c
School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, China
{haoyuanqin,chennanma}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {cwang,siqishen}@xmu.edu.cn,
{sz.mei,xinwangliu}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
In this work, we study the dormant neuron phenomenon in multi-agent reinforcement learning value factorization, where the mixing network suffers from reduced
network expressivity caused by an increasing number of inactive neurons. We
demonstrate the presence of the dormant neuron phenomenon across multiple
environments and algorithms, and show that this phenomenon negatively affects
the learning process. We show that dormant neurons correlates with the existence of over-active neurons, which have large activation scores. To address the
dormant neuron issue, we propose ReBorn, a simple but effective method that
transfers the weights from over-active neurons to dormant neurons. We theoretically show that this method can ensure the learned action preferences are not
forgotten after the weight-transferring procedure, which increases learning effectiveness. Our extensive experiments reveal that ReBorn achieves promising
results across various environments and improves the performance of multiple
popular value factorization approaches. The source code of ReBorn is available in
https://github.com/xmu-rl-3dv/ReBorn.

1

Introduction

In cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) [1], a group of agents whose value
function is approximated using deep neural networks must cooperate to achieve a common goal. Deep
neural network is the key driving force that scales MARL for complex decision-making tasks [2].
Recently, researchers have discovered the scaling laws that deep neural network models can increase
their capacity by enlarging the size of the model and the dataset. However, single-agent reinforcement
learning does not obey the scaling law and suffers from network expressivity issues [3, 4].
To alleviate the network expressivity issues in single-agent RL, researchers have proposed parameter
perturbing methods. Igl et al. [5] periodically resets some layers of the value network. ReSet [6]
resets the last few layers of the neural network while maintaining experience in the replay buffer.
ReDo [4] periodically re-initializes the input weights of some neurons and zero out the neuron’s
output weights. Albeit these methods can improve the performance of single-agent reinforcement
learning, it is unclear whether they work for MARL.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

