A Recipe for Charge Density Prediction

Xiang Fu1∗ Andrew Rosen2,3

Kyle Bystrom4

Boris Kozinsky4,5
1
2
4

Tess Smidt1

Rui Wang1

Albert Musaelian4

Tommi Jaakkola1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

UC Berkeley

3

Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

Harvard John A. Paulson School Of Engineering and Applied Sciences
5

Robert Bosch Research and Technology Center

Abstract
In density functional theory, the charge density is the core attribute of atomic
systems from which all chemical properties can be derived. Machine learning
methods are promising as a means of significantly accelerating charge density
predictions, yet existing approaches either lack accuracy or scalability. We propose
a recipe that can achieve both. In particular, we identify three key ingredients:
(1) representing the charge density with atomic and virtual orbitals (spherical
fields centered at atom/virtual coordinates); (2) using expressive and learnable
orbital basis sets (basis functions for the spherical fields); and (3) using a highcapacity equivariant neural network architecture. Our method achieves state-ofthe-art accuracy while being more than an order of magnitude faster than existing
methods. Furthermore, our method enables flexible efficiency–accuracy trade-offs
by adjusting the model and/or basis set sizes.

1

Introduction

Density functional theory (DFT) is a computational quantum chemistry method that has enabled
countless advancements in the chemical sciences by providing a tractable means to calculate the
electronic structure of molecules and materials [1]. The central concept in DFT is the charge
density, a fundamental quantity from which all derivable ground-state physicochemical properties of
a system, such as energy and forces, can, in principle, be derived. The most widely used Kohn–Sham
formalism [2] of DFT offers a reasonable balance between accuracy and computational efficiency
among conventional DFT workflows. However, it still scales with a complexity of roughly O(Ne3 )
where Ne is the number of electrons, rendering it computationally expensive and limiting its viability
for both large-scale systems and long-timescale ab initio molecular dynamics simulations.
In DFT, the solution to the Kohn–Sham equations are reliant on an iterative calculation to identify
the charge density that minimizes the potential energy functional for a given atomic configuration.
This process, known as converging the self-consistent field, is the main computational expense within
DFT. With a machine learning (ML) model that can effectively bypass the Kohn–Sham equations by
accurately and efficiently predicting the charge density, the number of steps required to converge the
ground-state electron density can be drastically reduced or potentially eliminated altogether by using
the predicted charge density as the initial guess. If accurate enough, a machine-learned charge density
could also be used to directly predict electronic structure properties, such as the band gap, band
structure, and electronic density of states of a material. Furthermore, the charge density itself can
provide an enormous amount of insight into a molecule or material. From the charge density, partial
∗

Correspondence to Xiang Fu (xiangfu@csail.mit.edu).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

