ParallelEdits: Efficient Multi-Aspect Text-Driven
Image Editing with Attention Grouping

Mingzhen Huang, Jialing Cai, Shan Jia, Vishnu Suresh Lokhande∗, Siwei Lyu∗
University at Buffalo, State University of New York, USA
Source prompt:
A striped brown cat
sits on wooden planks
against a wooden wall

Source
Image

Source prompt:
a man sitting in a boat is
silhouetted against the
sunset with mountain in the
background

InfEdit

Direct
Inversion

ParallelEdits
(Ours)
Number
of edited
aspects

1
cheetah

2

3

4

1

2

3

beach
necktie

curtain
sunglasses
wool rug

grey cat
ball
lawn
curled tail

ducks

bright sun
city

bear
bridge
fireworks

4

man
sailboat
evening glow
castle

Figure 1: Multi-aspect text-driven image editing. Multiple edits in images pose a significant challenge
in existing models (such as DirectInverison [1] and InfEdit [2]), as their performance downgrades with an
increasing number of aspects. In contrast, our ParallelEdits can achieve precise multi-aspect image editing in 5
seconds. The symbol ⊗ denotes a swap action, the symbol ⊕ denotes an object addition action, and the symbol
⊖ denotes an object deletion. Arrows (→) on the image highlight the aspects edited by our method.

Abstract
Text-driven image synthesis has made significant advancements with the development of diffusion models, transforming how visual content is generated from
text prompts. Despite these advances, text-driven image editing, a key area in
computer graphics, faces unique challenges. A major challenge is making simultaneous edits across multiple objects or attributes. Applying these methods
sequentially for multi-aspect edits increases computational demands and efficiency
losses. In this paper, we address these challenges with significant contributions.
Our main contribution is the development of ParallelEdits, a method that seamlessly manages simultaneous edits across multiple attributes. In contrast to previous
approaches, ParallelEdits not only preserves the quality of single attribute edits
but also significantly improves the performance of multitasking edits. This is
achieved through innovative attention distribution mechanism and multi-branch
design that operates across several processing heads. Additionally, we introduce
the PIE-Bench++ dataset, an expansion of the original PIE-Bench dataset, to better
support evaluating image-editing tasks involving multiple objects and attributes simultaneously. This dataset is a benchmark for evaluating text-driven image editing
methods in multifaceted scenarios. Codes are available at: https://mingzhenhuang.github.io/projects/ParallelEdits.html.
* Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

