Theoretical characterisation of the Gauss-Newton
conditioning in Neural Networks

Jim Zhao∗
University of Basel, Switzerland
jim.zhao@unibas.ch

Sidak Pal Singh∗
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
sidak.singh@inf.ethz.ch

Aurelien Lucchi
University of Basel, Switzerland
aurelien.lucchi@unibas.com

Abstract
The Gauss-Newton (GN) matrix plays an important role in machine learning, most
evident in its use as a preconditioning matrix for a wide family of popular adaptive
methods to speed up optimization. Besides, it can also provide key insights into the
optimization landscape of neural networks. In the context of deep neural networks,
understanding the GN matrix involves studying the interaction between different
weight matrices as well as the dependencies introduced by the data, thus rendering
its analysis challenging. In this work, we take a first step towards theoretically
characterizing the conditioning of the GN matrix in neural networks. We establish
tight bounds on the condition number of the GN in deep linear networks of arbitrary
depth and width, which we also extend to two-layer ReLU networks. We expand
the analysis to further architectural components, such as residual connections and
convolutional layers. Finally, we empirically validate the bounds and uncover
valuable insights into the influence of the analyzed architectural components.

1

Introduction

The curvature is a key geometric property of the loss landscape, which is characterized by the Hessian
matrix or approximations such as the Gauss-Newton (GN) matrix, and strongly influences the convergence of gradient-based optimization methods. In the realm of deep learning, where models often have
millions of parameters, understanding the geometry of the optimization landscape is essential to understanding the effectiveness of training algorithms. The Hessian matrix helps identify the directions in
which the loss function changes most rapidly, aiding in the selection of appropriate learning rates and
guiding optimization algorithms to navigate the complex, high-dimensional space of parameters. However, in practice, the Hessian is not easily accessible due to the high computational cost and memory requirements. Instead, the GN matrix (or its diagonal form) is commonly employed in adaptive optimization methods such as Adam [Kingma and Ba, 2014] with the goal to improve the conditioning of the
landscape. Although the Gauss-Newton matrix GO is only an approximation to the full Hessian matrix, it does seem to capture the curvature of the loss very well given the success of many second-order
optimization methods based on approximations of the Gauss-Newton matrix, such as K-FAC [Martens
and Grosse, 2020], Shampoo [Gupta et al., 2018] or Sophia [Liu et al., 2023]. Particularly interesting
is the last method, in which the authors observe that their optimizer based on the Gauss-Newton
matrix performs even better than their optimizer based on the full Hessian matrix, implying that the
Gauss-Newton matrix is a good preconditioner and captures the curvature of the loss landscape well.
∗

First two authors have equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

