Towards training digitally-tied analog blocks
via hybrid gradient computation

Timothy Nest∗ ♦
timothy.nest@mila.quebec

Maxence Ernoult† ♦
maxence@rain.ai

Abstract
Power efficiency is plateauing in the standard digital electronics realm such that
new hardware, models, and algorithms are needed to reduce the costs of AI training.
The combination of energy-based analog circuits and the Equilibrium Propagation
(EP) algorithm constitutes a compelling alternative compute paradigm for gradientbased optimization of neural nets. Existing analog hardware accelerators, however,
typically incorporate digital circuitry to sustain auxiliary non-weight-stationary
operations, mitigate analog device imperfections, and leverage existing digital
platforms. Such heterogeneous hardware lacks a supporting theoretical framework.
In this work, we introduce Feedforward-tied Energy-based Models (ff-EBMs), a
hybrid model comprised of feedforward and energy-based blocks housed on digital
and analog circuits. We derive a novel algorithm to compute gradients end-to-end
in ff-EBMs by backpropagating and “eq-propagating" through feedforward and
energy-based parts respectively, enabling EP to be applied flexibly on realistic
architectures. We experimentally demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach
on ff-EBMs using Deep Hopfield Networks (DHNs) as energy-based blocks, and
show that a standard DHN can be arbitrarily split into any uniform size while
maintaining or improving performance with increases in simulation speed of up
to four times. We then train ff-EBMs on ImageNet32 where we establish a new
state-of-the-art performance for the EP literature (46 top-1 %) 3 . Our approach
offers a principled, scalable, and incremental roadmap for the gradual integration
of self-trainable analog computational primitives into existing digital accelerators.

1

Introduction

Gradient-based optimization, the cornerstone and most energy greedy component of deep learning,
fundamentally relies upon three factors: i) highly parallel digital hardware such as GPUs, ii) feedforward models and iii) backprop (BP). With skyrocketing demands of AI compute, reducing the energy
consumption of AI systems has become a matter of great economic, societal and environmental
urgency [Strubell et al., 2020], calling for the exploration of novel compute paradigms [Thompson
et al., 2020, Scellier, 2021, Stern and Murugan, 2023].
One promising path towards this goal is analog in-memory computing [Sebastian et al., 2020]:
by mapping weights onto a crossbar of resistive devices, Kirchoff current and voltage laws inherently perform matrix-vector multiplications with constant time complexity [Cosemans et al.,
2019]. By stacking multiple such crossbars, an entire neural network can be mapped onto a physical
system. An important formalism for such a system is that of energy-based (EB) analog circuits
∗

Montreal Institute of Learning Algorithms (MILA)
Rain AI
♦
Equal contribution
3
Our code is available on https://github.com/rain-neuromorphics/hybrid_bp_ep_official
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

