Transfer Learning for Diffusion Models

Yidong Ouyang1 , Liyan Xie2∗, Hongyuan Zha3 , Guang Cheng1
1

2

Department of Statistics and Data Science, University of California, Los Angeles
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of Minnesota Twin Cities
3
School of Data Science, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen

yidongouyang@g.ucla.edu; liyanxie@umn.edu; zhahy@cuhk.edu.cn; guangcheng@ucla.edu

Abstract
Diffusion models, a specific type of generative model, have achieved unprecedented performance in recent years and consistently produce high-quality synthetic
samples. A critical prerequisite for their notable success lies in the presence of
a substantial number of training samples, which can be impractical in real-world
applications due to high collection costs or associated risks. Consequently, various
finetuning and regularization approaches have been proposed to transfer knowledge
from existing pre-trained models to specific target domains with limited data. This
paper introduces the Transfer Guided Diffusion Process (TGDP), a novel approach
distinct from conventional finetuning and regularization methods. We prove that
the optimal diffusion model for the target domain integrates pre-trained diffusion
models on the source domain with additional guidance from a domain classifier.
We further extend TGDP to a conditional version for modeling the joint distribution
of data and its corresponding labels, together with two additional regularization
terms to enhance the model performance. We validate the effectiveness of TGDP
on both simulated and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have achieved remarkable success in modeling data distributions and generating
various types of synthetic data, such as images [13, 36, 17], videos [14], vision language [32, 33, 30],
and time series [39]. However, their success heavily relies on the availability of a large number
of training samples. In real-world applications, acquiring ample samples for specific tasks can be
challenging due to the high costs associated with data collection or labeling, or the potential risks
involved. Therefore, an important research question is how to effectively transfer knowledge from a
pre-trained generative model in the source domain (using existing large-scale datasets) to a target
domain (for specific tasks) where data is limited.
Training a generative model directly or finetuning a pre-trained generative model on limited data
from the target domain often results in significant performance degradation due to overfitting and
memorization. To address these issues, numerous studies have proposed methods in generative domain
adaptation, including the GAN-based models [46, 45, 49, 1, 51, 28, 48, 9, 15, 43, 22, 50], diffusionbased model [25, 52, 44], etc. Specifically, approaches using diffusion models can be divided into
two categories: finetuning lightweight adapters [25, 44] and finetuning with regularization [52].
Approaches involving finetuning lightweight adapters focus on adjusting only a subset of parameters
in a pre-trained model. The primary challenge here is identifying which parameters to finetune.
This process is typically heuristic and requires preliminary experiments to identify the most efficient
parameters for adjustment. Additionally, the specific parameters to be finetuned can vary across
∗

Correspondence to: Liyan Xie, liyanxie@umn.edu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

