Optimal Scalarizations for Sublinear Hypervolume
Regret

Qiuyi (Richard) Zhang
Google Deepmind
qiuyiz@google.com

Abstract
Scalarization is a general, parallizable technique that can be deployed in any multiobjective setting to reduce multiple objectives into one, yet some have dismissed
this versatile approach because linear scalarizations cannot explore concave regions
of the Pareto frontier. To that end, we aim to find simple non-linear scalarizations
that provably explore a diverse set of k objectives on the Pareto frontier, as measured by the dominated hypervolume. We show that hypervolume scalarizations
with uniformly random weights achieves an optimal sublinear hypervolume regret
bound of O(T −1/k ), with matching lower bounds that preclude any algorithm
from doing better asymptotically. For the setting of multiobjective stochastic linear bandits, we utilize properties of hypervolume scalarizations to derive a novel
−1/2
e
non-Euclidean analysis to get regret bounds of O(dT
+ T −1/k ), removing
unnecessary poly(k) dependencies. We support our theory with strong empirical
performance of using non-linear scalarizations that outperforms both their linear
counterparts and other standard multiobjective algorithms in a variety of natural
settings.

1

Introduction

Optimization objectives in modern AI systems are becoming more complex with many different
components that must be combined to perform precise tradeoffs in machine learning models. Starting
from standard ℓp regularization objectives in regression problems [Kutner et al., 2005] to increasingly
multi-component losses used in reinforcement learning [Sutton et al., 1998] and deep learning [LeCun
et al., 2015], many of these single-objective problems are phrased as a scalarized form of an inherently
k-objective problem.
Scalarization Method. Practitioners often vary the weights of the scalarization method, with the
main goal of exploring the entire Pareto frontier, which is the set of optimal objectives that cannot
be simultaneously improved. First, one chooses some weights λ ∈ Rk and scalarization functions
sλ (y) : Rk → R that convert k multiple objectives F (a) := (f1 (a), ..., fk (a)) over some parameter
space a ∈ A ⊆ Rd into a single-objective scalar. Optimization is then applied to this family of
single-objective functions sλ (F (x)) for various λ and since we often choose sλ to be monotonically
increasing in all coordinates, xλ = arg maxa∈A sλ (F (a)) is on the Pareto frontier and the various
choices of λ recovers an approximation to the Pareto frontier [Paria et al., 2018].
Due to its simplicity of use, many have turned to a heuristic-based scalarization strategy to pick
the family of scalarizer and weights, which efficiently splits the multi-objective optimization into
numerous single "scalarized" optimizations [Roijers et al., 2013]. Linear scalarizations with varying
weights are often used in multi-objective optimization problems, such as in multi-objective reinforcement learning to combine task reward with the negative action norm [Abdolmaleki et al., 2021] or
in RLHF to align responses with human preferences Ouyang et al. [2022]. However, the appeal of
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

