Improving Equivariant Model Training via Constraint
Relaxation
Stefanos Pertigkiozoglou∗
University of Pennsylvania
pstefano@seas.upenn.edu

Evangelos Chatzipantazis∗
University of Pennsylvania
vaghat@seas.upenn.edu

Shubhendu Trivedi
Independent
shubhendu@csail.mit.edu

Kostas Daniilidis
University of Pennsylvania
Archimedes, Athena RC
kostas@cis.upenn.edu

Abstract
Equivariant neural networks have been widely used in a variety of applications due
to their ability to generalize well in tasks where the underlying data symmetries
are known. Despite their successes, such networks can be difficult to optimize
and require careful hyperparameter tuning to train successfully. In this work,
we propose a novel framework for improving the optimization of such models by
relaxing the hard equivariance constraint during training: We relax the equivariance
constraint of the network’s intermediate layers by introducing an additional nonequivariant term that we progressively constrain until we arrive at an equivariant
solution. By controlling the magnitude of the activation of the additional relaxation
term, we allow the model to optimize over a larger hypothesis space containing
approximate equivariant networks and converge back to an equivariant solution
at the end of training. We provide experimental results on different state-of-theart network architectures, demonstrating how this training framework can result
in equivariant models with improved generalization performance. Our code is
available at https://github.com/StefanosPert/Equivariant_Optimization_CR

1

Introduction

The explicit incorporation of task-specific symmetry in the design and implementation of effective
and parameter-efficient neural network (NN) models has matured into a rational and attractive NN
design meta-formalism in recent years—that of group equivariant convolutional neural networks
(GCNNs) (Cohen & Welling, 2016; Ravanbakhsh et al., 2017; Esteves et al., 2018; Kondor & Trivedi,
2018; Cohen et al., 2019; Maron et al., 2019; Weiler & Cesa, 2019; Bekkers, 2020; Villar et al., 2021;
Xu et al., 2022; Pearce-Crump, 2023). GCNNs involve using the machinery of group and representation theory to compose layers that are equivariant to transformations of the input. Such networks,
with hard-coded symmetry, have proven to be successful across a wide variety of tasks, while often
affording significant data efficiency. Such tasks/domains include: RNA structure (Townshend et al.,
2021), protein structure (Baek et al., 2021; Jumper et al., 2021), molecule generation (Satorras et al.,
2021), medical imaging (Winkels & Cohen, 2019), natural language processing (Gordon et al., 2020;
Petrache & Trivedi, 2024), computer vision (Chatzipantazis et al., 2023), robotics (Zhu et al., 2022;
Ordoñez-Apraez et al., 2024), density functional theory (Gong et al., 2023), particle physics (Bogatskiy et al., 2020), lattice gauge theories (Boyda et al., 2021) amongst many others. GCNNs
now have also matured enough to have a well-developed theory. This includes both prescriptive (or
∗

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

