Mercury: A Code Efficiency Benchmark for Code
Large Language Models

Mingzhe Du1,2 , Luu Anh Tuan1 , Bin Ji2 , Qian Liu3 , See-Kiong Ng2
1
Nanyang Technological University
2
National University of Singapore
3
Sea AI Lab
{mingzhe001, anhtuan.luu}@ntu.edu.sg, {jibin, seekiong}@nus.edu.sg, liuqian@sea.com

Abstract
Amidst the recent strides in evaluating Large Language Models for Code (Code
LLMs), existing benchmarks have mainly focused on the functional correctness
of generated code, neglecting the importance of their computational efficiency.
To fill the gap, we present Mercury, the first code efficiency benchmark for Code
LLMs. It comprises 1,889 Python tasks, each accompanied by adequate solutions
that serve as real-world efficiency baselines, enabling a comprehensive analysis
of the runtime distribution. Based on the distribution, we introduce a new metric
Beyond, which computes a runtime-percentile-weighted Pass score to reflect
functional correctness and code efficiency simultaneously. On Mercury, leading
Code LLMs can achieve 65% on Pass, while less than 50% on Beyond. Given that
an ideal Beyond score would be aligned with the Pass score, it indicates that while
Code LLMs exhibit impressive capabilities in generating functionally correct code,
there remains a notable gap in their efficiency. Finally, our empirical experiments
reveal that Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) serves as a robust baseline for
enhancing code efficiency compared with Supervised Fine Tuning (SFT), which
paves a promising avenue for future exploration of efficient code generation. 1

1

Introduction

The domain of code generation, which aims to empower computers to autonomously generate code
based on natural language task descriptions (NL2Code), has long been considered a promising way
to facilitate interaction between humans and computers [51, 49]. The recent emergence of Large
Language Models (LLMs) has spurred a new wave of NL2Code models [38, 42, 14, 33, 4], which
leverage the impressive language understanding and generative capabilities of LLMs to drive forward
the ambitious goal of synthesizing high-quality code from natural language instructions.
To measure the quality of code, recent code generation benchmarks mainly focus on evaluating their
functional correctness via test case fuzzing [31]. This approach assesses the outcome congruence
between the LLM-generated and canonical solutions by executing bespoken test cases. For instance,
HumanEval [9] and MBPP [3] collected a small but fine set of handcrafted tasks with test cases.
EvalPlus [30] further consolidates these two above benchmarks by augmenting the case scope. On the
contrary, APPS [18] widely gathered over 5,000 public coding tasks from online platforms. Despite
these strides, there is a discernible oversight in current code generation benchmarks concerning the
code efficiency evaluation, although that is critical in software development [50, 52]. Moreover,
handcrafting diverse solutions and test cases to cover all scenarios is infeasible [30]. In light of these
findings, we highlight vital limitations inherent in the existing code generation benchmarks:
1

Our code and data are available on GitHub: https://github.com/Elfsong/Mercury.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

