Intervention and Conditioning in Causal Bayesian
Networks
Sainyam Galhotra
Computer Science Dept.
Cornell University
sg@cs.cornell.edu

Joseph Y. Halpern
Computer Science Dept.
Cornell University
halpern@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Causal models are crucial for understanding complex systems and identifying
causal relationships among variables. Even though causal models are extremely
popular, conditional probability calculation of formulas involving interventions
pose significant challenges. In case of Causal Bayesian Networks (CBNs), Pearl
assumes autonomy of mechanisms that determine interventions to calculate a
range of probabilities. We show that by making simple yet often realistic independence assumptions, it is possible to uniquely estimate the probability of an
interventional formula (including the well-studied notions of probability of sufficiency and necessity). We discuss when these assumptions are appropriate. Importantly, in many cases of interest, when the assumptions are appropriate, these
probability estimates can be evaluated using observational data, which carries immense significance in scenarios where conducting experiments is impractical or
unfeasible.

1

Introduction

Causal models play a pivotal role in elucidating the causal relationships among variables. These
models facilitate a principled approach to understanding how various factors interact and influence each other in complex systems. For instance, in epidemiology, causal models often help us
understand the relationship between lifestyle choices and health outcomes (Greenland, Pearl, and
Robins 1999); and in economics, they help to analyze the impact of policy changes on market dynamics (Hicks 1979). These examples underscore the versatility and utility of causal models for
providing a formal representation of system variables.
Interventions and conditioning are the most fundamental procedures in the application of causal
models, useful to examine and analyze causal mechanisms. For example, interventions help explain the outcome of complex ML systems (Galhotra, Pradhan, and Salimi 2021); and in AI-driven
healthcare diagnostics, it is crucial to discern the effect of a particular intervention (like a change in
treatment protocol) on patient outcomes (Greenland 1999).
Despite their utility, calculating the probabilities related to interventions and conditioning in tandem
presents significant challenges. Indeed, it is not even clear what the semantics of queries involving
counterfactuals is. Work in the AI literature has focused on two types of models: functional causal
models1 and causal Bayesian networks (Pearl 2000). Both are typically described using directed
acyclic graphs, where each node is associated with a variable. In a causal model, with each variable
Y associated with a non-root node, there is a deterministic (structural) equation, that gives the value
of Y as a function of the values of its parents; there is also a probability on the values of root nodes.
In a CBN, like in a Bayesian network, each variable Y is associated with a conditional probability
1

Unless specified, in this paper, “causal models” refer to “functional causal models”.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

