Muscles in Time: Learning to Understand Human
Motion by Simulating Muscle Activations

David Schneider∗ †
Susanne Sutschet†

Simon Reiß†

Marco Kugler†

M. Saquib Sarfraz‡

Alexander Jaus†

Sven Matthiesen†

Kunyu Peng†

Rainer Stiefelhagen†

Abstract
Exploring the intricate dynamics between muscular and skeletal structures is pivotal
for understanding human motion. This domain presents substantial challenges,
primarily attributed to the intensive resources required for acquiring ground truth
muscle activation data, resulting in a scarcity of datasets. In this work, we address
this issue by establishing Muscles in Time (MinT), a large-scale synthetic muscle
activation dataset. For the creation of MinT, we enriched existing motion capture
datasets by incorporating muscle activation simulations derived from biomechanical human body models using the OpenSim platform, a common approach in
biomechanics and human motion research. Starting from simple pose sequences,
our pipeline enables us to extract detailed information about the timing of muscle
activations within the human musculoskeletal system. Muscles in Time contains
over nine hours of simulation data covering 227 subjects and 402 simulated muscle
strands. We demonstrate the utility of this dataset by presenting results on neural
network-based muscle activation estimation from human pose sequences with two
different sequence-to-sequence architectures.
Data and code are provided under https://simplexsigil.github.io/mint.

1

Introduction

Like prisoners in Plato’s cave, neural networks for human motion understanding often rely on indirect
representations rather than direct, biologically grounded data. In Plato’s allegory, prisoners in a
cave see only shadows cast on the wall, not the true objects. Similarly, neural networks trained on
accessible data, such as RGB and depth-based video recordings or motion capture, only perceive
surface-level appearance of motion in contrast to the inner mechanics of the human body.
This reliance on external visual observations provides an incomplete understanding of the true
complexities of human motion. Just as the prisoners lack a direct view of the objects casting the
shadows, current models lack exposure to the internal workings of the human body, such as the
muscle activations driving motion. This gap limits their ability to develop an in-depth understanding
of physical exertion, motion difficulty, and mass impact on the body.
Our community has progressed from capturing human motion with camera sensors and predicting
activities to pose-based recognition systems that account for the body and its motion over time. These
advances, while significant, still overlook the interplay of muscle activations, which are the root of
pose sequences and patterns.
∗

Corresponding author: david.schneider@kit.edu
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
‡
Mercedes-Benz Tech Innovation
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

