Pseudo-Private Data Guided Model Inversion Attacks
Xiong Peng1 Bo Han1† Feng Liu2 Tongliang Liu3 Mingyuan Zhou4
1
TMLR Group, Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
2
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne
3
Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney
4
McCombs School of Business, The University of Texas at Austin
{csxpeng, bhanml}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk
fengliu.ml@gmail.com tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

Abstract
In model inversion attacks (MIAs), adversaries attempt to recover the private training data by exploiting access to a well-trained target model. Recent advancements
have improved MIA performance using a two-stage generative framework. This approach first employs a generative adversarial network to learn a fixed distributional
prior, which is then used to guide the inversion process during the attack. However,
in this paper, we observed a phenomenon that such a fixed prior would lead to a
low probability of sampling actual private data during the inversion process due to
the inherent distribution gap between the prior distribution and the private data distribution, thereby constraining attack performance. To address this limitation, we
propose increasing the density around high-quality pseudo-private data—recovered
samples through model inversion that exhibit characteristics of the private training data—by slightly tuning the generator. This strategy effectively increases the
probability of sampling actual private data that is close to these pseudo-private data
during the inversion process. After integrating our method, the generative model
inversion pipeline is strengthened, leading to improvements over state-of-the-art
MIAs. This paves the way for new research directions in generative MIAs. Our
source code is available at: https://github.com/tmlr-group/PPDG-MI.

1

Introduction

Currently, machine learning (ML) models, especially deep neural networks (DNNs), have become
prevalent in privacy-sensitive applications such as secure systems [Yin et al., 2020], personal chatbots [Ouyang et al., 2022] and healthcare services [Murdoch, 2021]. These applications inevitably
rely on private and confidential datasets during model training, raising concerns about potential privacy leakages [Liu et al., 2021]. Unfortunately, recent studies reveal that ML models are vulnerable
to various privacy attacks [Fredrikson et al., 2014, Krishna et al., 2019, Choquette-Choo et al., 2021].
Model inversion attacks (MIAs), a category of these attacks, pose significant privacy risks, which aim
to infer and recover original training data by exploiting access to a well-trained model.
In the pioneering work [Fredrikson et al., 2015], MIAs were formulated as a gradient-based optimization problem in the raw data space. The goal was to seek synthetic features that maximize the
prediction score for a targeted class under the target model, exploiting the strong dependency between
inputs and labels established during training. For example, in attack scenarios where the target model
is a facial recognition model trained on private facial images, traditional MIAs would optimize over
the synthetic images to maximize the prediction score for a target identity.
†

Correspondence to Bo Han (bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

