Streaming Bayes GFlowNets

Tiago da Silva
Getulio Vargas Foundation
tiago.henrique@fgv.br

Daniel Augusto de Souza
University College London
daniel.souza.21@ucl.ac.uk

Diego Mesquita
Getulio Vargas Foundation
diego.mesquita@fgv.br

Abstract
Bayes’ rule naturally allows for inference refinement in a streaming fashion, without the need to recompute posteriors from scratch whenever new data arrives. In
principle, Bayesian streaming is straightforward: we update our prior with the
available data and use the resulting posterior as a prior when processing the next
data chunk. In practice, however, this recipe entails i) approximating an intractable
posterior at each time step; and ii) encapsulating results appropriately to allow
for posterior propagation. For continuous state spaces, variational inference (VI)
is particularly convenient due to its scalability and the tractability of variational
posteriors. For discrete state spaces, however, state-of-the-art VI results in analytically intractable approximations that are ill-suited for streaming settings. To
enable streaming Bayesian inference over discrete parameter spaces, we propose
streaming Bayes GFlowNets (abbreviated as SB-GFlowNets) by leveraging the recently proposed GFlowNets — a powerful class of amortized samplers for discrete
compositional objects. Notably, SB-GFlowNet approximates the initial posterior
using a standard GFlowNet and subsequently updates it using a tailored procedure
that requires only the newly observed data. Our case studies in linear preference
learning and phylogenetic inference showcase the effectiveness of SB-GFlowNets
in sampling from an unnormalized posterior in a streaming setting. As expected,
we also observe that SB-GFlowNets is significantly faster than repeatedly training
a GFlowNet from scratch to sample from the full posterior.

1

Introduction

One of the foundations of the Big Data revolution in the sciences and engineering is the use of
streaming data that is continuously collected and meant to be processed as it arrives. Many of the
large statistical models in use were first formulated for the batched i.i.d. data setting and updating
such models in this setting is a challenge of its own, as it would naively require us to revisit all past
data at each update to avoid forgetting. [19, 39] In this context, Bayesian inference appears as a
natural starting point to learning in the streaming data setting due to its innate property of coherence
[5], which allows learning can happen continuously, independently of how the data is chunked into
packages or ordered. More specifically, given a prior distribution p(θ) and a data generating likelihood
p(yi | θ), the posterior distribution over a set of data p(θ | y1 , y2 ) ∝ p(y2 | θ)p(y1 | θ)p(θ), can be
written as p(y2 | θ)p(θ | y1 ), where first we compute the posterior over y1 and then used as a prior to
compute the posterior over y2 . As conveniently summarized by Lindley [33]: “Today’s posterior is
tomorrow’s prior".
Nonetheless, Bayesian inference is notoriously known for being hard to obtain closed-form solutions.
The gold standard of approximate methods, Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), requires that
the prior and likelihood distributions probability density/mass functions can be evaluated, however,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

