STimage-1K4M: A histopathology image-gene
expression dataset for spatial transcriptomics

Jiawen Chen

Muqing Zhou

Wenrong Wu

Jinwei Zhang

Yun Li∗

Didong Li∗

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{jiawenn, muqingz, wenrong, jinweizh, yun_li, didongli}@unc.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in multi-modal algorithms have driven and been driven by the
increasing availability of large image-text datasets, leading to significant strides
in various fields, including computational pathology. However, in most existing
medical image-text datasets, the text typically provides high-level summaries that
may not sufficiently describe sub-tile regions within a large pathology image. For
example, an image might cover an extensive tissue area containing cancerous and
healthy regions, but the accompanying text might only specify that this image is
a cancer slide, lacking the nuanced details needed for in-depth analysis. In this
study, we introduce STimage-1K4M, a novel dataset designed to bridge this gap by
providing genomic features for sub-tile images. STimage-1K4M contains 1,149
images derived from spatial transcriptomics data, which captures gene expression
information at the level of individual spatial spots within a pathology image.
Specifically, each image in the dataset is broken down into smaller sub-image tiles,
with each tile paired with 15, 000 − 30, 000 dimensional gene expressions. With
4, 293, 195 pairs of sub-tile images and gene expressions, STimage-1K4M offers
unprecedented granularity, paving the way for a wide range of advanced research
in multi-modal data analysis an innovative applications in computational pathology,
and beyond. 1

1

Introduction

Multi-modal data, especially image-text pairs, has gained significant importance and popularity (Srinivasan et al., 2021; Schuhmann et al., 2022), driven by the recent success of multi-modal models
such as Contrastive Language-Image Pre-Training (CLIP, Radford et al. (2021)). Researchers have
been leveraging these models and data across various fields due to their versatility. Initially, many
image models were trained to predict a fixed set of predetermined object categories, limiting their
generalizability to identify other visual objects or concepts. Learning directly from text descriptions
about images provides a complementary and broader source of supervision, expanding the range of
potential applications.
Histopathology plays a crucial role in medical diagnostics, focusing on the microscopic examination
of tissue samples to detect diseases and guide treatment decisions (Bera et al., 2019). It helps identify
cellular abnormalities, including cancerous cells, inflammation, and tissue degeneration (Reddy,
1996; Bera et al., 2019). The collection of image-text pair data for histopathology requires careful
annotation of whole-slide images (Huang et al., 2023; Ikezogwo et al., 2024) to create large-scale
∗

Corresponding authors
The data and code are publicly available at https://github.com/JiawenChenn/STimage-1K4M and
https://huggingface.co/datasets/jiawennnn/STimage-1K4M
1

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

