OwMatch: Conditional Self-Labeling with Consistency
for Open-World Semi-Supervised Learning

1

Shengjie Niu1∗ , Lifan Lin2∗, Jian Huang1 , Chao Wang2†
Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 2 Southern University of Science and Technology
shengjie.niu@connect.polyu.hk, 12012816@mail.sustech.edu.cn,
j.huang@polyu.edu.hk, wangc6@sustech.edu.cn

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) offers a robust framework for harnessing the potential of unannotated data. Traditionally, SSL mandates that all classes possess
labeled instances. However, the emergence of open-world SSL (OwSSL) introduces a more practical challenge, wherein unlabeled data may encompass samples
from unseen classes. This scenario leads to the misclassification of unseen classes
as known ones, consequently undermining classification accuracy. To overcome
this challenge, this study revisits two methodologies from self-supervised and semisupervised learning, self-labeling and consistency, tailoring them to address the
OwSSL problem. Specifically, we propose an effective framework called OwMatch,
combining conditional self-labeling and open-world hierarchical thresholding. Theoretically, we analyze the estimation of class distribution on unlabeled data through
rigorous statistical analysis, thus demonstrating that OwMatch can ensure the unbiasedness of the self-label assignment estimator with reliability. Comprehensive
empirical analyses demonstrate that our method yields substantial performance
enhancements across both known and unknown classes in comparison to previous
studies. Code is available at https://github.com/niusj03/OwMatch.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has made remarkable success in various tasks by leveraging substantial labeled training
data [22, 21, 13]. However, the costly and time-consuming labeling process limits their application in
practical scenarios. Semi-supervised learning (SSL) significantly reduces the dependency on labeled
data by exploring the inherent structure of unlabeled data [16]. Despite promising results, SSL
methods assume a closed-world scenario where, though limited, all classes possess labeled instances.
This assumption may be violated due to difficulties in data collection, such as in medical diagnostics,
where it is common to encounter new symptoms or fail to annotate due to technical constraints. As a
result, only a subset of the categories can be precisely labeled during the annotation process. Recently,
numerous studies have sought to identify such novel classes effectively. Open-world SSL (OwSSL)
is innovative in promoting dual objectives: classifying instances of seen classes and discovering
instances of novel classes [5].
A notable challenge in OwSSL is the confirmation bias of model: model tends to predict instances
as seen classes owing to the lack of ground-truth supervision of novel-class instances. To eliminate
this bias, existing works utilize unsupervised clustering methods, including contrastive loss and
binary cross-entropy (BCE) loss, to group pairs identified by similarity metrics [5, 15]. Among
these unsupervised techniques, self-labeling [1, 6] has shown remarkable success, which involves
assigning self-labels to unlabeled data, with the generation of high-quality self-labels being the key
∗
†

The first two authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

