Leveraging Environment Interaction for Automated
PDDL Translation and Planning with Large Language
Models
Sadegh Mahdavi∗
University of British Columbia
smahdavi@ece.ubc.ca

Raquel Aoki
Borealis AI
raquel.aoki@borealisai.com

Keyi Tang
Borealis AI
keyi.tang@borealisai.com

Yanshuai Cao
Borealis AI
yanshuai.cao@borealisai.com

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown remarkable performance in various
natural language tasks, but they often struggle with planning problems that require
structured reasoning. To address this limitation, the conversion of planning problems into the Planning Domain Definition Language (PDDL) has been proposed as
a potential solution, enabling the use of automated planners. However, generating
accurate PDDL files typically demands human inputs or correction, which can be
time-consuming and costly. In this paper, we propose a novel approach that leverages LLMs and environment feedback to automatically generate PDDL domain
and problem description files without the need for human intervention. Our method
introduces an iterative refinement process that generates multiple problem PDDL
candidates and progressively refines the domain PDDL based on feedback obtained
from interacting with the environment. To guide the refinement process, we develop
an Exploration Walk (EW) metric, which provides rich feedback signals for LLMs
to update the PDDL file. We evaluate our approach on 10 PDDL environments.
We achieve an average task solve rate of 66% compared to a 29% solve rate by
GPT-4’s intrinsic planning with chain-of-thought prompting. Our work enables
the automated modeling of planning environments using LLMs and environment
feedback, eliminating the need for human intervention in the PDDL translation
process and paving the way for more reliable LLM agents in challenging problems.
Our code is available at https://github.com/BorealisAI/llm-pddl-planning

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable success across various domains,
including mathematics, coding, and even the bar exam [1]. These models excel at understanding and
generating natural language, offering flexibility and adaptability to a wide range of tasks. However,
when it comes to planning and long-horizon reasoning, LLMs have shown limited performance
[8, 28], despite some promising results [3].
Planning is a crucial aspect of intelligence that involves reasoning to find a sequence of actions to
achieve a desired goal state from an initial state. The Planning Domain Definition Language (PDDL)
[18] is a widely used formalism for describing planning problems. PDDL provides a structured way
∗

Work performed while interning at Borealis AI.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

