Finding good policies in average-reward Markov
Decision Processes without prior knowledge

Adrienne Tuynman
adrienne.tuynman@inria.fr

Rémy Degenne
remy.degenne@inria.fr

Emilie Kaufmann
emilie.kaufmann@univ-lille.fr
Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189-CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France

Abstract
We revisit the identification of an ε-optimal policy in average-reward Markov
Decision Processes (MDP). In such MDPs, two measures of complexity have
appeared in the literature: the diameter, D, and the optimal bias span, H, which
satisfy H ≤ D. Prior work have studied the complexity of ε-optimal policy
identification only when a generative model is available. In this case, it is known
that there exists an MDP with D ≃ H for which the sample complexity to output
an ε-optimal policy is Ω(SAD/ε2 ) where S and A are the sizes of the state and
action spaces. Recently, an algorithm with a sample complexity of order SAH/ε2
has been proposed, but it requires the knowledge of H. We first show that the
sample complexity required to estimate H is not bounded by any function of S, A
and H, ruling out the possibility to easily make the previous algorithm agnostic
to H. By relying instead on a diameter estimation procedure, we propose the first
algorithm for (ε, δ)-PAC policy identification that does not need any form of prior
knowledge on the MDP. Its sample complexity scales in SAD/ε2 in the regime
of small ε, which is near-optimal. In the online setting, our first contribution is
a lower bound which implies that a sample complexity polynomial in H cannot
be achieved in this setting. Then, we propose an online algorithm with a sample
complexity in SAD2 /ε2 , as well as a novel approach based on a data-dependent
stopping rule that we believe is promising to further reduce this bound.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a paradigm in which an agent interacts with its environment, modeled
as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), by taking actions and observing rewards. Its goal is to learn, or
to act according to, a good policy, that is a mapping from state to actions which maximizes cumulative
rewards. However, there are different ways to define this notion of (expected) cumulative reward:
in the finite horizon setting, one should maximize the expected sum of rewards up to a certain fixed
horizon; in the discounted setting, each consecutive reward is γ times as important as the previous
one, with 0 < γ < 1. In this paper, we focus on the average reward setting, in which the value of a
policy is measured by its asymptotic mean reward per time step. This setting is ideal for long-term
learning, as there is no need to tune the horizon or discount parameters. However, the asymptotic
nature of its optimality criterion makes the problem more complicated and highly sensitive to small
changes in the MDP, which is less observable in the finite horizon or discounted settings.
Formally, a Markov Decision Processes is defined as a tuple (S,A,P ,r) where S is the state space
of finite size S, A is the action space of finite size A. Letting ΣX denote the set of distribution
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

