S AFE S ORA: Towards Safety Alignment of Text2Video
Generation via a Human Preference Dataset
Juntao Dai123 , Tianle Chen1 , Xuyao Wang1 , Ziran Yang1
Taiye Chen1 , Jiaming Ji12 , Yaodong Yang12∗
1

2

Center for AI Safety and Governance, Institute for AI, Peking University
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Institute for AI, Peking University
3
LLM Safety Centre, Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI)
{jtd.acad, ctianle75, xuyao2w}@gmail.com,
yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
To mitigate the risk of harmful outputs from large vision models (LVMs), we
introduce the S AFE S ORA dataset to promote research on aligning text-to-video
generation with human values. This dataset encompasses human preferences in
text-to-video generation tasks along two primary dimensions: helpfulness and
harmlessness. To capture in-depth human preferences and facilitate structured
reasoning by crowdworkers, we subdivide helpfulness into 4 sub-dimensions and
harmlessness into 12 sub-categories, serving as the basis for pilot annotations.
The S AFE S ORA dataset includes 14,711 unique prompts, 57,333 unique videos
generated by 4 distinct LVMs, and 51,691 pairs of preference annotations labeled
by humans. We further demonstrate the utility of the S AFE S ORA dataset through
several applications, including training the text-video moderation model and aligning LVMs with human preference by fine-tuning a prompt augmentation module or
the diffusion model. These applications highlight its potential as the foundation
for text-to-video alignment research, such as human preference modeling and the
development and validation of alignment algorithms. Our project is available at
https://sites.google.com/view/safe-sora.
Warning: this paper contains example data that may be offensive or harmful.

1

Introduction

With advances in multi-modal technology, the capabilities of AI-powered assistants to interact with
humans are expanding beyond textual communication [1]. These assistants increasingly process and
generate inputs and outputs across multiple modalities, including text [2, 3], voice [4, 5], images
[6, 7, 8], and videos [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. However, the broadening capabilities of AI systems
suggest that misalignment with human values could lead to increasingly severe consequences [15, 16].
Recently, Sora [12] demonstrated a remarkable ability to accurately interpret and execute complex
human instructions, playing minute-long videos while maintaining high visual quality and compelling
visual coherence. Meanwhile, applications of assistants with text-to-video capabilities are expected
across various domains, including movies [17, 18], healthcare [19, 20, 21, 22], robotics [23, 24], etc.
However, this also raises broader concerns about the potential misuse of such powerful capabilities
[25]. In comparison to the well-established field of text-to-text alignment, which is supported by
extensive research [26, 27, 28, 3, 29], the text-to-video domain remains underdeveloped, notably
lacking in available datasets.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

