General bounds on the quality of Bayesian coresets

Trevor Campbell∗
Department of Statistics
University of British Columbia
trevor@stat.ubc.ca

Abstract
Bayesian coresets speed up posterior inference in the large-scale data regime by
approximating the full-data log-likelihood function with a surrogate log-likelihood
based on a small, weighted subset of the data. But while Bayesian coresets and
methods for construction are applicable in a wide range of models, existing theoretical analysis of the posterior inferential error incurred by coreset approximations
only apply in restrictive settings—i.e., exponential family models, or models with
strong log-concavity and smoothness assumptions. This work presents general
upper and lower bounds on the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence of coreset approximations that reflect the full range of applicability of Bayesian coresets. The
lower bounds require only mild model assumptions typical of Bayesian asymptotic
analyses, while the upper bounds require the log-likelihood functions to satisfy
a generalized subexponentiality criterion that is weaker than conditions used in
earlier work. The lower bounds are applied to obtain fundamental limitations on
the quality of coreset approximations, and to provide a theoretical explanation for
the previously-observed poor empirical performance of importance sampling-based
construction methods. The upper bounds are used to analyze the performance of
recent subsample-optimize methods. The flexibility of the theory is demonstrated in
validation experiments involving multimodal, unidentifiable, heavy-tailed Bayesian
posterior distributions.

1

Introduction

Large-scale data is now commonplace in scientific and commerical applications of Bayesian statistics.
But despite its prevalence, and the corresponding wealth of research dedicated to scalable Bayesian
inference, there are still suprisingly few general methods that provably provide inferential results,
within some reasonable tolerated error, at a significant computational cost savings. Exact Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods require many full passes over the data [1, Ch. 6–12, 2, Ch. 11–
12], limiting the utility of these methods when even a single pass is expensive. A wide range of
MCMC methods that access only a subset of data per iteration, e.g., via delayed acceptance [3–6],
pseudomarginal or auxiliary variable methods [7–9], and basic subsampling [10–13], provide at most
a minor improvement over full-data MCMC [14–16]. On the other hand, methods including carefully
constructed log-likelihood function control variates can provide substantial gains [17–19]. However,
black-box control variate constructions for large-scale data often rely on assumptions such as posterior
density differentiability and unimodality that do not hold in many popular models, e.g., those with
discrete variables or multimodality. See [15, 20] for a survey of scalable MCMC methods. Parametric
approximations via variational inference [21] or the Laplace approximation [22, 23] can be obtained
scalably using stochastic optimization methods, but existing general theoretical guarantees for these
methods again typically rely on posterior normality assumptions [24, p. 141–144,25–30] (see [21, 31]
for a review).
∗

https://trevorcampbell.me

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

