Credal Deep Ensembles for Uncertainty Quantification

Kaizheng Wang1,4,∗ Fabio Cuzzolin3 Shireen Kudukkil Manchingal3
Keivan Shariatmadar2,4 David Moens2,4 Hans Hallez1
1
KU Leuven, Department of Computer Science, DistriNet
2
KU Leuven, Department of Mechanical Engineering, LMSD
3
Oxford Brookes University, Visual Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
4
Flanders Make@KU Leuven
{kaizheng.wang, keivan.shariatmadar, david.moens, hans.hallez}@kuleuven.be
{fabio.cuzzolin, 19185895}@brookes.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper introduces an innovative approach to classification called Credal Deep
Ensembles (CreDEs), namely, ensembles of novel Credal-Set Neural Networks
(CreNets). CreNets are trained to predict a lower and an upper probability bound
for each class, which, in turn, determine a convex set of probabilities (credal set)
on the class set. The training employs a loss inspired by distributionally robust
optimization which simulates the potential divergence of the test distribution from
the training distribution, in such a way that the width of the predicted probability interval reflects the ‘epistemic’ uncertainty about the future data distribution.
Ensembles can be constructed by training multiple CreNets, each associated with
a different random seed, and averaging the outputted intervals. Extensive experiments are conducted on various out-of-distributions (OOD) detection benchmarks
(CIFAR10/100 vs SVHN/Tiny-ImageNet, CIFAR10 vs CIFAR10-C, ImageNet vs
ImageNet-O) and using different network architectures (ResNet50, VGG16, and
ViT Base). Compared to Deep Ensemble baselines, CreDEs demonstrate higher test
accuracy, lower expected calibration error, and significantly improved epistemic
uncertainty estimation.

1

Introduction

The quantification of the uncertainty associated with neural network predictions has recently attracted
increasing attention, to enhance the reliability and robustness of neural networks. Researchers agree
to distinguish aleatory uncertainty (AU) from epistemic uncertainty (EU): the former arises from the
inherent randomness, e.g., data noise, and is irreducible. The latter is caused by a lack of knowledge
about the process which generates the data, due to the limited availability of training data, and is
reducible [1, 36]. Effective EU quantification is beneficial for out-of-distribution (OOD) detection
[30, 54] and can contribute to a variety of safety-critical applications, including autonomous driving
[21], medical diagnosis [44], flood uncertainty estimation [10], structural health monitoring [72].
In classification, standard neural networks (SNNs) whose predictions amount to single probability
distributions are unable to account for epistemic uncertainty, because a single distribution assumes
precise knowledge about the dependency between inputs and outputs. To properly capture the EU, the
network’s outcome needs to express the uncertainty about a prediction’s uncertainty itself [35, 62].
The most well-known approach to EU quantification in deep learning leverages Bayesian neural
networks (BNNs) [7, 22, 38]. BNNs model network parameters as distributions and thus predict a
‘second-order’ distribution (i.e., a distribution of distributions) [36], although in practice predictions
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

