G-Retriever: Retrieval-Augmented Generation for
Textual Graph Understanding and
Question Answering

Xiaoxin He1

Yijun Tian2 Yifei Sun1 Nitesh V. Chawla2 Thomas Laurent3
Yann LeCun4,5 Xavier Bresson1 Bryan Hooi1

{xiaoxin, yifeisun, xaviercs, bhooi}@comp.nus.edu.sg
{yijun.tian, nchawla}@nd.edu, tlaurent@lmu.edu, yann@cs.nyu.edu
1

National University of Singapore 2 University of Notre Dame 3 Loyola Marymount University
4
New York University 5 Meta AI

Abstract
Given a graph with textual attributes, we enable users to ‘chat with their graph’: that
is, to ask questions about the graph using a conversational interface. In response to
a user’s questions, our method provides textual replies and highlights the relevant
parts of the graph. While existing works integrate large language models (LLMs)
and graph neural networks (GNNs) in various ways, they mostly focus on either
conventional graph tasks (such as node, edge, and graph classification), or on answering simple graph queries on small or synthetic graphs. In contrast, we develop
a flexible question-answering framework targeting real-world textual graphs, applicable to multiple applications including scene graph understanding, common sense
reasoning, and knowledge graph reasoning. Toward this goal, we first develop a
Graph Question Answering (GraphQA) benchmark with data collected from different tasks. Then, we propose our G-Retriever method, introducing the first retrievalaugmented generation (RAG) approach for general textual graphs, which can be
fine-tuned to enhance graph understanding via soft prompting. To resist hallucination and to allow for textual graphs that greatly exceed the LLM’s context window
size, G-Retriever performs RAG over a graph by formulating this task as a PrizeCollecting Steiner Tree optimization problem. Empirical evaluations show that our
method outperforms baselines on textual graph tasks from multiple domains, scales
well with larger graph sizes, and mitigates hallucination. Our codes and datasets
are available at: https://github.com/XiaoxinHe/G-Retriever.

1

Introduction

Graphs and Large Language Models (LLMs). The advent of LLMs has significantly shaped the
artificial intelligence landscape. As these models are applied to increasingly diverse tasks, their ability
to process complex structured data will be increasingly vital. In particular, in our interconnected
world, a significant portion of real-world data inherently possesses a graph structure, such as the
Web, e-commerce, recommendation systems, knowledge graphs, and many others. Moreover, many
of these involve graphs with textual attributes (i.e., textual graphs), making them well-suited for
LLM-centric methods. This has spurred interest in combining graph-based technologies, particularly
graph neural networks (GNNs), with LLMs to enhance their reasoning on graphs [44, 15, 24].
The Present Work: Enabling ‘Chat With Your Graph’. While existing works integrate LLMs and
GNNs in various ways, they mostly focus on conventional graph tasks such as node, edge and graph
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

