C RITIC E VAL: Evaluate Large Language
Model as Critic
Tian Lan1∗ Wenwei Zhang2∗ Chen Xu4 Heyan Huang1
Dahua Lin2,3,5 Kai Chen2† Xian-Ling Mao1†
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 MMLab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Key Laboratory of Brain Health Intelligent Evaluation and Intervention,
Ministry of Education, Beijing Institute of Technology 5 CPII under InnoHK
https://github.com/open-compass/CriticEval

Abstract
Critique ability, i.e., the capability of Large Language Models (LLMs) to identify
and rectify flaws in responses, is crucial for their applications in self-improvement
and scalable oversight. While numerous studies have been proposed to evaluate
critique ability of LLMs, their comprehensiveness and reliability are still limited.
To overcome this problem, we introduce C RITIC E VAL, a novel benchmark designed
to comprehensively and reliably evaluate critique ability of LLMs. Specifically, to
ensure the comprehensiveness, C RITIC E VAL evaluates critique ability from four
dimensions across nine diverse task scenarios. It evaluates both scalar-valued and
textual critiques, targeting responses of varying quality. To ensure the reliability,
a large number of critiques are annotated to serve as references, enabling GPT-4
to evaluate textual critiques reliably. Extensive evaluations of open-source and
closed-source LLMs first validate the reliability of evaluation in C RITIC E VAL.
Then, experimental results demonstrate the promising potential of open-source
LLMs, the effectiveness of critique datasets and several intriguing relationships
between the critique ability and some critical factors, including task types, response
qualities and critique dimensions.

1

Introduction

Critique ability is crucial for the self-improvement [1, 2] of LLMs, as it enables the effective analysis
and correction of flaws in responses [3, 4]. This capability also facilitates a more robust framework,
i.e., scalable oversight [5, 6], for ensuring the AI systems growing in scale and capability remain
aligned with human-desired outcomes and ethical standards.
So far, while numerous works have been proposed to evaluate critique ability of LLMs in downstream
tasks, like common NLP tasks [7, 8] and reasoning tasks [4, 9], their comprehensiveness and reliability
are limited. Specifically, existing works [10, 11, 12] typically evaluate only specific aspects of critique
ability, resulting in limited evaluated critique dimensions [13, 11, 12, 10, 14], insufficient analysis of
response qualities and task types [4, 9]. Besides, while GPT-4 is frequently used to evaluate textual or
natural language critiques [3, 10, 13], its reliability across all critique dimensions and tasks remains
unverified [10, 15]. In summary, a comprehensive and reliable benchmark for assessing critique
capability of LLMs is still under-explored, significantly impeding the in-depth analysis.
∗
†

Equal contributions
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

