I NDIC VOICES -R: Unlocking a Massive Multilingual
Multi-speaker Speech Corpus for Scaling Indian TTS

Ashwin Sankar∗
Mehak Singal

Srija Anand∗

Shridhar Kumar

Praveen Srinivasa Varadhan∗
Deovrat Mehendale

Sherry Thomas

Aditi Krishana

Giri Raju

Mitesh Khapra†
AI4Bharat, Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Madras
Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India - 600036

Abstract
Recent advancements in text-to-speech (TTS) synthesis show that large-scale
models trained with extensive web data produce highly natural-sounding output.
However, such data is scarce for Indian languages due to the lack of high-quality,
manually subtitled data on platforms like LibriVox or YouTube. To address this
gap, we enhance existing large-scale ASR datasets containing natural conversations
collected in low-quality environments to generate high-quality TTS training data.
Our pipeline leverages the cross-lingual generalization of denoising and speech
enhancement models trained on English and applied to Indian languages. This
results in IndicVoices-R (IV-R), the largest multilingual Indian TTS dataset derived from an ASR dataset, with 1,704 hours of high-quality speech from 10,496
speakers across 22 Indian languages. IV-R matches the quality of gold-standard
TTS datasets like LJSpeech, LibriTTS, and IndicTTS. We also introduce the IV-R
Benchmark, the first to assess zero-shot, few-shot, and many-shot speaker generalization capabilities of TTS models on Indian voices, ensuring diversity in age,
gender, and style. We demonstrate that fine-tuning an English pre-trained model on
a combined dataset of high-quality IndicTTS and our IV-R dataset results in better
zero-shot speaker generalization compared to fine-tuning on the IndicTTS dataset
alone. Further, our evaluation reveals limited zero-shot generalization for Indian
voices in TTS models trained on prior datasets, which we improve by fine-tuning
the model on our data containing diverse set of speakers across language families.
We open-source code and data3 for all 22 official Indian languages.

1

Introduction

Scaling training data has been crucial in achieving better zero-shot speaker and style generalization
for English Text-To-Speech (TTS) systems, with studies demonstrating the benefits of increasing
data from a few hundred hours to beyond 10,000 hours [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Indeed, state-of-the-art models
like Natural Speech 3 [3] are trained on 200,000 hours of data. Additionally, using conversational
∗

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author: miteshk@cse.iitm.ac.in
3
Dataset Link -https://github.com/AI4Bharat/IndicVoices-R

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

