Hierarchical Programmatic Option Framework

Yu-An Lin∗ Chen-Tao Lee∗ Chih-Han Yang∗ Guan-Ting Liu∗ Shao-Hua Sun
National Taiwan University
{b06204039, b06703027, b10902069, f07944014, shaohuas}@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning aims to learn deep neural network policies to solve
large-scale decision-making problems. However, approximating policies using
deep neural networks makes it difficult to interpret the learned decision-making
process. To address this issue, prior works [10, 46, 74] proposed to use humanreadable programs as policies to increase the interpretability of the decision-making
pipeline. Nevertheless, programmatic policies generated by these methods struggle
to effectively solve long and repetitive RL tasks and cannot generalize to even
longer horizons during testing. To solve these problems, we propose the Hierarchical Programmatic Option framework (HIPO), which aims to solve long and
repetitive RL problems with human-readable programs as options (low-level policies). Specifically, we propose a method that retrieves a set of effective, diverse, and
compatible programs as options. Then, we learn a high-level policy to effectively
reuse these programmatic options to solve reoccurring subtasks. Our proposed
framework outperforms programmatic RL and deep RL baselines on various tasks.
Ablation studies justify the effectiveness of our proposed search algorithm for
retrieving a set of programmatic options.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (deep RL) has recently achieved tremendous success in various domains,
such as controlling robots [26, 31], playing strategy board games [67, 68], and mastering video
games [78, 82]. However, neural network policies learned by deep RL methods are not humaninterpretable, and their black-box nature poses challenges in scrutinizing model decisions and
establishing user trust [45, 64]. Moreover, deep RL policies often suffer from overfitting and struggle
to generalize to novel scenarios [17, 84], limiting their applicability in the context of most real-world
applications.
To address these issues, programmatic RL frameworks [10, 46, 74] were proposed to represent policies
as programs that detail task-solving procedures in a formal programming language. Particularly,
Trivedi et al. [74] and Liu et al. [46] synthesize programs from continuous latent spaces, whereas
Carvalho et al. [10] search programs directly from discrete programmatic spaces. Such program
policies are human-readable and demonstrate significantly improved zero-shot generalizability from
smaller state spaces to larger ones.
Despite encouraging results, prior programmatic RL frameworks are limited to generating concise
programs that can only tackle short-horizon tasks. Particularly for long-horizon RL problems like
robotic manipulation [2, 8] and autonomous driving [55, 58], these tasks consist of reoccurring
subtasks and sparse rewards, necessitating a significant number of actions to be fully resolved.
Therefore, the RL agent needs to learn a diverse and reusable set of skills to solve such tasks
effectively.
∗

Equal contribution.

Correspondence to: Shao-Hua Sun <shaohuas@ntu.edu.tw>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

