Near-Optimality of Contrastive Divergence Algorithms

Pierre Glaser
Kevin Han Huang
Arthur Gretton
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College London
pierreglaser@gmail.com, han.huang.20@ucl.ac.uk, arthur.gretton@gmail.com

Abstract
We perform a non-asymptotic analysis of the contrastive divergence (CD) algorithm,
a training method for unnormalized models. While prior work has established that
(for exponential family distributions) the CD iterates asymptotically converge at
an O(n−1/3 ) rate to the true parameter of the data distribution, we show, under
some regularity assumptions, that CD can achieve the parametric rate O(n−1/2 ).
Our analysis provides results for various data batching schemes, including the fully
online and minibatch ones. We additionally show that CD can be near-optimal, in
the sense that its asymptotic variance is close to the Cramér-Rao lower bound.

1

Introduction

Describing data using probability distributions is a central task in multiple scientific and industrial
disciplines [1, 2, 3]. Since the true distribution of the data is generally unknown, such a task requires
finding an estimator of the true distribution among a model class that best describes the available
data. An estimator can be characterized at multiple levels of granularity: at the highest level lies
consistency [4], a property which states that as the number of available data points increases, a given
estimator will converge to the one best describing the data distribution. At a lower level, a consistent
estimator can be further characterized by its convergence rate, a quantity upper–bounding its distance
to the true distribution as a function of the number of samples. A convergence rate can be either
asymptotic, e.g. hold only in the limit of an infinite sample size, or non-asymptotic, in which case
the rate also holds for finite sample sizes. In their simplest form, convergence rates are provided in
big–O notation, discarding finer grained information such as asymptotically dominated quantities as
well as multiplicative constants. These constants play a role in the so–called asymptotic variance of
the estimator, which is a precise descriptor of an estimator’s statistical efficiency. Convergence rates
and asymptotic variances have been the subject of extensive research in the statistical literature; in
particular, well–known lower bounds exists regarding both the best possible (asymptotic) convergence
rate of an estimator and its best possible asymptotic variance. These results set a clear frame of
reference to interpret individual convergence rates, and are routinely present in the analysis of modern
statistical algorithms such as noise-contrastive estimation [5, 6] or score matching [7, 8, 9].
In this work, we focus on cases where (1) the true data distribution admits a density with respect
to some known base measure, and (2) the model class is parametrized by a finite-dimensional
parameter. In this setting, provided that the true distribution belongs to the model class, a celebrated
result in statistical estimation states that the model maximizing the average log-likelihood both
achieves the best possible asymptotic convergence rate (called the parametric rate) and the best
possible asymptotic variance, called the Cramér-Rao bound (see, e.g. [10]). While this result
shows that Maximum Likelihood Estimators (MLE) are asymptotically optimal, fitting them is
complicated by computational hurdles when using models with intractable normalizing constants.
Such unnormalized models are common in the Machine Learning literature due to their high flexibility
[11, 12]; their weakness however lies in the fact that expectations under these models have no unbiased
approximation. For this reason, popular approximation algorithms such as unbiased gradient-based
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

