Attention Temperature Matters in ViT-Based
Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning

Yixiong Zou
Ran Ma
Yuhua Li
Ruixuan Li∗
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{yixiongz, ranma, idcliyuhua, rxli}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Cross-domain few-shot learning (CDFSL) is proposed to transfer knowledge from
large-scale source-domain datasets to downstream target-domain datasets with
only a few training samples. However, Vision Transformer (ViT), as a strong
backbone network to achieve many top performances, is still under-explored in the
CDFSL task in its transferability against large domain gaps. In this paper, we find
an interesting phenomenon of ViT in the CDFSL task: by simply multiplying a
temperature (even as small as 0) to the attention in ViT blocks, the target-domain
performance consistently increases, even though the attention map is downgraded
to a uniform map. In this paper, we delve into this phenomenon for an interpretation.
Through experiments, we interpret this phenomenon as a remedy for the ineffective
target-domain attention caused by the query-key attention mechanism under large
domain gaps. Based on it, we further propose a simple but effective method for the
CDFSL task to boost ViT’s transferability by resisting the learning of query-key
parameters and encouraging that of non-query-key ones. Experiments on four
CDFSL datasets validate the rationale of our interpretation and method, showing
we can consistently outperform state-of-the-art methods. Our codes are available
at https://github.com/Zoilsen/Attn_Temp_CDFSL.

1

Introduction

Deep networks have shown great power in learning from large-scale datasets [18, 11, 7]. However,
collecting sufficient training data for every domain is always challenging, which gives rise to the CrossDomain Few-Shot Learning (CDFSL) task. CDFSL requires a model to be firstly trained on a largescale pretraining dataset (source domain, general dataset, e.g., ImageNet [6]), and then transferred to
downstream datasets (target domain, expert-knowledge dataset, e.g., medical dataset [5, 44]) where
only a few training samples are available. Typically, large domain gaps exist between the source and
target dataset, making the transferring and downstream learning difficult [2, 12, 15].
Vision Transformer (ViT) [8], as a prevailing kind of deep network, has achieved top performances
in many computer vision tasks [47, 9, 37]. However, only a few works [14, 10, 53] studied ViT’s
transferability against large domain gaps for the CDFSL task. In this paper, we find an intriguing
phenomenon for the ViT-based CDFSL task: by multiplying a temperature parameter τ to the attention
map of ViT blocks, the downstream target-domain few-shot performance consistently increases when
τ < 1.0 or even close to 0, albeit the attention map is downgraded to a uniform map (Fig. 1).
In this paper, we delve into this phenomenon for an interpretation. We find the query-key attention
mechanism in the ViT network demonstrates high discriminability but low transferability, which
makes the target-domain attention ineffective, and the temperature adjustment is interpreted as a
remedy for the ineffective target-domain attention. Moreover, we find the non-query-key structures
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

