Optimal Algorithms for Online Convex Optimization
with Adversarial Constraints
Abhishek Sinha, Rahul Vaze
School of Technology and Computer Science
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research
Mumbai 400005, India
abhishek.sinha@tifr.res.in, rahul.vaze@gmail.com

Abstract
A well-studied generalization of the standard online convex optimization (OCO)
framework is constrained online convex optimization (COCO). In COCO, on every
round, a convex cost function and a convex constraint function are revealed to the
learner after it chooses the action for that round. The objective is to design an online
learning policy that simultaneously achieves a small regret while ensuring a small
cumulative constraint violation (CCV) against an adaptive adversary interacting
over a horizon of length T . A long-standing √
open question in COCO
√ is whether an
online policy can simultaneously achieve O( T ) regret and Õ( T ) CCV without
any restrictive assumptions. For the first time, we answer this in the affirmative
and show that a simple first-order policy can simultaneously achieve these bounds.
Furthermore, in the case of strongly convex cost and convex constraint functions,
the regret guarantee can be improved to O(log T ) while keeping the CCV bound
the same as above. We establish these results by effectively combining adaptive
OCO policies as a blackbox with Lyapunov optimization - a classic tool from
control theory. Surprisingly, the analysis is short and elegant.

1

Introduction

Online convex optimization (OCO) is a standard framework for modelling and analyzing a broad
family of online decision problems under uncertainty. In the OCO problem, on every round t, an
online policy first selects an action xt from a closed and convex admissible set (a.k.a. decision set)
X . Then the adversary reveals a convex cost function ft , resulting in a cost of ft (xt ). The goal of an
online policy is to choose an admissible action sequence {xt }Tt=1 so that its cumulative cost is not
much larger than that of any fixed admissible action chosen in hindsight. In particular, the objective
is to minimize the static regret defined below
T

T

t=1

t=1

RegretT ≡ sup sup RegretT (x⋆ ), where RegretT (x⋆ ) ≡ ∑ ft (xt ) − ∑ ft (x⋆ ).
x⋆ ∈X
{ft }T
t=1

(1)

The term static refers to using a fixed benchmark, specifically only one action x⋆ throughout the
horizon of length T .
In this paper, we consider a generalization of the standard OCO framework. In this problem, on
every round t, the online policy first chooses an admissible action xt ∈ X , and then the adversary
chooses a convex cost function ft ∶ X → R and k constraints of the form gt,i (x) ≤ 0, i ∈ [k], where
gt,i ∶ X → R is a convex function for each i ∈ [k]1 . Since gt,i ’s are revealed after the action xt is
1
Notations: For any natural number n, we define [n] ≡ {1, 2, . . . , n}. For any real number z, we define
(z)+ ≡ max(0, z).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

