Euclidean distance compression via deep random
features
Brett Leroux
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
lerouxbew@gmail.com

Luis Rademacher
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
lrademac@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
Motivated by the problem of compressing point sets into as few bits as possible
while maintaining information about approximate distances between points, we
construct random nonlinear maps φℓ that compress point sets in the following
way. For a point set S, the map φℓ : Rd → N −1/2 {−1, 1}N has the property
that storing φℓ (S) (a sketch of S) allows one to report squared distances between
points up to some multiplicative (1 ± ϵ) error with high probability. The maps φℓ
are the ℓ-fold composition of a certain type of random feature mapping.
Compared to existing techniques, our maps offer several advantages. The standard
method for compressing point sets by random mappings relies on the JohnsonLindenstrauss lemma and involves compressing point sets with a random linear
map. The main advantage of our maps φℓ over random linear maps is that ours
map point sets directly into the discrete cube N −1/2 {−1, 1}N and so there is no
additional step needed to convert the sketch to bits. For some range of parameters,
our maps φℓ produce sketches using fewer bits of storage space. We validate the
method with experiments, including an application to nearest neighbor search.

1

Introduction

Random projection is a commonly used method to lower the dimension of a set of points while
maintaining important properties of the data [30]. The random projection method involves mapping
a high-dimensional set of points in Rd to a lower dimensional subspace by some random projection
matrix in such a way that the pairwise distances and inner products between points are approximately
preserved. The random projection method has many applications to data analysis and a variety of
prominent algorithms [11, 17, 5, 8] including nearest neighbor search [13, 12].
The theoretical foundation of random projection is the Johnson-Lindenstrauss lemma which states
that a random orthogonal projection to a lower dimensional subspace has the property of preserving
pairwise distances and inner products [16]. Later it was observed [9, 13] that one can alternatively
take the projection matrix to be a matrix with i.i.d. Gaussian N (0, 1) entries.
Lemma 1 ([9, 13, 30]). Let each entry of an d × k matrix R be chosen independently from N (0, 1).

2
3
Let v = √1k RT u for u ∈ Rd . Then for any ϵ > 0, P ∥v∥2 − ∥u∥2 ≥ ϵ∥u∥2 < 2e−(ϵ −ϵ )k/4 .
A corollary of the above lemma is that if an arbitrary set of n points in Rd is mapped by the random
projection matrix R to Rk where k = Θ(ϵ−2 log n), then the squared distances between pairs of
points are distorted by a factor of at most (1 ± ϵ) with high probability. The projected points are thus
a lower dimensional representation of the original point set and this lowering of the dimension offers
two main advantages. The first is that algorithms that were originally intended to be performed on
the original point set can now instead be performed on the lower dimensional points.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

