ERBench: An Entity-Relationship based
Automatically Verifiable Hallucination Benchmark for
Large Language Models

Jio Oh∗ 1 Soyeon Kim∗ 1 Junseok Seo1 Jindong Wang2 Ruochen Xu3
Xing Xie2 Steven Euijong Whang† 1
1

KAIST 2 Microsoft Research Asia 3 Microsoft Azure

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have achieved unprecedented performances in
various applications, yet evaluating them is still challenging. Existing benchmarks
are either manually constructed or are automatic, but lack the ability to evaluate the
thought process of LLMs with arbitrary complexity. We contend that utilizing existing relational databases based on the entity-relationship (ER) model is a promising
approach for constructing benchmarks as they contain structured knowledge that
can be used to question LLMs. Unlike knowledge graphs, which are also used to
evaluate LLMs, relational databases have integrity constraints that can be used
to better construct complex in-depth questions and verify answers: (1) functional
dependencies can be used to pinpoint critical keywords that an LLM must know to
properly answer a given question containing certain attribute values; and (2) foreign
key constraints can be used to join relations and construct multi-hop questions,
which can be arbitrarily long and used to debug intermediate answers. We thus
propose ERBench, which uses these integrity constraints to convert any database
into an LLM benchmark. ERBench supports continuous evaluation as databases
change, multimodal questions, and various prompt engineering techniques. In our
experiments, we construct LLM benchmarks using databases of multiple domains
and make an extensive comparison of contemporary LLMs. We show how ERBench can properly evaluate any LLM by not only checking for answer correctness,
but also effectively verifying the rationales by looking for the right keywords.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) [1, 2] have become prevalent and are increasingly popular in a
wide range of applications, including natural language processing, chatbots, content generation, and
information retrieval, to name a few. However, a fundamental issue of LLMs is hallucination [3–6],
which refers to the phenomenon that LLMs generate fake, unverified, or non-existent information
especially for knowledge-related and safety-critical applications. Hallucination remains one of the
most severe issues that should be addressed, and we focus on factual hallucination.
To address factual hallucination, it is necessary to develop benchmarks that are comprehensive,
intricate, automatically verifiable, and can be scaled efficiently. One approach is to construct manual
benchmarks by human annotators [7–10], which are expensive and not scalable. Another approach is
to automatically construct evaluation samples using knowledge graphs [11] by converting triples to
simple factual questions or use existing QA datasets [12]. Although these benchmarks may scale as
* Equal contribution {harryoh99, purplehibird}@kaist.ac.kr. † Corresponding author ⟨swhang@kaist.ac.kr⟩

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

