Exploiting Representation Curvature for
Boundary Detection in Time Series

Yooju Shin1 , Jaehyun Park1 , Hwanjun Song1 , Susik Yoon2 , Byung Suk Lee3 , Jae-Gil Lee1∗
1
KAIST, 2 Korea University, 3 University of Vermont
{yooju.shin, jhpark813, jaegil, songhwanjun}@kaist.ac.kr, susik@korea.ac.kr, bslee@uvm.edu

Abstract
Boundaries are the timestamps at which a class in a time series changes. Recently,
representation-based boundary detection has gained popularity, but its emphasis
on consecutive distance difference backfires, especially when the changes are
gradual. In this paper, we propose a boundary detection method, RECURVE,
based on a novel change metric, the curvature of a representation trajectory, to
accommodate both gradual and abrupt changes. Here, a sequence of representations
in the representation space is interpreted as a trajectory, and a curvature at each
timestamp can be computed. Using the theory of random walk, we formally show
that the mean curvature is lower near boundaries than at other points. Extensive
experiments using diverse real-world time-series datasets confirm the superiority
of RECURVE over state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

In a time series composed of sequential data points (simply points) indexed by timestamps, there
are boundaries (or change points) signifying transitions between different classes or states, such as
a shift from running to walking [1, 2]. Detecting boundaries is a crucial task in preprocessing and
diverse applications of time-series data. As preprocessing, they partition a time series into segments
of coherent points, accelerating annotation of the time-series for further analysis and giving additional
supervision in classification [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. As primary tasks, they are valuable for identifying changes
that require human attention in a variety of domains, including climate, health care, finance, and
manufacturing; epilepsy detection, stock price tracking, and action segmentation are examples of
possible applications [8, 9, 10, 11].
Representation-based boundary detection methods [12, 13] are prevalent today because they do not
require specific assumptions on time-series properties, such as distribution or temporal shape, and can
handle high dimensionality due to the capability of a self-supervised model that autonomously learns
distinctive features from raw time series without any supervision. In these methods, a self-supervised
model [14, 15, 16] is first used to derive a representation of each point, and then a point is identified as
a boundary if its representation significantly deviates from those of adjacent points. Let’s refer to the
points close to a boundary as inter-segment points and the remaining points as intra-segment points.
In short, these methods operate by assuming that the distance between consecutive representations is
greater between inter-segment points than between intra-segment points.
However, this assumption on the distance difference does not always hold, especially when the
changes are subtle or gradual. Time-series representation learning methods often pursue preserving
the temporal coherence of a time series as their training goal is to make temporally close points
similar in their representations and distant points dissimilar [14]. As demonstrated in Figure 1, the
consecutive distances are not clearly distinguishable between intra- and inter-segment points for
relatively subtle changes with stair up ↔ stair down because just the direction of motion differs
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

