Robust Offline Active Learning on Graphs

Yuanchen Wu
Department of Statistics
The Pennsylvania State University
yqw5734@psu.edu

Yubai Yuan
Department of Statistics
The Pennsylvania State University
yvy5509@psu.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of active learning on graphs for node-level tasks, which
has crucial applications in many real-world networks where labeling node responses
is expensive. In this paper, we propose an offline active learning method that selects nodes to query by explicitly incorporating information from both the network
structure and node covariates. Building on graph signal recovery theories and the
random spectral sparsification technique, the proposed method adopts a two-stage
biased sampling strategy that takes both informativeness and representativeness
into consideration for node querying. Informativeness refers to the complexity
of graph signals that are learnable from the responses of queried nodes, while
representativeness refers to the capacity of queried nodes to control generalization
errors given noisy node-level information. We establish a theoretical relationship
between generalization error and the number of nodes selected by the proposed
method. Our theoretical results demonstrate the trade-off between informativeness
and representativeness in active learning. Extensive numerical experiments show
that the proposed method is competitive with existing graph-based active learning
methods, especially when node covariates and responses contain noises. Additionally, the proposed method is applicable to both regression and classification tasks
on graphs.

1

Introduction

In many graph-based semi-supervised learning tasks for node-level prediction, labeled nodes are
scarce, and the labeling process often incurs high costs in real-world applications. Randomly sampling
nodes for labeling can be inefficient, as it overlooks label dependencies across the network. Active
learning [29] addresses this issue by selecting informative nodes for labeling by human annotators,
thereby improving the performance of downstream prediction algorithms.
Active learning is closely related to the optimal experimental design principle [36] in statistics.
Traditional optimal experimental design methods select samples to maximize a specific statistical
criterion [26, 19]. However, these methods often are not designed to incorporate network structure,
therefore inefficient for graph-based learning tasks. On the other hand, selecting informative nodes
on a network is studied extensively in the graph signal sampling literature [11, 18, 10, 28]. These
strategies are typically based on the principle of network homophily, which assumes that connected
nodes tend to have similar labels. However, a node’s label often also depends on its individual
covariates. Therefore, signal-sampling strategies that focus solely on network information may miss
critical insights provided by covariates.
Recently, inspired by the great success of graph neural networks (GNNs) [16, 34] in graph-based
machine learning tasks, many GNN-based active learning strategies have been proposed. Existing
methods select nodes to query by maximizing information gain under different criteria, including
information entropy [4], the number of influenced nodes [39], prediction uncertainty [22], expected
error reduction [8], and expected model change [30]. Most of these information gain measurements
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

