Analysing the Generalisation and Reliability of
Steering Vectors

Daniel Tan1

David Chanin1

Aengus Lynch1

Brooks Paige1

Adrià Garriga-Alonso2

Robert Kirk1

Dimitrios Kanoulas1,3

1

AI Centre, Department of Computer Science, University College London
2
FAR AI 3 Archimedes/Athena RC
Correspondence to: daniel.tan.22@ucl.ac.uk, robert.kirk.20@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Steering vectors (SVs) are a new approach to efficiently adjust language model
behaviour at inference time by intervening on intermediate model activations. They
have shown promise in terms of improving both capabilities and model alignment.
However, the reliability and generalisation properties of this approach are unknown.
In this work, we rigorously investigate these properties, and show that steering
vectors have substantial limitations both in- and out-of-distribution. In-distribution,
steerability is highly variable across different inputs. Depending on the concept,
spurious biases can substantially contribute to how effective steering is for each
input, presenting a challenge for the widespread use of steering vectors. We
additionally show steerability is also mostly a property of the dataset rather than
the model by measuring steerability across multiple models. Out-of-distribution,
while steering vectors often generalise well, for several concepts they are brittle
to reasonable changes in the prompt, resulting in them failing to generalise well.
Similarity in behaviour between distributions somewhat predicts generalisation
performance, but there is more work needed to understand when and why steering
vectors generalise correctly. Overall, our findings show that while steering can
work well in the right circumstances, there remain many technical difficulties of
applying steering vectors to robustly guide models’ behaviour at scale.

1

Introduction

Steering Vectors (SVs) [30, 33, 43, 18] have been recently proposed as a technique for guiding
language model behaviour at inference time. Existing work has shown promising results in using
these SVs to detect and guide models towards high-level traits such as honesty [43], sycophancy
[30], and positive sentiment [31]. They have also been shown to be useful for improving model
capabilities [39, 18, 34] and red-teaming [29]. SVs are of interest as they enjoy a number of practical
benefits over other model adjustment techniques that require adding more information into the context
window [5, 38, In-Context Learning], or performing training to adjust model parameters (fine-tuning).
Recent work shows that steering vectors can be learned in an unsupervised way [20], thus removing
another obstacle for their use. It may even be possible for different steering vectors to be used in
combination for multiple behaviours [34, 36]. It would thus be very important and useful in practice
if steering vectors were truly effective.
However, existing work has mostly evaluated SVs in-distribution, and looked at aggregate behaviour.
It is unknown how reliable the change in behaviour caused by SVs is, and how well SVs generalise to
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

