Query-Efficient Correlation Clustering
with Noisy Oracle

Yuko Kuroki
CENTAI Institute
Turin, Italy
yuko.kuroki@centai.eu

Atsushi Miyauchi
CENTAI Institute
Turin, Italy
atsushi.miyauchi@centai.eu

Francesco Bonchi
CENTAI Institute, Turin, Italy
Eurecat, Barcelona, Spain
bonchi@centai.eu

Wei Chen
Microsoft Research
Beijing, China
weic@microsoft.com

Abstract
We study a general clustering setting in which we have n elements to be clustered,
and we aim to perform as few queries as possible to an oracle that returns a noisy
sample of the weighted similarity between two elements. Our setting encompasses
many application domains in which the similarity function is costly to compute and
inherently noisy. We introduce two novel formulations of online learning problems
rooted in the paradigm of Pure Exploration in Combinatorial Multi-Armed Bandits
(PE-CMAB): fixed confidence and fixed budget settings. For both settings, we
design algorithms that combine a sampling strategy with a classic approximation
algorithm for correlation clustering and study their theoretical guarantees. Our
results are the first examples of polynomial-time algorithms that work for the case
of PE-CMAB in which the underlying offline optimization problem is NP-hard.

1

Introduction



Given a set V = [n] of n objects and a pairwise similarity measure s : V2 → [0, 1] (where V2 is
the set of unordered pairs of elements of V , and the value closer to 1 means higher similarity), the
goal of Correlation Clustering [7] is to cluster the objects so that, to the best possible extent, similar
objects are put in the same cluster and dissimilar objects are put in different clusters. Assuming that
cluster identifiers are represented by natural numbers, a clustering C can be represented as a function
` : V → N, where each cluster is a maximal set of objects sharing the same label. The objective is to
minimize the following cost:
X
X
costs (`) =
(1 − s(x, y)) +
s(x, y).
(1)
(x,y)∈(V2 ),
(x,y)∈(V2 ),
`(x)=`(y)

`(x)6=`(y)

The intuition underlying the above problem definition is that if two objects x and y are dissimilar,
expressed by a small value of s(x, y), yet they are assigned to the same cluster, we should incur a
high cost. Conversely, if s(x, y) is high, indicating that x and y are very similar, but they are assigned
to different clusters, we should also incur a high cost.
Two key features make correlation clustering quite suitable in real-world applications. Firstly, it does
not require the number of clusters as part of the input; instead, it automatically finds the optimal
number, performing model selection. Secondly, it only requires the pairwise information without
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

