Diffusion Policies Creating a Trust Region for
Offline Reinforcement Learning

Tianyu Chen
Zhendong Wang
Mingyuan Zhou
The University of Texas at Austin
{tianyuchen, zhendong.wang}@utexas.edu
mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) leverages pre-collected datasets to train optimal policies. Diffusion Q-Learning (DQL), introducing diffusion models as
a powerful and expressive policy class, significantly boosts the performance of
offline RL. However, its reliance on iterative denoising sampling to generate actions slows down both training and inference. While several recent attempts have
tried to accelerate diffusion-QL, the improvement in training and/or inference
speed often results in degraded performance. In this paper, we introduce a dual
policy approach, Diffusion Trusted Q-Learning (DTQL), which comprises a diffusion policy for pure behavior cloning and a practical one-step policy. We bridge
the two polices by a newly introduced diffusion trust region loss. The diffusion
policy maintains expressiveness, while the trust region loss directs the one-step
policy to explore freely and seek modes within the region defined by the diffusion policy. DTQL eliminates the need for iterative denoising sampling during
both training and inference, making it remarkably computationally efficient. We
evaluate its effectiveness and algorithmic characteristics against popular Kullback–
Leibler divergence-based distillation methods in 2D bandit scenarios and gym
tasks. We then show that DTQL could not only outperform other methods on
the majority of the D4RL benchmark tasks but also demonstrate efficiency in
training and inference speeds. The PyTorch implementation is available at https:
//github.com/TianyuCodings/Diffusion_Trusted_Q_Learning.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) centers on developing a policy to make sequential decisions by interacting with an environment, aiming to maximize the total rewards accumulated over a trajectory
[Wiering and Van Otterlo, 2012, Li, 2017]. Offline RL addresses these challenges by enabling the
training of an RL policy from fixed datasets of previously collected data, without further interactions
with the environment [Lange et al., 2012, Fu et al., 2020]. This approach leverages large-scale
historical data, mitigating the risks and costs associated with live environment exploration. However,
offline RL introduces its own set of challenges, primarily related to the distribution shift between the
data on which the policy was trained and the data it encounters during evaluation [Fujimoto et al.,
2019]. Additionally, the limited expressive power of policies that may not adequately capture the
multimodal nature of action behaviors is also a concern.
To mitigate distribution shifts, popular approaches include weighted regression, such as IQL
[Kostrikov et al., 2021] and AWAC [Nair et al., 2020], aimed at extracting viable policies from
historical data. Alternatively, behavior-regularized policy optimization techniques are employed to
constrain the divergence between the learned and in-sample policies during training [Wu et al., 2019].
Notable examples of this strategy include TD3-BC [Fujimoto and Gu, 2021], CQL [Kumar et al.,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

