Convergence Analysis of Split Federated Learning on
Heterogeneous Data

Pengchao Han ∗
Guangdong University of Technology, China
hanpengchao@gdut.edu.cn

Chao Huang ∗
Montclair State University, USA
huangch@montclair.edu

Geng Tian
Southern University of Science and Technology, China
12332463@mail.sustech.edu.cn
Ming Tang †
Southern University of Science and Technology, China
tangm3@sustech.edu.cn

Xin Liu
University of California, Davis, USA
xinliu@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
Split federated learning (SFL) is a recent distributed approach for collaborative
model training among multiple clients. In SFL, a global model is typically split into
two parts, where clients train one part in a parallel federated manner, and a main
server trains the other. Despite the recent research on SFL algorithm development,
the convergence analysis of SFL is missing in the literature, and this paper aims to
fill this gap. The analysis of SFL can be more challenging than that of federated
learning (FL), due to the potential dual-paced updates at the clients and the main
server. We provide convergence analysis of SFL for strongly convex and general
convex
√objectives on heterogeneous data. The convergence rates are O(1/T ) and
O(1/ 3 T ), respectively, where T denotes the total number of rounds for SFL
training. We further extend the analysis to non-convex objectives and the scenario
where some clients may be unavailable during training. Experimental experiments
validate our theoretical results and show that SFL outperforms FL and split learning
(SL) when data is highly heterogeneous across a large number of clients.

1

Introduction

1.1

Motivation

Federated learning (FL) [18, 9] allows distributed clients to train a global machine learning model
collaboratively without sharing raw data. FL leverages the parallel computing capabilities of clients
to enhance model training efficiency. However, FL is usually computationally intensive. Clients
need to train the entire global model multiple times, which can be infeasible for resource-constrained
edge devices. This challenge is further exacerbated as the trend towards increasingly larger model
architectures demands more substantial resources [1]. Moreover, FL suffers from the client drift
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
This work was partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants 62202214
and 62401161), Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (Grants 2023A1515012819 and
2022A1515110056), and USDA-020-67021-32855.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

