E 3: Exploring Embodied Emotion Through
A Large-Scale Egocentric Video Dataset
Wang Lin1,→ , Yueying Feng1,→ , Wenkang Han1,→ , Tao Jin1 , Zhou Zhao1 ,
Fei Wu1 , Chang Yao1 , Jingyuan Chen1,† ,
Zhejiang University1
{linwanglw, yueyingf, jint_zju, zhaozhou,
wufei, changy, jingyuanchen,}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Understanding human emotions is fundamental to enhancing human-computer
interaction, especially for embodied agents that mimic human behavior. Traditional
emotion analysis often takes a third-person perspective, limiting the ability of agents
to interact naturally and empathetically. To address this gap, this paper presents E 3
for Exploring Embodied Emotion, the first massive first-person view video dataset.
E 3 contains more than 50 hours of video, capturing 8 different emotion types in
diverse scenarios and languages. The dataset features videos recorded by individuals in their daily lives, capturing a wide range of real-world emotions conveyed
through visual, acoustic, and textual modalities. By leveraging this dataset, we
define 4 core benchmark tasks - emotion recognition, emotion classification, emotion localization, and emotion reasoning - supported by more than 80k manually
crafted annotations, providing a comprehensive resource for training and evaluating
emotion analysis models. We further present Emotion-LlaMa, which complements
visual modality with acoustic modality to enhance the understanding of emotion in
first-person videos. The results of comparison experiments with a large number
of baselines demonstrate the superiority of Emotion-LlaMa and set a new benchmark for embodied emotion analysis. We expect that E 3 can promote advances
in multimodal understanding, robotics, and augmented reality, and provide a solid
foundation for the development of more empathetic and context-aware embodied
agents. Project page: https://exploring-embodied-emotion-official.github.io.

1

Introduction

Embodied Agents [16], which are capable of simulating human interactions by perceiving the
environment and executing corresponding behaviors, have facilitated a wide range of applications [53,
55, 56, 58]. Emotion analysis [39], as a key component of understanding human behavior, is crucial
for improving the naturalness and effectiveness of human-computer interaction. To enhance the
accuracy of emotional interactions in real-world scenarios, embodied agents necessitate large and
diverse datasets for training and validating their algorithms.
Although current emotion analysis techniques have made significant progress in a variety of applications, most works [90, 98, 105] focus on analyzing emotions from a third-person view, which involves
assessing emotional states from an external observer’s standpoint. However, for embodied agents,
understanding emotions from a first-person view (FPV) or an egocentric perspective is crucial [60].
In FPV, agents perceive and respond to emotions through their own perceptual system, which is more
* Equal Contribution.
†

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

