ChatTracker: Enhancing Visual Tracking
Performance via Chatting with Multimodal Large
Language Model

Yiming Sun∗1,2 , Fan Yu∗1 , Shaoxiang Chen3 , Yu Zhang1 , Junwei Huang1 ,
Yang Li 1,4 †, Chenhui Li1 , Changbo Wang 1
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
3
Meituan Inc
4
Shanghai Frontiers Science Center of Molecule Intelligent Syntheses, Shanghai, China.

Abstract
Visual object tracking aims to locate a targeted object in a video sequence based on
an initial bounding box. Recently, Vision-Language (VL) trackers have proposed
to utilize additional natural language descriptions to enhance versatility in various
applications. However, VL trackers are still inferior to State-of-The-Art (SoTA)
visual trackers in terms of tracking performance. We found that this inferiority
primarily results from their heavy reliance on manual textual annotations, which
include the frequent provision of ambiguous language descriptions. In this paper, we propose ChatTracker to leverage the wealth of world knowledge in the
Multimodal Large Language Model (MLLM) to generate high-quality language
descriptions and enhance tracking performance. To this end, we propose a novel
reflection-based prompt optimization module to iteratively refine the ambiguous
and inaccurate descriptions of the target with tracking feedback. To further utilize
semantic information produced by MLLM, a simple yet effective VL tracking
framework is proposed and can be easily integrated as a plug-and-play module to
boost the performance of both VL and visual trackers. Experimental results show
that our proposed ChatTracker achieves a performance comparable to existing
methods.

1

Introduction

Visual object tracking stands as a foundational and challenging task in the computer vision realm [27,
3]. It aims to locate an object in each frame of a video given an initial object box. Recently, VisionLanguage (VL) trackers leverage additional natural language descriptions to boost their efficacy. For
instance, the shape of a target may change during tracking. However, the semantic information of the
target, such as its category or material, remains the same. This makes language text more potential
and stable to describe such an appearance-changing object than an image template solely. Despite
these advantages, current VL trackers [15, 46, 13] are still inferior to SoTA Visual Trackers [31, 8]
on mainstream benchmarks [10, 24]. We identify the following reasons for this: 1) VL trackers
heavily rely on manual annotations, which often contain ambiguous language descriptions. 2) Manual
textual annotations primarily focus on the tracking target and neglect the semantic information
embedded in the text, such as the presence of various background objects and their relations to
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author. Email: yli@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

