Embodied Agent Interface: Benchmarking LLMs for
Embodied Decision Making
∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

Manling Li1, 2 , Shiyu Zhao1 , Qineng Wang1, 2 , Kangrui Wang1, 2 , Yu Zhou1 ,
Sanjana Srivastava1 , Cem Gokmen1 , Tony Lee1 , Li Erran Li3 , Ruohan Zhang1 , Weiyu Liu1 ,
Percy Liang1 , Li Fei-Fei1 , Jiayuan Mao4 , Jiajun Wu1
1
Stanford University 2 Northwestern University 3 Amazon 4 MIT
embodied-agent-interface.github.io
Data

§ Code

3 PyPI

o Docker

Å Video

[ Docs

Abstract
We aim to evaluate Large Language Models (LLMs) for embodied decision making.
While a significant body of work has been leveraging LLMs for decision making
in embodied environments, we still lack a systematic understanding of their performance because they are usually applied in different domains, for different purposes,
and built based on different inputs and outputs. Furthermore, existing evaluations
tend to rely solely on a final success rate, making it difficult to pinpoint what ability
is missing in LLMs and where the problem lies, which in turn blocks embodied
agents from leveraging LLMs effectively and selectively. To address these limitations, we propose a generalized interface (E MBODIED AGENT I NTERFACE) that
supports the formalization of various types of tasks and input-output specifications
of LLM-based modules. Specifically, it allows us to unify 1) a broad set of embodied decision-making tasks involving both state and temporally extended goals,
2) four commonly-used LLM-based modules for decision making: goal interpretation, subgoal decomposition, action sequencing, and transition modeling, and
3) a collection of fine-grained metrics that break down evaluation into error types,
such as hallucination errors, affordance errors, and various types of planning errors.
Overall, our benchmark offers a comprehensive assessment of LLMs’ performance
for different subtasks, pinpointing the strengths and weaknesses in LLM-powered
embodied AI systems and providing insights into the effective and selective use of
LLMs in embodied decision making.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have emerged as powerful tools for building embodied decisionmaking agents capable of following human instructions (such as “cleaning the refrigerator”, “polishing furniture”) and achieving the specified goals through a sequence of actions in various digital
and physical environments [1–3]. Despite many reports of their success, our understanding of LLMs’
full capabilities and limitations in embodied decision-making remains limited. Existing evaluation
methods fall short of providing comprehensive insights due to three key limitations: the lack of
standardization in 1) embodied decision-making tasks, 2) modules that an LLM can interface with or
be implemented for, and 3) fine-grained evaluation metrics beyond a single success rate. In this paper,
we propose the E MBODIED AGENT I NTERFACE to address these challenges.
(1) Standardization of goal specifications: We want embodied agents to achieve goals. However,
the specification of goals and the criteria for agents’ success evaluation vary significantly across
different domains, even for similar tasks. For example, BEHAVIOR [4] focuses on achieving a state
that satisfies certain state goals (e.g., “not_stained(fridge)” in Figure 1), while VirtualHome [5] uses
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

