Lumen: Unleashing Versatile Vision-Centric
Capabilities of Large Multimodal Models

Yang Jiao∗1,2,3 , Shaoxiang Chen3 , Zequn Jie†3 , Jingjing Chen†1,2
Lin Ma3 , Yu-Gang Jiang1,2
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center on Intelligent Visual Computing
3
Meituan

Abstract
Large Multimodal Model (LMM) is a hot research topic in the computer vision
area and has also demonstrated remarkable potential across multiple disciplinary
fields. A recent trend is to further extend and enhance the perception capabilities
of LMMs. The current methods follow the paradigm of adapting the visual task
outputs to language-oriented formats. This adaptation leads to the convenient
development of such LMMs with minimal modifications, however, it overlooks the
inductive biases within diverse visual tasks and hinders the learning of perception
capabilities. To address this issue, we propose a novel LMM architecture named
Lumen, which decouples the learning of perception capabilities into task-agnostic
and task-specific stages. Firstly, Lumen promotes fine-grained vision-language
concept alignment, which is the fundamental capability for various visual tasks.
Thus the output of the task-agnostic stage is a shared representation for all visioncentric tasks we address in this paper. Afterward, the task-specific decoding is
carried out by flexibly routing the shared representation to lightweight task decoders
with negligible training efforts. Comprehensive experimental results on a series
of vision-centric and VQA benchmarks indicate that our Lumen model not only
achieves or surpasses the performance of existing LMM-based approaches in a
range of vision-centric tasks while maintaining general visual understanding and
instruction following capabilities.

1

Introduction

As the Large Language Models (LLMs) [1, 2] currently ignite the spark of Artificial General
Intelligence (AGI), Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] take a step forward by
integrating visual modalities with the linguistic prowess of LLMs. With the instruction-following
and content-reasoning capabilities inherited from LLMs, the LMM has successfully functioned as
a versatile assistant across a wide range of tasks, including visual question answering [10, 11, 12],
image captioning [13, 14], text-to-image generation [15], etc.
In pursuit of more convenient and efficient human-AI interaction, it is crucial to further explore
fundamental vision-centric capabilities encapsulated in the LMMs, which aid in detailed object
referencing and dialogue responses. Early works, e.g., MiniGPT-v2 [16], Kosmos-2 [17] and QwenVL [18], equip the LMM with the grounding ability by reformulating bounding boxes as a sequence of
coordinate tokens and adapting them to the language model’s output space. Griffon [19] extends this
design to object detection by meticulously curating a language-prompted detection dataset. Owing
to such language model-oriented reformulation, these methods can be implemented with minimal
modifications to existing LMMs.
∗

This work is done when Yang Jiao is an intern at Meituan. † Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

