Self-Guided Masked Autoencoder
Jeongwoo Shin1 , Inseo Lee1 , Junho Lee1 , Joonseok Lee1,2∗
1
Seoul National University, 2 Google Research
{swswss, ian.lee, joon2003, joonseok}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Masked Autoencoder (MAE) is a self-supervised approach for representation learning, widely applicable to a variety of downstream tasks in computer vision. In
spite of its success, it is still not fully uncovered what and how MAE exactly
learns. In this paper, with an in-depth analysis, we discover that MAE intrinsically
learns pattern-based patch-level clustering from surprisingly early stages of pretraining. Upon this understanding, we propose self-guided masked autoencoder,
which internally generates informed mask by utilizing its progress in patch clustering, substituting the naive random masking of the vanilla MAE. Our approach
significantly boosts its learning process without relying on any external models
or supplementary information, keeping the benefit of self-supervised nature of
MAE intact. Comprehensive experiments on various downstream tasks verify the
effectiveness of the proposed method.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning has been an attractive direction to alleviate the substantial cost for data
annotation. For example, Masked Language Modeling (MLM), predicting masked words of an input
sentence, is demonstrated to capture contextual meaning of a word by BERT [13] and GPT [8].
Motivated from the success of MLM, Masked Image Modeling (MIM) has been introduced in
computer vision, utilizing abundant unlabeled image data. Among them, Masked Autoencoder
(MAE) [22], equipped with a Vision Transformer (ViT) [15]-based asymmetric encoder-decoder
structure, demonstrates that simple reconstruction of the RGB pixels for the masked patches is enough
to achieve competitive performance on various downstream tasks.
In the wake of MAE’s impressive performance, a succession of studies have emerged aiming to
augment its capabilities through the integration of informed masking techniques. These innovative
endeavors leverage diverse sources of additional information, including attention maps generated
by a supervised ViT [28], knowledge learned by pre-trained self-supervised models [32, 10], or
supplementary adversarial modules [45], all aiming at refining the quality of the masks. However,
these prevailing approaches have merely applied informed masking without truly understanding the
mechanism of MAE, relying on external resources such as pre-trained models or labels.
To this end, we embark on an in-depth analysis through extensive experiments to understand the
internal operation of MAE, as it is still not fully uncovered what and how MAE exactly learns, despite
the several prior endeavors [9, 41, 61, 29]. Based on our analysis of MAE, we then explore the
potential of MAE to produce informed masks on its own. We first demonstrate that MAE intrinsically
learns pattern-based patch-level clustering and this property emerges from extremely early stages
of pre-training (Section 3.3). We then unveil the underlying mechanism of the mask tokens in the
decoder (Section 3.4). Upon this understanding, we propose a novel method to boost the training
process of MAE via informed masks, generated in an entirely unsupervised manner without incurring
any external models or supplementary information, unlike the previous informed masking methods.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

