GVKF: Gaussian Voxel Kernel Functions for Highly
Efficient Surface Reconstruction in Open Scenes

Gaochao Song∗ Chong Cheng∗ Hao Wang†
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
gcsong4@gmail.com
ccheng735@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn
haowang@hkust-gz.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper we present a novel method for efficient and effective 3D surface
reconstruction in open scenes. Existing Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) based
works typically require extensive training and rendering time due to the adopted
implicit representations. In contrast, 3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS) uses an explicit
and discrete representation, hence the reconstructed surface is built by the huge
number of Gaussian primitives, which leads to excessive memory consumption and
rough surface details in sparse Gaussian areas. To address these issues, we propose
Gaussian Voxel Kernel Functions (GVKF), which establish a continuous scene
representation based on discrete 3DGS through kernel regression. The GVKF
integrates fast 3DGS rasterization and highly effective scene implicit representations, achieving high-fidelity open scene surface reconstruction. Experiments
on challenging scene datasets demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of our
proposed GVKF, featuring with high reconstruction quality, real-time rendering
speed, significant savings in storage and training memory consumption. Project
page: https://3dagentworld.github.io/gvkf/.

1

Introduction

3D surface reconstruction in open scenes holds great significance in various practical applications,
such as autonomous driving, virtual reality, urban planning and etc. However, achieving high-fidelity
and efficient open scene reconstruction has been a longstanding challenge, due to the trade-off
between the rendering quality and the required resources for optimization.
In pursuit of this goal, two predominant approaches are Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [27, 40, 1,
11, 19] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [15, 4, 21, 41] based methods. On one hand, NeRF-based
implicit representations typically require extensive training and rendering time, which limits the
practical use in large-scale scene reconstruction [11, 38, 26, 36]. On the other hand, 3DGS [15] adopts
explicit representations, which enables high-quality novel view synthesis while achieving real-time
rendering. This makes 3DGS more feasible for efficient scene reconstruction in the applications such
as autonomous driving and virtual reality.
Recently, there are studies using 3DGS technology for novel view synthesis and surface reconstruction
in street scenes and urban environments [4, 21, 41, 23]. For instance, SuGaR [12] attempts to
reconstruct the 3D surfaces based on Gaussian points. However, it has been noted that overly
large and sparse Gaussian points can significantly affect the geometric representations of the scene,
∗
†

Both authors contributed equally to this research.
The corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

