Multi-Winner Reconfiguration

Jiehua Chen
Institute of Logic and Computation
TU Wien
Austria
jchen@ac.tuwien.ac.at

Christian Hatschka
Institute of Logic and Computation
TU Wien
Austria
chatschka@ac.tuwien.ac.at

Sofia Simola
Institute of Logic and Computation
TU Wien
Austria
ssimola@ac.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract
We introduce a multi-winner reconfiguration model to examine how to transition
between two subsets of alternatives (aka. committees) through a sequence of minor
yet impactful modifications, called reconfiguration path. We analyze this model
under four approval-based voting rules: Chamberlin-Courant (CC), Proportional
Approval Voting (PAV), Approval Voting (AV), and Satisfaction Approval Voting
(SAV). The problem exhibits computational intractability for CC and PAV, and
polynomial solvability for AV and SAV. We provide a detailed multivariate complexity analysis for CC and PAV, demonstrating that although the problem remains
challenging in many scenarios, there are specific cases that allow for efficient
parameterized algorithms.

1

Introduction

In the rapidly evolving landscape of technology, policy, and market dynamics, we need to be able
to adapt and reconfigure existing solutions. This necessity spans various domains, such as disaster
management (Ito et al., 2011; Ju et al., 2017) – where one needs to switch, step by step, from an
existing power supply distribution to another one, while ensuring no blackouts occur in-between –
and game and puzzle-solving (Nishimura, 2018) – where one needs to transfer from one feasible state
to another via a sequence of feasible moves. The crucial idea is to employ a systematic approach
to transition from one solution to another with minimal disruption. Such a concept, known as
reconfiguration (Ito et al., 2011), is omnipresent in areas ranging from everyday life to complex
decision-making processes in computational social choice (COMSOC) such as switching catalogs in
streaming services (Prime-Video, 2024; Netflix, 2024) or product displays in department stores.
This paper delves into reconfiguration within COMSOC, using multi-winner elections as a primary
example to illustrate its importance and applicability. Our focus is on how to find such a reconfiguration through incremental yet meaningful changes, adhering to a set criterion that quantifies
the “closeness” between successive solutions. In multi-winner elections, we are given a preference
profile consisting of a finite set of alternatives and a finite set of voters, each with preferences over
the alternatives. The objective is to select a committee (i.e., a subset of alternatives) of fixed size k,
representing voters’ preferences optimally. Briefly put, in multi-winner reconfiguration we need to
decide whether there exists a transformation between two size-k (not necessarily optimal) committees
via a sequence of intermediate size-k committees that are “almost” as good as the input committees
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

