Learning to Mitigate Externalities: the Coase Theorem
with Hindsight Rationality

Antoine Scheid1
Etienne Boursier2

Aymeric Capitaine1

Eric Moulines1

Michael I. Jordan3,4

Alain Durmus1

1

Centre de Mathématiques Appliquées – CNRS – École polytechnique – Palaiseau, 91120, France
2
INRIA Saclay, Université Paris Saclay, LMO - Orsay, 91400, France
3
University of California, Berkeley
4
Inria, Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University - Paris, 75, France

Abstract
In economic theory, the concept of externality refers to any indirect effect resulting
from an interaction between players that affects the social welfare. Most of the
models within which externality has been studied assume that agents have perfect
knowledge of their environment and preferences. This is a major hindrance to
the practical implementation of many proposed solutions. To address this issue,
we consider a two-player bandit setting where the actions of one of the players
affect the other player and we extend the Coase theorem [Coase, 2013]. This result
shows that the optimal approach for maximizing the social welfare in the presence
of externality is to establish property rights, i.e., enable transfers and bargaining
between the players. Our work removes the classical assumption that bargainers
possess perfect knowledge of the underlying game. We first demonstrate that in the
absence of property rights, the social welfare breaks down. We then design a policy
for the players which allows them to learn a bargaining strategy which maximizes
the total welfare, recovering the Coase theorem under uncertainty.

1

Introduction

The concept of externality is used in economics to capture phenomena that impact the global welfare
stemming from economic interactions without any compensation [Buchanan and Stubblebine, 2006,
Shah et al., 2018]. Externality is generally considered as market failure since they result in a loss
of collective welfare. Given its practical importance [Dahlman, 1979, Greenfield et al., 2009],
mechanisms that characterize and mitigate externalities are central to modern economic thinking.
A first approach to tackle the adverse effects of externalities in modern economics was based on
quotas and taxation [see, e.g., Pigou, 2017, and the references therein]. However, Coase’s theorem
[Coase, 2013] shows that in the presence of well-defined property rights and low transaction costs,
parties affected by externalities can privately negotiate efficient solutions, and recover a welfare
efficient allocation through transfers and bargaining.
Throughout the paper, we use the following simple example to illustrate our results.
Example 1. Consider two firms 1 (upstream) and 2 (downstream) respectively producing quantities
q1 ⩾ 0 and q2 ⩾ 0 of a good sold at a fixed price p > 0. They incur strictly increasing and convex
costs, captured by the differentiable cost functions c1 : q1 7→ c1 (q1 ) and c2 : q2 7→ c2 (q2 ), satisfying
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

