DeformableTST: Transformer for Time Series
Forecasting without Over-reliance on Patching

Donghao Luo, Xue Wang
Department of Precision Instrument, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
ldh21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wangxue@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
With the proposal of patching technique in time series forecasting, Transformerbased models have achieved compelling performance and gained great interest from
the time series community. But at the same time, we observe a new problem that
the recent Transformer-based models are overly reliant on patching to achieve ideal
performance, which limits their applicability to some forecasting tasks unsuitable
for patching. In this paper, we intent to handle this emerging issue. Through diving
into the relationship between patching and full attention (the core mechanism
in Transformer-based models), we further find out the reason behind this issue
is that full attention relies overly on the guidance of patching to focus on the
important time points and learn non-trivial temporal representation. Based on this
finding, we propose DeformableTST as an effective solution to this emerging
issue. Specifically, we propose deformable attention, a sparse attention mechanism
that can better focus on the important time points by itself, to get rid of the need of
patching. And we also adopt a hierarchical structure to alleviate the efficiency issue
caused by the removal of patching. Experimentally, our DeformableTST achieves
the consistent state-of-the-art performance in a broader range of time series tasks,
especially achieving promising performance in forecasting tasks unsuitable for
patching, therefore successfully reducing the reliance on patching and broadening
the applicability of Transformer-based models. Code is available at this repository:
https://github.com/luodhhh/DeformableTST.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting is widely used in real-world applications, such as transportation management [39, 5], economic planning [41, 30, 31], energy planning [42, 34] and weather forecasting [45].
Because of the immense practical value, time series forecasting has received great attention and has
grown tremendously in recent years [44, 19, 33, 2, 28, 32, 25].
But looking back at the development of time series forecasting, Transformer-based models, who
have sparked the boom of time series forecasting [55, 47, 57], are constantly being challenged. In
particular, some recent studies [52, 18, 22] have questioned that attention mechanism is not suitable
for modeling the temporal dependency in time series. As the early strike back of Transformer-based
models, PatchTST [35] proposes that attention mechanism can work better in temporal modeling
with the help of large size patching technique. Afterwards, equipped with the growing patch size
and increasing input length, the advanced Transformer-based models [53, 58, 51, 6] gain great
performance improvement and successfully win back the championship in time series forecasting.
However, with large size patching becoming a must-have technique for the following Transformerbased models, a new problem occurs: patched-based Transformers have to work with a very long
input length and a very large patch size to achieve ideal performance [35, 53, 22]. But large size
patching cannot be apply to all kinds of time series forecasting tasks. For example, some forecasting
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

