Local Anti-Concentration Class: Logarithmic Regret
for Greedy Linear Contextual Bandit

Seok-Jin Kim
Columbia University
New York, NY, USA
seok-jin.kim@columbia.edu

Min-hwan Oh
Seoul National Univeristy
Seoul, South Korea
minoh@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We study the performance guarantees of exploration-free greedy algorithms for the
linear contextual bandit problem. We introduce a novel condition, named the Local
Anti-Concentration (LAC) condition, which enables a greedy bandit algorithm
to achieve provable efficiency. We show that the LAC condition is satisfied by a
broad class of distributions, including Gaussian, exponential, uniform, Cauchy, and
Student’s t distributions, along with other exponential family distributions and their
truncated variants. This significantly expands the class of distributions under which
greedy algorithms can perform efficiently. Under our proposed LAC condition, we
prove that the cumulative expected regret of the greedy algorithm for the linear
contextual bandit is bounded by O(poly log T ). Our results establish the widest
range of distributions known to date that allow a sublinear regret bound for greedy
algorithms, further achieving a sharp poly-logarithmic regret.

1

Introduction

In the contextual multi-armed bandit problem [2, 6, 24, 25], an agent uses revealed contextual
information in each round to decide which arm to pull, receiving a reward corresponding to the
pulled arm. The stochastic version of this problem observes rewards as random samples, with their
expectation tied to the arm’s contextual information. The agent’s goal is to design a sequential
arm-pulling strategy to maximize cumulative rewards, necessitating a balance between exploration
and exploitation. Linear contextual bandits, where expected reward is modeled as a linear function
of contextual information, serve as the fundamental framework for contextual bandits [1, 10, 26].
Various exploration strategies, including upper confidence bound (UCB) [1, 11], Thompson sampling
(TS) [3, 4], and ϵ-greedy [19] are widely used and studied in the theoretical analysis for linear
contextual bandits. However, exploration can often be challenging in practice, possibly leading to
over-exploration and performance deterioration. Some domains may find exploration infeasible or
even unethical, and it may appear unfair in applications such as healthcare and clinical domains.
Furthermore, exploration strategies tend to add complexity for algorithm designers and decisionmaking systems.
A greedy policy, i.e., pure exploitation without exploration, selects arms greedily based on current
problem parameter estimates. While a greedy policy’s effectiveness cannot be guaranteed in general
since it may fail to find optimality in the worst case, the possibility of its favorable performances in
certain scenarios has been of interest both practically and theoretically. Therefore, understanding when
a greedy policy can perform effectively, i.e., when exploration is not needed, is a fundamental research
question. Recently, a simple greedy policy has been proved to achieve near-optimal regret bounds for
linear contextual bandit problems under some stochastic conditions of contexts [8, 20, 30, 33, 34].
Such efficient learning is possible if the greedy policy can benefit from suitable diversity in the contexts
(or the features of arms) — so that even with exploration-free action selection, parameter estimation is
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

