Tolerant Algorithms for Learning with
Arbitrary Covariate Shift

Surbhi Goel
Department of Computer Science
University of Pennsylvania
surbhig@seas.upenn.edu

Abhishek Shetty∗
Department of EECS
UC Berkeley
shetty@berkeley.edu

Konstantinos Stavropoulos†
Department of Computer Science
UT Austin
kstavrop@utexas.edu

Arsen Vasilyan‡
Department of EECS
UC Berkeley
arsenvasilyan@gmail.com

Abstract
We study the problem of learning under arbitrary distribution shift, where the
learner is trained on a labeled set from one distribution but evaluated on a different,
potentially adversarially generated test distribution. We focus on two frameworks:
PQ learning [GKKM20], allowing abstention on adversarially generated parts of
the test distribution, and TDS learning [KSV24b], permitting abstention on the
entire test distribution if distribution shift is detected. All prior known algorithms
either rely on learning primitives that are computationally hard even for simple
function classes, or end up abstaining entirely even in the presence of a tiny amount
of distribution shift.
We address both these challenges for natural function classes, including intersections of halfspaces and decision trees, and standard training distributions, including
Gaussians. For PQ learning, we give efficient learning algorithms, while for TDS
learning, our algorithms can tolerate moderate amounts of distribution shift. At
the core of our approach is an improved analysis of spectral outlier-removal techniques from learning with nasty noise. Our analysis can (1) handle arbitrarily large
fraction of outliers, which is crucial for handling arbitrary distribution shifts, and
(2) obtain stronger bounds on polynomial moments of the distribution after outlier
removal, yielding new insights into polynomial regression under distribution shifts.
Lastly, our techniques lead to novel results for tolerant testable learning [RV23],
and learning with nasty noise.

1

Introduction

Despite the tremendous progress of machine learning, real-world deployment and use of machine
learning models has proven challenging. A major reason for this is distribution shift, which occurs
when the model is trained on one distribution Dtrain over X ×{±1}, while the data during deployment
comes from a different distribution Dtest . In such scenarios, a model can unexpectedly make incorrect
∗

Supported by an Apple AI/ML PhD Fellowship
Supported by the NSF AI Institute for Foundations of Machine Learning (IFML) and by scholarships from
Bodossaki Foundation and Leventis Foundation.
‡
Supported by NSF awards CCF-2006664, DMS-2022448, CCF-1565235, CCF-1955217, Big George
Fellowship and Fintech@CSAIL. Part of this work was conducted while the author was visiting the Simons
Institute for the Theory of Computing.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

