Understanding Representation of Deep Equilibrium
Models from Neural Collapse Perspective

Ye Shi ∗
ShanghaiTech University
shiye@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Haixiang Sun
ShanghaiTech University
sunhx@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep Equilibrium Model (DEQ), which serves as a typical implicit neural network,
emphasizes their memory efficiency and competitive performance compared to
explicit neural networks. However, there has been relatively limited theoretical
analysis on the representation of DEQ. In this paper, we utilize the Neural Collapse
(N C) as a tool to systematically analyze the representation of DEQ under both
balanced and imbalanced conditions. N C is an interesting phenomenon in the
neural network training process that characterizes the geometry of class features
and classifier weights. While extensively studied in traditional explicit neural
networks, the N C phenomenon has not received substantial attention in the context
of implicit neural networks. We theoretically show that N C exists in DEQ under
balanced conditions. Moreover, in imbalanced settings, despite the presence of
minority collapse, DEQ demonstrated advantages over explicit neural networks.
These advantages include the convergence of extracted features to the vertices of a
simplex equiangular tight frame and self-duality properties under mild conditions,
highlighting DEQ’s superiority in handling imbalanced datasets. Finally, we validate our theoretical analyses through experiments in both balanced and imbalanced
scenarios.

1

Introduction

Recently, there has been significant research on implicitly-defined layers in neural networks [1, 2,
3, 6, 9, 20, 21, 49], where the output is implicitly mapped from the input under certain conditions.
These layers embed interpretability and introduce inductive bias [26] into black-box neural networks,
demonstrating superior performance compared to existing explicit layers.
Among these implicit networks, the Deep Equilibrium Model (DEQ) is a memory-efficient architecture that represents all hidden layers as the equilibrium point of a nonlinear fixed-point equation.
Due to the absence of a closed-form solution in its forward process, DEQ can be viewed as having an
infinite number of layers during iteration as long as the threshold is set low enough, enhancing its
ability to fit input data. Consequently, its representational capacity is relatively stronger compared to
a single-layer network structure. This phenomenon explains why DEQ has achieved state-of-the-art
results in classification tasks compared to existing architectures like ResNet. For instance, it has been
successfully applied to language tasks and image classification tasks, reaching state-of-the-art performance. Additionally, DEQ can be applied in various domains and integrated with numerous other
models, including inverse problems [19], Neural ODEs [11], diffusion models [24, 43], Gaussian
processes [17], and more.
However, recent research reveals a phenomenon called Neural Collapse (N C) concerning the learned
deep representations across datasets in image classification tasks [42]. Under the N C regime, the last∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

