Pipeline Parallelism with Controllable Memory

Penghui Qi∗ 12 , Xinyi Wan∗ 1 , Nyamdavaa Amar† 2 , Min Lin1
1
Sea AI Lab 2 National University of Singapore
{qiph,wanxy,linmin}@sea.com amara@u.nus.edu

Abstract
Pipeline parallelism has been widely explored, but most existing schedules lack
a systematic methodology. In this paper, we propose a framework to decompose
pipeline schedules as repeating a building block, and show that the lifespan of
the building block decides the peak activation memory of the pipeline schedule.
Guided by the observations, we find that almost all existing pipeline schedules, to
the best of our knowledge, are memory inefficient. To address this, we introduce a
family of memory efficient building blocks with controllable activation memory,
which can reduce the peak activation memory to 1/2 of 1F1B without sacrificing
efficiency, and even to 1/3 with comparable throughput. We can also achieve almost
zero pipeline bubbles while maintaining the same activation memory as 1F1B. Our
evaluations demonstrate that in pure pipeline parallelism settings, our methods
outperform 1F1B by from 7% to 55% in terms of throughput. When employing
a grid search over hybrid parallelism hyperparameters in practical scenarios, our
methods demonstrate a 16% throughput improvement over the 1F1B baseline for
large language models. The implementation is open-sourced at this url.

1

Introduction

Distributed model training has attracted a lot of attention in recent years, especially after the boom
of large language models [Brown et al., 2020]. As the model size becomes larger and larger, data
parallelism (DP) [Goyal et al., 2017] is no longer capable to hold all the parameters in a single device.
Under this background, model parallelism [Harlap et al., 2018, Huang et al., 2019, Shoeybi et al.,
2019, Zheng et al., 2022] is proposed to partition parameters into a set of devices to address the
memory constraint. Tensor parallelism (TP) [Shoeybi et al., 2019] is a commonly used model parallel
strategy, which partitions weight parameters into several devices and performs matrix multiplication
separately. A well-known shortcoming of TP is that, it requires a lot of communication volume,
which makes it inefficient when bandwidth becomes the bottleneck Narayanan et al. [2021]. In
such situations, pipeline parallelism [Harlap et al., 2018, Huang et al., 2019], which is another
model parallel strategy, shows its advantage in low communication cost. The core idea of pipeline
parallelism is to split the entire model into several stages, which can be processed by several devices
in a streaming way. In a typical large-scale training scenarios such as Narayanan et al. [2021], TP is
generally used within one compute node, and PP is used to scale up across nodes.
Although PP has been widely adopted and developed, it suffers from two prominent disadvantages:
pipeline bubbles and large activation memory. To eliminate pipeline bubbles, one line of work
focuses on asynchronous PP [Gaunt et al., 2017, Yang et al., 2021], which is theoretically bubble
free. However, it sacrifices the exact optimization semantics and may result in lower convergence
performance [Lian et al., 2018, Tang et al., 2020]. A parallel line of works revolve around synchronous
PP, focusing on reducing pipeline bubbles and/or activation memory. GPipe [Huang et al., 2019] is
∗
†

Equal Contributors.
Work was done during an internship at Sea AI Lab.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

