MonkeySee: Space-time-resolved reconstructions of
natural images from macaque multi-unit activity

Lynn Le1 , Paolo Papale 2 , Katja Seeliger3 , Antonio Lozano2 , Thirza Dado1 ,
Feng Wang 2 , Pieter Roelfsema 2,4,5,6 , Marcel van Gerven1 , Yağmur Güçlütürk1 , Umut Güçlü†1
1

Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands
2
Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, Amsterdam, Netherlands
3
Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany
4
Centre for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, Netherlands
5
Institut de la Vision, Paris, France
6
Amsterdam University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands
†Correspondence Email: u.guclu@donders.ru.nl

Abstract
In this paper, we reconstruct naturalistic images directly from macaque brain signals using a convolutional neural network (CNN) based decoder. We investigate
the ability of this CNN-based decoding technique to differentiate among neuronal
populations from areas V1, V4, and IT, revealing distinct readout characteristics
for each. This research marks a progression from low-level to high-level brain
signals, thereby enriching the existing framework for utilizing CNN-based decoders
to decode brain activity. Our results demonstrate high-precision reconstructions
of naturalistic images, highlighting the efficiency of CNN-based decoders in advancing our knowledge of how the brain’s representations translate into pixels.
Additionally, we present a novel space-time-resolved decoding technique, demonstrating how temporal resolution in decoding can advance our understanding of
neural representations. Moreover, we introduce a learned receptive field layer that
sheds light on the CNN-based model’s data processing during training, enhancing
understanding of its structure and interpretive capacity.

1

Introduction

Artificial neural network models designed for decoding naturalistic images from neural activity
signals significantly advance our understanding of how visual information is processed in the brain.
Decoding models aim to disentangle patterns of neural responses to different stimuli, offering insights
into how visual stimuli (e.g., a brown horse or a white t-shirt) are represented by neural populations.
Leveraging a large amount of naturalistic data facilitates the reconstruction of natural vision and
allows for comprehensive analyses of visual features. Due to the immense variety of naturalistic
visual space, reconstructing such stimuli from neural activity is considered the most challenging but
also the most intriguing problem in neural decoding.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have recently become a cornerstone in neural decoding and
encoding models. Their ability to study fundamental features carried by populations of neuronal
signals has led to significant advancements in understanding the computational mechanisms of natural
scene perception. Encoding models provide valuable insights into how brain activity changes in
response to stimuli, showcasing the features of CNNs that predict neural responses within specific
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

