A MOR: A Recipe for Building Adaptable Modular
Knowledge Agents Through Process Feedback

Jian Guan1,2 , Wei Wu2∗ , Zujie Wen2 , Peng Xu2 , Hongning Wang1 , Minlie Huang1∗
1
The CoAI group, DCST, Institute for Artificial Intelligence,
1
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technology and Systems,
1
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology,
1
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. 2 Ant Group.
{jianguanthu, wuwei19850318,wang.hongn}@gmain.com,
{zujie.wzj,peng.x}@antgroup.com, aihuang@tsinghua.edu.cn.

Abstract
The notable success of large language models (LLMs) has sparked an upsurge in
building language agents to complete various complex tasks. We present A MOR,
an agent framework based on open-source LLMs, which reasons with external
knowledge bases and adapts to specific domains through human supervision to the
reasoning process. A MOR builds reasoning logic over a finite state machine (FSM)
that solves problems through autonomous executions and transitions over disentangled modules. This allows humans to provide direct feedback to the individual
modules, and thus naturally forms process supervision. Based on this reasoning and
feedback framework, we develop A MOR through two-stage fine-tuning: warm-up
and adaptation. The former fine-tunes the LLM with examples automatically constructed from various public datasets, enabling A MOR to generalize across different
knowledge environments, while the latter tailors A MOR to specific domains using
process feedback. Extensive experiments across multiple domains demonstrate
the advantage of A MOR to strong baselines, thanks to its FSM-based reasoning
and process feedback mechanism. The code and data are publicly available at
https://github.com/JianGuanTHU/AMOR.

1

Introduction

LLMs, with astounding performance over general natural language processing (NLP) problems [42,
1, 36], have spurred great interest in building LLM-based agents to solve complex tasks by interacting
with external resources such as web knowledge [27], specialized tools [31], etc.
We focus on developing agents for knowledge-intensive tasks, where the agent completes users’
information-seeking requests by interacting with specific knowledge bases [22]. To address the
complexity of such tasks, we posit the desiderata for a qualifying agent as follows: Firstly, the
agent should possess a robust reasoning logic about the task to solve individual problems with
precise pathways. Secondly, the agent should maintain an adaptive mechanism to adjust to specific
environments, rather than staying static. Thirdly, the reasoning process should be amenable to human
interventions, enabling humans to steer the agent’s behavior through direct feedback to the process
rather than only to the outcome. This ability can significantly facilitate alignment between agent
behavior and human intent [39].
Although extensive studies have been conducted on building language agents, few, if any, can
fulfill all the required criteria due to their uncontrollable reasoning logic, static model capability, or
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

