Federated Black-Box Adaptation for Semantic
Segmentation

Jay N. Paranjape
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
The Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, USA
jparanj1@jhu.edu
S. Swaroop Vedula
Malone Center for Engineering in Healthcare
The Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, USA

Shameema Sikder
Wilmer Eye Institute
The Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, USA

Vishal M. Patel
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
The Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, USA

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is a form of distributed learning that allows multiple
institutions or clients to collaboratively learn a global model to solve a task. This
allows the model to utilize the information from every institute while preserving data privacy. However, recent studies show that the promise of protecting
the privacy of data is not upheld by existing methods and that it is possible to
recreate the training data from the different institutions. This is done by utilizing
gradients transferred between the clients and the global server during training or
by knowing the model architecture at the client end. In this paper, we propose
a federated learning framework for semantic segmentation without knowing the
model architecture nor transferring gradients between the client and the server,
thus enabling better privacy preservation. We propose BlackFed - a black-box
adaptation of neural networks that utilizes zero order optimization (ZOO) to
update the client model weights and first order optimization (FOO) to update
the server weights. We evaluate our approach on several computer vision and
medical imaging datasets to demonstrate its effectiveness. To the best of our
knowledge, this work is one of the first works in employing federated learning
for segmentation, devoid of gradients or model information exchange. Code:
https://github.com/JayParanjape/blackfed/tree/master

1

Introduction

With data-driven methods becoming immensely popular in Artificial Intelligence (AI) research and
applications, there has been a surge in data collection and curation across the world. This has, in
turn, led to the development of AI models that require substantial amounts of data to train. Federated
Learning (FL) [34] was developed as a viable approach towards training such models by effectively
harnessing the data collected at different centers across the world. Through FL, it becomes possible for
multiple institutions to collaborate and build a joint model that learns from all of them, while reducing
the burden of collecting more data individually. However, collaborations between different institutions
present a non-trivial challenge due to disparity in data distributions as well as the imperative of
safeguarding data privacy. Consequently, FL aims to jointly learn a shared model that performs well
on data from all participating institutions without exchanging raw data. Various FL approaches have
been proposed in the literature [1, 10, 12, 16, 25, 22, 35, 37, 41, 44, 55, 56, 30, 34, 29, 31]. Among
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

