Recursive PAC-Bayes: A Frequentist Approach to
Sequential Prior Updates with No Information Loss

Yi-Shan Wu
University of South Denmark
yswu@imada.sdu.dk

Yijie Zhang
University of Copenhagen & Novo Nordisk A/S
yizh@di.ku.dk

Badr-Eddine Chérief-Abdellatif
CNRS, LPSM, Sorbonne Université, Université Paris Cité
badr-eddine.cherief-abdellatif@cnrs.fr

Yevgeny Seldin
University of Copenhagen
seldin@di.ku.dk

Abstract
PAC-Bayesian analysis is a frequentist framework for incorporating prior knowledge into learning. It was inspired by Bayesian learning, which allows sequential
data processing and naturally turns posteriors from one processing step into priors
for the next. However, despite two and a half decades of research, the ability to
update priors sequentially without losing confidence information along the way
remained elusive for PAC-Bayes. While PAC-Bayes allows construction of datainformed priors, the final confidence intervals depend only on the number of points
that were not used for the construction of the prior, whereas confidence information
in the prior, which is related to the number of points used to construct the prior, is
lost. This limits the possibility and benefit of sequential prior updates, because the
final bounds depend only on the size of the final batch.
We present a novel and, in retrospect, surprisingly simple and powerful PACBayesian procedure that allows sequential prior updates with no information loss.
The procedure is based on a novel decomposition of the expected loss of randomized classifiers. The decomposition rewrites the loss of the posterior as an excess
loss relative to a downscaled loss of the prior plus the downscaled loss of the prior,
which is bounded recursively. As a side result, we also present a generalization of
the split-kl and PAC-Bayes-split-kl inequalities to discrete random variables, which
we use for bounding the excess losses, and which can be of independent interest. In
empirical evaluation the new procedure significantly outperforms state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

PAC-Bayesian analysis was born from an attempt to derive frequentist generalization guarantees
for Bayesian-style prediction rules (Shawe-Taylor and Williamson, 1997, McAllester, 1998). The
motivation was to provide a way to incorporate prior knowledge into the frequentist analysis of generalization. PAC-Bayesian bounds provide high-probability generalization guarantees for randomized
classifiers. A randomized classifier is defined by a distribution ρ on a set of prediction rules H, which
is used to sample a prediction rule each time a prediction is to be made. Bayesian posterior is an
example of a randomized classifier, whereas PAC-Bayesian bounds hold generally for all randomized
classifiers. Prior knowledge is encoded through a prior distribution π on H, and the complexity
of a posterior distribution ρ is measured by the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence from the prior,
KL(ρ∥π). PAC-Bayesian generalization guarantees are optimized by posterior distributions ρ that
optimize a trade-off between empirical data fit and divergence from the prior in the KL sense.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

