BuckTales: A multi-UAV dataset for multi-object
tracking and re-identification of wild antelopes

Hemal Naik1,2,3,4∗

Junran Yang1

Margaret C Crofoot1,2,3

Dipin Das1

Akanksha Rathore1,2,4,5

Vivek Hari Sridhar1,2,3,4
Department for the Ecology of Animal Societies, Max Planck Institute of Animal Behavior1
Center for the Advanced Study of Collective Behaviour, University of Konstanz2
Department of Biology, University of Konstanz3
Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science4
Computer Science & Information Systems, BITS Pilani, Hyderabad5

Abstract
Understanding animal behaviour is central to predicting, understanding, and mitigating impacts of natural and anthropogenic changes on animal populations and
ecosystems. However, the challenges of acquiring and processing long-term, ecologically relevant data in wild settings have constrained the scope of behavioural
research. The increasing availability of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), coupled with advances in machine learning, has opened new opportunities for wildlife
monitoring using aerial tracking. However, limited availability of datasets with
wild animals in natural habitats has hindered progress in automated computer
vision solutions for long-term animal tracking. Here we introduce BuckTales,
the first large-scale UAV dataset designed to solve multi-object tracking (MOT)
and re-identification (Re-ID) problem in wild animals, specifically the mating
behaviour (or lekking) of blackbuck antelopes. Collected in collaboration with
biologists, the MOT dataset includes over 1.2 million annotations including 680
tracks across 12 high-resolution (5.4K) videos, each averaging 66 seconds and
featuring 30 to 130 individuals. The Re-ID dataset includes 730 individuals captured with two UAVs simultaneously. The dataset is designed to drive scalable,
long-term animal behaviour tracking using multiple camera sensors. By providing
baseline performance with two detectors, and benchmarking several state-of-the-art
tracking methods, our dataset reflects the real-world challenges of tracking wild
animals in socially and ecologically relevant contexts. In making these data widely
available, we hope to catalyze progress in MOT and Re-ID for wild animals, fostering insights into animal behaviour, conservation efforts, and ecosystem dynamics
through automated, long-term monitoring.

1

Introduction

In a rapidly changing world, behaviour is the most flexible tool in an animal’s toolkit to solve
problems and adapt to novel challenges. While numerous observational and automated sensor-based
techniques exist to study animal behaviour, the past decade has seen a significant increase in the
∗

Corresponding authors: hmnaiks@gmail.com, vivekhsridhar@gmail.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

