Multiclass Transductive Online Learning

Steve Hanneke
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
steve.hanneke@gmail.com

Vinod Raman
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48104
vkraman@umich.edu

Amirreza Shaeri
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
amirreza.shaeiri@gmail.com

Unqiue Subedi
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48104
subedi@umich.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of multiclass transductive online learning when the
number of labels can be unbounded. Previous works by Ben-David et al. [1997]
and Hanneke et al. [2023b] only consider the case of binary and finite label spaces,
respectively. The latter work determined that their techniques fail to extend to the
case of unbounded label spaces, and they pose the question of characterizing the
optimal mistake bound for unbounded label spaces. We answer this question by
showing that a new dimension, termed the Level-constrained Littlestone dimension,
characterizes online learnability in this setting. Along the way, we show that
the trichotomy of possible minimax rates of the expected number of mistakes
established by Hanneke et al. [2023b] for finite label spaces in the realizable setting
continues to hold even when the label space is unbounded. In particular, if the
learner plays for T ∈ N rounds, its minimax expected number of mistakes can
only grow like Θ(T ), Θ(log T ), or Θ(1). To prove this result, we give another
combinatorial dimension, termed the Level-constrained Branching dimension, and
show that its finiteness characterizes constant minimax expected mistake-bounds.
The trichotomy is then determined by a combination of the Level-constrained
Littlestone and Branching dimensions. Quantitatively, our upper bounds improve
upon existing multiclass upper bounds in Hanneke et al. [2023b] by removing the
dependence on the label set size. In doing so, we explicitly construct learning
algorithms that can handle extremely large or unbounded label spaces. A key and
novel component of our algorithm is a new notion of shattering that exploits the
sequential nature of transductive online learning. Finally, we complete our results
by proving expected regret bounds in the agnostic setting, extending the result of
Hanneke et al. [2023b].

1

Introduction

Imagine you are a famous musician who has released K ∈ N songs. You are now on tour visiting
T ∈ N cities worldwide based on the pre-specified plan, each with unique musical preferences that
you have some understanding of. At each city, you can perform only one song in your concert,
and following each performance, the audience provides feedback indicating their preferred song
from your repertoire. Your goal is to select the song that aligns with the majority’s taste in each
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

