Bridging Multicalibration and Out-of-distribution
Generalization Beyond Covariate Shift

Jiayun Wu∗
Depart. of Computer Science & Tech.
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China 100084
wujy22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Jiashuo Liu
Depart. of Computer Science & Tech.
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China 100084
liujiashuo77@gmail.com

Peng Cui
Key Laboratory of Pervasive Computing, Ministry of Education
Depart. of Computer Science & Tech., Tsinghua University
Beijing, China 100084
cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn
Zhiwei Steven Wu
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
zhiweiw@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We establish a new model-agnostic optimization framework for out-of-distribution
generalization via multicalibration, a criterion that ensures a predictor is calibrated
across a family of overlapping groups. Multicalibration is shown to be associated
with robustness of statistical inference under covariate shift. We further establish a
link between multicalibration and robustness for prediction tasks both under and
beyond covariate shift. We accomplish this by extending multicalibration to incorporate grouping functions that consider covariates and labels jointly. This leads to
an equivalence of the extended multicalibration and invariance, an objective for
robust learning in existence of concept shift. We show a linear structure of the
grouping function class spanned by density ratios, resulting in a unifying framework for robust learning by designing specific grouping functions. We propose
MC-Pseudolabel2 , a post-processing algorithm to achieve both extended multicalibration and out-of-distribution generalization. The algorithm, with lightweight
hyperparameters and optimization through a series of supervised regression steps,
achieves superior performance on real-world datasets with distribution shift.

1

Introduction

We revisit the problem of out-of-distribution generalization and establish new connections with multicalibration [17], a criterion originating from algorithmic fairness. Multicalibration is a strengthening
of calibration, which only requires a predictor f to be correct on average within each level set:
E[Y − f (X) | f (X)] = 0
∗
2

This research was conducted as part of a visit to Carnegie Mellon University.
Code available at: https://github.com/IC-hub/MC-Pseudolabel

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

