Navigating the Safety Landscape: Measuring Risks in
Finetuning Large Language Models

ShengYun Peng1

Pin-Yu Chen2 Matthew Hull1 Duen Horng Chau1
1
Georgia Tech 2 IBM
{speng65,matthewhull,polo}@gatech.edu
pin-yu.chen@ibm.com

Abstract
Safety alignment is crucial to ensure that large language models (LLMs) behave
in ways that align with human preferences and prevent harmful actions during
inference. However, recent studies show that the alignment can be easily compromised through finetuning with only a few adversarially designed training examples.
We aim to measure the risks in finetuning LLMs through navigating the LLM
safety landscape. We discover a new phenomenon observed universally in the
model parameter space of popular open-source LLMs, termed as “safety basin”:
random perturbations to model weights maintain the safety level of the original
aligned model within its local neighborhood. However, outside this local region,
safety is fully compromised, exhibiting a sharp, step-like drop. This safety basin
contrasts sharply with the LLM capability landscape, where model performance
peaks at the origin and gradually declines as random perturbation increases. Our
discovery inspires us to propose the new V ISAGE safety metric that measures
the safety in LLM finetuning by probing its safety landscape. Visualizing the
safety landscape of the aligned model enables us to understand how finetuning
compromises safety by dragging the model away from the safety basin. The LLM
safety landscape also highlights the system prompt’s critical role in protecting
a model, and that such protection transfers to its perturbed variants within the
safety basin. These observations from our safety landscape research provide new
insights for future work on LLM safety community. Our code is publicly available
at https://github.com/ShengYun-Peng/llm-landscape.

1

Introduction

Safety alignment is the foundation to bring LLMs’ behaviors in line with human preferences and
restrict harmful behaviors at inference time [42, 43, 3]. Though aligned LLMs have adopted one or
a combination of the safety alignment methods, e.g., reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF) [35], instruction tuning [45], direct preference optimization (DPO) [39], and rejection
sampling [33], LLM safety can easily be compromised by finetuning with only a few adversarially
designed training examples. For instance, both GPT-3.5 Turbo and LLaMA-2 [43] fail to refuse
users’ harmful queries after only finetuning with 10-shot harmful examples [37]. This brings practical
safety concern to model deployment as customization is the desirable way for specific use case. In
this paper, we explore the following fundamental problems in LLM safety: Are all open-source
LLMs equally vulnerable to finetuning? Why can simple finetuning easily break LLM’s safety
alignment? How fast does the model start to break during finetuning?
We discovered that all these questions can be addressed by navigating the LLM safety landscape.
In deep learning literature, visualization of the model landscape has significantly improved our
comprehension of generalization errors, optimization trajectories, and model ensembles [31, 30, 13].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

