Graph Neural Networks and Arithmetic Circuits

Timon Barlag
Institute for Theoretical Computer Science
Leibniz University Hanover
Hanover, Germany
barlag@thi.uni-hannover.de

Vivian Holzapfel
Institute for Theoretical Computer Science
Leibniz University Hanover
Hanover, Germany
holzapfel@thi.uni-hannover.de

Laura Strieker
Institute for Theoretical Computer Science
Leibniz University Hanover
Hanover, Germany
strieker@thi.uni-hannover.de

Jonni Virtema
School of Computer Science
University of Sheffield
Sheffield, United Kingdom
j.t.virtema@sheffield.ac.uk

Heribert Vollmer
Institute for Theoretical Computer Science
Leibniz University Hanover
Hanover, Germany
vollmer@thi.uni-hannover.de

Abstract
We characterize the computational power of neural networks that follow the graph
neural network (GNN) architecture, not restricted to aggregate-combine GNNs
or other particular types. We establish an exact correspondence between the
expressivity of GNNs using diverse activation functions and arithmetic circuits
over real numbers. In our results the activation function of the network becomes a
gate type in the circuit. Our result holds for families of constant depth circuits and
networks, both uniformly and non-uniformly, for all common activation functions.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have recently received growing attention from a theoretical point of view in a number
of papers studying their computational properties. Relevant to this paper are examinations of the
computational power of neural networks after training, i.e., the training process is not taken into
account but instead the computational power of an optimally trained network is studied. Starting
already in the nineties, the expressive power of feed-forward neural networks (FNNs) has been
related to Boolean threshold circuits, see, e.g., [Maass et al., 1991, Siegelmann and Sontag, 1995,
Maass, 1997, He and Papakonstantinou, 2022]. Most importantly, Maass [1997] showed that when
restricting networks to Boolean inputs, a language can be decided by a family of (in a certain sense)
“polynomial-size” FNNs if and only if it belongs to the class TC0 , i.e., the class of all languages
decidable by families of Boolean circuits of constant depth and polynomial size using negation gates
and unbounded fan-in AND, OR, and threshold gates.
In the last five years attention has shifted to the study of graph neural networks (GNNs) which is a
model for machine learning tasks on graph-structured inputs. Their expressive power can be closely
related to the Weisfeiler-Leman algorithm [Xu et al., 2019, Morris et al., 2019, 2021]. Originally
developed to solve the graph isomorphism problem, the WL algorithm is connected to fragments of
first-order logic; hence the logical expressiveness of GNNs was subsequently studied. Barceló et al.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

