End-To-End Causal Effect Estimation
from Unstructured Natural Language Data

Nikita Dhawan∗
University of Toronto, Vector Institute
nikita@cs.toronto.edu
Karen Ullrich
Meta AI
karenu@meta.com

Leonardo Cotta
Vector Institute
leonardo.cotta@vectorinstitute.ai
Rahul G. Krishnan
University of Toronto, Vector Institute
rahulgk@cs.toronto.edu

Chris J. Maddison
University of Toronto, Vector Institute
cmaddis@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Knowing the effect of an intervention is critical for human decision-making, but
current approaches for causal effect estimation rely on manual data collection and
structuring, regardless of the causal assumptions. This increases both the cost and
time-to-completion for studies. We show how large, diverse observational text data
can be mined with large language models (LLMs) to produce inexpensive causal
effect estimates under appropriate causal assumptions. We introduce NATURAL, a
novel family of causal effect estimators built with LLMs that operate over datasets
of unstructured text. Our estimators use LLM conditional distributions (over
variables of interest, given the text data) to assist in the computation of classical
estimators of causal effect. We overcome a number of technical challenges to realize
this idea, such as automating data curation and using LLMs to impute missing
information. We prepare six (two semi-synthetic and four real) observational
datasets, paired with corresponding ground truth in the form of randomized trials,
which we used to systematically evaluate each step of our pipeline. NATURAL
estimators demonstrate remarkable performance, yielding causal effect estimates
that fall within 3 percentage points of their ground truth counterparts, including on
real-world Phase 3/4 clinical trials. Our results suggest that unstructured text data
is a rich source of causal effect information, and NATURAL is a first step towards
an automated pipeline to tap this resource.

1

Introduction

Estimating the causal effects of interventions is time consuming and costly, but the resulting outcomes
are precious. Health agencies around the world often require randomized controlled trial (RCT) data
to approve medical interventions. Clinical trials are key contributors to large R&D costs for drug
developers [30]. Natural experiments are another source of rich interventional data, but they may not
always exist or have enough data relevant to a given causal hypothesis [12].
When treatment randomization is infeasible, observational data can be used to identify average
treatment effects (ATEs) [48], under common assumptions, e.g., no unobserved confounding. Such
∗

Work done during internship at Meta AI.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

