Grounded Answers for Multi-agent Decision-making
Problem through Generative World Model

Zeyang Liu

Xinrui Yang

Shiguang Sun

zeyang.liu@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

xinrui.yang@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

ssg2019@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

Long Qian

Lipeng Wan

Xingyu Chen∗

qianlongym@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

wanlipeng77@xjtu.edu.cn

chenxingyu_1990@xjtu.edu.cn

Xuguang Lan∗
xglan@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Application
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China

Abstract
Recent progress in generative models has stimulated significant innovations in many
fields, such as image generation and chatbots. Despite their success, these models
often produce sketchy and misleading solutions for complex multi-agent decisionmaking problems because they miss the trial-and-error experience and reasoning
as humans. To address this limitation, we explore a paradigm that integrates a
language-guided simulator into the multi-agent reinforcement learning pipeline to
enhance the generated answer. The simulator is a world model that separately learns
dynamics and reward, where the dynamics model comprises an image tokenizer
as well as a causal transformer to generate interaction transitions autoregressively,
and the reward model is a bidirectional transformer learned by maximizing the
likelihood of trajectories in the expert demonstrations under language guidance.
Given an image of the current state and the task description, we use the world model
to train the joint policy and produce the image sequence as the answer by running
the converged policy on the dynamics model. The empirical results demonstrate
that this framework can improve the answers for multi-agent decision-making
problems by showing superior performance on the training and unseen tasks of
the StarCraft Multi-Agent Challenge benchmark. In particular, it can generate
consistent interaction sequences and explainable reward functions at interaction
states, opening the path for training generative models of the future.

1

Introduction

Recent progress in generative artificial intelligence with models capable of generating creative
content has shown attractive prospects for real-world applications, such as image generation (Takagi
& Nishimoto, 2023), embodied agents (Brohan et al., 2023b), and chatbots (Köpf et al., 2024). Most
generative models attempt to directly obtain the answer by training on natural language or image
datasets and inserting decomposed reasoning steps in few-shot demonstrations. However, these
methods do not experience firsthand the situations described by the language and the image. They
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

