OW-VISCapTor: Abstractors for Open-World Video
Instance Segmentation and Captioning

Anwesa Choudhuri, Girish Chowdhary and Alexander G. Schwing
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{anwesac2,girishc,aschwing}@illinois.edu

Abstract
We propose the new task ‘open-world video instance segmentation and captioning’.
It requires to detect, segment, track and describe with rich captions never before
seen objects. This challenging task can be addressed by developing “abstractors”
which connect a vision model and a language foundation model. Concretely, we
connect a multi-scale visual feature extractor and a large language model (LLM)
by developing an object abstractor and an object-to-text abstractor. The object
abstractor, consisting of a prompt encoder and transformer blocks, introduces
spatially-diverse open-world object queries to discover never before seen objects in
videos. An inter-query contrastive loss further encourages the diversity of object
queries. The object-to-text abstractor is augmented with masked cross-attention
and acts as a bridge between the object queries and a frozen LLM to generate rich
and descriptive object-centric captions for each detected object. Our generalized
approach surpasses the baseline that jointly addresses the tasks of open-world video
instance segmentation and dense video object captioning by 13% on never before
seen objects, and by 10% on object-centric captions.

1

Introduction

We propose the generalized task of open-world video instance segmentation and captioning (OWVISCap). This task combines open-world video instance segmentation (OW-VIS) [1–5] and the
generation of rich object-centric captions for objects [6]. Specifically, OW-VISCap involves detecting, segmenting, and tracking previously seen or unseen objects in a video, while simultaneously
generating free-form captions for each of the detected/segmented objects. The open-world aspect
makes this task widely applicable. However, it also makes this task challenging because the objects
are often never seen during training, are occasionally partly or entirely occluded, the appearance
and position of these objects change over time, the objects may leave the scene only to re-appear
at a later time, and because generating free-form object-centric captions requires a powerful object
representation as well as a strong natural language understanding. Addressing these challenges to
obtain an accurate method for this task that works online is crucial in fields like autonomous systems,
and augmented as well as virtual reality, among others.
OW-VISCap generalizes open-world video instance segmentation (OW-VIS) which requires to
deal with never-before-seen objects [2–5, 1, 7]. For example, in Fig. 1, the trailer truck (top row)
highlighted in yellow, and the lawn mower (bottom row) highlighted in green, are never seen before
during training. Current OW-VIS methods suffer from the following two main issues.
Firstly, all methods on video instance segmentation, closed- or open-world, assign a one-word label to
the segmented objects. However, we argue that free-form captions are more descriptive than discrete
class labels [8, 9], and naturally facilitate zero-shot fine-grained captioning of objects, especially in
an open-world setting. Notably, vision-language models have not been explored to unify open-world
video instance segmentation and spatio-temporally dense fine-grained object captioning.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

