Navigating Chemical Space with Latent Flows

Guanghao Wei*‡
Cornell University

Yining Huang*
Harvard University

gw338@cornell.edu

yininghuang@hms.harvard.edu

Chenru Duan
Deep Principle, Inc.

Yue Song†
California Institute of Technology

Yuanqi Du†
Cornell University

duanchenru@gmail.com

yuesong@caltech.edu

yd392@cornell.edu

Abstract
Recent progress of deep generative models in the vision and language domain has
stimulated significant interest in more structured data generation such as molecules.
However, beyond generating new random molecules, efficient exploration and a
comprehensive understanding of the vast chemical space are of great importance
to molecular science and applications in drug design and materials discovery. In
this paper, we propose a new framework, ChemFlow, to traverse chemical space
through navigating the latent space learned by molecule generative models through
flows. We introduce a dynamical system perspective that formulates the problem
as learning a vector field that transports the mass of the molecular distribution
to the region with desired molecular properties or structure diversity. Under this
framework, we unify previous approaches on molecule latent space traversal and
optimization and propose alternative competing methods incorporating different
physical priors. We validate the efficacy of ChemFlow on molecule manipulation
and single- and multi-objective molecule optimization tasks under both supervised
and unsupervised molecular discovery settings. Codes and demos are publicly
available on GitHub at https://github.com/garywei944/ChemFlow.

1

Introduction

Designing new functional molecules has been a long-standing challenge in molecular discovery
which concerns a wide range of applications in drug design and materials discovery [48, 57]. With the
increasing interest in applying deep learning models in scientific problems [60, 70], molecular design
has attracted considerable attention given its massively available data and accessible evaluations.
Among the developed methods, two paradigms emerge: one paradigm searches for new molecules
based on combinatorial optimization approaches respecting the discrete nature of molecules; the
other paradigm builds upon the success of deep generative models in approximating the molecular
distribution with a given dataset and then generating new molecules from the learned models [8].
Both of the approaches have demonstrated promising results in small molecule, protein, and materials
design [61, 26, 41, 69]. Despite the promise, the chemical space is tremendously large with the
number of drug-like small molecule compounds estimated to be from 1023 to 1060 [3, 39]. This
necessitates either more efficient searching methods or better understanding about the structure of
the chemical space. Following the progress made in studying the latent structure of deep generative
models (e.g. generative adversarial networks (GANs) [19], variational autoencoders (VAEs) [35],
*

Equal Contribution.
Equal Supervision.
‡
This work was completed while the author was at Cornell University.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

