Combining Statistical Depth and Fermat Distance for
Uncertainty Quantification
Hai-Vy Nguyen1,2,3 , Fabrice Gamboa2 , Reda Chhaibi2 , Sixin Zhang3 , Serge Gratton3 ,
Thierry Giaccone1
1

Ampere Software Technology
Institut de mathématiques de Toulouse
3
Institut de Recherche en Informatique de Toulouse
2

{thierry.giaccone, hai-vy.nguyen}@ampere.cars,
{reda.chhaibi, fabrice.gamboa}@math.univ-toulouse.fr,
{serge.gratton, sixin.zhang}@irit.fr

Abstract
We measure the out-of-domain uncertainty in the prediction of Neural Networks
using a statistical notion called “Lens Depth” (LD) combined with Fermat Distance,
which is able to capture precisely the “depth” of a point with respect to a distribution
in feature space, without any distributional assumption. Our method also has no
trainable parameter. The method is applied directly in the feature space at test
time and does not intervene in training process. As such, it does not impact the
performance of the original model. The proposed method gives excellent qualitative
results on toy datasets and can give competitive or better uncertainty estimation on
standard deep learning datasets compared to strong baseline methods.

1

Introduction

We consider a multi-class classification problem with the input space X . In general, a classification
model consists of a feature extractor (backbone) Φθ1 and a classifier hθ2 : fθ “ hθ2 ˝ Φθ1 , where
θ “ pθ1 , θ2 q is the set of parameters of the model. The backbone transforms inputs into fixeddimension vectors in the so-called feature space F. The classifier h then maps the features to
predictions. The model fθ is trained on i.i.d. examples drawn from In-Distribution (ID) Pin . fθ̂
denotes the trained model.
OOD detection. Classification by neural networks has proved highly effective in terms of precision.
However, beside performance, in critical applications, one needs to detect out-of-distribution (OOD)
data for safety reasons. Indeed, at the inference stage, the model should only predict for data coming
from the ID and reject OOD samples. For this purpose, one needs to associate a confidence (or
uncertainty) score S with these data so that one can reject uncertain predictions. This is referred as
Out-of-domain uncertainty [5]. At the inference stage, x is considered as ID if Spxq ě ε (with some
threshold ε P R) and OOD otherwise. We develop a method applicable directly in the feature space
F of a trained model fθ̂ . It yields a score function SF : Spxq :“ SF pΦθ̂1 pxqq. The high-level idea
is to measure directly “how central” a point is with respect to (w.r.t.) clusters taking into account
density and geometry of each cluster in the feature space. This provides an uncertainty score. For
this objective, standard methods consist in assuming some prior distribution such as GDA (Gaussian
Discriminant Analysis) based on Gaussian fitting [13]. However, the assumption that the data in a
cluster is Gaussian distributed or follow any particular distribution is quite restrictive. We will show
in our experiments section that the Gaussian assumption fails even in a very simple case (Section
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

