Out-of-Distribution Detection with a Single
Unconditional Diffusion Model
Alvin Heng1 , Alexandre H. Thiery2 , Harold Soh1,3
1

2

Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
Department of Statistics and Data Science, National University of Singapore
3
Smart Systems Institute, National University of Singapore

{alvinh, harold}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is a critical task in machine learning that seeks
to identify abnormal samples. Traditionally, unsupervised methods utilize a deep
generative model for OOD detection. However, such approaches require a new
model to be trained for each inlier dataset. This paper explores whether a single
model can perform OOD detection across diverse tasks. To that end, we introduce
Diffusion Paths (DiffPath), which uses a single diffusion model originally trained
to perform unconditional generation for OOD detection. We introduce a novel
technique of measuring the rate-of-change and curvature of the diffusion paths
connecting samples to the standard normal. Extensive experiments show that with
a single model, DiffPath is competitive with prior work using individual models
on a variety of OOD tasks involving different distributions. Our code is publicly
available at https://github.com/clear-nus/diffpath.

1

Introduction

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection, also known as anomaly or outlier detection, seeks to detect
abnormal samples that are far from a given distribution. This is a vital problem as deep neural
networks are known to be overconfident when making incorrect predictions on outlier samples [1, 2],
leading to potential issues in safety-critical applications such as robotics, healthcare, finance, and
criminal justice [3]. Traditionally, OOD detection using only unlabeled data relies on training a
generative model on in-distribution data. Thereafter, measures such as model likelihood or its variants
are used as an OOD detection score [4–6]. An alternative approach is to utilize the excellent sampling
capabilities of diffusion models (DMs) to reconstruct corrupted samples, and use the reconstruction
loss as an OOD measure [7–9].
However, these conventional methods require separate generative models tailored to specific inlier
distributions and require retraining if the inlier data changes, such as in continual learning setups.
This prompts the question: can OOD detection be performed using a single generative model? We
answer in the affirmative and present Diffusion Paths (DiffPath) in this paper. While the use of a
single model for OOD detection has been proposed in the discriminative setting [10], to the best of
our knowledge, we are the first to explore this for generative models. We believe that the generative
setting is particularly salient in light of recent trends where single generative foundation models are
utilized across various tasks [11, 12].
Our method utilizes a single pretrained DM. In a departure from prior works that utilize variants of likelihoods [6, 5, 4] or reconstruction losses [7–9], we propose to perform OOD detection by measuring characteristics of the forward diffusion trajectory, specifically its rate-of-change and curvature, which can be computed from the score predicted
by the diffusion model. We provide theoretical and empirical analyses that motivate these
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

