Evidential Mixture Machines: Deciphering
Multi-Label Correlations for Active Learning
Sensitivity
Dayou Yu1
Minghao Li2
Weishi Shi2
Qi Yu1 ∗
Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY 146231
University of North Texas, Denton, TX 762032
{dy2507,qi.yu}@rit.edu1
{ minghaoli@my.,weishi.shi@}unt.edu2

Abstract
Multi-label active learning is a crucial yet challenging area in contemporary machine learning, often complicated by a large and sparse label space. This challenge
is further exacerbated in active learning scenarios where labeling resources are constrained. Drawing inspiration from existing mixture of Bernoulli models, which efficiently compress the label space into a more manageable weight coefficient space
by learning correlated Bernoulli components, we propose a novel model called
Evidential Mixture Machines (EMM). Our model leverages mixture components
derived from unsupervised learning in the label space and improves prediction accuracy by predicting weight coefficients following the evidential learning paradigm.
These coefficients are aggregated as proxy pseudo counts to enhance component
offset predictions. The evidential learning approach provides an uncertainty-aware
connection between input features and the predicted coefficients and components.
Additionally, our method combines evidential uncertainty with predicted label
embedding covariances for active sample selection, creating a richer, multi-source
uncertainty metric beyond traditional uncertainty scores. Experiments on synthetic
datasets show the effectiveness of evidential uncertainty prediction and EMM’s
capability to capture label correlations through predicted components. Further
testing on real-world datasets demonstrates improved performance compared to
existing multi-label active learning methods.

1

Introduction

Active learning (AL) is a paradigm where we have access to abundant unlabeled data instances with a
limited labeling budget [35] [15]. Most AL methods focus on the selection strategy that helps the
machine learner achieve better performances with an informed selection of labeled data instances.
However, while AL for standard classification tasks has been studied extensively, an important task
that is multi-label classification has been largely overlooked. In real-world problems, each data
instance may be associated with more than one labels [11, 39, 27]. For machine learning models, the
difference between the multi-class problem where only one ground truth label is associated with a
data instance and the multi-label classification (MLC) problem is fundamental. Classic solutions
either transforming the MLC problem into multiple binary problems or directly build a joint learning
problem for all labels. With the binary approach, we lose the common underlying correlations
between input features and labels. The number of classifiers may be large due to the large label space,
thus the separated training process can be costly. Also, many labels are relatively rare and may depend
on other labels, and we can not learn such dependencies when we isolate these labels. With the joint
learning approach, the biggest challenge is to combine common labels with rare labels in a balanced
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

