Human Expertise in Algorithmic Prediction

Rohan Alur
EECS, LIDS
MIT
ralur@mit.edu

Manish Raghavan
EECS, LIDS, Sloan
MIT
mragh@mit.edu

Devavrat Shah
EECS, IDSS, LIDS, SDSC
MIT
devavrat@mit.edu

Abstract
We introduce a novel framework for incorporating human expertise into algorithmic
predictions. Our approach leverages human judgment to distinguish inputs which
are algorithmically indistinguishable, or “look the same" to predictive algorithms.
We argue that this framing clarifies the problem of human-AI collaboration in
prediction tasks, as experts often form judgments by drawing on information which
is not encoded in an algorithm’s training data. Algorithmic indistinguishability
yields a natural test for assessing whether experts incorporate this kind of “side
information", and further provides a simple but principled method for selectively
incorporating human feedback into algorithmic predictions. We show that this
method provably improves the performance of any feasible algorithmic predictor
and precisely quantify this improvement. We find empirically that although algorithms often outperform their human counterparts on average, human judgment
can improve algorithmic predictions on specific instances (which can be identified
ex-ante). In an X-ray classification task, we find that this subset constitutes nearly
30% of the patient population. Our approach provides a natural way of uncovering
this heterogeneity and thus enabling effective human-AI collaboration.

1

Introduction

Despite remarkable advances in machine learning, human judgment continues to play a critical role in
many high-stakes prediction tasks. For example, consider the problem of triage in the emergency room,
where healthcare providers assess and prioritize patients for immediate care. On one hand, prognostic
algorithms offer significant promise for improving triage decisions; indeed, algorithmic predictions
are often more accurate than even expert human decision makers [13, 17, 30, 41, 44, 16, 15, 53]. On
the other hand, predictive algorithms may fail to fully capture the relevant context for each individual.
For example, an algorithmic risk score may only have access to tabular electronic health records
or other structured data (e.g., medical imaging), while a physician has access to many additional
modalities—not least of which is the ability to directly examine the patient!
These two observations—that algorithms often outperform humans, but humans often have access to a
richer information set—are not in conflict with each other. Indeed, [3] find exactly this phenomenon in
an analysis of emergency room triage decisions. This suggests that, even in settings where algorithms
outperform humans, algorithms might still benefit from some form of human input. Ideally this
collaboration will yield human-AI complementarity [6, 61], in which a joint system outperforms
either a human or algorithm working alone. Our work thus begins with the following question:
When (and how) can human judgment improve the predictions of any learning algorithm?
Example: X-ray classification. Consider the problem of diagnosing atelectasis (a partially or fully
collapsed lung; we study this task in detail in Section 5). Today’s state-of-the-art deep learning
models can perform well on these kinds of classification tasks using only a patient’s chest X-ray as
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

