Uncertainty-based Offline Variational Bayesian
Reinforcement Learning for Robustness under
Diverse Data Corruptions

Rui Yang1,2 , Jie Wang1,2∗, Guoping Wu1 , Bin Li1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition
{yr0013, guoping}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{jiewangx, binli}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Real-world offline datasets are often subject to data corruptions (such as noise or
adversarial attacks) due to sensor failures or malicious attacks. Despite advances in
robust offline reinforcement learning (RL), existing methods struggle to learn robust
agents under high uncertainty caused by the diverse corrupted data (i.e., corrupted
states, actions, rewards, and dynamics), leading to performance degradation in
clean environments. To tackle this problem, we propose a novel robust variational
Bayesian inference for offline RL (TRACER). It introduces Bayesian inference
for the first time to capture the uncertainty via offline data for robustness against
all types of data corruptions. Specifically, TRACER first models all corruptions as
the uncertainty in the action-value function. Then, to capture such uncertainty, it
uses all offline data as the observations to approximate the posterior distribution
of the action-value function under a Bayesian inference framework. An appealing
feature of TRACER is that it can distinguish corrupted data from clean data using
an entropy-based uncertainty measure, since corrupted data often induces higher
uncertainty and entropy. Based on the aforementioned measure, TRACER can
regulate the loss associated with corrupted data to reduce its influence, thereby
enhancing robustness and performance in clean environments. Experiments demonstrate that TRACER significantly outperforms several state-of-the-art approaches
across both individual and simultaneous data corruptions.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) aims to learn an effective policy from a fixed dataset without
direct interaction with the environment [1, 2]. This paradigm has recently attracted much attention in
scenarios where real-time data collection is expensive, risky, or impractical, such as in healthcare [3],
autonomous driving [4], and industrial automation [5]. Due to the restriction of the dataset, offline
RL confronts the challenge of distribution shift between the policy represented in the offline dataset
and the policy being learned, which often leads to the overestimation for out-of-distribution (OOD)
actions [1, 6, 7]. To address this challenge, one of the promising approaches introduce uncertainty
estimation techniques, such as using the ensemble of action-value functions or Bayesian inference to
measure the uncertainty of the dynamics model [8–11] or the action-value function [12–15] regarding
the rewards and transition dynamics. Therefore, they can constrain the learned policy to remain close
to the policy represented in the dataset, guiding the policy to be robust against OOD actions.
∗

Corresponding author. Email: jiewangx@ustc.edu.cn.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

