Sigmoid Gating is More Sample Efficient than
Softmax Gating in Mixture of Experts

Huy Nguyen

Nhat Ho⋆

Alessandro Rinaldo⋆

Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, The University of Texas at Austin†
{huynm, minhnhat}@utexas.edu, alessandro.rinaldo@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
The softmax gating function is arguably the most popular choice in mixture of
experts modeling. Despite its widespread use in practice, the softmax gating may
lead to unnecessary competition among experts, potentially causing the undesirable
phenomenon of representation collapse due to its inherent structure. In response,
the sigmoid gating function has been recently proposed as an alternative and
has been demonstrated empirically to achieve superior performance. However, a
rigorous examination of the sigmoid gating function is lacking in current literature.
In this paper, we verify theoretically that the sigmoid gating, in fact, enjoys a
higher sample efficiency than the softmax gating for the statistical task of expert
estimation. Towards that goal, we consider a regression framework in which the
unknown regression function is modeled as a mixture of experts, and study the
rates of convergence of the least squares estimator under the over-specified case in
which the number of fitted experts is larger than the true value. We show that two
gating regimes naturally arise and, in each of them, we formulate an identifiability
condition for the expert functions and derive the corresponding convergence rates.
In both cases, we find that experts formulated as feed-forward networks with
commonly used activation such as ReLU and GELU enjoy faster convergence
rates under the sigmoid gating than those under softmax gating. Furthermore,
given the same choice of experts, we demonstrate that the sigmoid gating function
requires a smaller sample size than its softmax counterpart to attain the same error
of expert estimation and, therefore, is more sample efficient.

1

Introduction

Mixture of experts (MoE) [15, 17] has recently emerged as a powerful machine learning model that
helps scale up the model capacity while requiring a nearly constant computational overhead [34, 8].
In particular, it aggregates multiple sub-models called experts based on a gating network. Here,
experts can be formulated as neural networks, and they specialize in different aspects of the data.
For instance, in large language models [16, 31, 19, 40, 7, 5, 30], one expert might focus on syntax,
another on semantics, whereas the others concentrate on context. Meanwhile, the gating network
takes the input data and calculates a set of weights that determine the contribution of each expert.
This gating mechanism guarantees that the most relevant experts are assigned more weight for a given
input. In addition to language modeling, MoE has also been leveraged in several other applications,
including computer vision [32, 20, 33], multi-task learning [12, 10], multi-modal learning [11],
speech recognition [38, 9, 29] and reinforcement learning [3, 28].
⋆

Co-last authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

