Zeroth-Order Sampling Methods for
Non-Log-Concave Distributions: Alleviating
Metastability by Denoising Diffusion

Ye He
Georgia Institute of Technology
yhe367@gatech.edu

Kevin Rojas
Georgia Institute of Technology
kevin.rojas@gatech.edu

Molei Tao
Georgia Institute of Technology
mtao@gatech.edu

Abstract
This paper considers the problem of sampling from non-logconcave distribution,
based on queries of its unnormalized density. It first describes a framework,
Denoising Diffusion Monte Carlo (DDMC), based on the simulation of a denoising
diffusion process with its score function approximated by a generic Monte Carlo
estimator. DDMC is an oracle-based meta-algorithm, where its oracle is the
assumed access to samples that generate a Monte Carlo score estimator. Then we
provide an implementation of this oracle, based on rejection sampling, and this turns
DDMC into a true algorithm, termed Zeroth-Order Diffusion Monte Carlo (ZODMC). We provide convergence analyses by first constructing a general framework,
i.e. a performance guarantee for DDMC, without assuming the target distribution
to be log-concave or satisfying any isoperimetric inequality. Then we prove that
ZOD-MC admits an inverse polynomial dependence on the desired sampling
accuracy, albeit still suffering from the curse of dimensionality. Consequently,
for low dimensional distributions, ZOD-MC is a very efficient sampler, with
performance exceeding latest samplers, including also-denoising-diffusion-based
RDMC and RSDMC. Last, we experimentally demonstrate the insensitivity of
ZOD-MC to increasingly higher barriers between modes or discontinuity in nonconvex potential.

1

Introduction

The problem of drawing samples from a distribution based on unnormalized density ∝ exp(−V )
(described by the potential V ) is a fundamental statistical and algorithmic problem. This classical
problem nevertheless remains as a research frontier, providing pivotal tools to applications such as
decision making, statistical inference / estimation, uncertainty quantification, data assimilation, and
molecular dynamics. Worth mentioning is that machine learning could benefit vastly from progress
in sampling as well, not only because of its connection to inference, optimization and approximation,
but also through modern domains such as diffusion generative modeling & differential privacy.
Recent years have seen rapid developments of sampling algorithms with quantitative and nonasymptotic theoretical guarantees. Many of the results are either based on discretizations of diffusion
processes [12, 13, 50, 16, 34, 33] or gradient flows [38, 10, 22]. In order to develop such guarantees,
it is necessary to make assumptions about the target distributions, for instance, that it satisfies an
isoperimetric property, where standard requirements are log-concavity or functional inequalities
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

