On the Impacts of the Random Initialization in the
Neural Tangent Kernel Theory

Guhan Chen
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
chen-gh23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Yicheng Li
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
liyc22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Qian Lin∗
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
qianlin@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper aims to discuss the impact of random initialization of neural networks in
the neural tangent kernel (NTK) theory, which is ignored by most recent works in
the NTK theory. It is well known that as the network’s width tends to infinity, the
neural network with random initialization converges to a Gaussian process f GP ,
which takes values in L2 (X ), where X is the domain of the data. In contrast, to
adopt the traditional theory of kernel regression, most recent works introduced a
special mirrored architecture and a mirrored (random) initialization to ensure the
network’s output is identically zero at initialization. Therefore, it remains a question
whether the conventional setting and mirrored initialization would make wide neural
networks exhibit different generalization capabilities. In this paper, we first show
that the training dynamics of the gradient flow of neural networks with random
initialization converge uniformly to that of the corresponding NTK regression with
random initialization f GP . We then show that P(f GP ∈ [HNT ]s ) = 1 for any
3
3
s < d+1
and P(f GP ∈ [HNT ]s ) = 0 for any s ≥ d+1
, where [HNT ]s is the real
NT
interpolation space of the RKHS H
associated with the NTK. Consequently,
the generalization error of the wide neural network trained by gradient descent
3
is Ω(n− d+3 ), and it still suffers from the curse of dimensionality. On one hand,
the result highlights the benefits of mirror initialization. On the other hand, it
implies that NTK theory may not fully explain the superior performance of neural
networks.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the advancement of neural networks has revolutionized various domains, including
computer vision, generative modeling, and others. Notably, large language models like the renowned
GPT series [8, 51] have shown exceptional proficiency in language-related tasks. Similarly, neural
networks have achieved significant successes in image classification, as evidenced by works such
as [27, 34, 37]. This proliferation of neural networks spans a wide range of fields. Despite these
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

