Compressing Large Language Models using Low Rank
and Low Precision Decomposition

Rajarshi Saha
Stanford University

Naomi Sagan
Stanford University

Andrea J. Goldsmith
Princeton University

Varun Srivastava
Stanford University
Mert Pilanci
Stanford University

Abstract
The prohibitive sizes of Large Language Models (LLMs) today make it difficult to deploy them on memory-constrained edge devices. This work introduces
CALDERA – a new post-training LLM compression algorithm that harnesses the
inherent low-rank structure of a weight matrix W by approximating it via a lowrank, low-precision decomposition as W ≈ Q + LR. Here, L and R are low rank
factors, and the entries of Q, L and R are quantized. The model is compressed by
substituting each layer with its Q + LR decomposition, and the zero-shot performance of the compressed model is evaluated. Additionally, L and R are readily
amenable to low-rank adaptation, consequently enhancing the zero-shot performance. CALDERA obtains this decomposition by formulating it as an optimization
problem minQ,L,R ∥(Q + LR − W)X⊤ ∥2F , where X is the calibration data, and
Q, L, R are constrained to be representable using low-precision formats. Theoretical upper bounds on the approximation error of CALDERA are established using
a rank-constrained regression framework, and the tradeoff between compression
ratio and model performance is studied by analyzing the impact of target rank and
quantization bit budget. Results illustrate that compressing LlaMa-2 7B/13B/70B
and LlaMa-3 8B models using CALDERA outperforms existing post-training LLM
compression techniques in the regime of less than 2.5 bits per parameter. The
implementation is available at: https://github.com/pilancilab/caldera.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) stand out due to their remarkable ability to generate human-like
text, thereby supporting a diverse range of applications ranging from writing assistance to code
generation. These models leverage vast datasets and significant computational resources to achieve
their impressive functionality. The architecture of LLMs typically includes multiple layers, each with
weight matrices essential for encoding various aspects of the training data – from simple syntactic
patterns to complex semantic relationships. However, the substantial size of these trained models
leads to high computational costs and considerable energy consumption during inference, which can
be challenging for deployment in resource-constrained environments. As LLMs continue to expand in
scale, compression techniques to reduce the memory and computational requirements of the models
are becoming crucial to ensure their broad accessibility.
Due to the correlated nature of language syntax and semantics learned during training, often, the
weight matrices of LLMs exhibit redundancy, which manifests as a low-rank structure. This redundancy suggests the potential for compression without substantial loss in performance. This
work introduces CALDERA: Calibration Aware Low-Precision DEcomposition with Low-Rank
Adaptation, which compresses LLMs by leveraging the approximate low rank structure inherent in
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

