AudioMarkBench: Benchmarking Robustness of
Audio Watermarking

Hongbin Liu∗ 1 , Moyang Guo∗ 1 , Zhengyuan Jiang1 , Lun Wang2 , Neil Zhenqiang Gong1
1
Duke University, 2 Google
1
{hongbin.liu, moyang.guo, zhengyuan.jiang, neil.gong}@duke.edu, 2 lunwang@google.com

Abstract
The increasing realism of synthetic speech, driven by advancements in text-tospeech models, raises ethical concerns regarding impersonation and disinformation. Audio watermarking offers a promising solution via embedding humanimperceptible watermarks into AI-generated audios. However, the robustness of
audio watermarking against common/adversarial perturbations remains understudied. We present AudioMarkBench, the first systematic benchmark for evaluating
the robustness of audio watermarking against watermark removal and watermark
forgery. AudioMarkBench includes a new dataset created from Common-Voice
across languages, biological sexes, and ages, 3 state-of-the-art watermarking methods, and 15 types of perturbations. We benchmark the robustness of these methods
against the perturbations in no-box, black-box, and white-box settings. Our findings
highlight the vulnerabilities of current watermarking techniques and emphasize the
need for more robust and fair audio watermarking solutions. Our dataset and code
are publicly available at https://github.com/moyangkuo/AudioMarkBench.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in text-to-speech (TTS) generative models enable generating highly realistic
synthetic audios that are indistinguishable from real human voices. However, this capability raises
significant concerns, such as malicious impersonation, dissemination of false information, or copyright infringement. For example, a scammer used synthetic audios to impersonate President Biden
in illegal robocalls during a New Hampshire primary election, and thus faces a $6 million fine and
felony charges [5].
Audio watermarking [14, 3, 12] offers a promising approach to mitigate concerns about synthetic
audio authenticity. It embeds an imperceptible watermark into a synthetic audio using a watermark
encoder, outputting a watermarked audio. During detection, a watermark decoder extracts a watermark
from a given audio input. By comparing the extracted watermark with the ground-truth watermark,
one can determine the authenticity of the given audio.
Existing audio watermarking methods perform well when there are no perturbations added to
watermarked audios [14, 3, 12]. However, real-world audios often undergo various perturbations.
Common perturbations include compression using standards like MP3 or Opus [15] to reduce internet
transmission costs. Additionally, attackers may craft adversarial perturbations designed to deceive
watermarking methods. However, the robustness of audio watermarking against these perturbations
remains under-explored and lacks systematic benchmarking.
Our work: In this work, we aim to bridge the gap by introducing AudioMarkBench (Audio
Watermarking Benchmark), the first systematic and comprehensive benchmark for assessing the
∗

Equal contributions.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

