Cambrian-1: A Fully Open, Vision-Centric
Exploration of Multimodal LLMs

Shengbang Tong∗ Ellis Brown∗ Penghao Wu∗
Sanghyun Woo Manoj Middepogu Sai Charitha Akula Jihan Yang
Shusheng Yang Adithya Iyer Xichen Pan Austin Wang
Rob Fergus Yann LeCun Saining Xie†
New York University

Abstract
We introduce Cambrian-1, a family of multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) designed with a
vision-centric approach. While stronger language models can enhance multimodal
capabilities, the design choices for vision components are often insufficiently
explored and disconnected from visual representation learning research. This
gap hinders accurate sensory grounding in real-world scenarios. Our study uses
LLMs and visual instruction tuning as an interface to evaluate various visual
representations, offering new insights into different models and architectures—selfsupervised, strongly supervised, or combinations thereof—based on experiments
with over 20 vision encoders. We critically examine existing MLLM benchmarks,
addressing the difficulties involved in consolidating and interpreting results from
various tasks, and introduce a new vision-centric benchmark, CV-Bench. To
further improve visual grounding, we propose the Spatial Vision Aggregator (SVA),
a dynamic and spatially-aware connector that integrates high-resolution vision
features with LLMs while reducing the number of tokens. Additionally, we discuss
the curation of high-quality visual instruction-tuning data from publicly available
sources, emphasizing the importance of data source balancing and distribution
ratio. Collectively, Cambrian-1 not only achieves state-of-the-art performance but
also serves as a comprehensive, open cookbook for instruction-tuned MLLMs. We
provide model weights, code, supporting tools, datasets, and detailed instructiontuning and evaluation recipes. We hope our release will inspire and accelerate
advancements in multimodal systems and visual representation learning.
Project page: https://cambrian-mllm.github.io/

1

Introduction

There is a long-standing debate in philosophy about whether understanding and meaning in language
require sensory grounding. Aristotle’s emphasis on acquiring knowledge through sensory experience
and empirical observation was central to his ancient Peripatetic school and remains influential to this
day [8]; Aquinas famously formalized these ideas in the 13th century with the Peripatetic axiom:
“Nihil est in intellectu quod non sit prius in sensu” (Nothing is in the intellect that was not first in
the senses) [7]. Though many philosophers disagree [23], it is evident that having robust and highly
capable sensory grounding is at least beneficial. Consider the Cambrian explosion, during which the
emergence of vision is believed [105] to have been crucial for early animals to not only find food
and avoid predators but also to evolve and improve. In fact, most human knowledge (and nearly
∗
†

Project Lead
Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

