Are More LM Calls All You Need? Towards the
Scaling Properties of Compound AI Systems

Lingjiao Chen1 , Jared Davis1 , Boris Hanin3 , Peter Bailis1 ,
Ion Stoica2 , Matei Zaharia2 , James Zou1
Stanford University1
University of California, Berkeley2
Princeton University3

Abstract
Many recent state-of-the-art results in language tasks were achieved using compound systems that perform multiple Language Model (LM) calls and aggregate
their responses. However, there is little understanding of how the number of LM
calls – e.g., when asking the LM to answer each question multiple times and taking a majority vote – affects such a compound system’s performance. In this paper,
we initiate the study of scaling properties of compound inference systems. We analyze, theoretically and empirically, how the number of LM calls affects the performance of Vote and Filter-Vote, two of the simplest compound system designs,
which aggregate LM responses via majority voting, optionally applying LM ﬁlters.
We ﬁnd, surprisingly, that across multiple language tasks, the performance of both
Vote and Filter-Vote can ﬁrst increase but then decrease as a function of the number of LM calls. Our theoretical results suggest that this non-monotonicity is due
to the diversity of query difﬁculties within a task: more LM calls lead to higher
performance on “easy” queries, but lower performance on “hard” queries, and nonmonotone behavior can emerge when a task contains both types of queries. This
insight then allows us to compute, from a small number of samples, the number
of LM calls that maximizes system performance, and deﬁne an analytical scaling
model for both systems. Experiments show that our scaling model can accurately
predict the performance of Vote and Filter-Vote systems and thus ﬁnd the optimal
number of LM calls to make.

1

Introduction

Compound AI systems that perform multiple Language Model (LM) calls and aggregate their responses are increasingly leveraged to solve language tasks [ZKC+ 24, DLT+ 23, TAB+ 23, TWL+ 24,
WWS+ 22]. For example, Google’s Gemini Ultra achieved state-of-the-art results on MMLU using a
CoT@32 voting strategy: the LM is called 32 times, and then the majority vote of the 32 responses is
used in the ﬁnal response [TAB+ 23]. Other compound systems ﬁlter responses using an LM before
selecting one [Alp23].
A natural question is, thus, how does scaling the number of LM calls affect the performance of
such compound systems? This question is under-explored in research, but characterizing the scaling
dynamics is crucial for researchers and practitioners to estimate how many LM calls are needed for
their applications and allocate computational resources aptly. Understanding these scaling dynamics
is also helpful in recognizing the limits of compound inference strategies.
As a ﬁrst step towards answering this question, we study the scaling properties of two popular
compound system designs, Vote and Filter-Vote. Vote aggregates multiple proposed answers via
majority vote, as in Gemini’s CoT@32. Filter-Vote leverages a ﬁlter before performing a majority
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

