Can Graph Neural Networks Expose Training Data
Properties? An Efficient Risk Assessment Approach

Hanyang Yuan1,2,4†‡ , Jiarong Xu2∗ , Renhong Huang1
Mingli Song1,4‡ , Chunping Wang3 , Yang Yang1
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Fudan University, 3 Finvolution Group
4
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
{yuanhanyang, renh2, brooksong, yangya}@zju.edu.cn
jiarongxu@fudan.edu.cn, wangchunping02@xinye.com

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have attracted considerable attention due to their
diverse applications. However, the scarcity and quality limitations of graph data
present challenges to their training process in practical settings. To facilitate the
development of effective GNNs, companies and researchers often seek external
collaboration. Yet, directly sharing data raises privacy concerns, motivating data
owners to train GNNs on their private graphs and share the trained models. Unfortunately, these models may still inadvertently disclose sensitive properties of
their training graphs (e.g., average default rate in a transaction network), leading
to severe consequences for data owners. In this work, we study graph property
inference attack to identify the risk of sensitive property information leakage from
shared models. Existing approaches typically train numerous shadow models for
developing such attack, which is computationally intensive and impractical. To
address this issue, we propose an efficient graph property inference attack by leveraging model approximation techniques. Our method only requires training a small
set of models on graphs, while generating a sufficient number of approximated
shadow models for attacks. To enhance diversity while reducing errors in the approximated models, we apply edit distance to quantify the diversity within a group
of approximated models and introduce a theoretically guaranteed criterion to evaluate each model’s error. Subsequently, we propose a novel selection mechanism to
ensure that the retained approximated models achieve high diversity and low error.
Extensive experiments across six real-world scenarios demonstrate our method’s
substantial improvement, with average increases of 2.7% in attack accuracy and
4.1% in ROC-AUC, while being 6.5× faster compared to the best baseline.

1

Introduction

Graph data, encapsulating relationships between entities across various domains such as social
networks, molecular networks, and transaction networks, holds immense value [1–3]. Graph neural
networks (GNNs) have proven effective in modeling graph data [4–6], yielding promising results
across diverse applications, including recommender systems [7], molecular prediction [8, 9], and
anomaly detection [10]. While training high-quality GNN models may necessitate a substantial
amount of data, graphs may be scarce or of low quality in practice [11, 12], prompting companies
and researchers to seek additional data from external sources [13].
†

This work was done when the author was a visiting student at Fudan University.
State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Security, Zhejiang University.
* Corresponding author.
‡

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

