Quantum algorithm for large-scale market
equilibrium computation

Po-Wei Huang1 and Patrick Rebentrost1, 2
Centre for Quantum Technologies, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117543
2
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117417
huangpowei22@u.nus.edu, patrick@comp.nus.edu.sg

1

Abstract
Classical algorithms for market equilibrium computation such as proportional
response dynamics face scalability issues with Internet-based applications such as
auctions, recommender systems, and fair division, despite having an almost linear
runtime in terms of the product of buyers and goods. In this work, we provide
the first quantum algorithm for market equilibrium computation with sub-linear
performance. Our algorithm provides a polynomial runtime speedup in terms of the
product of the number of buyers and goods while reaching the same optimization
objective value as the classical algorithm. Numerical simulations of a system with
16384 buyers and goods support our theoretical results that our quantum algorithm
provides a significant speedup.

1

Introduction

The balance of supply and demand is a fundamental and well-known law that determines the price of
goods in a market. In a market with a set of n buyers and m goods, the competitive equilibrium [1, 2]
determines the optimal price and allocation of goods such that the supply equals the demand in the
given market. The computation of the competitive equilibrium is known as the market equilibrium
computation problem, whose unique solution was shown to exist under a general model of the
economics in the seminal work of Arrow and Debreu [3]. The relevance of such problems in
algorithmic game theory [4, 5] is substantiated by the first welfare theorem, which implies that the
competitive equilibria are Pareto-efficient [6], where no allocation is available that makes one agent
better without making another one worse. In competitive equilibrium from equal income (CEEI)
scenarios, such equilibria are further known to by envy-free [7, 8], where no agent would prefer an
allocation received by another agent over their own.
The market equilibrium computation problem has, in recent years, been extended to various large-scale
Internet-based markets [9], including auction markets [10], fair item allocation/fair division [11–13],
scheduling problems [14] and recommender systems [15]. Such developments call for the need to
further develop algorithmic theories for markets and the computation of market equilibria. We focus
on a particular type of market known as the Fisher market [16, 17], where there is a set of n buyers
interested in buying m infinitely-divisible goods, and where each buyer has their monetary budget
that has no intrinsic value apart from being used to purchase goods. We mainly consider Fisher
markets with linear utilities, where the total utility gained by purchasing goods is strictly linear to the
value and proportion of the goods obtained.
For combinatorial formulations of the market equilibrium problem, algorithms have been discovered
that can obtain exact and approximate solutions [18–21], these algorithms scale poorly against the
growing number of buyers and goods. One can also formulate the market equilibrium computation
problem as an optimization problem that maximizes a convex objective function known as the
Eisenberg-Gale (EG) convex program [22, 23]. For such optimization problems, approximate
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

