Towards Diverse Device Heterogeneous Federated
Learning via Task Arithmetic Knowledge Integration

Mahdi Morafah∗1 , Vyacheslav Kungurtsev2 , Hojin Chang1 , Chen Chen3 , Bill Lin1
1

University of California San Diego (UCSD), 2 Czech Technical University in Prague,
3
University of Central Florida (UCF)
∗
Correspondence: mmorafah@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a promising paradigm for collaborative machine learning, while preserving user data privacy. Despite its potential,
standard FL algorithms lack support for diverse heterogeneous device prototypes,
which vary significantly in model and dataset sizes—from small IoT devices to
large workstations. This limitation is only partially addressed by existing knowledge distillation (KD) techniques, which often fail to transfer knowledge effectively across a broad spectrum of device prototypes with varied capabilities. This
failure primarily stems from two issues: the dilution of informative logits from
more capable devices by those from less capable ones, and the use of a single
integrated logits as the distillation target across all devices, which neglects their
individual learning capacities and and the unique contributions of each device.
To address these challenges, we introduce TAKFL, a novel KD-based framework that treats the knowledge transfer from each device prototype’s ensemble
as a separate task, independently distilling each to preserve its unique contributions and avoid dilution. TAKFL also incorporates a KD-based self-regularization
technique to mitigate the issues related to the noisy and unsupervised ensemble
distillation process. To integrate the separately distilled knowledge, we introduce an adaptive task arithmetic knowledge integration process, allowing each
student model to customize the knowledge integration for optimal performance.
Additionally, we present theoretical results demonstrating the effectiveness of
task arithmetic in transferring knowledge across heterogeneous device prototypes
with varying capacities. Comprehensive evaluations of our method across both
computer vision (CV) and natural language processing (NLP) tasks demonstrate
that TAKFL achieves state-of-the-art results in a variety of datasets and settings,
significantly outperforming existing KD-based methods. Our code is released
at https://github.com/MMorafah/TAKFL.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) has rapidly gained traction as a promising approach to train machine learning models collaboratively across multiple devices, while preserving the privacy of user data. Standard federated learning methods, such as FedAvg [33], however, are primarily designed for unrealistic device-homogeneous scenarios, where all devices are assumed to have identical compute
resource and can train the same neural network architecture [28, 33, 49, 21, 27, 48, 31]. Therefore,
standard FL cannot support the participation of heterogeneous devices, all of which could significantly contribute to model training due to their unique and invaluable local datasets. To address
this gap, knowledge distillation (KD) techniques have emerged as a promising approach to establish
federation among heterogeneous device prototypes and facilitate knowledge transfer between them.
In this approach, locally updated client models from different device prototypes, collectively termed
as ensembles, serve as teachers to distill their knowledge into each device prototype’s server student
model using an unlabeled public dataset.
Project Website: https://mmorafah.github.io/takflpage.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

