ZeroMark: Towards Dataset Ownership Verification
without Disclosing Watermarks

Junfeng Guo1,∗, Yiming Li2,∗ , Ruibo Chen1 , Yihan Wu1 , Chenxi Liu1 , Heng Huang1
1
Department of Computer Science, Institute of Health Computing
University of Maryland College Park
2
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technology University
{gjf2023,ruibo,yihanwu,chenxi,heng}@umd.edu; liyiming.tech@gmail.com

Abstract
High-quality public datasets significantly prompt the prosperity of deep neural
networks (DNNs). Currently, dataset ownership verification (DOV), which consists of dataset watermarking and ownership verification, is the only feasible solution to protect their copyright by preventing unauthorized use. In this paper, we
revisit existing DOV methods and find that they all mainly focused on the first
stage by designing different types of dataset watermarks and directly exploiting
watermarked samples as the verification samples for ownership verification. As
such, their success relies on an underlying assumption that verification is a onetime and privacy-preserving process, which does not necessarily hold in practice.
To alleviate this problem, we propose ZeroMark to conduct ownership verification
without disclosing dataset-specified watermarks. Our method is inspired by our
empirical and theoretical findings of the intrinsic property of DNNs trained on the
watermarked dataset. Specifically, ZeroMark first generates the closest boundary
version of given benign samples and calculates their boundary gradients under
the label-only black-box setting. After that, it examines whether the given suspicious method has been trained on the protected dataset by performing a hypothesis
test, based on the cosine similarity measured on the boundary gradients and the
watermark pattern. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets verify the effectiveness of our ZeroMark and its resistance to potential adaptive attacks. The
codes for reproducing our main experiments are publicly available at GitHub.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated their strong ability in widespread applications,
such as face recognition [1, 2, 3]. Currently, there are many (high-quality) public datasets, such as
CIFAR [4] and ImageNet [5], that can be easily downloaded and used. Arguably, their availability
is one of the key factors in the prosperity of DNNs, as developers can evaluate and improve their
models upon them. In particular, these datasets are usually only freely available for non-commercial
use since their collection and annotation are time-consuming and even expensive.
To the best of our knowledge, dataset ownership verification (DOV) [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11] is currently
the only feasible solution for protecting the copyright of public datasets. Specifically, DOV consists
of two main stages, including dataset watermarking and ownership verification. In the first stage,
dataset owners will introduce some imperceptible watermarked samples to generate the released
watermarked version of the original dataset, so that all models trained on it will have specific distinctive prediction behaviors on particular samples (i.e., verification samples) while having normal
∗

The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

