BAKU: An Efficient Transformer for
Multi-Task Policy Learning

Siddhant Haldar

Zhuoran Peng

Lerrel Pinto

New York University

Abstract
Training generalist agents capable of solving diverse tasks is challenging, often
requiring large datasets of expert demonstrations. This is particularly problematic
in robotics, where each data point requires physical execution of actions in the real
world. Thus, there is a pressing need for architectures that can effectively leverage
the available training data. In this work, we present BAKU, a simple transformer
architecture that enables efficient learning of multi-task robot policies. BAKU
builds upon recent advancements in offline imitation learning and meticulously
combines observation trunks, action chunking, multi-sensory observations, and
action heads to substantially improve upon prior work. Our experiments on 129
simulated tasks across LIBERO, Meta-World suite, and the Deepmind Control suite
exhibit an overall 18% absolute improvement over RT-1 and MT-ACT, with a 36%
improvement on the harder LIBERO benchmark. On 30 real-world manipulation
tasks, given an average of just 17 demonstrations per task, BAKU achieves a 91%
success rate. Videos of the robot are best viewed at baku-robot.github.io.

1

Introduction

Learning generalist policies that can solve multiple tasks is a long standing problem in decision
making and robotics. While significant advances have been made in computer vision [4, 59] and
natural language processing [2, 53, 69], algorithms that can effectively do so for physical agents are
far behind. A key reason for this is the scale of available data. While large-scale datasets in vision
and language can readily be amassed from the Internet, robotics presents a unique challenge. Given
its interactive nature, data acquisition requires physical engagement with the world, making robot
data considerably more laborious to obtain in terms of both time and financial costs.
A prominent approach for training multi-task policies is to bite the bullet and collect large amounts of
data, often by contracting teleoperators [37, 6, 61]. However, policies trained on such data are quite
inefficient, often achieving performance far below independently trained single-task policies [75, 44,
57]. The current best answer to solve this problem is unfortunately to collect even more demonstration
data from experts.
In this work, we present BAKU, a simple architecture for multi-task policy learning that provides
highly efficient training, particularly in data-scarce problems such as robotics. BAKU builds upon
recent work in multitask learning [5, 6] and has three key features. First, a transformer encoder that
fuses information from multiple modalities like vision and language while incorporating temporal
context. Second, a FiLM-conditioned [46] visual encoder helps the model learn task-specific representations by adapting the encoder to the task. Third, an action prediction head that is separated from
the observational encoding trunk, enabling BAKU to be easily retrofitted with state-of-the-art action
Correspondence to: siddhanthaldar@nyu.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

