Pessimistic Backward Policy for GFlowNets

Hyosoon Jang1 , Yunhui Jang1 , Minsu Kim2 , Jinkyoo Park2 , Sungsoo Ahn1
1
2
POSTECH
KAIST
{hsjang1205,uni5510,sungsoo.ahn}@postech.ac.kr,
{min-su,jinkyoo.park}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
This paper studies Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets), which learn to sample
objects proportionally to a given reward function through the trajectory of state
transitions. In this work, we observe that GFlowNets tend to under-exploit the
high-reward objects due to training on insufficient number of trajectories, which
may lead to a large gap between the estimated flow and the (known) reward
value. In response to this challenge, we propose a pessimistic backward policy
for GFlowNets (PBP-GFN), which maximizes the observed flow to align closely
with the true reward for the object. We extensively evaluate PBP-GFN across
eight benchmarks, including hyper-grid environment, bag generation, structured
set generation, molecular generation, and four RNA sequence generation tasks. In
particular, PBP-GFN enhances the discovery of high-reward objects, maintains the
diversity of the objects, and consistently outperforms existing methods.

1

Introduction

Generative Flow Networks [1, GFlowNets] are models that sample compositional objects from
a Boltzmann distribution defined by some reward function. To this end, GFlowNets construct
an object through a trajectory of state transitions, e.g., iteratively adding molecular fragments to
construct a molecule. They are attractive for their ability to sample a diverse set of high-reward
objects, as demonstrated in molecular discovery [2, 3], biological sequence design [4], combinatorial
optimization [5], and large language models [6].
In detail, GFlowNets aim to sample from the Boltzmann distribution using a forward policy to decide
the state transitions. However, this is challenging since the forward policy induces the distribution
over trajectories, while the Boltzmann distribution is only defined on the terminal state of trajectories,
i.e., objects. Hence, directly matching the two distributions with respect to the terminal state requires
an intractable marginalization of the forward policy over the exponentially sized trajectory space.
To circumvent this issue, GFlowNets employ an auxiliary backward policy that lifts the Boltzmann
distribution to the trajectories via reversing the state transitions. In particular, the backward policy
decomposes the unnormalized Boltzmann density of a terminal state into the unnormalized densities
of trajectories, coined backward flow, associated with the terminal state. Then the forward policy
learns the Boltzmann distribution by matching its unnormalized density, i.e., reward, coined forward
flow, with the backward flow on the observed trajectories. We call this training scheme flow matching.1
The training objective of the flow matching has been investigated such as detailed balance [7]
and trajectory balance [8], and sub-trajectory balance [9]. To facilitate training, improved credit
assignment techniques have been explored [10, 11]. Additionally, exploration methods [12] have
been proposed to collect more diverse trajectories. Moreover, exploitation methods such as focusing
on the higher-reward trajectories from the backward policy [13] and sampling high-reward trajectories
with local search [14] have been presented for the collection of higher-reward trajectories.
1

In this work, we refer to flow matching as the learning scheme that aligns the forward and backward flow.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

