Hamiltonian Score Matching and Generative Flows

Peter Holderrieth
MIT CSAIL
phold@mit.edu

Yilun Xu
NVIDIA
yilunx@nvidia.com

Tommi Jaakkola
MIT CSAIL
tommi@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Classical Hamiltonian mechanics has been widely used in machine learning in the
form of Hamiltonian Monte Carlo for applications with predetermined force fields.
In this work, we explore the potential of deliberately designing force fields for
Hamiltonian ODEs, introducing Hamiltonian velocity predictors (HVPs) as a tool
for score matching and generative models. We present two innovations constructed
with HVPs: Hamiltonian Score Matching (HSM), which estimates score functions
by augmenting data via Hamiltonian trajectories, and Hamiltonian Generative
Flows (HGFs), a novel generative model that encompasses diffusion models and
flow matching as HGFs with zero force fields. We showcase the extended design
space of force fields by introducing Oscillation HGFs, a generative model inspired
by harmonic oscillators. Our experiments validate our theoretical insights about
HSM as a novel score matching metric and demonstrate that HGFs rival leading
generative modeling techniques.

1

Introduction

Hamiltonian mechanics is a cornerstone of classical physics, providing a powerful framework for
analyzing the dynamics of physical systems [33, 4]. The Hamiltonian formalism has been widely
applied in machine learning and Bayesian statistics via Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) [14, 36, 8].
In this setting, the goal is to sample from a probability distribution π whose density π(x) is known
up to a normalization factor. In HMC, one interprets ∇ log π(x) as a force function and plugs it into
a Hamiltonian ODE to construct a fast-mixing Markov chain exploring the data space quickly. This
makes HMC one of the most powerful sampling algorithms to date [36, 23].
In generative modeling, the density π(x) is unknown, only data samples x1 , . . . , xn ∼ π are given,
and the goal is to learn to generate novel samples from π. Current state-of-the-art models are based
on diffusion [41, 42, 45, 21] and enjoy widespread success in image generation [39], molecular
generation [11], and robotics [10]. Diffusion models learn the score function ∇ log πσ (x) for a
range of noise scales σ via denoising score matching (DSM) [48]. This enables one to subsequently
generate high-quality samples by following a stochastic differential equation [45].
In light of the success of HMC, it is natural to ask whether the Hamiltonian formalism can also
improve generative models or provide novel insights into their construction. Previous works have
exploited the connection between Hamiltonian physics and generative modeling for specific force
fields [13]. However, these works usually consider particular (fixed) force fields and stay within the
diffusion framework.
More recently, flow-based generative models such as flow matching have enabled scalable training of
continuous normalizing flows (CNFs) [31, 32]. These ODE-based models allow to craft first-order
ODEs transforming arbitrary distributions from one to another. Inspired by these successes, we
consider the Hamiltonian ODE as a Neural ODE [7]. We show that we can marginalize out velocity
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

