Recurrent neural network dynamical systems
for biological vision

Wayne W.M. Soo
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
wmws2@cam.ac.uk

Aldo Battista
Center for Neural Science
New York University
aldo.battista@nyu.edu

Puria Radmard
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
pr450@cam.ac.uk

Xiao-Jing Wang
Center for Neural Science
New York University
xjwang@nyu.edu

Abstract
In neuroscience, recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are modeled as continuous-time
dynamical systems to more accurately reflect the dynamics inherent in biological
circuits. However, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) remain the preferred
architecture in vision neuroscience due to their ability to efficiently process visual
information, which comes at the cost of the biological realism provided by RNNs.
To address this, we introduce a hybrid architecture that integrates the continuoustime recurrent dynamics of RNNs with the spatial processing capabilities of CNNs.
Our models preserve the dynamical characteristics typical of RNNs while having
comparable performance with their conventional CNN counterparts on benchmarks like ImageNet. Compared to conventional CNNs, our models demonstrate
increased robustness to noise due to noise-suppressing mechanisms inherent in
recurrent dynamical systems. Analyzing our architecture as a dynamical system is
computationally expensive, so we develop a toolkit consisting of iterative methods
specifically tailored for convolutional structures. We also train multi-area RNNs using our architecture as the front-end to perform complex cognitive tasks previously
impossible to learn or achievable only with oversimplified stimulus representations.
In monkey neural recordings, our models capture time-dependent variations in
neural activity in higher-order visual areas. Together, these contributions represent
a comprehensive foundation to unify the advances of CNNs and dynamical RNNs
in vision neuroscience.

1

Introduction

Dynamical systems have long been a cornerstone in the field of neuroscience, tracing their origins back
to the modeling of single neurons [1, 2]. Early biophysical models provided critical insights into the
dynamic behavior of neurons. Building on this foundation, neuroscientists progressed to constructing
networks of dynamical neurons [3–12]. The idea was to understand not just how individual neurons
operate but how networks of neurons interact to produce complex behaviors [5–7, 12] and cognitive
functions [8–10]. The rise of deep learning and artificial recurrent neural networks (RNNs) marked a
significant turning point in this endeavor. Neuroscience quickly adopted RNNs due to their ability to
model time-dependent processes [13–29], much like how biological circuits process information over
time. In these models, each artificial neuron can behave according to some biophysical dynamics,
whether through rate coding [13, 14, 18, 30] or spiking mechanisms [19, 20]. This alignment with
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

