Generalizable and Animatable Gaussian Head Avatar
Xuangeng Chu
The University of Tokyo
xuangeng.chu@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Tatsuya Harada
The University of Tokyo
RIKEN AIP
harada@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

GAGAvatar

Source Images

Driving Images

Result Images

Figure 1: Our method can reconstruct animatable avatars from a single image, offering strong
generalization and controllability with real-time reenactment speeds.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose Generalizable and Animatable Gaussian head Avatar
(GAGAvatar) for one-shot animatable head avatar reconstruction. Existing methods
rely on neural radiance fields, leading to heavy rendering consumption and low
reenactment speeds. To address these limitations, we generate the parameters of
3D Gaussians from a single image in a single forward pass. The key innovation
of our work is the proposed dual-lifting method, which produces high-fidelity
3D Gaussians that capture identity and facial details. Additionally, we leverage
global image features and the 3D morphable model to construct 3D Gaussians
for controlling expressions. After training, our model can reconstruct unseen
identities without specific optimizations and perform reenactment rendering at
real-time speeds. Experiments show that our method exhibits superior performance
compared to previous methods in terms of reconstruction quality and expression
accuracy. We believe our method can establish new benchmarks for future research
and advance applications of digital avatars. Code and demos are available at
https://github.com/xg-chu/GAGAvatar.

1

Introduction

One-shot head avatar reconstruction has garnered significant attention in computer vision and graphics
recently due to its great potential in applications such as virtual reality and online meetings. The
typical problem involves faithfully recreating the source head from one image while precisely
controlling expressions and poses. In recent years, many exploratory methods have achieved this goal
using 2D generative models and 3D synthesizers.
Some early 2D-based methods [Yin et al., 2022, Ren et al., 2021] typically combine estimated
deformation fields with generative networks to drive images. However, due to the lack of necessary 3D constraints and modeling, these methods struggle to maintain multi-view consistency of
expressions and identities when head poses change significantly. Recently, Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) [Mildenhall et al., 2020] have shown impressive results in head avatar synthesis, providing
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

