SS3DM: Benchmarking Street-View Surface
Reconstruction with a Synthetic 3D Mesh Dataset

Yubin Hu1* Kairui Wen1* Heng Zhou1 Xiaoyang Guo2 Yong-Jin Liu1
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Horizon Robotics

Abstract
Reconstructing accurate 3D surfaces for street-view scenarios is crucial for applications such as digital entertainment and autonomous driving simulation. However,
existing street-view datasets, including KITTI, Waymo, and nuScenes, only offer
noisy LiDAR points as ground-truth data for geometric evaluation of reconstructed
surfaces. These geometric ground-truths often lack the necessary precision to
evaluate surface positions and do not provide data for assessing surface normals.
To overcome these challenges, we introduce the SS3DM dataset, comprising precise Synthetic Street-view 3D Mesh models exported from the CARLA simulator.
These mesh models facilitate accurate position evaluation and include normal
vectors for evaluating surface normal. To simulate the input data in realistic driving
scenarios for 3D reconstruction, we virtually drive a vehicle equipped with six
RGB cameras and five LiDAR sensors in diverse outdoor scenes. Leveraging
this dataset, we establish a benchmark for state-of-the-art surface reconstruction
methods, providing a comprehensive evaluation of the associated challenges. For
more information, visit our homepage at https://ss3dm.top.

1

Introduction

Reconstructing city-scale 3D meshes from street-view inputs is a challenging task in computer vision
and graphics. While recent methods based on 3D Gaussians [23, 56] and NeRFs [29, 54] offer
implicit proxies for novel view rendering, explicit mesh models remain indispensable for various
industrial applications, including mixed reality, robotics, and gaming. Furthermore, the increasing
use of closed-loop sensor simulations in autonomous driving scenarios [57, 52] has intensified the
demand for high-precision city-scale mesh reconstructions.
To analyze the challenges in street-view surface reconstruction and enhance existing algorithms,
it is crucial to benchmark these techniques using datasets that provide precise ground-truth mesh
models. However, recent evaluations [37, 16] heavily rely on sparse LiDAR points from publicly
available street-view datasets such as KITTI [10], Waymo [45], and nuScenes [5]. These evaluations
encounter two main limitations. Firstly, the presence of random floaters and irregularities in the
LiDAR points, caused by LiDAR sensor noise, hampers accurate geometric assessment. Secondly,
the absence of surface normal information in LiDAR points poses challenges in evaluating the
quality of reconstructed mesh models, since meshes with poor surface normal quality could appear
geometrically invalid or ill-shaped, despite exhibiting good point-wise distance accuracy.
To mitigate these limitations, we propose SS3DM, a synthetic dataset specifically tailored for surface
reconstruction of street-view outdoor scenes. SS3DM comprises meticulous ground-truth meshes
of streets, buildings, and objects, facilitating the evaluation of surface reconstruction outcomes.
*

These authors contributed equally to this work
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

