Vript: A Video Is Worth Thousands of Words

Dongjie Yang1 , Suyuan Huang2 , Chengqiang Lu3 , Xiaodong Han3 ,
Haoxin Zhang3 , Yan Gao3 , Yao Hu3 , Hai Zhao1, ∗
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Beihang University, 3 Xiaohongshu Inc.
1
{djyang.tony@,zhaohai@cs.}sjtu.edu.cn, 2 huangsuyuan@buaa.edu.cn,
3
{lusuo,shuweng,haoli9,yadun,xiahou}@xiaohongshu.com

Abstract
Advancements in multimodal learning, particularly in video understanding and
generation, require high-quality video-text datasets for improved model performance. Vript addresses this issue with a meticulously annotated corpus of 12K
high-resolution videos, offering detailed, dense, and script-like captions for over
420K clips. Each clip has a caption of ~145 words, which is over 10x longer
than most video-text datasets. Unlike captions only documenting static content in
previous datasets, we enhance video captioning to video scripting by documenting
not just the content, but also the camera operations, which include the shot types
(medium shot, close-up, etc) and camera movements (panning, tilting, etc). By
utilizing the Vript, we explore three training paradigms of aligning more text
with the video modality rather than clip-caption pairs. This results in Vriptor,
a top-performing video captioning model among open-source models, comparable to GPT-4V in performance. Vriptor is also a powerful model capable of
end-to-end generation of dense and detailed captions for long videos. Moreover,
we introduce Vript-Hard, a benchmark consisting of three video understanding
tasks that are more challenging than existing benchmarks: Vript-HAL is the first
benchmark evaluating action and object hallucinations in video LLMs, Vript-RR
combines reasoning with retrieval resolving question ambiguity in long-video
QAs, and Vript-ERO is a new task to evaluate the temporal understanding of
events in long videos rather than actions in short videos in previous works. All
code, models, and datasets (Vript, Vript_CN, Vript_Multilingual) are available in
https://github.com/mutonix/Vript.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22

23

24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of multimodal learning [2, 3, 4], researchers are increasingly focusing
on understanding [5, 6, 7] and generation [8, 9, 10] of the video modality. This has triggered a
surge in demand for high-quality video-text datasets containing high-resolution videos and detailed
captions. Compared to image-text pairs [11, 12], video-text pairs are harder to obtain and annotate.
As a video has an additional temporal dimension, it contains more information than a single image.
Additionally, a video often comprises numerous events, and each event can consist of several scenes.
For instance, a travel vlog might feature events such as preparing for the journey and visiting various
destinations. Each event can be depicted using different shots. Video captioning takes more labor for
annotators to check through the whole video and write down thousands of words to annotate every
∗

Corresponding author.

Submitted to the 38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets
and Benchmarks. Do not distribute.

