Learning Transferable Features for
Implicit Neural Representations

Kushal Vyas
kushal.vyas@rice.edu
Richard G. Baraniuk
richb@rice.edu

Ahmed Imtiaz Humayun
imtiaz@rice.edu

Aniket Dashpute
aniket.dashpute@rice.edu

Ashok Veeraraghavan
vashok@rice.edu

Guha Balakrishnan
guha@rice.edu

Rice University

Abstract
Implicit neural representations (INRs) have demonstrated success in a variety of
applications, including inverse problems and neural rendering. An INR is typically
trained to capture one signal of interest, resulting in learned neural features that
are highly attuned to that signal. Assumed to be less generalizable, we explore the
aspect of transferability of such learned neural features for fitting similar signals.
We introduce a new INR training framework, STRAINER that learns transferrable
features for fitting INRs to new signals from a given distribution, faster and with
better reconstruction quality. Owing to the sequential layer-wise affine operations
in an INR, we propose to learn transferable representations by sharing initial
encoder layers across multiple INRs with independent decoder layers. At test
time, the learned encoder representations are transferred as initialization for an
otherwise randomly initialized INR. We find STRAINER to yield extremely powerful
initialization for fitting images from the same domain and allow for a ≈ +10dB
gain in signal quality early on compared to an untrained INR itself. STRAINER
also provides a simple way to encode data-driven priors in INRs. We evaluate
STRAINER on multiple in-domain and out-of-domain signal fitting tasks and inverse
problems and further provide detailed analysis and discussion on the transferability
of STRAINER’s features. Our demo can be accessed here.

1

Introduction

Implicit neural representations (INRs) are a powerful family of continuous learned function approximators for signal data that are implemented using multilayer perceptron (MLP) deep neural
networks. An INR fθ : Rm 7→ Rn maps coordinates lying in a m-dimensional space to a value in
a n-dimensional output space, where θ represents the MLP’s tunable parameters. For example, a
typical INR for a natural image would use an input space in R2 (consisting of the x and y pixel coordinates), and an output space in R3 (representing the RGB value of a pixel). INRs have demonstrated
several useful properties including capturing details at all spatial frequencies [39, 36], providing
powerful priors for natural signals [36, 39], and facilitating compression [12, 27]. For these reasons,
in the past 5 years, INRs have found important uses in image and signal processing including shape
representation [17, 16], novel view synthesis [31, 34, 42], material rendering [24], computational
imaging [5, 30], medical imaging [49], linear inverse problems [8, 44], virtual reality [11] and
compression [12, 27, 43, 51].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

