Incentivizing Quality Text Generation
via Statistical Contracts
Eden Saig1 , Ohad Einav1 , Inbal Talgam-Cohen1,2
1
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
2
Tel Aviv University
{edens,ohadeinav,italgam}@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
While the success of large language models (LLMs) increases demand for machinegenerated text, current pay-per-token pricing schemes create a misalignment of
incentives known in economics as moral hazard: Text-generating agents have
strong incentive to cut costs by preferring a cheaper model over the cutting-edge
one, and this can be done “behind the scenes” since the agent performs inference
internally. In this work, we approach this issue from an economic perspective,
by proposing a pay-for-performance, contract-based framework for incentivizing
quality. We study a principal-agent game where the agent generates text using
costly inference, and the contract determines the principal’s payment for the text
according to an automated quality evaluation. Since standard contract theory is
inapplicable when internal inference costs are unknown, we introduce cost-robust
contracts. As our main theoretical contribution, we characterize optimal cost-robust
contracts through a direct correspondence to optimal composite hypothesis tests
from statistics, generalizing a result of Saig et al. (NeurIPS’23). We evaluate our
framework empirically by deriving contracts for a range of objectives and LLM
evaluation benchmarks, and find that cost-robust contracts sacrifice only a marginal
increase in objective value compared to their cost-aware counterparts.

1

Introduction

Modern-day LLMs are showing increasingly impressive capabilities, and simultaneously becoming
increasingly costly. With rising success at handling complex tasks, conversational AI systems are
seeing ubiquitous usage across critical domains such as healthcare [19, 34], financial risk assessment
[27], and law [24, 35]. To achieve such levels of performance, contemporary LLM architectures
contain billions and even trillions of parameters, leading to a computational pipeline that requires
dedicated facilities and substantial energy to operate [33].
Due to the high computational requirements of modern LLMs, language generation tasks are typically
outsourced to commercial firms which generate text for a fee. These firms either maintain dedicated
infrastructure optimized for inference workloads, or act as intermediaries that facilitate access to
such resources. To address the tension between performance and computational costs, such firms
typically have multiple service options, each offering a different trade-off between model quality and
cost [1, 7, 36, 37]. Currently, the most common pricing scheme for such services is pay-per-token, in
which users agree in advance to pay a fixed rate for each token of text generated by the system [10].
While simple and intuitive, the pay-per-token pricing scheme creates a misalignment of economic
incentives between the firms and their consumers, known in the economic literature as moral hazard:
As inference is performed internally and a fixed price is agreed upon in advance, firms can strategically
increase their profit margin by generating text using a cheaper, lower-quality model. Due to the
stochastic nature of language generation, consumers may not be able to reliably determine the quality
of the model being used, exposing them to this kind of hazard.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

