AdvAD: Exploring Non-Parametric Diffusion for
Imperceptible Adversarial Attacks

Jin Li1 , Ziqiang He1 , Anwei Luo1 , Jian-Fang Hu1 , Z. Jane Wang2 , Xiangui Kang1∗
1
Guangdong Key Lab of Information Security,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University
2
Electrical and Computer Engineering Dept, University of British Columbia

Abstract
Imperceptible adversarial attacks aim to fool DNNs by adding imperceptible perturbation to the input data. Previous methods typically improve the imperceptibility
of attacks by integrating common attack paradigms with specifically designed
perception-based losses or the capabilities of generative models. In this paper,
we propose Adversarial Attacks in Diffusion (AdvAD), a novel modeling framework distinct from existing attack paradigms. AdvAD innovatively conceptualizes
attacking as a non-parametric diffusion process by theoretically exploring basic
modeling approach rather than using the denoising or generation abilities of regular diffusion models requiring neural networks. At each step, much subtler yet
effective adversarial guidance is crafted using only the attacked model without
any additional network, which gradually leads the end of diffusion process from
the original image to a desired imperceptible adversarial example. Grounded in
a solid theoretical foundation of the proposed non-parametric diffusion process,
AdvAD achieves high attack efficacy and imperceptibility with intrinsically lower
overall perturbation strength. Additionally, an enhanced version AdvAD-X is
proposed to evaluate the extreme of our novel framework under an ideal scenario.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed AdvAD and
AdvAD-X. Compared with state-of-the-art imperceptible attacks, AdvAD achieves
an average of 99.9% (+17.3%) ASR with 1.34 (-0.97) l2 distance, 49.74 (+4.76)
PSNR and 0.9971 (+0.0043) SSIM against four prevalent DNNs with three different architectures on the ImageNet-compatible dataset. Code is available at
https://github.com/XianguiKang/AdvAD.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are shown to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks [1, 2] (i.e., add
maliciously crafted perturbations to the input data), posing serious security concerns to real-world
applications [3]. The research of adversarial attacks also plays an important role in proactively
exposing potential threats, as well as promoting model robustness and corresponding defense methods
[4–11]. Many attacks [12–15] focus on maximizing the attack success rate and transferability under
relatively lenient restrictions (i.e., l∞ or l2 norm) of adversarial perturbation, but they could have
poor stealthiness and imperceptibility since the crafted adversarial examples can be easily detected by
the Human Visual System (HVS) [16]. Therefore, imperceptible adversarial attacks [17–23], aiming
to maintain attacking efficacy while improving imperceptibility, have attracted considerable attention.
Current imperceptible adversarial attacks could be summarized into two categories: 1) perturbationbased attacks devised on perceptual characteristics, and 2) unrestricted attacks. The first one is
motivated by the fact that adding adversarial perturbations to different components of an image has
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

