No-Regret Learning in Harmonic Games:
Extrapolation in the Face of Conflicting Interests

Davide Legacci∗
Panayotis Mertikopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG 38000 Grenoble, France
{davide.legacci,panayotis.mertikopoulos}@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr
Christos Papadimitriou
Columbia University, NYC, &
Archimedes/Athena RC, Greece
christos@columbia.edu

Georgios Piliouras
Google DeepMind
London, UK
gpil@google.com

Bary Pradelski
CNRS, Maison Française d’Oxford
2–10 Norham Road, Oxford, OX2 6SE, United Kingdom
bary.pradelski@cnrs.fr

Abstract
The long-run behavior of multi-agent learning – and, in particular, no-regret learning – is relatively well-understood in potential games, where players have aligned
interests. By contrast, in harmonic games – the strategic counterpart of potential
games, where players have conflicting interests – very little is known outside the
narrow subclass of 2-player zero-sum games with a fully-mixed equilibrium. Our
paper seeks to partially fill this gap by focusing on the full class of (generalized) harmonic games and examining the convergence properties of follow-the-regularizedleader (FTRL), the most widely studied class of no-regret learning schemes. As
a first result, we show that the continuous-time dynamics of FTRL are Poincaré
recurrent, that is, they return arbitrarily close to their starting point infinitely often,
and hence fail to converge. In discrete time, the standard, “vanilla” implementation
of FTRL may lead to even worse outcomes, eventually trapping the players in a
perpetual cycle of best-responses. However, if FTRL is augmented with a suitable
extrapolation step – which includes as special cases the optimistic and mirror-prox
variants of FTRL – we show that learning converges to a Nash equilibrium from
any initial condition, and all players are guaranteed at most O(1) regret. These
results provide an in-depth understanding of no-regret learning in harmonic games,
nesting prior work on 2-player zero-sum games, and showing at a high level that
harmonic games are the canonical complement of potential games, not only from a
strategic, but also from a dynamic viewpoint.

1

Introduction

The question of “as if” rationality – that is, whether selfishly-minded, myopic agents may learn to
behave “as if ” they were fully rational – has been one of the cornerstones of non-cooperative game
theory, and for good reason. Especially in modern applications of game theory to machine learning
and data science – from online ad auctions to recommender systems and multi-agent reinforcement
∗ Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

