A Textbook Remedy for Domain Shifts:
Knowledge Priors for Medical Image Analysis

Yue Yang, Mona Gandhi, Yufei Wang, Yifan Wu, Michael S. Yao,
Chris Callison-Burch, James C. Gee, Mark Yatskar
University of Pennsylvania
yueyang1996.github.io/knobo

Abstract
While deep networks have achieved broad success in analyzing natural images,
when applied to medical scans, they often fail in unexpected situations. We
investigate this challenge and focus on model sensitivity to domain shifts, such as
data sampled from different hospitals or data confounded by demographic variables
such as sex, race, etc, in the context of chest X-rays and skin lesion images.
A key finding we show empirically is that existing visual backbones lack an
appropriate prior from the architecture for reliable generalization in these settings.
Taking inspiration from medical training, we propose giving deep networks a prior
grounded in explicit medical knowledge communicated in natural language. To this
end, we introduce Knowledge-enhanced Bottlenecks (KnoBo), a class of concept
bottleneck models that incorporates knowledge priors that constrain it to reason
with clinically relevant factors found in medical textbooks or PubMed. KnoBo
uses retrieval-augmented language models to design an appropriate concept space
and an automatic training procedure for recognizing the concept. We evaluate
different resources of knowledge and recognition architectures on a broad range
of domain shifts across 20 datasets. In our comprehensive evaluation with two
imaging modalities, KnoBo outperforms fine-tuned models on confounded datasets
by 32.4 % on average. Finally, evaluations reveal that PubMed is a promising
resource for making medical models less sensitive to domain shift, outperforming
other resources on both diversity of information and final prediction performance.

1

Introduction

Robustness to domain shifts is a key property for models operating on medical images because
transfer scenarios arise widely. Deep networks have achieved broad success in analyzing natural
images (everyday human contexts), but when applied to medical scans, they often substantially
degrade under distribution shift [86, 15]. Medical datasets are small, and unidentified confounds in
them combined with model misspecification can dramatically degrade performance [46, 21, 24]. Such
failure erodes confidence as models do not learn the right information from training data, hampering
adoption by medical professionals. We study such problems by investigating the performance of
systems in the presence of confounded data and address a main shortcoming we discover.
Model sensitivity to domain shift can be measured by introducing synthetic confounds into data
and evaluating on samples where the confound misleads the model. For example, in Figure 1, we
introduce confounded datasets for chest X-ray and skin lesion images where, during training, positive
data is sampled from one group and negative from another. This association is reversed at testing
time, creating an adversarial out-of-distribution (OOD) evaluation. In 5 such constructed confounds
per modality, covering scenarios of race, sex, age, scan position, and hospital, we find models unable
to generalize well, dropping over 63% on average over an in-distribution (ID) evaluation.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

