Animal-Bench: Benchmarking Multimodal Video
Models for Animal-centric Video Understanding

Yinuo Jing1 , Ruxu Zhang1 , Kongming Liang1∗, Yongxiang Li2 ,
Zhongjiang He2 , Zhanyu Ma1 , Jun Guo1
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
China Telecom Artificial Intelligence Technology Co. Ltd

{jingyinuo, zhangruxu, liangkongming, mazhanyu, guojun}@bupt.edu.cn
{liyx25, hezj}@chinatelecom.cn

Abstract
With the emergence of large pre-trained multimodal video models, multiple benchmarks have been proposed to evaluate model capabilities. However, most of the
benchmarks are human-centric, with evaluation data and tasks centered around
human applications. Animals are an integral part of the natural world, and animalcentric video understanding is crucial for animal welfare and conservation efforts.
Yet, existing benchmarks overlook evaluations focused on animals, limiting the
application of the models. To address this limitation, our work established an
animal-centric benchmark, namely Animal-Bench, to allow for a comprehensive
evaluation of model capabilities in real-world contexts, overcoming agent-bias in
previous benchmarks. Animal-Bench includes 13 tasks encompassing both common tasks shared with humans and special tasks relevant to animal conservation,
spanning 7 major animal categories and 819 species, comprising a total of 41,839
data entries. To generate this benchmark, we defined a task system centered on
animals and proposed an automated pipeline for animal-centric data processing. To
further validate the robustness of models against real-world challenges, we utilized
a video editing approach to simulate realistic scenarios like weather changes and
shooting parameters due to animal movements. We evaluated 8 current multimodal
video models on our benchmark and found considerable room for improvement.
We hope our work provides insights for the community and opens up new avenues
for research in multimodal video models. Our data and code will be released at
https://github.com/PRIS-CV/Animal-Bench.

1

Introduction

With the rapid advancement of artificial intelligence technology, multimodal video large models [1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8] have bridged the gap between video and language modalities. Leveraging extensive
knowledge and powerful comprehension capabilities, these models are being applied across various
areas, ushering in a new era of intelligence. The emergence of a new era of intelligence is also
accompanied by the development of new evaluation benchmarks. In contrast to conventional singletask benchmarks, the new benchmarks incorporate a variety of tasks and seek to evaluate the model’s
intelligence across multiple dimensions. Current evaluation studies [3, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13] primarily
arise from human daily needs, with a focus on human-centric application tasks, aiming to assess
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

