Optimal Multiclass U-Calibration Error and Beyond

Haipeng Luo∗
University of Southern California
haipengl@usc.edu

Spandan Senapati∗
University of Southern California
ssenapat@usc.edu

Vatsal Sharan∗
University of Southern California
vsharan@usc.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of online multiclass U-calibration, where a forecaster
aims to make sequential distributional predictions over K classes with low Ucalibration error, that is, low regret with respect to all bounded proper losses
simultaneously.
√ Kleinberg et al. (2023) developed an algorithm with U-calibration
error O(K T ) after T rounds and raised the open question of what the optimal
bound√is. We resolve this question by showing that the optimal U-calibration error
is Θ( KT ) — we start with a simple observation that the Follow-the-PerturbedLeader algorithm of Daskalakis and Syrgkanis (2016) achieves this upper bound,
followed by a matching lower bound constructed with a specific proper loss (which,
as a side result, also proves the optimality of the algorithm of Daskalakis and
Syrgkanis (2016) in the context of online learning against an adversary with
finite choices). We also strengthen our results under natural assumptions on the
loss functions, including Θ(log T ) U-calibration error for Lipschitz proper losses,
O(log T ) U-calibration error for a certain class of decomposable proper losses,
U-calibration error bounds for proper losses with a low covering number, and
others.

1

Introduction

We consider the fundamental problem of making sequential probabilistic predictions over an outcome
(e.g., predicting the probability of tomorrow’s weather being sunny, cloudy, or rainy). Specifically, at
each time t = 1, . . . , T , a forecaster/learner predicts pt ∈ ∆K , where ∆K denotes the probability
simplex over K outcomes. At the same time, an adversary decides the true outcome, encoded by a
one-hot vector yt ∈ E := {e1 , . . . , eK }, where ei denotes the i-th standard basis vector of RK . The
forecaster observes yt at the end of time t.
A popular approach to measure the performance of a forecaster is to measure her regret against the
best fixed prediction in hindsight. Fixing some loss function ℓ : ∆K × E → R, the regret of the forePT
PT
caster’s predictions with respect to ℓ is defined as R EGℓ := t=1 ℓ(pt , yt )−inf p∈∆K t=1 ℓ(p, yt ).
Perhaps the most common class of loss functions to evaluate a forecaster are proper loss functions.
A loss function is proper if Ey∼p [ℓ(p, y)] ≤ Ey∼p [ℓ(p′ , y)] for all p, p′ ∈ ∆K . Hence proper loss
functions incentivize the forecaster to predict the true probability of the outcome (to the best of their
knowledge). We will focus on proper loss functions in this work.
Note, however, that regret is measured with respect to a specific loss function ℓ. It is unclear which
proper loss one should minimize over for the specific application at hand — and there could even
*

Author ordering is alphabetical.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

