Diffusion Spectral Representation for Reinforcement
Learning

Dmitry Shribak∗
Georgia Tech
shribak@gatech.edu

Chen-Xiao Gao∗
Nanjing University
gaocx@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Chenjun Xiao
CUHK(SZ)
chenjunx@cuhk.edu.cn

Yitong Li
Georgia Tech
yli3277@gatech.edu

Bo Dai
Georgia Tech
bodai@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Diffusion-based models have achieved notable empirical successes in reinforcement learning (RL) due to their expressiveness in modeling complex distributions.
Despite existing methods being promising, the key challenge of extending existing methods for broader real-world applications lies in the computational cost
at inference time, i.e., sampling from a diffusion model is considerably slow as
it often requires tens to hundreds of iterations to generate even one sample. To
circumvent this issue, we propose to leverage the flexibility of diffusion models
for RL from a representation learning perspective. In particular, by exploiting
the connection between diffusion models and energy-based models, we develop
Diffusion Spectral Representation (Diff-SR), a coherent algorithm framework that
enables extracting sufficient representations for value functions in Markov decision
processes (MDP) and partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDP).
We further demonstrate how Diff-SR facilitates efficient policy optimization and
practical algorithms while explicitly bypassing the difficulty and inference cost of
sampling from the diffusion model. Finally, we provide comprehensive empirical
studies to verify the benefits of Diff-SR in delivering robust and advantageous
performance across various benchmarks with both fully and partially observable
settings.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have demonstrated remarkable generative modeling capabilities, achieving significant success in producing high-quality samples across various domains such as images and videos
[Ramesh et al., 2021, Saharia et al., 2022, Brooks et al., 2024]. In comparison to other generative
approaches, diffusion models stand out for their ability to represent complex, multimodal data distributions, a strength that can be attributed to two primary factors. First, diffusion models progressively
denoise data by reversing a diffusion process. This iterative refinement process empowers them to
capture complicated patterns and structures within the data distribution, thus enabling the generation
of samples with unprecedented accuracy [Ho et al., 2020]. Second, diffusion models exhibit impressive mode coverage, effectively addressing a common issue of mode collapse encountered in other
generative approaches [Song et al., 2020].
The potential of diffusion models is increasingly being investigated for sequential decision-making
tasks. The inherent flexibility of diffusion models to accurately capture complex data distributions
∗

Equal Contribution. Correspondence to: Bo Dai <bodai@cc.gatech.edu>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

