Reinforcing LLM Agents via
Policy Optimization with Action Decomposition

Muning Wen1 , Ziyu Wan1 , Jun Wang2 , Weinan Zhang1,† , Ying Wen1,† ,
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 University College London

Abstract
Language models as intelligent agents push the boundaries of sequential decisionmaking agents but struggle with limited knowledge of environmental dynamics
and exponentially huge action space. Recent efforts like GLAM and TWOSOME
manually constrain the action space to a restricted subset and employ reinforcement
learning to align agents’ knowledge with specific environments. However, they
overlook fine-grained credit assignments for intra-action tokens, which is essential
for efficient language agent optimization, and rely on human’s prior knowledge
to restrict action space. This paper proposes decomposing language agent optimization from the action level to the token level, offering finer supervision for
each intra-action token and manageable optimization complexity in environments
with unrestricted action spaces. Beginning with the simplification of flattening
all actions, we theoretically explore the discrepancies between action-level optimization and this naive token-level optimization. We then derive the Bellman
backup with Action Decomposition (BAD) to integrate credit assignments for
both intra-action and inter-action tokens, effectively eliminating the discrepancies.
Implementing BAD within the PPO algorithm, we introduce Policy Optimization
with Action Decomposition (POAD). POAD benefits from a finer-grained credit assignment process and lower optimization complexity, leading to enhanced learning
efficiency and generalization abilities in aligning language agents with interactive
environments. We validate POAD across diverse testbeds, with results affirming
the advantages of our approach and the correctness of our theoretical analysis1 .

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated promising capabilities of solving various tasks,
from instructions following to complex reasoning and real-world interaction [1–3]. This growing tasksolving ability underscores their potential as intelligent language agents in interactive environments
[4, 5]. However, despite in-context language generation aiding comprehension of environmental
states and action spaces in sequential decision-making tasks, misalignment issues [4, 5] such as
generating invalid actions and lacking knowledge of environmental dynamics hinder these agents’
ability to complete decision-making tasks robustly and efficiently.
Recent advances [4–8] have showcased that the aforementioned challenges can be alleviated in a
trial-and-error learning style, namely Reinforcement Learning (RL) [9]. Representatively, GLAM
[4] and TWOSOME [5] treat the language actions, i.e. token sequences outputted by a language
model, as whole units, and optimize actions’ likelihood, calculated as the products of conditional
probabilities of intra-action tokens. Leveraging the chain rule of probability, they build the bridge
between optimizing actions and optimizing tokens, aligning the training process of language models as
1†
Corresponding to Ying Wen <ying.wen@sjtu.edu.cn>, Weinan Zhang <wnzhang@sjtu.edu.cn>. The
source code could be accessed directly with this link https://github.com/morning9393/ADRL.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

