Stabilize the Latent Space for Image Autoregressive
Modeling: A Unified Perspective

Yongxin Zhu1,3 , Bocheng Li2,3 , Hang Zhang4 , Xin Li, Linli Xu∗ 2,3 , Lidong Bing
1
School of Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
3
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, 4 Zhejiang University
zyx2016@mail.ustc.edu.cn,bcli@mail.ustc.edu.cn,hangzhang_scu@foxmail.com
lixin4ever@gmail.com,linlixu@ustc.edu.cn,binglidong@gmail.com

Abstract
Latent-based image generative models, such as Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs)
and Mask Image Models (MIMs), have achieved notable success in image generation tasks. These models typically leverage reconstructive autoencoders like
VQGAN or VAE to encode pixels into a more compact latent space and learn the
data distribution in the latent space instead of directly from pixels. However, this
practice raises a pertinent question: Is it truly the optimal choice? In response,
we begin with an intriguing observation: despite sharing the same latent space,
autoregressive models significantly lag behind LDMs and MIMs in image generation. This finding contrasts sharply with the field of NLP, where the autoregressive
model GPT has established a commanding presence. To address this discrepancy,
we introduce a unified perspective on the relationship between latent space and
generative models, emphasizing the stability of latent space in image generative
modeling. Furthermore, we propose a simple but effective discrete image tokenizer
to stabilize the latent space for image generative modeling by applying K-Means
on the latent features of self-supervised learning models. Experimental results
show that image autoregressive modeling with our tokenizer (DiGIT) benefits
both image understanding and image generation with the next token prediction
principle, which is inherently straightforward for GPT models but challenging
for other generative models. Remarkably, for the first time, a GPT-style autoregressive model for images outperforms LDMs, which also exhibits substantial
improvement akin to GPT when scaling up model size. Our findings underscore the
potential of an optimized latent space and the integration of discrete tokenization
in advancing the capabilities of image generative models. The code is available at
https://github.com/DAMO-NLP-SG/DiGIT.

1

Introduction

In recent years, remarkable advancements have been achieved in the field of image generation,
principally propelled by the development of latent-based generative models, such as Latent Diffusion
Models (LDMs) [34, 30] and Mask Image Models (MIMs) [7, 26]. By employing reconstructive
autoencoders such as VQGAN [15] or VAE [23] to compress images into a manageable low dimensional latent space, these models can generate highly realistic and imaginative samples. Concurrently,
in light of the transformative impact of autoregressive (AR) generative models, such as Large Language Models [31, 32, 5, 27] in NLP, it becomes compelling to investigate the feasibility of similar
paradigms to images. Despite the advances in image autoregressive pre-training, exemplified by
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

