Personalized Federated Learning with
Mixture of Models for Adaptive Prediction and
Model Fine-Tuning

Yanning Shen ∗
University of California Irvine
yannings@uci.edu

Pouya M. Ghari
University of California Irvine
pmollaeb@uci.edu

Abstract
Federated learning is renowned for its efficacy in distributed model training, ensuring that users, called clients, retain data privacy by not disclosing their data to the
central server that orchestrates collaborations. Most previous work on federated
learning assumes that clients possess static batches of training data. However,
clients may also need to make real-time predictions on streaming data in nonstationary environments. In such dynamic environments, employing pre-trained
models may be inefficient, as they struggle to adapt to the constantly evolving data
streams. To address this challenge, clients can fine-tune models online, leveraging
their observed data to enhance performance. Despite the potential benefits of client
participation in federated online model fine-tuning, existing analyses have not
conclusively demonstrated its superiority over local model fine-tuning. To bridge
this gap, the present paper develops a novel personalized federated learning algorithm, wherein each client constructs a personalized model by combining a locally
fine-tuned model with multiple federated models learned by the server over time.
Theoretical analysis and experiments on real datasets corroborate the effectiveness
of this approach for real-time predictions and federated model fine-tuning.

1

Introduction

Federated learning enables a group of learners, known as clients, to collaborate and collectively train
a model under the coordination of a central server, without revealing their data. In this framework,
clients perform local model updates and share these updates with the server. By aggregating these
local updates, the server globally updates the model. Many prior works in the literature have assumed
that each client stores a batch of training data and updates models locally based on this stored data
(see e.g., [38, 29, 47, 5, 34, 53]). However, in some cases, clients may need to make real-time
predictions, and streams of data arrive sequentially, making it challenging to store and process data
in batch. Furthermore, if clients operate in a non-stationary and dynamic environment, employing
pre-trained models may fall short in prediction accuracy, requiring clients to fine-tune their models to
adapt to their data.
A federated learning framework, commonly referred to as online federated learning [37, 26, 19],
specifically addresses situations where clients engage in real-time predictions using a shared global
model. After making predictions, clients collaborate with the server to update the global model for
subsequent predictions in the future. Specifically, after making predictions, clients incur losses and
based on the incurred losses, clients update the model locally and send their local updates to the
server. The server updates the global model upon aggregating local updates and then distributes the
updated global model to clients for use in the ongoing online prediction task. In this context, the
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

