Many-shot Jailbreaking

Cem Anil∗

Esin Durmus

Sandipan Kundu

Nina Panickssery

Joshua Batson

Meg Tong

Mrinank Sharma

Joe Benton

Jesse Mu

Daniel Ford

Fracesco Mosconi
Rajashree Agrawal

Rylan Schaeffer

Mike Lambert

Ansh Radhakrishnan

Yuntao Bai

Trenton Bricken

Naomi Bashkansky

Samuel Svenningsen

Carson Denison

Evan J Hubinger

Timothy Maxwell

Nicholas Schiefer

Alex Tamkin

Tamera Lanhan

Karina Nguyen

Jared Kaplan

Deep Ganguli

Samuel R. Bowman

Roger Baker Grosse

James Sully

Tomasz Korbak
Ethan Perez

David Duvenaud

Abstract
We investigate a family of simple long-context attacks on large language models:
prompting with hundreds of demonstrations of undesirable behavior. This attack
is newly feasible with the larger context windows recently deployed by language
model providers like Google DeepMind, OpenAI and Anthropic. We find that in
diverse, realistic circumstances, the effectiveness of this attack follows a power
law, up to hundreds of shots. We demonstrate the success of this attack on the most
widely used state-of-the-art closed-weight models, and across various tasks. Our
results suggest very long contexts present a rich new attack surface for LLMs.

1

Introduction

The context window of large language models (LLMs) expanded from the size of long essays (around
4,000 tokens; Xu et al. (2023)) to multiple novels or codebases (10M tokens; Reid et al. (2024)) over
the course of 2023. Longer contexts present a new attack surface for adversarial attacks.
In search of a “fruit-fly" of long-context vulnerabilities, we study Many-shot Jailbreaking (MSJ;
Figure 1), a simple yet effective and scalable jailbreak. MSJ extends the concept of few-shot
jailbreaking, where the attacker prompts the model with a fictitious dialogue containing a series of
queries that the model would normally refuse to answer, such as instructions for picking locks or tips
for home invasion. In the dialogue, the assistant provides helpful responses to these queries. Previous
work has proposed (Rao et al., 2023) and studied (Wei et al., 2023c) few-shot jailbreaking in the
short-context regime . We examine the scalability of this attack with longer contexts and its impact
on mitigation strategies.
First, we probe the effectiveness of MSJ. We jailbreak many prominent large language models
including GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 OpenAI (2024), Claude 2.0 Anthropic (2023), Llama 2 (70B) Touvron
et al. (2023), and Mistral 7B Jiang et al. (2023) (Figure 1). Exploiting long context windows, we elicit
a variety of undesired behaviors, such as insulting users, and giving instructions to build weapons
(Figure 1) on Claude 2.0. We show the robustness of MSJ to format, style, and subject changes,
∗

Correspondance to: cem@anthropic.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

