Linearly Decomposing and Recomposing Vision
Transformers for Diverse-Scale Models
*

*

*

†

Shuxia Lin1,2 , Miaosen Zhang1,2 , Ruiming Chen1,2 , Qiufeng Wang1,2 , Xu Yang1,2 , and Xin
†
Geng1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary
Applications, Southeast University, Ministry of Education, China
{shuxialin, 230228501, 220232251, qfwang, xuyang_palm, xgeng}@seu.edu.cn

2

Abstract
Vision Transformers (ViTs) are widely used in a variety of applications, while
they usually have a fixed architecture that may not match the varying computational resources of different deployment environments. Thus, it is necessary to
adapt ViT architectures to devices with diverse computational overheads to achieve
an accuracy-efficient trade-off. This concept is consistent with the motivation
behind Learngene. To achieve this, inspired by polynomial decomposition in
calculus, where a function can be approximated by linearly combining several
basic components, we propose to linearly decompose the ViT model into a set
of components called learngenes during element-wise training. These learngenes
can then be recomposed into differently scaled, pre-initialized models to satisfy
different computational resource constraints. Such a decomposition-recomposition
strategy provides an economical and flexible approach to generating different
scales of ViT models for different deployment scenarios. Compared to model
compression or training from scratch, which require to repeatedly train on large
datasets for diverse-scale models, such strategy reduces computational costs since
it only requires to train on large datasets once. Extensive experiments are used to
validate the effectiveness of our method: ViTs can be decomposed and the decomposed learngenes can be recomposed into diverse-scale ViTs, which can achieve
comparable or better performance compared to traditional model compression and
pre-training methods. The code for our experiments is available in the supplemental
material.

1

Introduction

The pre-training Vision Transformers (ViTs) [13] have become fundamental to various applications,
including image classification [59, 7], object detection [29, 52], semantic segmentation [46, 67],
and multimodal tasks [63, 58]. However, these ViTs typically have a standard and relatively fixed
architecture, which poses challenges for deployment in diverse real-world settings, i.e., devices in
different application scenarios have different computational capabilities, making standard, fixed-size
ViTs unsuitable for direct deployment. Furthermore, the storage demands of a traditional ViT may
exceed the capabilities of certain devices. For instance, the memory size for the ViT-B/16 model [13]
with 86M parameters is approximately 320 MB, while some devices may find this prohibitive
due to inherent physical constraints, e.g., the limited RAM capacity of the Raspberry Pi 1 with
256MB-512MB of RAM.
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

