Interpretable Image Classification with Adaptive
Prototype-based Vision Transformers

Chiyu Ma

Jon Donnelly

Wenjun Liu

Dartmouth College
chiyu.ma.gr@dartmouth.edu

Duke University
jon.donnelly@duke.edu

Dartmouth College
wenjun.liu.gr@dartmouth.edu

Soroush Vosoughi

Cynthia Rudin

Chaofan Chen

Dartmouth College
soroush.vosoughi@dartmouth.edu

Duke University
cynthia@cs.duke.edu

University of Maine
chaofan.chen@maine.edu

Abstract
We present ProtoViT, a method for interpretable image classification combining
deep learning and case-based reasoning. This method classifies an image by
comparing it to a set of learned prototypes, providing explanations of the form “this
looks like that.” In our model, a prototype consists of parts, which can deform over
irregular geometries to create a better comparison between images. Unlike existing
models that rely on Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) backbones and spatially
rigid prototypes, our model integrates Vision Transformer (ViT) backbones into
prototype based models, while offering spatially deformed prototypes that not only
accommodate geometric variations of objects but also provide coherent and clear
prototypical feature representations with an adaptive number of prototypical parts.
Our experiments show that our model can generally achieve higher performance
than the existing prototype based models. Our comprehensive analyses ensure
that the prototypes are consistent and the interpretations are faithful. Our code is
available at https://github.com/Henrymachiyu/ProtoViT.

1

Introduction

With the expanding applications of machine learning models in critical and high-stakes domains
like healthcare [4, 14, 44, 52, 51], autonomous vehicles [32], finance [47] and criminal justice [5], it
has become crucial to develop models that are not only effective but also interpretable by humans.
This need for clarity and accountability has led to the emergence of prototype networks. These
networks combine the capabilities of deep learning with the clarity of case-based reasoning, providing
understandable outcomes in fine-grained image classification tasks. Prototype networks operate by
dissecting an image into informative image patches and comparing these with prototypical features
established during their training phase. The model then aggregates evidence of similarities to these
prototypical features to draw a final decision on classification.
Existing prototype-based models [10, 4, 13, 26, 35, 36, 46, 27, 45, 8, 7], which are inherently
interpretable [34] (i.e., the learned prototypes are directly interpretable, and all calculations can
be visibly checked), are mainly developed with convolutional neural networks (CNNs). As vision
transformers (ViTs) [15, 40, 41] gain popularity and inspire extensive applications, it becomes crucial
to investigate how prototype-based architectures can be integrated with vision transformer backbones.
Though a few attempts to develop a prototype-based vision transformer have been made [50, 49, 22],
these methods do not provide inherently interpretable explanations of the models’ reasoning because
they do not project the learned prototypical features to examples that actually exist in the dataset.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

