Coupled Mamba: Enhanced Multi-modal Fusion with
Coupled State Space Model

Wenbing Li Hang Zhou Junqing Yu Zikai Song† Wei Yang†
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{wenbingli, henrryzh, yjqing, skyesong, weiyangcs}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
The essence of multi-modal fusion lies in exploiting the complementary information inherent in diverse modalities. However, prevalent fusion methods rely
on traditional neural architectures and are inadequately equipped to capture the
dynamics of interactions across modalities, particularly in presence of complex
intra- and inter-modality correlations. Recent advancements in State Space Models
(SSMs), notably exemplified by the Mamba model, have emerged as promising
contenders. Particularly, its state evolving process implies stronger modality fusion
paradigm, making multi-modal fusion on SSMs an appealing direction. However,
fusing multiple modalities is challenging for SSMs due to its hardware-aware
parallelism designs. To this end, this paper proposes the Coupled SSM model,
for coupling state chains of multiple modalities while maintaining independence
of intra-modality state processes. Specifically, in our coupled scheme, we devise
an inter-modal hidden states transition scheme, in which the current state is dependent on the states of its own chain and that of the neighbouring chains at the
previous time-step. To fully comply with the hardware-aware parallelism, we
devise an expedite coupled state transition scheme and derive its corresponding
global convolution kernel for parallelism. Extensive experiments on CMU-MOSEI,
CH-SIMS, CH-SIMSV2, BRCA, MM-IMDB through multi-domain input verify
the effectiveness of our model compared to current state-of-the-art methods, improved F1-Score by 0.4%, 0.9%, and 2.3% on the CMU-MOSEI, CH-SIMS and
CH-SIMSV2 datasetes respectively, 49% faster inference and 83.7% GPU memory
save. The results demonstrate that Coupled Mamba model is capable of enhanced
multi-modal fusion.

1

Introduction

Real-world data captured and processed across multiple modalities, such as text, image, video, and
sensor data, yield a rich tapestry of information that is inherently complementary. This complementarity profoundly enhances the capacities of deep learning models, facilitating more nuanced
interpretations and predictions. As a result, deep learning models that integrate multi-modal data
have shown substantial superiority over their uni-modal counterparts in various domains, including
visual-language learning [1, 2, 3], multi-modal classification/segmentation [4, 5, 6, 7], sentiment
analysis [8, 9, 10, 11] and etc. Given these advantages, the development of effective multi-modal
fusion techniques has emerged as a center of attention. A variety of works have explored this topic
on convolution or Transformer -based models, and developed specified mechanisms as early, middle,
and late fusion, depending on position of fusion been conducted. A more prevalent practice is to
first extract features using modality-specific backbones and then devise a fusion module to exploit
the complementary information from all modalities. Existing fusion paradigms either aggregate
†

Indicates co-corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

