SpelsNet: Surface Primitive Elements Segmentation by
B-Rep Graph Structure Supervision

Kseniya Cherenkova
SnT, University of Luxembourg, Artec3D
kseniya.cherenkova@uni.lu
Anis Kacem
SnT, University of Luxembourg
anis.kacem@uni.lu

Elona Dupont
SnT, University of Luxembourg
elona.dupont@uni.lu

Gleb Gusev
Artec3D
gleb@artec3d.com

Djamila Aouada
SnT, University of Luxembourg
djamila.auoada@uni.lu

Abstract
Boundary Representation (B-Rep) is the standard approach for modeling shapes
in Computer-Aided Design(CAD). We present SpelsNet, a neural architecture
for segmenting 3D point clouds into surface primitive elements under topological supervision of its B-Rep graph structure. We also propose a point-to-BRep
adjacency representation that allows for adapting conventional Linear Algebraic
Representation of B-Rep graph structure to the point cloud domain. Thanks to this
representation, SpelsNet learns from both spatial and topological domains to enable
accurate and topologically consistent surface primitive element segmentation. In
particular, SpelsNet is composed of two main components; (1) a supervised 3D
spatial segmentation head that outputs B-Rep element types and memberships;
(2) a graph-based head that leverages the proposed topological supervision. To
train SpelsNet with the proposed point-to-BRep adjacency supervision, we extend
two existing CAD datasets with the required annotations, and conduct a thorough experimental validation on them. The obtained results showcase the efficacy
of SpelsNet and its topological supervision compared to a set of baselines and
state-of-the-art approaches.

1

Introduction

Creating a structured and editable Computer-Aided Design (CAD) representation Mortenson [2006],
Shah and Mäntylä [1995] from an unstructured 3D scan (e.g. point cloud) is a core challenge, often
referred to as reverse engineering. This field has a long history of extensive research due to its
numerous commercial applications Abella et al. [1994], Varady et al. [1997], Bénière et al. [2013],
Liu et al. [2023]. Modern CAD workflows commonly use Boundary Representation as the primary
format to model complex shapes Lambourne et al. [2021], Guo et al. [2022]. The wide adoption of
B-Rep in most CAD software and recent advances in neural point cloud representations challenges the
reverse engineering research towards the problem of learnable B-Rep inference from point clouds Liu
et al. [2023], Guo et al. [2022], Yan et al. [2021], Huang et al. [2021].
Boundary Representation (B-Rep) is a collection of connected surface elements with their geometric
definitions in a form of parametric surfaces, curves and points Shah and Mäntylä [1995]. The topology
of these elements is also described by the connection of face, edge and vertex components. Thus,
face is a bounded surface, edge is a bounded curve, and vertex is a realisation of a 3D point DiCarlo
et al. [2014]. B-Rep is a compact representation and it retains more structural information about an
object than a point cloud. Most popular approaches to reverse engineer B-Reps from point clouds
follow a segmentation-fitting paradigm, i.e. the point cloud is firstly segmented into surface patches,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

