Generalized Linear Bandits with Limited Adaptivity

Ayush Sawarni∗
Stanford University
ayushsaw@stanford.edu

Nirjhar Das†
Indian Institute of Science Bangalore
nirjhardas@iisc.ac.in

Siddharth Barman
Indian Institute of Science Bangalore
barman@iisc.ac.in

Gaurav Sinha
Microsoft Research India
gauravsinha@microsoft.com

Abstract
We study the generalized linear contextual bandit problem within the constraints
of limited adaptivity. In this paper, we present two algorithms, B-GLinCB and
RS-GLinCB, that address, respectively, two prevalent limited adaptivity settings.
Given a budget M on the number of policy updates, in the first setting, the algorithm
needs to decide upfront M rounds at which it will update its policy, while in the
second setting it can adaptively perform M policy updates during its √
course. For
the first setting, we design an algorithm B-GLinCB, that incurs Õ( T ) regret
when M = Ω (log log T ) and the arm feature vectors are generated stochastically.
For the second setting, we design an algorithm
√ RS-GLinCB that updates its policy
Õ(log2 T ) times and achieves a regret of Õ( T ) even when the arm feature vectors
are adversarially generated. Notably, in these bounds, we manage to eliminate the
dependence on a key instance dependent parameter κ, that captures non-linearity
of the underlying reward model. Our novel approach for removing this dependence
for generalized linear contextual bandits might be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Contextual Bandits (CB) is an archetypal framework that models sequential decision making in
time-varying environments. In this framework, the algorithm (decision maker) is presented, in each
round, with a set of arms (represented as d-dimensional feature vectors), and it needs to decide which
arm to play. Once an arm is played, a reward corresponding to the played arm is accrued. The regret
of the round is defined as the difference between the maximum reward possible in that round and the
reward of the played arm. The goal is to design a policy for selecting arms that minimizes cumulative
regret (referred to as the regret of the algorithm) over a specified number of rounds, T . In the last few
decades, much progress has been made in designing algorithms for special classes of reward models,
e.g. linear model [3, 4, 1, 16], logistic model [6, 2, 7, 28] and generalized linear models [8, 19].
However, despite this progress, there is a key challenge that prevents deployment of CB algorithms
in the real world. Practical situations often allow for very limited adaptivity, i.e., do not allow
CB algorithms to update their policy at all rounds. For example, in clinical trials [10], each trial
involves administering medical treatments to a cohort of patients, with medical outcomes observed
and collected for the entire cohort at the conclusion of the trial. This data is then used to design the
treatment for the next phase of the trial. Similarly, in online advertising [25] and recommendations
[18], updating the policy after every iteration during deployment is often infeasible due to infrastructural constraints. A recent line of work [23, 22, 11, 12, 21, 9, 26] tries to address this limitation
∗
†

Work done while author was at Microsoft Research India
Work done while author was at Microsoft Research India

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

