Optimal deep learning of holomorphic operators
between Banach spaces

Ben Adcock
Department of Mathematics
Simon Fraser University
Canada

Nick Dexter
Department of Scientific Computing
Florida State University
USA

Sebastian Moraga
Department of Mathematics
Simon Fraser University
Canada

Abstract
Operator learning problems arise in many key areas of scientific computing where
Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) are used to model physical systems. In such
scenarios, the operators map between Banach or Hilbert spaces. In this work, we
tackle the problem of learning operators between Banach spaces, in contrast to the
vast majority of past works considering only Hilbert spaces. We focus on learning
holomorphic operators – an important class of problems with many applications.
We combine arbitrary approximate encoders and decoders with standard feedforward Deep Neural Network (DNN) architectures – specifically, those with constant
width exceeding the depth – under standard ℓ2 -loss minimization. We first identify
a family of DNNs such that the resulting Deep Learning (DL) procedure achieves
optimal generalization bounds for such operators. For standard fully-connected
architectures, we then show that there are uncountably many minimizers of the
training problem that yield equivalent optimal performance. The DNN architectures
we consider are ‘problem agnostic’, with width and depth only depending on the
amount of training data m and not on regularity assumptions of the target operator.
Next, we show that DL is optimal for this problem: no recovery procedure can
surpass these generalization bounds up to log terms. Finally, we present numerical
results demonstrating the practical performance on challenging problems including
the parametric diffusion, Navier-Stokes-Brinkman and Boussinesq PDEs.

1

Introduction

Operator learning is increasingly being investigated for problems arising in computational science
and engineering. These problems are often posed in terms of Partial Differential Equations (PDEs),
which can be viewed as operators mapping function spaces to function spaces. Depending on the
requirements for well-posedness of the PDE, both the input and solution spaces are often Hilbert, or,
more generally, Banach spaces. The aim of operator learning is to efficiently capture the dynamic
behavior of these operators using surrogate models, typically based on Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs). Specifically, we want to learn
F : X → Y,

X ∈ X 7→ F (X) ∈ Y,

(1.1)

where Y is the PDE solution space, X represents the data supplied to the PDE, i.e., possibly multiple
functions describing initial and boundary conditions or forcing terms or, equivalently, a vector of
parameters defining such functions.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

