Towards Multi-Domain Learning for
Generalizable Video Anomaly Detection

MyeongAh Cho∗
Kyung Hee University
maycho@khu.ac.kr

Taeoh Kim
NAVER Cloud
taeoh.kim@navercorp.com

Dongyoon Wee
NAVER Cloud
dongyoon.wee@navercorp.com

Minho Shim
NAVER Cloud
minho.shim@navercorp.com
Sangyoun Lee†
Yonsei University
syleee@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Most of the existing Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) studies have been conducted
within single-domain learning, where training and evaluation are performed on a
single dataset. However, the criteria for abnormal events differ across VAD datasets,
making it problematic to apply a single-domain model to other domains. In this
paper, we propose a new task called Multi-Domain learning for VAD (MDVAD) to
explore various real-world abnormal events using multiple datasets for a general
model. MDVAD involves training on datasets from multiple domains simultaneously, and we experimentally observe that Abnormal Conflicts between domains
hinder learning and generalization. The task aims to address two key objectives: (i)
better distinguishing between general normal and abnormal events across multiple
domains, and (ii) being aware of ambiguous abnormal conflicts. This paper is the
first to tackle abnormal conflict issue and introduces a new benchmark, baselines,
and evaluation protocols for MDVAD. As baselines, we propose a framework with
Null(Angular)-Multiple Instance Learning and an Abnormal Conflict classifier.
Through experiments on a MDVAD benchmark composed of six VAD datasets
and using four different evaluation protocols, we reveal abnormal conflicts and
demonstrate that the proposed baseline effectively handles these conflicts, showing
robustness and adaptability across multiple domains.

1

Introduction

Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) is identifying abnormal events in diverse scenarios depicted in a
video and determining their temporal intervals at a frame-level. Nowadays, CCTVs are ubiquitous,
recording every moment of life, which aids in preventing accidents and responding to crimes promptly.
However, human monitoring of every situation is highly inefficient, requiring significant labor and
resources. Consequently, extensive research has been conducted to automate VAD through deep
learning by leveraging large amounts of surveillance data [33, 5, 24, 15, 55, 44, 43, 50, 21, 7].
In VAD research, Weakly-supervised VAD (WVAD) [55, 44, 43, 50, 21, 7], which involves learning
normal and abnormal events with minimal supervision of the video-level annotation and detecting
abnormal events at the frame-level during testing, has been studied a lot recently. This paper focuses
on the WVAD setting (denoted as VAD), and a summary of VAD research is explained in the
∗
†

Work done while doing an internship at NAVER Cloud.
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

