MemVLT: Vision-Language Tracking with Adaptive
Memory-based Prompts

Xiaokun Feng1,2 Xuchen Li1,2 Shiyu Hu5 Dailing Zhang1,2
Meiqi Wu3 Jing Zhang2 Xiaotang Chen1,2,4 Kaiqi Huang1,2,4
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University
{fengxiaokun2022, lixuchen2024}@ia.ac.cn, shiyu.hu@ntu.edu.sg, zhangdailing2023@ia.ac.cn
wumeiqi18@mails.ucas.ac.cn, jing_zhang@ia.ac.cn, {xtchen,kaiqi.huang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Vision-language tracking (VLT) enhances traditional visual object tracking by integrating language descriptions, requiring the tracker to flexibly understand complex
and diverse text in addition to visual information. However, most existing visionlanguage trackers still overly rely on initial fixed multimodal prompts, which struggle to provide effective guidance for dynamically changing targets. Fortunately,
the Complementary Learning Systems (CLS) theory suggests that the human memory system can dynamically store and utilize multimodal perceptual information,
thereby adapting to new scenarios. Inspired by this, (i) we propose a Memorybased Vision-Language Tracker (MemVLT). By incorporating memory modeling
to adjust static prompts, our approach can provide adaptive prompts for tracking
guidance. (ii) Specifically, the memory storage and memory interaction modules
are designed in accordance with CLS theory. These modules facilitate the storage
and flexible interaction between short-term and long-term memories, generating
prompts that adapt to target variations. (iii) Finally, we conduct extensive experiments on mainstream VLT datasets (e.g., MGIT, TNL2K, LaSOT and LaSOText ).
Experimental results show that MemVLT achieves new state-of-the-art performance. Impressively, it achieves 69.4% AUC on the MGIT and 63.3% AUC on the
TNL2K, improving the existing best result by 8.4% and 4.7%, respectively. The
code and models will be released at: https://github.com/XiaokunFeng/MemVLT.

1

Introduction

The vision-language tracking (VLT) task [1] aims to locate a user-defined object in a video sequence
using multimodal prompts, which comprise a template patch and a language description. As an
extension of traditional visual single object tracking (SOT) task [2, 3, 4], VLT can harness the
complementary advantages of multiple modalities. Therefore, vision-language trackers (VLTs)
have the potential to achieve more promising tracking performance, which has recently attracted
widespread attention [5, 6, 7, 8].
Similar to SOT, VLT still adopts the one-shot setting [9], providing prompts only at the initial moment.
However, these fixed prompts struggle to provide continuous reference for targets in video sequences
due to their inherent dynamic variability [10]. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), the initial prompts depict a
gun placed on a table. However, when the target is subsequently picked up, there is a significant
deviation in the target’s state from given prompts. Regarding the target state in different frames, we
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

