Automated Label Unification for Multi-Dataset
Semantic Segmentation with GNNs

Rong Ma∗, Jie Chen∗, Xiangyang Xue, and Jian Pu†
Fudan University
rma22@m.fudan.edu.cn, {chenj19,xyxue,jianpu}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep supervised models possess significant capability to assimilate extensive training data, thereby presenting an opportunity to enhance model performance through
training on multiple datasets. However, conflicts arising from different label spaces
among datasets may adversely affect model performance. In this paper, we propose
a novel approach to automatically construct a unified label space across multiple
datasets using graph neural networks. This enables semantic segmentation models
to be trained simultaneously on multiple datasets, resulting in performance improvements. Unlike existing methods, our approach facilitates seamless training without
the need for additional manual reannotation or taxonomy reconciliation. This significantly enhances the efficiency and effectiveness of multi-dataset segmentation
model training. The results demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms
other multi-dataset training methods when trained on seven datasets simultaneously,
and achieves state-of-the-art performance on the WildDash 2 benchmark. Our code
can be found in https://github.com/Mrhonor/AutoUniSeg.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in computer vision [35, 21] have shown the advantages of large datasets in training
robust visual models [2]. However, for deep supervised visual models that rely on annotated data,
the collection of such extensive annotated datasets can be prohibitively costly [11]. To address this
expense and expand the data available for training, several efforts [4, 23, 30] focus on the challenges
of multi-dataset training, enabling the use of diverse datasets to train more robust and generalizable
models.
Models trained on multiple datasets must confront the challenge of reconciling conflicting annotation
standards and label spaces. For example, the class road in the BDD dataset [46] can be further divided
into several classes in the Mapillary dataset [33]: road, lane marking and crosswalk. Similarly, the
Mapillary dataset labels both barrier and curb as distinct classes, while in the IDD dataset [42], they
are combined under the single label curb. These conflicts impact the supervised learning of models,
as they may be incorrectly penalized for predicting finer-grained classes from other datasets.
Another challenge is the task of unifying diverse dataset labels to produce outputs in a standardized
format [29, 24]. Several methods [11, 30] attempt to address this by concatenating the label spaces of
all datasets and using language models to encode label names into a text embedding space. However,
there approaches introduce redundancy and fail to handle issues where labels share names but differ
in annotation granularity. Other methods involve manually constructing universal taxonomies [4, 24]
or relabeling [23], both of which are time-consuming and labor-intensive. Recent approaches aim to
* These authors contributed to the work equally and should be regarded as co-first authors.
†

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

