Neural decoding from stereotactic EEG: accounting
for electrode variability across subjects
Georgios Mentzelopoulos1, * , Evangelos Chatzipantazis1 , Ashwin G. Ramayya2 , Michelle J.
Hedlund2 , Vivek P. Buch2 , Kostas Daniilidis1, 3 , Konrad P. Kording1 , and Flavia Vitale1, *
1

University of Pennsylvania, 2 Stanford University, 3 Archimedes, Athena RC

Abstract
Deep learning based neural decoding from stereotactic electroencephalography
(sEEG) would likely benefit from scaling up both dataset and model size. To
achieve this, combining data across multiple subjects is crucial. However, in
sEEG cohorts, each subject has a variable number of electrodes placed at distinct
locations in their brain, solely based on clinical needs. Such heterogeneity in
electrode number/placement poses a significant challenge for data integration,
since there is no clear correspondence of the neural activity recorded at distinct
sites between individuals. Here we introduce seegnificant: a training framework
and architecture that can be used to decode behavior across subjects using sEEG
data. We tokenize the neural activity within electrodes using convolutions and
extract long-term temporal dependencies between tokens using self-attention in the
time dimension. The 3D location of each electrode is then mixed with the tokens,
followed by another self-attention in the electrode dimension to extract effective
spatiotemporal neural representations. Subject-specific heads are then used for
downstream decoding tasks. Using this approach, we construct a multi-subject
model trained on the combined data from 21 subjects performing a behavioral task.
We demonstrate that our model is able to decode the trial-wise response time of the
subjects during the behavioral task solely from neural data. We also show that the
neural representations learned by pretraining our model across individuals can be
transferred in a few-shot manner to new subjects. This work introduces a scalable
approach towards sEEG data integration for multi-subject model training, paving
the way for cross-subject generalization for sEEG decoding.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has revolutionized many fields ranging from natural language processing [Vaswani
et al., 2017], to computer vision [Dosovitskiy et al., 2020], and neural decoding [Azabou et al., 2023].
Advances in these fields have shown that performance and generalization benefit from scaling up both
datasets and model size, underscoring the importance of integrating data across multiple individuals.
Recent work by Azabou et al. [2023] showed that such approaches can achieve excellent generalization
in the motor decoding domain, by combining invasive microelectrode array recordings from multiple
non-human primates. Despite their promise, however, such approaches have not been used to build
scalable decoders for human brain recordings collected with stereotactic electroenchephalography
(sEEG). Compared to other approaches (e.g., ECoG, microelectrodes), sEEG is minimally invasive
and is currently the gold-standard clinical tool for invasive electrophysiology in humans. Therefore,
building strong neural decoding models using sEEG promises to be medically relevant.
* Contact: gment@upenn.edu, vitalef@pennmedicine.upenn.edu

Project page: https://gmentz.github.io/seegnificant
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

