Exploratory Retrieval-Augmented Planning For
Continual Embodied Instruction Following

Minjong Yoo1 , Jinwoo Jang1 , Wei-jin Park2 , Honguk Woo1∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University
2
Acryl Inc.
mjyoo2@skku.edu, jinustar@skku.edu, jin@acryl.ai, hwoo@skku.edu
1

Abstract
This study presents an Exploratory Retrieval-Augmented Planning (ExRAP) framework, designed to tackle continual instruction following tasks of embodied agents
in dynamic, non-stationary environments. The framework enhances Large Language Models’ (LLMs) embodied reasoning capabilities by efficiently exploring
the physical environment and establishing the environmental context memory,
thereby effectively grounding the task planning process in time-varying environment contexts. In ExRAP, given multiple continual instruction following tasks,
each instruction is decomposed into queries on the environmental context memory
and task executions conditioned on the query results. To efficiently handle these
multiple tasks that are performed continuously and simultaneously, we implement
an exploration-integrated task planning scheme by incorporating the informationbased exploration into the LLM-based planning process. Combined with memoryaugmented query evaluation, this integrated scheme not only allows for a better
balance between the validity of the environmental context memory and the load
of environment exploration, but also improves overall task performance. Furthermore, we devise a temporal consistency refinement scheme for query evaluation
to address the inherent decay of knowledge in the memory. Through experiments
with VirtualHome, ALFRED, and CARLA, our approach demonstrates robustness
against a variety of embodied instruction following scenarios involving different
instruction scales and types, and non-stationarity degrees, and it consistently outperforms other state-of-the-art LLM-based task planning approaches in terms of
both goal success rate and execution efficiency.

1

Introduction

The application of Large Language Models (LLMs) in embodied AI is essential for harnessing
common knowledge and immediately applying it to unseen tasks and domains without requiring
additional training or data. Researchers are further enhancing task adaptation by integrating environmental information with the intrinsic common knowledge of LLMs [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. This capability
proves invaluable in fields such as home robotics and autonomous driving, where it enables embodied
agents to learn across diverse instruction following tasks with minimal data requirements.
For embodied agents, these tasks are often not mere single, one-time instructions but are multiple and
persistent, necessitating continuous access to environmental knowledge to reason and plan effectively
for user needs. In such scenarios, the efficiency of repeatedly collecting environmental knowledge
through interaction each time the agent plans can be suboptimal. Furthermore, there is a clear need to
integrate and manage multiple user requirements effectively.
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

