MAN TruckScenes: A multimodal dataset for
autonomous trucking in diverse conditions

Felix Fent1

Fabian Kuttenreich2∗

Stefan Juergens2
Ulrich Voll2

Florian Ruch2

Lorenz Lechermann2

Christian Nissler2

Min Yan2

1

Technical University of Munich
School of Engineering & Design
Institute of Automotive Technology

Farija Rizwin2
Andrea Perl2

Markus Lienkamp1
2

MAN Truck & Bus SE
truckscenes@man.eu

Abstract
Autonomous trucking is a promising technology that can greatly impact modern
logistics and the environment. Ensuring its safety on public roads is one of the main
duties that requires an accurate perception of the environment. To achieve this,
machine learning methods rely on large datasets, but to this day, no such datasets
are available for autonomous trucks. In this work, we present MAN TruckScenes,
the first multimodal dataset for autonomous trucking. MAN TruckScenes allows
the research community to come into contact with truck-specific challenges, such
as trailer occlusions, novel sensor perspectives, and terminal environments for the
first time. It comprises more than 740 scenes of 20 s each within a multitude of
different environmental conditions. The sensor set includes 4 cameras, 6 lidar, 6
radar sensors, 2 IMUs, and a high-precision GNSS. The dataset’s 3D bounding
boxes were manually annotated and carefully reviewed to achieve a high quality
standard. Bounding boxes are available for 27 object classes, 15 attributes, and a
range of more than 230 m. The scenes are tagged according to 34 distinct scene
tags, and all objects are tracked throughout the scene to promote a wide range
of applications. Additionally, MAN TruckScenes is the first dataset to provide
4D radar data with 360° coverage and is thereby the largest radar dataset with
annotated 3D bounding boxes. Finally, we provide extensive dataset analysis and
baseline results. The dataset, development kit, and more are available online.

1

Introduction

Autonomous trucking has the potential to fundamentally change today’s traffic by increasing safety
on public roads, reducing logistics costs, and counteracting the shortage of drivers [2, 20]. However,
the safe and reliable operation of autonomous trucks depends on an accurate perception of the
surroundings. To achieve this, modern self-driving vehicles rely on machine learning algorithms to
detect, track, and predict surrounding objects. However, the use of machine learning methods also
drives the need for large-scale datasets.
While numerous datasets exist for autonomous passenger cars [15], datasets for autonomous trucks
are missing. However, heavy-duty vehicles have their unique challenges. Large vehicles require
∗

corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

