Discovering Creative Behaviors through DUPLEX:
Diverse Universal Features for Policy Exploration

Borja G. Leon∗
Iconic
borja@iconicgames.ai

Francesco Riccio
Sony AI
francesco.riccio@sony.com

Kaushik Subramanian
Sony AI
kaushik.subramanian@sony.com

Peter R. Wurman
Sony AI
peter.wurman@sony.com

Peter Stone
Sony AI
The University of Texas at Austin
peter.stone@sony.com

Abstract
The ability to approach the same problem from different angles is a cornerstone
of human intelligence that leads to robust solutions and effective adaptation
to problem variations. In contrast, current RL methodologies tend to lead to
policies that settle on a single solution to a given problem, making them brittle
to problem variations. Replicating human flexibility in reinforcement learning
agents is the challenge that we explore in this work. We tackle this challenge
by extending state-of-the-art approaches to introduce DUPLEX, a method that
explicitly defines a diversity objective with constraints and makes robust estimates
of policies’ expected behavior through successor features. The trained agents
can (i) learn a diverse set of near-optimal policies in complex highly-dynamic
environments and (ii) exhibit competitive and diverse skills in out-of-distribution
(OOD) contexts. Empirical results indicate that DUPLEX improves over previous
methods and successfully learns competitive driving styles in a hyper-realistic
simulator (i.e., GranTurismo™ 7) as well as diverse and effective policies in
several multi-context robotics MuJoCo simulations with OOD gravity forces and
height limits. To the best of our knowledge, our method is the first to achieve
diverse solutions in complex driving simulators and OOD robotic contexts.
DUPLEX agents demonstrating diverse behaviors can be found at https:
//ai.sony/publications/Discovering-Creative-Behaviors-throughDUPLEX-Diverse-Universal-Features-for-Policy-Exploration/.

1

Introduction

In non-stationary complex environments, reinforcement learning (RL) [1] agents are compelled to
exhibit flexible and diverse behaviors to robustly adapt to different scenarios and interact with other
actors [2, 3]. To this end, a growing community is researching methodologies to train agents that,
unlike conventional RL [4, 5], can solve tasks with a diverse set of near-optimal strategies [6]. Such
methodologies are explicitly crafted to enhance the exploration of the state-action space, equipping
∗

Work done at Sony AI.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

