NAVSIM: Data-Driven Non-Reactive
Autonomous Vehicle Simulation and Benchmarking
Daniel Dauner1,2 Marcel Hallgarten1,5 Tianyu Li3 Xinshuo Weng4 Zhiyu Huang4,6
Zetong Yang3 Hongyang Li3 Igor Gilitschenski7,8 Boris Ivanovic4 Marco Pavone4,9
Andreas Geiger1,2 Kashyap Chitta1,2
1
University of Tübingen 2 Tübingen AI Center 3 OpenDriveLab at Shanghai AI Lab
4
NVIDIA Research 5 Robert Bosch GmbH 6 Nanyang Technological University
7
University of Toronto 8 Vector Institute 9 Stanford University

Abstract
Benchmarking vision-based driving policies is challenging. On one hand, openloop evaluation with real data is easy, but these results do not reflect closedloop performance. On the other, closed-loop evaluation is possible in simulation,
but is hard to scale due to its significant computational demands. Further, the
simulators available today exhibit a large domain gap to real data. This has
resulted in an inability to draw clear conclusions from the rapidly growing body of
research on end-to-end autonomous driving. In this paper, we present NAVSIM, a
middle ground between these evaluation paradigms, where we use large datasets
in combination with a non-reactive simulator to enable large-scale real-world
benchmarking. Specifically, we gather simulation-based metrics, such as progress
and time to collision, by unrolling bird’s eye view abstractions of the test scenes for
a short simulation horizon. Our simulation is non-reactive, i.e., the evaluated policy
and environment do not influence each other. As we demonstrate empirically, this
decoupling allows open-loop metric computation while being better aligned with
closed-loop evaluations than traditional displacement errors. NAVSIM enabled
a new competition held at CVPR 2024, where 143 teams submitted 463 entries,
resulting in several new insights. On a large set of challenging scenarios, we observe
that simple methods with moderate compute requirements such as TransFuser can
match recent large-scale end-to-end driving architectures such as UniAD. Our
modular framework can potentially be extended with new datasets, data curation
strategies, and metrics, and will be continually maintained to host future challenges.
Our code is available at https://github.com/autonomousvision/navsim.

1

Introduction

Autonomous vehicles (AVs) have gained immense research interest due to their potential to change
transportation and improve traffic safety [23, 9]. This has created a large community working on the
development of AV algorithms, which map high-dimensional sensor data to desired vehicle control
outputs. Therefore, measuring and comparing the performance of AV algorithms is a crucial task.
Unfortunately, it is extremely challenging to evaluate driving performance, and the most widely-used
benchmarks today fall short in several respects: (1) the datasets used, such as nuScenes [5], were
created for perception tasks such as object detection. As such, they focus on visual diversity and
label quality instead of the relevance of the data for research on planning. Often, most frames have a
trivial solution of extrapolating the historical driving behavior, leading to “blind” driving policies that
observe only the vehicle’s past trajectory obtaining state-of-the-art performance [56, 32, 16]. (2) Due
to the fact that driving is an inherently multifaceted task where the algorithm must coordinate several
desired properties such as safety, comfort, and progress, the evaluation metric must also balance
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

