Language Model as Visual Explainer

Xingyi Yang Xinchao Wang∗
National University of Singapore
xyang@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
In this paper, we present Language Model as Visual Explainer (LVX), a systematic
approach for interpreting the internal workings of vision models using a treestructured linguistic explanation, without the need for model training. Central
to our strategy is the collaboration between vision models and LLM to craft
explanations. On one hand, the LLM is harnessed to delineate hierarchical visual
attributes, while concurrently, a text-to-image API retrieves images that are most
aligned with these textual concepts. By mapping the collected texts and images to
the vision model’s embedding space, we construct a hierarchy-structured visual
embedding tree. This tree is dynamically pruned and grown by querying the LLM
using language templates, tailoring the explanation to the model. Such a scheme
allows us to seamlessly incorporate new attributes while eliminating undesired
concepts based on the model’s representations. When applied to testing samples,
our method provides human-understandable explanations in the form of attributeladen trees. Beyond explanation, we retrained the vision model by calibrating it
on the generated concept hierarchy, allowing the model to incorporate the refined
knowledge of visual attributes. To access the effectiveness of our approach, we
introduce new benchmarks and conduct rigorous evaluations, demonstrating its
plausibility, faithfulness, and stability.

1

Introduction

Unlocking the secrets of deep neural networks is akin to navigating through an intricate, ever-shifting
maze, as the intricate decision flow within the networks is, in many cases, extremely difficult for
humans to fully interpret. In this quest, extracting clear, understandable explanations from these
perplexing mazes has become an imperative task.
While efforts have been made to explain computer vision models, these approaches often fall
short of providing direct and human-understandable explanations. Standard techniques, such as
attribution methods [46, 55, 90, 68, 1, 62, 65, 64], mechanical interpretability [22] and prototype
analysis [10, 49], only highlight certain pixels or features that are deemed important by the model. As
such, these methods often require the involvement of experts to verify or interpret the outputs for nontechnical users. Natural language explanations [27, 7, 41, 35], on the other hand, present an attractive
alternative, since the produced texts are better aligned with human understanding. Nevertheless, these
approaches typically rely on labor-intensive and biased manual annotation of textual rationales for
model training.
In this study, we attempt to explain AI decision in a human-understandable manner, for example,
tree-structured language. We call this task visual explanatory tree parsing. To implement this, we
present a systematic approach, Language Model as Visual Explainer (LVX), for interpreting vision
models structured natural language, without model training.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

