Decentralized Noncooperative Games with Coupled
Decision-Dependent Distributions

Wenjing Yan Xuanyu Cao ∗
Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
wj.yan@connect.ust.hk, eexcao@ust.hk

Abstract
Distribution variations in machine learning, driven by the dynamic nature of deployment environments, significantly impact the performance of learning models. This
paper explores endogenous distribution shifts in learning systems, where deployed
models influence environments, which in turn alters the data distributions that the
learning models rely on. This phenomenon is formulated by a decision-dependent
distribution mapping within the recently introduced framework of performative
prediction (PP) (Perdomo et al., 2020). Our study investigates the performative
effect in a decentralized noncooperative game, where players aim to minimize
private cost functions while simultaneously managing coupled inequality constraints. In this context, we examine two equilibrium concepts for the studied game:
performative stable equilibrium (PSE) and Nash equilibrium (NE), and establish
sufficient conditions for their existence and uniqueness. Notably, we provide the
first upper bound on the distance between the PSE and NE in the literature, which
is challenging to evaluate due to the absence of strong convexity on the joint cost
function. Furthermore, we develop a decentralized stochastic primal-dual algorithm
for efficiently computing the PSE point. By rigorously bounding the performative
effect, we prove that the proposed algorithm achieves sublinear convergence rates
for both performative regret and constraint violations and maintains the same order
of convergence rate as the case without performativity. Numerical experiments
further confirm the effectiveness of our algorithm and theoretical results.

1

Introduction

Machine learning aims to generalize models trained on given datasets to make accurate predictions or decisions on new, unseen data (El Naqa and Murphy, 2015). The effectiveness of those
models depends on the alignment between the training datasets and deployment environments
(Quinonero-Candela et al., 2008). However, real-world environments are seldom static and often
exhibit fluctuations that can severely degrade model performance (Zhou, 2022). In particular, shifts
in data-generating distributions, driven by the dynamic nature of real-world conditions, present
significant challenges for model deployment.
Distribution shifts in machine learning can occur exogenously or endogenously. Exogenous distribution shifts are driven by external factors beyond the control of the learning platforms, such as
environmental changes (Chan et al., 2020) or policy amendments (Wu et al., 2021). In contrast,
endogenous shifts arise from the system’s inherent dynamics and interactions, where the deployed
models affect environments, which in turn alters the data distributions that the learning models rely
on (Dong et al., 2018). For instance, an increase in commodity prices may decrease user interest,
thereby impacting sales. The key distinction lies in the controllability of endogenous shifts, providing
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

