No Filter: Cultural and Socioeconomic Diversity
in Contrastive Vision–Language Models

Angéline Pouget∗†
apouget@ethz.ch
Xiao Wang
wangxiao@google.com

Lucas Beyer
lbeyer@google.com

Emanuele Bugliarello
bugliarello@google.com

Andreas Peter Steiner
andstein@google.com

Xiaohua Zhai
xzhai@google.com

Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin†
ibomohsin@google.com
Google DeepMind

Abstract
We study cultural and socioeconomic diversity in contrastive vision–language
models (VLMs). Using a broad range of benchmark datasets and evaluation metrics,
we bring to attention several important findings. First, the common filtering of
training data to English image–text pairs disadvantages communities of lower
socioeconomic status and negatively impacts cultural understanding. Notably, this
performance gap is not captured by—and even at odds with—the currently popular
evaluation metrics derived from the Western-centric ImageNet and COCO datasets.
Second, pretraining with global, unfiltered data before fine-tuning on English
content can improve cultural understanding without sacrificing performance on
said popular benchmarks. Third, we introduce the task of geo-localization as a
novel evaluation metric to assess cultural diversity in VLMs. Our work underscores
the value of using diverse data to create more inclusive multimodal systems and lays
the groundwork for developing VLMs that better represent global perspectives.

1

Introduction

Contrastive vision–language models (VLMs) have emerged as a powerful and versatile method to
bridge the gap between visual and textual information in deep learning systems. They utilize a
dual-encoder architecture to map both images and texts into a shared latent space. Representations in
this latent space are learned leveraging large datasets of noisy image-text pairs from the web. Work
including CLIP [46], ALIGN [31] and SigLIP [75] validates this approach at scale with impressive
zero-shot transfer results across a wide range of downstream tasks.
However, due to the growing range of applications for contrastive VLMs, it is imperative to evaluate
them not only with respect to standard performance metrics, such as their classification accuracy on
ImageNet-ILSRCV2012 [17] or image-text retrieval performance on COCO [38], both of which are
Western-oriented [53, 16], but also in terms of “cultural diversity.” We illustrate what we mean in
Figure 1 (a) and (b). When performing zero-shot classification on images from the Google Landmarks
Dataset (GLDv2) [66], SigLIP models trained on only English-language image–text pairs (henceforth
∗
†

Work performed while interning at Google DeepMind.
Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

