Meta-Learning Universal Priors
Using Non-Injective Change of Variables

Yilang Zhang
Department of ECE
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55414
zhan7453@umn.edu

Alireza Sadeghi
Department of ECE
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55414
sadeg012@umn.edu

Georgios B. Giannakis
Department of ECE
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55414
georgios@umn.edu

Abstract
Meta-learning empowers data-hungry deep neural networks to rapidly learn from
merely a few samples, which is especially appealing to tasks with small datasets.
Critical in this context is the prior knowledge accumulated from related tasks.
Existing meta-learning approaches typically rely on preselected priors, such as a
Gaussian probability density function (pdf). The limited expressiveness of such priors however, hinders the enhanced performance of the trained model when dealing
with tasks having exceedingly scarce data. Targeting improved expressiveness, this
contribution introduces a data-driven prior that optimally fits the provided tasks
using a novel non-injective change-of-variable (NCoV) model. Unlike preselected
prior pdfs with fixed shapes, the advocated NCoV model can effectively approximate a considerably wide range of pdfs. Moreover, compared to conventional
change-of-variable models, the introduced NCoV exhibits augmented expressiveness for pdf modeling, especially in high-dimensional spaces. Theoretical analysis
underscores the appealing universal approximation capacity of the NCoV model.
Numerical experiments conducted on three few-shot learning datasets validate
the superiority of data-driven priors over the prespecified ones, showcasing its
pronounced effectiveness when dealing with extremely limited data resources.

1

Introduction

Advances in deep learning (DL) have boosted the notion of “learning from data” with field-changing
performance improvements reported across a wide range of applications [24, 15, 52]. Large-scale DL
models with high fitting capacity have documented ability to cope with the “curse of dimensionality”
by providing compact low-dimensional representations of high-dimensional data. Nonetheless, these
high-capacity models typically require protracted training using massive data records. Humans on the
contrary, can perform exceptionally well on tasks such as object recognition or concept comprehension
with merely a few samples. How to acquire the learning ability of humans in the DL training processes
is thus appealing and imperative for a number of application domains, especially when data are
scarce or costly to annotate. Examples of such applications include machine translation [52], medical
imaging [31], and robot manipulations [27].
Meta-learning, also referred to as “learning to learn,” seeks to gather the prior knowledge shared
across a set of inter-related tasks, to enable quickly solving an unseen yet related learning task using
minimal training samples [10]. This form of higher-level learning effectively extracts domain-generic
inductive biases from prior tasks, which can be subsequently transferred to learn a new task even
with limited data. This mirrors the capability that humans excel at — leveraging past experiences to
rapidly acquire new skills. Meta-learning holds the promise of yielding powerful priors with which
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

