Interpreting the Weight Space
of Customized Diffusion Models
Amil Dravid∗1,2
Rameen Abdal3

Gordon Wetzstein3
1

Diffusion Unet
weights

Single Image Inversion

Yossi Gandelsman∗1

Kuan-Chieh Wang2

Alexei A. Efros1

Kfir Aberman2

UC Berkeley 2 Snap Inc. 3 Stanford University
weights2weights (w2w)
Space
beard

Identity Editing

Sampling

Figure 1: weights2weights (w2w) space enables controllable creation of new customized diffusion
models. We model a manifold of customized diffusion models as a subspace of weights that encodes
different instances of a broad visual concept (e.g., human identities, dog breeds, etc.). This forms
a space that supports inverting the subject (e.g., identity) from a single image into a model, editing
the subject encoded in the model, and sampling new models that encode new instances of the visual
concept. Each of these operations results in a new model that can consistently generate the subject.

Abstract
We investigate the space of weights spanned by a large collection of customized
diffusion models. We populate this space by creating a dataset of over 60,000
models, each of which is a base model fine-tuned to insert a different person’s
visual identity. We model the underlying manifold of these weights as a subspace,
which we term weights2weights. We demonstrate three immediate applications of
this space that result in new diffusion models – sampling, editing, and inversion.
First, sampling a set of weights from this space results in a new model encoding
a novel identity. Next, we find linear directions in this space corresponding to
semantic edits of the identity (e.g., adding a beard), resulting in a new model with
the original identity edited. Finally, we show that inverting a single image into this
space encodes a realistic identity into a model, even if the input image is out of
distribution (e.g., a painting). We further find that these linear properties of the
diffusion model weight space extend to other visual concepts. Our results indicate
that the weight space of fine-tuned diffusion models can behave as an interpretable
meta-latent space producing new models.1
∗
1

Equal contribution
Project page: https://snap-research.github.io/weights2weights
Code: https://github.com/snap-research/weights2weights

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

