Non-convolutional Graph Neural Networks

Yuanqing Wang
Center for Data Science
and Simons Center
for Computational Physical Chemistry
New York University
New York, N.Y. 10004
wangyq@wangyq.net

Kyunghyun Cho
Center for Data Science, New York University
and Prescient Design, Genetech
New York, N.Y. 10004
kc119@nyu.edu

Abstract
Rethink convolution-based graph neural networks (GNN)—they characteristically
suffer from limited expressiveness, over-smoothing, and over-squashing, and require specialized sparse kernels for efficient computation. Here, we design a simple
graph learning module entirely free of convolution operators, coined random walk
with unifying memory (RUM) neural network, where an RNN merges the topological and semantic graph features along the random walks terminating at each node.
Relating the rich literature on RNN behavior and graph topology, we theoretically
show and experimentally verify that RUM attenuates the aforementioned symptoms
and is more expressive than the Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) isomorphism test. On a
variety of node- and graph-level classification and regression tasks, RUM not only
achieves competitive performance, but is also robust, memory-efficient, scalable,
and faster than the simplest convolutional GNNs.

1

Introduction: Convolutions in GNNs

Graph neural networks (GNNs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]—neural models operating on representations of nodes
(V) and edges (E) in a graph (denoted by G = {V, E}, E ⊆ V × V, with structure represented by the
adjacency matrix Aij = 1[(vi , vj ) ∈ E])—have shown promises in a wide array of social and physical
modeling applications. Most GNNs follow a convolutional scheme, where the D-dimensional node
representations X ∈ R|V |×D are aggregated based on the structure of local neighborhoods:
X′ = ÂX.

(1)

Here, Â displays a unique duality—the input features doubles as a compute graph. The difference
among convolutional GNN architectures, apart from the subsequent treatment of the resulting
intermediate representation X′ , typically amounts to the choices of transformations (Â) of the original
adjacency matrix (A)—the normalized Laplacian for graph convolutional networks (GCN) [1], a
learned, sparse stochastic matrix for graph attention networks (GAT) [6], powers of the graph
Laplacian for simplifying graph networks (SGN) [7], and the matrix exponential thereof for graph
neural diffusion (GRAND) [8], to name a few. For all such transformations, it is easy to verify that
permutation equivariance (Equation 9) is trivially satisfied, laying the foundations of data-efficient
graph learning. At the same time, this class of methods share common pathologies as well:
Limited expressiveness. (Figure 1) Xu et al. [2] groundbreakingly elucidates that GNNs cannot
exceed the expressiveness of Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) isomorphism test [9]. Worse still, when the
support of neighborhood multiset is uncountable, no GNN with a single aggregation function can be
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

