Incorporating Test-Time Optimization into Training
with Dual Networks for Human Mesh Recovery

Yongwei Nie1 , Mingxian Fan1 , Chengjiang Long2 , Qing Zhang3 , Jian Zhu4 , Xuemiao Xu1∗
1
South China University of Technology, China
2
Meta Reality Labs, USA
3
Sun Yat-sen University, China
4
Guangdong University of Technology, China
{nieyongwei, xuemx}@scut.edu.cn, fanmingxian123@gmail.com
cjfykx@gmail.com, zhangq93@mail.sysu.edu.cn, rockeyzhu@163.com

Abstract
Human Mesh Recovery (HMR) is the task of estimating a parameterized 3D human
mesh from an image. There is a kind of methods first training a regression model
for this problem, then further optimizing the pretrained regression model for any
specific sample individually at test time. However, the pretrained model may
not provide an ideal optimization starting point for the test-time optimization.
Inspired by meta-learning, we incorporate the test-time optimization into training,
performing a step of test-time optimization for each sample in the training batch
before really conducting the training optimization over all the training samples.
In this way, we obtain a meta-model, the meta-parameter of which is friendly to
the test-time optimization. At test time, after several test-time optimization steps
starting from the meta-parameter, we obtain much higher HMR accuracy than
the test-time optimization starting from the simply pretrained regression model.
Furthermore, we find test-time HMR objectives are different from training-time
objectives, which reduces the effectiveness of the learning of the meta-model.
To solve this problem, we propose a dual-network architecture that unifies the
training-time and test-time objectives. Our method, armed with meta-learning and
the dual networks, outperforms state-of-the-art regression-based and optimizationbased HMR approaches, as validated by the extensive experiments. The codes are
available at https://github.com/fmx789/Meta-HMR.

1

Introduction

Human mesh recovery (HMR) from a single image is of great importance to human-related applications, such as action capture without MoCap device, action transfer with vision-based system, and
VR/AR entertainments, etc. This topic has received extensive research during past years, for which
most of previous approaches represent a 3D human mesh by the parametric human model SMPL [39]
with parameters Θ = (θ, β), where θ encodes the pose of the mesh and β describes the body shape.
The aim is thus to estimate Θ of a human in a given image.
Originally, the problem is solved by optimizing a standard human mesh so that its 2D projection
matches the 2D joints of the target human (e.g., SMPLify [5]). Later, works of [23, 33, 58, 37, 8,
67, 73, 66] propose end-to-end networks trained on large datasets to directly output a 3D SMPL
mesh given an input image. In SPIN [28], the regression-based approach [23] and optimization-based
approach SMPLify [5] are combined together by interleaved training, where the regression method
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

