Annealed Multiple Choice Learning: Overcoming
limitations of Winner-takes-all with annealing

David Perera∗ 1
david.perera@telecom-paris.fr
Théo Mariotte1

Adrien Cortés3
1

Victor Letzelter∗ 1 2
victor.letzelter@telecom-paris.fr
Mickael Chen2

Slim Essid1

Gaël Richard1

LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
2
Valeo.ai
3
Sorbonne Université

Abstract
We introduce Annealed Multiple Choice Learning (aMCL) which combines simulated annealing with MCL. MCL is a learning framework handling ambiguous tasks
by predicting a small set of plausible hypotheses. These hypotheses are trained
using the Winner-takes-all (WTA) scheme, which promotes the diversity of the
predictions. However, this scheme may converge toward an arbitrarily suboptimal
local minimum, due to the greedy nature of WTA. We overcome this limitation
using annealing, which enhances the exploration of the hypothesis space during
training. We leverage insights from statistical physics and information theory
to provide a detailed description of the model training trajectory. Additionally,
we validate our algorithm by extensive experiments on synthetic datasets, on the
standard UCI benchmark, and on speech separation.

1

Introduction

Ambiguous prediction tasks arise in deep learning when the target y is ill-defined from the input
x. Predicting y directly from x can be challenging due to the partial predictability of y from the
information contained in x. Multiple Choice Learning (MCL) [25, 41] addresses these challenges
by providing a small set of plausible hypotheses, each representing a different possible outcome
given the input. MCL learns these hypotheses using a competitive training scheme that promotes the
specialization of the hypotheses in distinct regions of the output space Y. The framework iteratively
partitions Y into a Voronoi tesselation and guides each hypothesis toward the barycenter of its
respective Voronoi cell [63]. This mechanism makes MCL akin to a gradient-descent-based and
conditional variant of the popular K-means algorithm [45]. Like K-means, MCL is sensitive to
initialization, subject to hypothesis collapse [49], and more generally may converge toward arbitrarily
suboptimal hypothesis configurations [63]. While there is a substantial body of literature addressing
the limitations of K-means [3, 20, 58], relatively little has been done to address these challenges in
the context of MCL [63, 49, 54]. The core issue of MCL lies with its greedy gradient-based update of
the hypotheses. This greediness precludes the exploration of the hypothesis space, preventing MCL
from optimally capturing the ambiguity of y. We propose to incorporate annealing into this gradient
descent update in order to improve the robustness of MCL.
Simulated annealing, inspired by the gradual cooling of metals, was originally introduced for
statistical mechanics applications [28, 52] and was later applied to combinatorial problems [35]. It is
*

Equal Contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

