Bayes-optimal learning of an extensive-width neural
network from quadratically many samples

Antoine Maillard
Department of Mathematics
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
Simon Martin
INRIA & Laboratoire de Physique
ENS, Université PSL, France

Emanuele Troiani
Statistical Physics Of Computation Laboratory
EPFL, Switzerland
Lenka Zdeborová
Statistical Physics Of Computation Laboratory
EPFL, Switzerland

Florent Krzakala
Information Learning and Physics Laboratory
EPFL, Switzerland

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning a target function corresponding to a single
hidden layer neural network, with a quadratic activation function after the first layer,
and random weights. We consider the asymptotic limit where the input dimension
and the network width are proportionally large. Recent work [Cui et al., 2023]
established that linear regression provides Bayes-optimal test error to learn such
a function when the number of available samples is only linear in the dimension.
That work stressed the open challenge of theoretically analyzing the optimal test
error in the more interesting regime where the number of samples is quadratic in
the dimension. In this paper, we solve this challenge for quadratic activations and
derive a closed-form expression for the Bayes-optimal test error. We also provide an
algorithm, that we call GAMP-RIE, which combines approximate message passing
with rotationally invariant matrix denoising, and that asymptotically achieves the
optimal performance. Technically, our result is enabled by establishing a link
with recent works on optimal denoising of extensive-rank matrices and on the
ellipsoid fitting problem. We further show empirically that, in the absence of
noise, randomly-initialized gradient descent seems to sample the space of weights,
leading to zero training loss, and averaging over initialization leads to a test error
equal to the Bayes-optimal one.

1

Introduction

Learning with multi-layer neural networks brought impressive progress and applications in many
areas. It is well established that a large enough non-linear neural network can represent a large class
of functions [Cybenko, 1989]. Yet the conditions under which the values of the weights can be found
efficiently, and from how many samples of the data, remain theoretically elusive. While one may
hope that a detailed understanding of these fundamental limitations will eventually allow for a more
efficient training, answering such questions for general data and target function remains, however,
beyond the reach of current theoretical methods.
In an early attempt to overcome the difficulty of the above generic question, a long line of work
originating in Gardner and Derrida [1989], Sompolinsky et al. [1990] proposed to study the optimal
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

