Can Large Language Model Agents Simulate
Human Trust Behavior?
Chengxing Xie∗ 1, 11 Canyu Chen∗ 2
Feiran Jia Ziyu Ye Shiyang Lai5 Kai Shu6 Jindong Gu3 Adel Bibi3 Ziniu Hu7
David Jurgens8 James Evans5, 9, 10 Philip H.S. Torr3 Bernard Ghanem1 Guohao Li † 3, 11
1
KAUST 2 Illinois Institute of Technology 3 University of Oxford 4 Pennsylvania State University
5
University of Chicago 6 Emory 7 California Institute of Technology
8
University of Michigan 9 Santa Fe Institute 10 Google 11 CAMEL-AI.org
4

5

Project website: https://agent-trust.camel-ai.org

Abstract
Large Language Model (LLM) agents have been increasingly adopted as simulation
tools to model humans in social science and role-playing applications. However,
one fundamental question remains: can LLM agents really simulate human behavior? In this paper, we focus on one critical and elemental behavior in human
interactions, trust, and investigate whether LLM agents can simulate human trust
behavior. We first find that LLM agents generally exhibit trust behavior, referred
to as agent trust, under the framework of Trust Games, which are widely recognized in behavioral economics. Then, we discover that GPT-4 agents manifest
high behavioral alignment with humans in terms of trust behavior, indicating the
feasibility of simulating human trust behavior with LLM agents. In addition, we
probe the biases of agent trust and differences in agent trust towards other LLM
agents and humans. We also explore the intrinsic properties of agent trust under
conditions including external manipulations and advanced reasoning strategies. Our
study provides new insights into the behaviors of LLM agents and the fundamental
analogy between LLMs and humans beyond value alignment. We further illustrate
broader implications of our discoveries for applications where trust is paramount.

1

Introduction

There is an increasing trend to adopt Large Language Models (LLMs) as agent-based simulation tools
for humans in various social science fields including economics, politics, psychology, ecology and
sociology (Gao et al., 2023b; Manning et al., 2024; Ziems et al., 2023), and role-playing applications
such as assistants, companions and mentors (Yang et al., 2024; Abdelghani et al., 2023; Chen et al.,
2024) due to their human-like cognitive capacity. Nevertheless, most previous research is based on
one insufficiently validated assumption that LLM agents behave like humans in simulation. Thus, a
fundamental question remains: Can LLM agents really simulate human behavior?
In this paper, we focus on trust behavior in human interactions, which comprises the intention to
place self-interest at risk based on the positive expectations of others (Rousseau et al., 1998). Trust
is one of the most critical and elemental behaviors in human interactions and plays an essential role
in social settings ranging from daily communication to economic and political institutions (Uslaner,
2000; Coleman, 1994). Here, we investigate whether LLM agents can simulate human trust behavior,
paving the way to explore their potential to simulate more complex human behavior and society itself.
First, we explore whether LLM agents manifest trust behavior in their interactions. Given the
challenge of quantifying trust behavior, we choose to study them based on the Trust Game and its
∗
Equal Contribution. Correspondence to: Chengxing Xie <xiechengxing34@gmail.com>, Canyu Chen
<cchen151@hawk.iit.edu>, Guohao Li <guohao@robots.ox.ac.uk>.
†
Work performed while Guohao Li was at KAUST and Chengxing Xie was a visiting student at KAUST.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

