DASH: Warm-Starting Neural Network Training in
Stationary Settings without Loss of Plasticity

Baekrok Shin ∗ Junsoo Oh ∗ Hanseul Cho Chulhee Yun
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST
{br.shin, junsoo.oh, jhs4015, chulhee.yun}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Warm-starting neural network training by initializing networks with previously
learned weights is appealing, as practical neural networks are often deployed under
a continuous influx of new data. However, it often leads to loss of plasticity, where
the network loses its ability to learn new information, resulting in worse generalization than training from scratch. This occurs even under stationary data distributions,
and its underlying mechanism is poorly understood. We develop a framework emulating real-world neural network training and identify noise memorization as the
primary cause of plasticity loss when warm-starting on stationary data. Motivated
by this, we propose Direction-Aware SHrinking (DASH), a method aiming to
mitigate plasticity loss by selectively forgetting memorized noise while preserving learned features. We validate our approach on vision tasks, demonstrating
improvements in test accuracy and training efficiency.1 2

1

Introduction

When training a neural network on a gradually changing dataset, the model tends to lose its plasticity,
which refers to the model’s ability to adapt to new information (Dohare et al., 2021; Lyle et al., 2023b;
Nikishin et al., 2022). This phenomenon is particularly relevant in scenarios with non-stationary data
distributions, such as reinforcement learning (Igl et al., 2020; Nikishin et al., 2022) and continual
learning (Chen et al., 2023; Kumar et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2021). While requiring to overwrite outdated
knowledge as the environment changes, models overfitted to previously encountered environments
often struggle to cumulate new information, which in turn leads to reduced generalization performance
(Lyle et al., 2023b). Under this viewpoint, various efforts have been made to mitigate the loss of
plasticity, such as resetting layers (Nikishin et al., 2022), regularizing weights (Kumar et al., 2023),
and modifying architectures (Lee et al., 2023; Lyle et al., 2023a; Nikishin et al., 2023).
Perhaps surprisingly, a similar phenomenon occurs in supervised learning settings, even where new
data points sampled from a stationary data distribution are added to the dataset during training.
It is counterintuitive, as one would expect advantages in both generalization performance and
computational efficiency when we warm-start from a model pre-trained on data points of the same
distribution. For a particular example, when a model is pre-trained using a portion of a dataset
and then we resume the training with the whole dataset, the generalization performance is often
worse than a model trained from scratch (i.e., cold-start), despite achieving similar training accuracy
(Ash and Adams, 2020; Berariu et al., 2021; Igl et al., 2020). Liu et al. (2020) report a similar
observation: training neural networks with random labels leads to a spurious local minimum which
is challenging to escape from, even when retraining with a correctly labeled dataset. Interestingly,
Igl et al. (2020) found that pre-training with random labels followed by the corrected dataset yields
∗

Authors contributed equally to this paper.
The NVIDIA GPU implementation can be found on github.com/baekrok/DASH.
2
For the Intel Gaudi implementation, visit: github.com/NAVER-INTEL-Co-Lab/gaudi-dash.

1

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

