Personalized Federated Learning via Feature
Distribution Adaptation

Connor J. McLaughlin, Lili Su
Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115
{mclaughlin.co,l.su}@northeastern.edu

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is a distributed learning framework that leverages commonalities between distributed client datasets to train a global model. Under
heterogeneous clients, however, FL can fail to produce stable training results. Personalized federated learning (PFL) seeks to address this by learning individual
models tailored to each client. One approach is to decompose model training
into shared representation learning and personalized classifier training. Nonetheless, previous works struggle to navigate the bias-variance trade-off in classifier
learning, relying solely on limited local datasets or introducing costly techniques
to improve generalization. In this work, we frame representation learning as a
generative modeling task, where representations are trained with a classifier based
on the global feature distribution. We then propose an algorithm, pFedFDA, that
efficiently generates personalized models by adapting global generative classifiers
to their local feature distributions. Through extensive computer vision benchmarks,
we demonstrate that our method can adjust to complex distribution shifts with
significant improvements over current state-of-the-art in data-scarce settings. Our
source code is available on GitHub1 .

1

Introduction

The success of deep learning models relies heavily on access to large, diverse, and comprehensive
training data. However, communication constraints, user privacy concerns, and government regulations on centralized data collection often pose significant challenges to this requirement [31, 37, 18].
To address these issues, Federated Learning (FL) [34] has gained considerable attention as a distributed learning framework, especially for its privacy-preserving properties and efficiency in training
deep networks.
The FedAvg algorithm, introduced in the seminal work [34], remains one of the most widely
adopted algorithms in FL applications [32, 45, 38, 49, 40, 7]. It utilizes a parameter server to
maintain a global model, trained through iterative rounds of distributed client local updates and server
aggregation of client models. While effective under independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.)
client data, its performance deteriorates as client datasets become more heterogeneous (non-i.i.d.).
Data heterogeneity leads to the well-documented phenomenon of client drift [19], where distinct
local objectives cause the model to diverge from the global optimum, resulting in slow convergence
[20, 28] and suboptimal local client performance [42]. Despite extensive efforts [27, 19, 46, 6] to
enhance FedAvg for non-i.i.d. clients, the use of a single global model remains too restrictive for
many FL applications.
Personalized federated learning (PFL) has emerged as an alternative framework that produces
separate models tailored to each client. The success of personalization techniques depends on
1

https://github.com/cj-mclaughlin/pFedFDA

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

