Hierarchical Federated Learning with
Multi-Timescale Gradient Correction
Wenzhi Fang
Purdue University
fang375@purdue.edu
Evan Chen
Purdue University
chen4388@purdue.edu

Dong-Jun Han
Yonsei University
djh@yonsei.ac.kr

Shiqiang Wang
IBM Research
wangshiq@us.ibm.com

Christopher G. Brinton
Purdue University
cgb@purdue.edu

Abstract
While traditional federated learning (FL) typically focuses on a star topology where
clients are directly connected to a central server, real-world distributed systems
often exhibit hierarchical architectures. Hierarchical FL (HFL) has emerged as a
promising solution to bridge this gap, leveraging aggregation points at multiple
levels of the system. However, existing algorithms for HFL encounter challenges
in dealing with multi-timescale model drift, i.e., model drift occurring across
hierarchical levels of data heterogeneity. In this paper, we propose a multi-timescale
gradient correction (MTGC) methodology to resolve this issue. Our key idea is
to introduce distinct control variables to (i) correct the client gradient towards the
group gradient, i.e., to reduce client model drift caused by local updates based on
individual datasets, and (ii) correct the group gradient towards the global gradient,
i.e., to reduce group model drift caused by FL over clients within the group.
We analytically characterize the convergence behavior of MTGC under general
non-convex settings, overcoming challenges associated with couplings between
correction terms. We show that our convergence bound is immune to the extent
of data heterogeneity, confirming the stability of the proposed algorithm against
multi-level non-i.i.d. data. Through extensive experiments on various datasets and
models, we validate the effectiveness of MTGC in diverse HFL settings. The code
for this project is available at https://github.com/wenzhifang/MTGC.

1

Introduction

In the past several years, federated learning (FL) has emerged as a prevalent approach for distributed
training [17, 22, 11, 52, 24]. Conventional FL has typically considered a star topology training
architecture, where clients directly communicate with a central server for model synchronization
[35, 26]. Scaling this architecture to large numbers of clients becomes problematic, however, given
the heterogeneity in FL resource availability and dataset statistics manifesting over large geographies
[14, 17, 10]. In practice, such communication networks are often comprised of a hierarchical
architecture from clients to the main server, as observed in edge/fog computing [25, 38] and softwaredefined networks (SDN) [20], where devices are supported by intermediate edge servers that are in
turn connected to the cloud.
To bridge this gap, researchers have proposed hierarchical federated learning (HFL) which integrates
group aggregations into FL frameworks [30, 5, 47, 15]. In HFL (see Fig. 1), clients are segmented into
multiple groups, and the training within each group is coordinated by a group aggregator node (e.g.,
an edge server coordinating a cell). Meanwhile, the central server orchestrates the training globally
by periodically aggregating models across all client groups, facilitated by the group aggregators.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

