Grammar-Aligned Decoding

Kanghee Park1∗ Jiayu Wang1∗ Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick2
Nadia Polikarpova2 Loris D’Antoni1
1
2
University of Wisconsin-Madison
University of California San Diego
{kpark247, jwang2782, ldantoni}@wisc.edu, {tberg, npolikarpova}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) struggle with reliably generating highly structured
outputs, such as program code, mathematical formulas, or well-formed markup.
Constrained decoding approaches mitigate this problem by greedily restricting
what tokens an LLM can output at each step to guarantee that the output matches
a given constraint. Specifically, in grammar-constrained decoding (GCD), the
LLM’s output must follow a given grammar. In this paper we demonstrate that
GCD techniques (and in general constrained decoding techniques) can distort the
LLM’s distribution, leading to outputs that are grammatical but appear with likelihoods that are not proportional to the ones given by the LLM, and so ultimately are
low-quality. We call the problem of aligning sampling with a grammar constraint,
grammar-aligned decoding (GAD), and propose adaptive sampling with approximate expected futures (ASAp), a decoding algorithm that guarantees the output
to be grammatical while provably producing outputs that match the conditional
probability of the LLM’s distribution conditioned on the given grammar constraint.
Our algorithm uses prior sample outputs to soundly overapproximate the future
grammaticality of different output prefixes. Our evaluation on code generation
and structured NLP tasks shows how ASAp often produces outputs with higher
likelihood (according to the LLM’s distribution) than existing GCD techniques,
while still enforcing the desired grammatical constraints. 2

1

Introduction

Despite their remarkable success, pre-trained Large Language Models (LLMs) often struggle with
generating highly structured outputs, such as program code, configuration files, or mathematical
formulas. A naïve approach to enforcing structure is rejection sampling, which repeatedly samples
strings from the LLM and checks them against a validity oracle, typically in the form of a contextfree grammar (CFG). Rejection sampling is highly inefficient or simply intractable for restrictive
grammars and long output sequences—i.e., most generated strings will not be in the target grammar.
Constrained decoding addresses the inefficiency of rejection sampling by greedily “forcing” the
LLM output to satisfy the given constraint. Specifically, when the constraint is given as a grammar,
grammar-constrained decoding (GCD) [7, 27, 28], can build automata that allow for on-the-fly
masking of tokens that will provably lead to outputs outside of the grammar during decoding.
While GCD does not incur the overhead of rejection sampling—i.e., the generated output is always in
the language of the grammar—we show that GCD and in general all forms of structured decoding
introduce a new problem: structured decoding distorts the LLM’s learned language distribution,
effectively hindering the LLM’s capabilities.
∗
2

Equal contribution
Our code, datasets, and checkpoints are available at: https://github.com/ebmoon/transformers-GAD.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

