OVT-B: A New Large-Scale Benchmark for
Open-Vocabulary Multi-Object Tracking

Haiji Liang1 , Ruize Han2,3∗
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
coolsea@zju.edu.cn, rz.han@siat.ac.cn
1

Abstract
Open-vocabulary object perception has become an important topic in artificial
intelligence, which aims to identify objects with novel classes that have not been
seen during training. Under this setting, open-vocabulary object detection (OVD)
in a single image has been studied in many literature. However, open-vocabulary
object tracking (OVT) from a video has been studied less, and one reason is the
shortage of benchmarks. In this work, we have built a new large-scale benchmark
for open-vocabulary multi-object tracking namely OVT-B. OVT-B contains 1,048
categories of objects and 1,973 videos with 637,608 bounding box annotations,
which is much larger than the sole open-vocabulary tracking dataset, i.e., OVTAO-val dataset (200+ categories, 900+ videos). The proposed OVT-B can be
used as a new benchmark to pave the way for OVT research. We also develop a
simple yet effective baseline method for OVT. It integrates the motion features for
object tracking, which is an important feature for MOT but is ignored in previous
OVT methods. Experimental results have verified the usefulness of the proposed
benchmark and the effectiveness of our method. We have released the benchmark
to the public at https://github.com/Coo1Sea/OVT-B-Dataset.

1

Introduction

Multi-object tracking (MOT) has achieved significant progress in tracking specific categories such
as humans and vehicles [1, 2]. However, the classical MOT task mainly focuses on tracking targets
of people and vehicles, which makes the methods encounter difficulties when extended to a broader
range of target categories, limiting their practical application value. Recent studies in the open
vocabulary detection (OVD) domain, such as [3], [4], have demonstrated the capability to detect
objects of categories unseen during training directly. As we all know, detection is the fundamental
task of MOT. So the burgeoning OVD can greatly bring generalization ability to MOT models.
OVTrack [5] is the first study attempting to combine open vocabulary with multi-object tracking.
This work develops a simple baseline method namely OVTrack by combining a state-of-the-art open
vocabulary detector and an appearance matching-based track head. As the basic study, based on a
large generic MOT dataset TAO, it builds a new dataset containing OV-TAO-val and OV-TAO-test for
performance evaluation, with a comprehensive tracking metric TETA[6] as the evaluation criterion.
Open-vocabulary multi-object tracking (OVMOT), as a new yet practical task, is very promising
with great research potential. However, the largest challenge for the further study of this topic is the
lack of a comprehensive benchmark. We all know that accurately evaluating the performance of new
OVMOT methods requires a benchmark dataset containing a large number of videos and categories.
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

