Toward Dynamic Non-Line-of-Sight Imaging
with Mamba Enforced Temporal Consistency

Yue Li

Shida Sun Juntian Ye Yueyi Zhang Feihu Xu Zhiwei Xiong∗
University of Science and Technology of China
{yueli65,sunyi2017,jt141884,sdsun}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{zhyuey,feihuxu,zwxiong}@ustc.edu.cn

Yi Sun

Abstract
Dynamic reconstruction in confocal non-line-of-sight imaging encounters great
challenges since the dense raster-scanning manner limits the practical frame rate. A
fewer pioneer works reconstruct high-resolution volumes from the under-scanning
transient measurements but overlook temporal consistency among transient frames.
To fully exploit multi-frame information, we propose the first spatial-temporal
Mamba (ST-Mamba) based method tailored for dynamic reconstruction of transient
videos. Our method capitalizes on neighbouring transient frames to aggregate
the target 3D hidden volume. Specifically, the interleaved features extracted
from the input transient frames are fed to the proposed ST-Mamba blocks, which
leverage the time-resolving causality in transient measurement. The cross STMamba blocks are then devised to integrate the adjacent transient features. The
target high-resolution transient frame is subsequently recovered by the transient
spreading module. After transient fusion and recovery, a physical-based network is
employed to reconstruct the hidden volume. To tackle the substantial noise inherent
in transient videos, we propose a wave-based loss function to impose constraints
within the phasor field. Besides, we introduce a new dataset, comprising synthetic
videos for training and real-world videos for evaluation. Extensive experiments
showcase the superior performance of our method on both synthetic data and realworld data captured by different imaging setups. The code and data are available at
https://github.com/Depth2World/Dynamic_NLOS.

1

Introduction

Non-Line-of-Sight (NLOS) imaging revolutionizes our comprehension of the environment by revealing hidden information. Different from conventional cameras, the NLOS system captures indirect
light reflections or signals that interact with the hidden object, subsequently rebounding off the relay
wall that is visible to the imaging system. By analyzing these reflections, NLOS can reveal critical
properties like albedo and surface normal of the hidden objects, unlocking valuable insights. A typical
active NLOS imaging setup is illustrated in Fig. 1. The pulsed laser emits periodic pulses directed
towards a relay wall, serving the dual purpose of illumination and synchronization for the imaging
system. The Single Photon Avalanche Diode (SPAD) captures photons reflected from the relay wall,
while the Time-Correlated Single Photon Counting sensor (TCSPC) records their arrival times within
each pulse period. The temporal distribution of each scanning point accumulates over successive pulse
periods, termed exposure time. Consequently, the total acquisition time for a transient measurement
scales proportionally with the exposure time and the density of the scanning grid. Notably, achieving
high-quality reconstructions necessitates dense scanning grids, at the expense of longer acquisition
times, typically ranging from minutes to hours.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

