MatFormer: Nested Transformer for Elastic Inference
Devvrit∗ ∆⋄ Sneha Kudugunta∗†⋄ Aditya Kusupati∗†⋄+
Tim Dettmers† Kaifeng Chen⋄ Inderjit Dhillon⋄∆ Yulia Tsvetkov† Hannaneh Hajishirzi†
Sham Kakade‡ Ali Farhadi† Prateek Jain⋄+
⋄
Google DeepMind ∆ University of Texas at Austin † University of Washington ‡ Harvard University

Abstract
Foundation models are applied in a broad spectrum of settings with different inference constraints, from massive multi-accelerator clusters to resource-constrained
standalone mobile devices. However, the substantial costs associated with training
these models often limit the number of unique model sizes that can be offered. Consequently, practitioners are compelled to select a model that may not be optimally
aligned with their specific latency and cost requirements. We present MatFormer2 ,
a novel Transformer architecture designed to provide elastic inference across diverse deployment constraints. MatFormer achieves this by incorporating a nested
Feed Forward Network (FFN) block structure within a standard Transformer model.
During training, we optimize the parameters of multiple nested FFN blocks with
varying sizes, enabling the extraction of hundreds of accurate smaller models without incurring additional computational costs. We empirically validate the efficacy
of MatFormer across different model classes (decoders and encoders) and modalities (language and vision), demonstrating its potential for real-world deployment.
We show that a 850M decoder-only MatFormer language model (MatLM) allows
us to extract multiple smaller models spanning from 582M to 850M parameters,
each exhibiting better validation loss and one-shot downstream evaluations than
independently trained counterparts. Furthermore, we observe that smaller encoders
extracted from a universal MatFormer-based ViT (MatViT) encoder preserve the
metric-space structure for adaptive large-scale retrieval. Finally, we showcase that
speculative decoding with the accurate and consistent submodels extracted from
MatFormer can lead to significant reduction in inference latency. Project website.

1

Introduction

Large Foundation models [49, 45, 17] are deployed in a variety of settings with different compute and
accuracy demands like real-time response on mobile phones or on multi-cluster GPUs for web-scale
batch serving. However, typical model families provide only a few independently trained models
of different sizes. For example, the Llama-2 family provides models with 7B, 13B, 34B, and 70B
parameters [59]. So practitioners are forced to choose a smaller (and typically less accurate) model
than their latency/cost budget. Alternatively, one can use compression/pruning to fit a bigger model
in a given compute budget [19, 36, 53], but that requires additional training.
We introduce MatFormer, a natively elastic Transformer [61] architecture that overcomes this challenge. MatFormer allows for training one universal model which can be used to extract hundreds
of smaller submodels without any additional training cost (Figure 1). MatFormer is a general
∗

Equal technical contribution. + Aditya Kusupati and Prateek Jain led the project.
Correspondence: devvrit@cs.utexas.edu,{snehakudugunta,kusupati,prajain}@google.com
2
MatFormer stands for
Matryoshka Transformer, reflecting the model’s inherent nested structure.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

