Conformal Classification with Equalized Coverage for
Adaptively Selected Groups

Yanfei Zhou
Department of Data Sciences and Operations
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California, USA
yanfei.zhou@marshall.usc.edu

Matteo Sesia
Department of Data Sciences and Operations
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California, USA
sesia@marshall.usc.edu

Abstract
This paper introduces a conformal inference method to evaluate uncertainty in
classification by generating prediction sets with valid coverage conditional on
adaptively chosen features. These features are carefully selected to reflect potential
model limitations or biases. This can be useful to find a practical compromise between efficiency—by providing informative predictions—and algorithmic fairness—
by ensuring equalized coverage for the most sensitive groups. We demonstrate the
validity and effectiveness of this method on simulated and real data sets.

1

Introduction

1.1

Uncertainty, Fairness, and Efficiency in Machine Learning

Increasingly sophisticated machine learning (ML) models, like deep neural networks, are revolutionizing decision-making in many high-stakes domains, including medical diagnostics [1], job screening
[2], and recidivism prediction [3, 4]. However, serious concerns related to uncertainty quantification
[5, 6] and algorithmic fairness [7–10] underscore the need for novel methods that can provide reliable
and unbiased measures of confidence, applicable to any model.
Uncertainty quantification is crucial because ML models, although effective on average, can make
errors while displaying overconfidence [11]. Consequently, in some situations users may lack
sufficient warning about the potential unreliability of a prediction, raising trust and safety concerns.
A promising solution is conformal inference [12–14], which enables converting the output of any
model into prediction sets with precise coverage guarantees. These sets reflect the model’s confidence
on a case-by-case basis, with smaller sets indicating higher confidence in a specific prediction.
Algorithmic fairness focuses on the challenges of prediction inaccuracies that disproportionately
impact specific groups, often identified by sensitive attributes like race, sex, and age. Among the
many sources of algorithmic bias are training data that do not adequately represent the population’s
heterogeneity and a focus on maximizing average performance. However, fairness is partly subjective
and lacks a universally accepted definition [15], leading to sometimes conflicting interpretations [16].
This complexity makes conformal inference with equalized coverage [17] an appealing approach.
Equalized coverage aims to ensure that the prediction sets attain their coverage not only on average for
the whole population (e.g., above 90%) but also at the same level within each group of interest. While
this does not necessarily imply that the prediction sets will have equal size on average across different
groups—since it is possible the predictive model may be more or less accurate for different groups—it
objectively communicates the possible limitations of a model. This transparency helps decisionmakers recognize when predictions may be less reliable for specific subgroups, allowing them to
either avoid unnecessary actions or adopt more cautious strategies in cases of higher uncertainty,
thereby minimizing the potential harm from inaccurate predictions.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

