Stabilizing Zero-Shot Prediction: A Novel Antidote to
Forgetting in Continual Vision-Language Tasks

Zijian Gao1,2 †, Xingxing Zhang3 †, Kele Xu1,2∗, Xinjun Mao1,2 , Huaimin Wang1,2
School of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, 410000, China.
2
State Key Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software Environment, Changsha, 410000, China.
3
School of Computer Science, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100049, China.
{gaozijian19, xukelele, xjmao, hmwang}@nudt.edu.cn, xxzhang1993@gmail.com
1

Abstract
Continual learning (CL) empowers pre-trained vision-language (VL) models to
efficiently adapt to a sequence of downstream tasks. However, these models often encounter challenges in retaining previously acquired skills due to parameter
shifts and limited access to historical data. In response, recent efforts focus on
devising specific frameworks and various replay strategies, striving for a typical
learning-forgetting trade-off. Surprisingly, both our empirical research and theoretical analysis demonstrate that the stability of the model in consecutive zero-shot
predictions serves as a reliable indicator of its anti-forgetting capabilities for previously learned tasks. Motivated by these insights, we develop a novel replay-free CL
method named ZAF (Zero-shot Antidote to Forgetting), which preserves acquired
knowledge through a zero-shot stability regularization applied to wild data in a plugand-play manner. To enhance efficiency in adapting to new tasks and seamlessly
access historical models, we introduce a parameter-efficient EMA-LoRA neural architecture based on the Exponential Moving Average (EMA). ZAF utilizes new data
for low-rank adaptation (LoRA), complemented by a zero-shot antidote on wild
data, effectively decoupling learning from forgetting. Our extensive experiments
demonstrate ZAF’s superior performance and robustness in pre-trained models
across various continual VL concept learning tasks, achieving leads of up to 3.70%,
4.82%, and 4.38%, along with at least a 10x acceleration in training speed on three
benchmarks, respectively. Additionally, our zero-shot antidote significantly reduces
forgetting in existing models by at least 6.37%. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/Zi-Jian-Gao/Stabilizing-Zero-Shot-Prediction-ZAF.

1

Introduction

In the rapidly evolving landscape of artificial intelligence, pre-trained models have become fundamental to achieving state-of-the-art results across a myriad of applications [25]. Recently, large
vision-language (VL) models have provided remarkable predictions on downstream tasks without
any training examples [30, 13, 2, 19]. However, these models are typically trained on static datasets,
which may not capture the continuously evolving variety and complexity of real-world data. As
new concepts emerge and existing categories expand, the static nature of these pre-trained models
can lead to diminished performance over time. For example, the CLIP model [30] achieves an
accuracy of less than 60% on the MNIST dataset (i.e., a performance significantly lower than that of a
conventionally trained CNN [17]) [49]. To bridge this gap, continual learning (CL) has emerged as a
vital methodology, making learning new knowledge a lifelong process for the pre-trained VL model.
∗

Corresponding author. † Equal Contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

