Learn To be Efficient: Build Structured Sparsity in
Large Language Models

Haizhong Zheng †
Z. Morley Mao†

Xiaoyan Bai†
Beidi Chen‡

Xueshen Liu†

Fan Lai§

Atul Prakash †

†

University of Michigan ‡ Carnegie Mellon University
§
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{hzzheng, smallyan, liuxs, zmao, aprakash}@umich.edu ,
beidic@andrew.cmu.edu, fanlai@illinois.edu

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable success with their
billion-level parameters, yet they incur high inference overheads. The emergence
of activation sparsity in LLMs provides a natural approach to reduce this cost by
involving only parts of the parameters for inference. However, existing methods
only focus on utilizing this naturally formed activation sparsity in a post-training
setting, overlooking the potential for further amplifying this inherent sparsity.
In this paper, we hypothesize that LLMs can learn to be efficient by achieving
more structured activation sparsity. To achieve this, we introduce a novel training
algorithm, Learn-To-be-Efficient (LTE), designed to train efficiency-aware LLMs
to learn to activate fewer neurons and achieve a better trade-off between sparsity
and performance. Furthermore, unlike SOTA MoEfication methods, which mainly
focus on ReLU-based models, LTE can also be applied to LLMs like LLaMA using
non-ReLU activations. Extensive evaluation on language understanding, language
generation, and instruction tuning tasks show that LTE consistently outperforms
SOTA baselines. Along with our hardware-aware custom kernel implementation,
LTE reduces LLaMA2-7B inference latency by 25% at 50% sparsity. We make our
code publicly available at GitHub1 .

1

Introduction

Training
FFN
Layers

Add & Norm

Self-Attention
Block

FFN
Layers

Add & Norm

1

FFN activations

FFN activations

Self-Attention
Block

The exponential growth in data volumes and model
sizes has catalyzed significant breakthroughs in largescale models, enabling a wide range of applications [2, 47, 53, 48, 30]. Among them, large language models (LLMs), like GPT-3 [2], OPT [47],
and LLaMA [38, 39], have demonstrated impressive
natural language ability. However, the skyrocketing
number of model parameters [21, 36] and dataset
size [51, 45, 52, 44] has introduced challenges in further scaling those models. The exponential growth in
model size has not only inflated the deployment costs
of LLMs, due to their significant computational and

LTE

FFN

FFN with structured sparsity

Figure 1: Learn-To-be-Efficient (LTE) performs efficiency-aware training to construct
structured model contextual sparsity for fast
inference. Activated neurons are in orange.

https://github.com/haizhongzheng/LTE

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

