E 2: Easy Regional Contrastive Learning of Expressive
Fashion Representations

Daiqing Qi
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22904
daiqing.qi@virginia.edu

Text-to-Image Retrieval
Reference Text

Retrieved Image

Description: Long sleeve cotton fleece
sweatshirt in black. Rib knit crewneck
collar, cuffs, and hem. Applique in black
and white embroidered at front, … ,
Sub-Category: SWEATSHIRTS, Brand:
Versus, Composition: cotton …

Retrieved Image
Modifying Text
Has a more fun
graphic and
has more
arrows on it.

55.4
CLIP-FT, ICML’21
Ours

Zero-shot Text-guided Image Retrieval
Reference Image

Handong Zhao
Adobe Research
San Jose, CA 95110
hazhao@adobe.com

Image-to-Text Retrieval
Reference Image

Retrieved Text
Description: Quilted leather backpack in
black. Carry handle at top. Twin adjustable
shoulder straps with pin-buckle fastening.
Logo plaque at face. Two-way zip closure...
Sub-Category: BACKPACKS, Brand: Gucci,
Composition: Leather …

+9.1

28.3
CIReVL, ICLR’24

Sheng Li
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22904
shengli@virginia.edu

Zero-shot Fashion Image Captioning
Reference Image

+3.4
CIReVL+Ours

Generated Full Text
Description: short sleeve cotton jersey t shirt in white. rib knit crewneck collar. patch
pocket at chest. cut-out at sleeve. tonal
stitching. Brand: Sacai. Sub-Category: t shirts. Composition: body: linen, polyester.
trim: cotton, polyester. Season: SS2018

55.2
CLIP-FT, ICML’21
Ours

+7.6

16.9
DeCap, ICLR’23
+4.5
DeCap+Ours
14.2
CapDec, EMNLP’22
+4.9
CapDec+Ours

Figure 1: Model performance on downstream tasks. The first row shows the direct application of our
model in cross-modal retrieval. The second row shows that, when replacing the CLIP encoders with
ours in existing SOTA models in zero-shot text-guided image retrieval and fashion image captioning,
their results can be further improved notably. (We show R@1 results for cross-modal retrieval,
average R@10 for text-guided image retrieval, and B@4 for image captioning. )

Abstract
When learning vision-language models (VLM) for the fashion domain, most existing works design new architectures from vanilla BERT with additional objectives,
or perform dense multi-task learning with fashion-specific tasks. Though progress
has been made, their architecture or objectives are often intricate and the extendibility is limited. By contrast, with simple architecture (comprising only two unimodal
encoders) and just the contrastive objective, popular pre-trained VL models (e.g.,
CLIP) achieve superior performance in general domains, which are further easily
extended to downstream tasks. However, inheriting such benefits of CLIP in the
fashion domain is non-trivial in the presence of the notable domain gap. Empirically, we find that directly finetuning on fashion data leads CLIP to frequently
ignore minor yet important details such as logos and composition, which are critical
in fashion tasks such as retrieval and captioning. In this work, to maintain CLIP’s
simple architecture and objective while explicitly attending to fashion details, we
propose E 2 : Easy Regional Contrastive Learning of Expressive Fashion Representations. E 2 introduces only a few selection tokens and fusion blocks (just 1.9%
additional parameters in total) with only contrastive losses. Despite lightweight,
in our primary focus, cross-modal retrieval, E 2 notably outperforms existing
fashion VLMs with various fashion-specific objectives. Moreover, thanks to CLIP’s
widespread use in downstream tasks in general domains (e.g., zero-shot composed
image retrieval and image captioning), our model can easily extend these models
from general domain to the fashion domain with notable improvement (Fig. 1). To
conduct a comprehensive evaluation, we further collect data from Amazon Reviews
to build a new dataset (Fig. 4) for cross-modal retrieval in the fashion domain.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

