Improving Subgroup Robustness via Data Selection

Saachi Jain∗, Kimia Hamidieh∗, Kristian Georgiev∗,
Andrew Ilyas, Marzyeh Ghassemi, Aleksander M ˛
adry
MIT
{saachij,hamidieh,krisgrg,ailyas,mghassem,madry}@mit.edu

Abstract
Machine learning models can often fail on subgroups that are underrepresented
during training. While dataset balancing can improve performance on underperforming groups, it requires access to training group annotations and can end up
removing large portions of the dataset. In this paper, we introduce Data Debiasing
with Datamodels (D3M), a debiasing approach which isolates and removes specific
training examples that drive the model’s failures on minority groups. Our approach
enables us to efficiently train debiased classifiers while removing only a small
number of examples, and does not require training group annotations or additional
hyperparameter tuning.

1

Introduction

The advent of large datasets such as OpenImages [23] and The Pile [13] has led to machine learning
models being trained on explicit [4] and illegal [48] content, or on data that encode negative societal
biases [6, 12, 2, 8] and other spurious correlations [32, 30]. On one hand, there is increasing evidence
that models reflect the biases in these datasets; on the other hand, the enormous scale of these datasets
makes it extremely expensive to manually curate them—and so removal of such “harmful data” is
challenging.
In this paper, we propose an approach that aims to remove data responsible for biased model
predictions. In particular, we focus on a specific way of quantifying model bias— worst-group error—
which captures the extent to which model performance degrades on pre-defined subpopulations of the
data. We aim to identify (and remove) the points in the training dataset that contribute most to this
metric to improve the model’s group robustness.
The challenge inherent in this approach is that it requires an understanding of how training data affect
machine learning model predictions. To overcome this challenge, we first approximate predictions as
simple, direct functions of the training dataset, using a framework called datamodeling [18, 33]. We
can then write our quantitative notion of model bias (which is a function of predictions) as a function
of the dataset. Finally, by studying this function, we identify the training data points that contribute
most to this measure of model bias. With the resulting method, which we call Data Debiasing with
Datamodels (D3M), we show that, across a variety of datasets, there are often a small number of
examples that disproportionately drive worst-group error. Removing these examples, in turn, greatly
improves models’ worst-group error while maintaining dataset size.
Roadmap & contributions. In the rest of this paper, we present and demonstrate the effectiveness
of our Data Debiasing with Datamodels (D3M). Concretely, we show that D3M enables us to:
• Pinpoint examples that harm worst-group accuracy. We show that there are often a
small number of examples that disproportionately drive models’ worst-group error on
validation data. For example, on CelebA-Age, our method improves worst group error over
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

