Nonparametric Evaluation of Noisy ICA Solutions
Syamantak Kumar1

Purnamrita Sarkar2

Peter Bickel3

Derek Bean4

1
Department of Computer Science, UT Austin
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, UT Austin
3
Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley
4
Department of Statistics, University of Wisconsin, Madison
syamantak@utexas.edu, purna.sarkar@austin.utexas.edu,
bickel@stat.berkeley.edu, derekb@stat.wisc.edu
2

Abstract
Independent Component Analysis (ICA) was introduced in the 1980’s as a model
for Blind Source Separation (BSS), which refers to the process of recovering the
sources underlying a mixture of signals, with little knowledge about the source
signals or the mixing process. While there are many sophisticated algorithms
for estimation, different methods have different shortcomings. In this paper, we
develop a nonparametric score to adaptively pick the right algorithm for ICA with
arbitrary Gaussian noise. The novelty of this score stems from the fact that it just
assumes a finite second moment of the data and uses the characteristic function
to evaluate the quality of the estimated mixing matrix without any knowledge
of the parameters of the noise distribution. In addition, we propose some new
contrast functions and algorithms that enjoy the same fast computability as existing
algorithms like FASTICA and JADE but work in domains where the former may
fail. While these also may have weaknesses, our proposed diagnostic, as shown by
our simulations, can remedy them. Finally, we propose a theoretical framework to
analyze the local and global convergence properties of our algorithms.

1

Introduction

Independent Component Analysis (ICA) was introduced in the 1980’s as a model for Blind Source
Separation (BSS) [13, 12], which refers to the process of recovering the sources underlying a mixture
of signals, with little knowledge about the source signals or the mixing process. It has become a
powerful alternative to the Gaussian model, leading to PCA in factor analysis. A good account of the
history, many results, and the role of dimensionality in noiseless ICA can be found in [28, 5]. In one
of its first forms, ICA is based on observing n independent samples from a k-dimensional population:
x = Bz + g

(1)

where B ∈ Rd×k (d ≥ k) is an unknown mixing matrix, z ∈ Rk is a vector of statistically
independent mean zero “sources” or “factors” and g ∼ N (0 , Σ) is a d dimensional mean zero
Gaussian noise vector with covariance matrix Σ, independent of z . We denote diag (a ) := cov (z )
and S := cov (x ) = B diag (a ) B T + Σ. The goal of the problem is to estimate B.
ICA was initially developed in the context of g = 0, now called noiseless ICA. In that form, it
spawned an enormous literature [17, 39, 40, 1, 8, 27, 35, 37, 23, 11, 6, 42] and at least two wellestablished algorithms FASTICA [29] and JADE [9] which are widely used. The general model with
nonzero g and unknown noise covariance matrix Σ, known as noisy ICA, has developed more slowly,
with its own literature [4, 50, 49, 30, 31, 41].
In the following sections, we will show that various ICA and noisy ICA methods have distinct
shortcomings. Some struggle with heavy-tailed distributions and outliers, while others require
approximations of entropy-based objectives, which have their own challenges (see eg. [32]).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

