Provable Acceleration of Nesterov’s Accelerated
Gradient for Rectangular Matrix Factorization and
Linear Neural Networks
Zhenghao Xu
Georgia Institute of Technology
zhenghaoxu@gatech.edu

Yuqing Wang
University of California, Berkeley
yq.wang@berkeley.edu

Tuo Zhao
Georgia Institute of Technology
tourzhao@gatech.edu

Rachel Ward
University of Texas at Austin
rward@math.utexas.edu

Molei Tao
Georgia Institute of Technology
mtao@gatech.edu

Abstract
We study the convergence rate of first-order methods for rectangular matrix factorization, which is a canonical nonconvex optimization problem. Specifically, given
a rank-r matrix A ∈ Rm×n , we prove that gradient descent (GD) can find a pair
of ϵ-optimal solutions XT ∈ Rm×d and YT ∈ Rn×d , where d ≥ r, satisfying
∥XT YT⊤ − A∥F ≤ ϵ∥A∥F in T = O(κ2 log 1ϵ ) iterations with high probability,
where κ denotes the condition number of A. Furthermore, we prove that Nesterov’s
accelerated gradient (NAG) attains an iteration complexity of O(κ log 1ϵ ), which is
the best-known bound of first-order methods for rectangular matrix factorization.
Different from small balanced random initialization in the existing literature, we
adopt an unbalanced initialization, where X0 is large and Y0 is 0. Moreover,
our initialization and analysis can be further extended to linear neural networks,
where we prove that NAG can also attain an accelerated linear convergence rate. In
particular, we only require the width of the network to be greater than or equal to
the rank of the output label matrix. In contrast, previous results achieving the same
rate require excessive widths that additionally depend on the condition number and
the rank of the input data matrix.

1

Introduction

Nonconvex optimization is pervasive in the training of modern machine learning models. Despite the
success of first-order methods in practice, theoretical understanding of their convergence properties
is limited even for simple nonconvex problems. Take the rectangular low-rank matrix factorization
problem as an example, which is a canonical nonconvex problem:
min

X∈R

m×d

,Y∈R

n×d

f (X, Y) =

1
2
A − XY⊤ F ,
2

(1)

where we solve for two small matrices X ∈ Rm×d and Y ∈ Rn×d to approximate a big rank-r target
matrix A ∈ Rm×n with r ≪ min(m, n) and m, n not necessarily equal. Specifically, we consider
the over-parameterized regime where d ≥ r, so that the global minimum of (1) is zero. While various
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

