DreamMesh4D: Video-to-4D Generation with
Sparse-Controlled Gaussian-Mesh Hybrid
Representation

Zhiqi Li∗1,2

Yiming Chen∗1,2

Peidong Liu†2

1

Zhejiang University 2 Westlake University
{lizhiqi49, chenyiming, liupeidong}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent advancements in 2D/3D generative techniques have facilitated the generation of dynamic 3D objects from monocular videos. Previous methods mainly
rely on the implicit neural radiance fields (NeRF) or explicit Gaussian Splatting as
the underlying representation, and struggle to achieve satisfactory spatial-temporal
consistency and surface appearance. Drawing inspiration from modern 3D animation pipelines, we introduce DreamMesh4D, a novel framework combining
mesh representation with geometric skinning technique to generate high-quality
4D object from a monocular video. Instead of utilizing classical texture map for
appearance, we bind Gaussian splats to triangle face of mesh for differentiable
optimization of both the texture and mesh vertices. In particular, DreamMesh4D
begins with a coarse mesh obtained through an image-to-3D generation procedure.
Sparse points are then uniformly sampled across the mesh surface, and are used
to build a deformation graph to drive the motion of the 3D object for the sake
of computational efficiency and providing additional constraint. For each step,
transformations of sparse control points are predicted using a deformation network,
and the mesh vertices as well as the surface Gaussians are deformed via a novel geometric skinning algorithm. The skinning algorithm is a hybrid approach combining
LBS (linear blending skinning) and DQS (dual-quaternion skinning), mitigating
drawbacks associated with both approaches. The static surface Gaussians and mesh
vertices as well as the dynamic deformation network are learned via reference view
photometric loss, score distillation loss as well as other regularization losses in a
two-stage manner. Extensive experiments demonstrate superior performance of
our method in terms of both rendering quality and spatial-temporal consistency.
Furthermore, our method is compatible with modern graphic pipelines, showcasing
its potential in the 3D gaming and film industry. The source code is available at
our website: https://lizhiqi49.github.io/DreamMesh4D.

1

Introduction

The emergence and development of Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) have significantly
revolutionized 3D generation techniques in recent years [20]. The technology has effectively allowed
the creation of static objects, including their shape, texture, and even an entire scene from a simple
text prompt or a single image. Recently, the wave of advancement has been propelled to the filed of
dynamic (4D) content generation [45], which offers immense potential in fields including, but not
limited to, AR/VR, filming, gaming and animation. However, it’s still quite challenging to efficiently
∗

Equal Contribution;

†

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

