LRM-Zero: Training Large Reconstruction Models
with Synthesized Data

Desai Xie† 1, 2
Sai Bi1
1
Yi Zhou
Sören Pirk3
1

Zhixin Shu1
Kai Zhang1
2
Arie Kaufman
Xin Sun1

Zexiang Xu1
Hao Tan1

2
3
Adobe Research
Stony Brook University
Kiel University
dexxie,ari@cs.stonybrook.edu
sbi,zshu,kaiz,zexu,yizho,xinsun,hatan@adobe.com
soeren.pirk@gmail.com

Abstract
We present LRM-Zero, a Large Reconstruction Model (LRM) trained entirely on
synthesized 3D data, achieving high-quality sparse-view 3D reconstruction. The
core of LRM-Zero is our procedural 3D dataset, Zeroverse, which is automatically
synthesized from simple primitive shapes with random texturing and augmentations (e.g., height fields, boolean differences, and wireframes). Unlike previous 3D
datasets (e.g., Objaverse) which are often captured or crafted by humans to approximate real 3D data, Zeroverse completely ignores realistic global semantics but is
rich in complex geometric and texture details that are locally similar to or even
more intricate than real objects. We demonstrate that our LRM-Zero, trained with
our fully synthesized Zeroverse, can achieve high visual quality in the reconstruction of real-world objects, competitive with models trained on Objaverse. We also
analyze several critical design choices of Zeroverse that contribute to LRM-Zero’s
capability and training stability. Our work demonstrates that 3D reconstruction, one
of the core tasks in 3D vision, can potentially be addressed without the semantics
of real-world objects. The Zeroverse’s procedural synthesis code and interactive
visualization are available at: https://desaixie.github.io/lrm-zero/.

1

Introduction

The current wave of rapid development in foundation models [10] has been empowered by two key
components: scalable model architectures [86, 40, 67] and massive datasets [19, 68, 79]. Foundation
models in text [65, 3, 85], image [70, 29] and video [48, 5, 35] domains have capitalized on both
factors. As there is a unified trend of adopting transformers [86] as the model architecture, many
recent works have identified the training data as the most crucial factor [8, 20, 37, 2, 11].
Following the progress in other modalities, transformer-based [86] 3D Large Reconstruction Models [41, 49, 90, 98, 84] (LRM) has emerged as a potential foundation model for the 3D domain, which
uses a scalable model architecture. However, 3D data is still difficult to acquire, considering that both
manually capturing and hand-crafting 3D objects are expensive, time-consuming and require special
expertise. Also, 3D data is more sensitive for its license safety, different types of bias, and identity
leakage.
†This work is done while Desai is an intern at Adobe Research.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

