Achieving Constant Regret in Linear Markov
Decision Processes
Zhiyuan Fan∗
EECS
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
fanzy@mit.edu

Weitong Zhang∗
School of Data Science and Society
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
weitongz@unc.edu
Jiafan He
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
jiafanhe19@ucla.edu

Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We study the constant regret guarantees in reinforcement learning (RL). Our objective is to design an algorithm that incurs only finite regret over infinite episodes
with high probability. We introduce an algorithm, Cert-LSVI-UCB, for misspecified linear Markov decision processes (MDPs) where both the transition kernel
and the reward function can be approximated by some linear function up to misspecification level ζ. At the core of Cert-LSVI-UCB is an innovative certified
estimator, which facilitates a fine-grained concentration analysis for multi-phase
value-targeted regression, enabling us to establish an instance-dependent regret
bound that is constant w.r.t. the number of episodes. Specifically, we demonstrate that for a linear MDP characterized by a minimal suboptimality gap ∆,
e 3 H 5 /∆) with high probability,
Cert-LSVI-UCB has a cumulative regret of O(d
√ 2
e
provided that the misspecification level ζ is below O(∆/(
dH )). Here d is
the dimension of the feature space and H is the horizon. Remarkably, this regret
bound is independent of the number of episodes K. To the best of our knowledge,
Cert-LSVI-UCB is the first algorithm to achieve a constant, instance-dependent,
high-probability regret bound in RL with linear function approximation without
relying on prior distribution assumptions.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has been a popular approach for teaching agents to make decisions
based on feedback from the environment. RL has shown great success in a variety of applications,
including robotics (Kober et al., 2013), gaming (Mnih et al., 2013), and autonomous driving. In
most of these applications, there is a common expectation that RL agents will master tasks after
making only a bounded number of mistakes, even over indefinite runs. However, theoretical support
for this expectation is limited in RL literature: in the worst case, existing
works such as Jin et al.
√
e K) regret upper bounds with
(2020); Ayoub et al. (2020); Wang et al. (2019) only provided O(
K being the number of episodes; in the instance-dependent case, Simchowitz and Jamieson (2019);
Yang et al. (2021); He et al. (2021a) achieved logarithmic high-probability regret upper bounds (e.g.,
∗

equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

