Blind Image Restoration via Fast Diffusion Inversion

Hamadi Chihaoui Abdelhak Lemkhenter Paolo Favaro
Computer Vision Group, Institute of Informatics, University of Bern, Switzerland
{hamadi.chihaoui,abdelhak.lemkhenter,paolo.favaro}@unibe.ch

Abstract
Image Restoration (IR) methods based on a pre-trained diffusion model have
demonstrated state-of-the-art performance. However, they have two fundamental
limitations: 1) they often assume that the degradation operator is completely known
and 2) they alter the diffusion sampling process, which may result in restored
images that do not lie onto the data manifold. To address these issues, we propose
Blind Image Restoration via fast Diffusion inversion (BIRD) a blind IR method
that jointly optimizes for the degradation model parameters and the restored image.
To ensure that the restored images lie onto the data manifold, we propose a novel
sampling technique on a pre-trained diffusion model. A key idea in our method
is not to modify the reverse sampling, i.e., not to alter all the intermediate latents,
once an initial noise is sampled. This is ultimately equivalent to casting the IR
task as an optimization problem in the space of the input noise. Moreover, to
mitigate the computational cost associated with inverting a fully unrolled diffusion
model, we leverage the inherent capability of these models to skip ahead in the
forward diffusion process using large time steps. We experimentally validate
BIRD on several image restoration tasks and show that it achieves state of the art
performance. Project page: https://hamadichihaoui.github.io/BIRD.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in generative learning due to the development of diffusion models [7, 18] have led
to models capable of generating detailed and realistic high-resolution images. In addition to their
data generation capabilities, these models also provide an implicit representation of the distribution
of the data they train on, which can be used for other applications, such as image restoration (IR).
Indeed, several approaches have emerged to solve inverse problems using pre-trained diffusion models
[8, 11, 21]. Those approaches start from a random noise vector as the diffusion input and introduce a
projection after each diffusion reverse step to enforce the consistency with the corrupted image. As
shown by Chung [3] this procedure alters the original diffusion sampling process, and may cause the
generated image to leave the data manifold during the iterative denoising process, which ultimately
results in unrealistic image samples. Moreover, most of these methods are non-blind as they assume
to have full knowledge of the degradation model, which is not practical in real-world applications.
To overcome all these challenges, we propose a novel blind image restoration method that jointly
optimizes the degradation model parameters and the restored image only at test time (and thus
separately for each new image). We call this method BIRD, which stands for Blind Image Restoration
via fast Diffusion inversion. Since BIRD does not need to pre-train a model for the degradation
operator, it can be used immediately on a wide range of IR tasks such as Gaussian deblurring, motion
deblurring, super-resolution and denoising (see Figure 2). In this work, we show that having a
strong image prior and ensuring that the restored image never leaves the data manifold during the
reconstruction process are fundamental properties to generalize to a wide range of image degradation
problems. As shown in Figure 1, BIRD (see (f) to (i)) reconstructs realistic images at each iteration,
while BlindDPS (see (b) to (e)) may initially reconstruct non realistic images. We observe that even
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

