ART: Automatic Red-teaming for Text-to-Image
Models to Protect Benign Users

1

Guanlin Li1 , Kangjie Chen1,∗ , Shudong Zhang2 , Jie Zhang3 , Tianwei Zhang1
Nanyang Technological University, 2 Xidian University,3 CFAR and IHPC, A*STAR.
∗
Corresponding author
{guanlin001, kangjie001}@e.ntu.edu.sg, sdong.zhang@outlook.com,
zhang_jie@cfar.a-star.edu.sg, tianwei.zhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Large-scale pre-trained generative models are taking the world by storm, due to
their abilities in generating creative content. Meanwhile, safeguards for these
generative models are developed, to protect users’ rights and safety, most of which
are designed for large language models. Existing methods primarily focus on
jailbreak and adversarial attacks, which mainly evaluate the model’s safety under
malicious prompts. Recent work found that manually crafted safe prompts can
unintentionally trigger unsafe generations. To further systematically evaluate the
safety risks of text-to-image models, we propose a novel Automatic Red-Teaming
framework, ART. Our method leverages both vision language model and large
language model to establish a connection between unsafe generations and their
prompts, thereby more efficiently identifying the model’s vulnerabilities. With
our comprehensive experiments, we reveal the toxicity of the popular open-source
text-to-image models. The experiments also validate the effectiveness, adaptability,
and great diversity of ART. Additionally, we introduce three large-scale red-teaming
datasets for studying the safety risks associated with text-to-image models. Datasets
and models can be found in https://github.com/GuanlinLee/ART.
C ONTENT WARNING : T HIS PAPER INCLUDES EXAMPLES THAT CONTAIN OFFENSIVE CONTENT
( E . G ., VIOLENCE , SEXUALLY EXPLICIT CONTENT, NEGATIVE STEREOTYPES ). I MAGES , WHERE
INCLUDED , ARE BLURRED BUT MAY STILL BE UPSETTING .

1

Introduction

Recently, generative models have achieved significant success in text generation, exemplified by
models such as ChatGPT [34], Llama [43], and Mistral [24], as well as in image generation with
models like Stable Diffusion [37] and Midjourney [7]. Despite their utility in daily applications, these
models can produce biased and harmful content, both intentionally and unintentionally. For instance,
[28, 48, 32] have designed jailbreak methods that circumvent the safeguards of large language models
(LLMs), enabling them to generate harmful and illegal responses. These security risks are a major
concern for model developers, researchers, users, and regulatory bodies. Thus, enhancing the safety
of content generated by these models is of paramount importance.
To ensure generative models produce unbiased, safe, and legal responses, one crucial approach is
aligning the models with human preferences and values. This involves supervising the training
data collection and checking the training process during model development. Once the training is
complete, another critical step is to analyze the model’s safety through advanced attacking methods, a
process known as red-teaming [19, 42]. Previous red-teaming methods designed for LLMs to bypass
safeguards and produce harmful responses utilize jailbreak attacks [28, 32] and various adversarial
attacks [40, 20]. However, text-to-image models, such as Stable Diffusion Models, have received
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

