Inferring stochastic low-rank recurrent neural
networks from neural data
Matthijs Pals1,2 A Erdem Sağtekin1,2,3 Felix Pei1,2 Manuel Gloeckler1,2 Jakob H Macke1,2,4
1

Machine Learning in Science, Excellence Cluster Machine Learning, University of Tübingen, Germany
2
Tübingen AI Center, Tübingen, Germany
3
Graduate Training Centre of Neuroscience, University of Tübingen, Germany
4
Department Empirical Inference, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany

Abstract
A central aim in computational neuroscience is to relate the activity of large
populations of neurons to an underlying dynamical system. Models of these neural
dynamics should ideally be both interpretable and fit the observed data well. Lowrank recurrent neural networks (RNNs) exhibit such interpretability by having
tractable dynamics. However, it is unclear how to best fit low-rank RNNs to
data consisting of noisy observations of an underlying stochastic system. Here,
we propose to fit stochastic low-rank RNNs with variational sequential Monte
Carlo methods. We validate our method on several datasets consisting of both
continuous and spiking neural data, where we obtain lower dimensional latent
dynamics than current state of the art methods. Additionally, for low-rank models
with piecewise-linear nonlinearities, we show how to efficiently identify all fixed
points in polynomial rather than exponential cost in the number of units, making
analysis of the inferred dynamics tractable for large RNNs. Our method both
elucidates the dynamical systems underlying experimental recordings and provides
a generative model whose trajectories match observed variability.

1

Introduction

A common goal of many scientific fields is to extract the dynamical systems underlying noisy
experimental observations. In particular, in neuroscience, much work is devoted to understanding the
coordinated firing of neurons as being implemented through underlying dynamical systems [1–5].
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) constitute a common model-class of neural dynamics [6–13]
which can be reverse-engineered to form hypotheses about neural computations [14, 15]. As a
result, several recent research directions have centered on interpretable or analytically tractable RNN
architectures. In particular, RNNs with low-rank structure [16–22] admit a direct mapping between
high-dimensional population activity and an underlying low-dimensional dynamical system. RNNs
with piecewise-linear activations [8, 9, 23–26] are tractable, as they have fixed points and cycles that
can be accessed analytically.
To serve as useful models of brain activity, it is important that models also capture the observed brain
activity, including trial-to-trial variability. Many methods that fit RNNs to data are restricted to RNNs
with deterministic transitions [6–8, 10–12]. It is unlikely that, in general, all variability in the data
can be explained by variability in the RNNs initial state. Thus, adopting stochastic transitions is
imperative. While probabilistic sequence models are used effectively in neuroscience [27], they have
so far largely consisted of state space models without an obvious mechanistic interpretation [28–32].
{firstname.secondname}@uni-tuebingen.de
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

