Hierarchical Object-Aware Dual-Level Contrastive
Learning for Domain Generalized Stereo Matching

Meiqing Wu ∗
Nanyang Technological University
meiqingwu@ntu.edu.sg

Yikun Miao
Beijing Institute of Technology
joshmiao233@gmail.com
Siew-Kei Lam
Nanyang Technological University
assklam@ntu.edu.sg

Changsheng Li
Beijing Institute of Technology
lcs@bit.edu.cn

Thambipillai Srikanthan
Nanyang Technological University
astsrikan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Stereo matching algorithms that leverage end-to-end convolutional neural networks
have recently demonstrated notable advancements in performance. However, a
common issue is their susceptibility to domain shifts, hindering their ability in generalizing to diverse, unseen realistic domains. We argue that existing stereo matching networks overlook the importance of extracting semantically and structurally
meaningful features. To address this gap, we propose an effective hierarchical
object-aware dual-level contrastive learning (HODC) framework for domain generalized stereo matching. Our framework guides the model in extracting features that
support semantically and structurally driven matching by segmenting objects at
different scales and enhances correspondence between intra- and inter-scale regions
from the left feature map to the right using dual-level contrastive loss. HODC can
be integrated with existing stereo matching models in the training stage, requiring
no modifications to the architecture. Remarkably, using only synthetic datasets for
training, HODC achieves state-of-the-art generalization performance with various
existing stereo matching network architectures, across multiple realistic datasets.

1

Introduction

Stereo matching aims to find horizontal pixel-wise displacement, i.e.disparity, between a rectified
stereo image pair to recover depth for applications including autonomous driving, robotics, and
augmented reality. In recent years, deep learning based stereo matching networks have achieved
state-of-the-art performance in multiple benchmarks [12, 28, 32, 33], benefiting from the expressive
power of deep feature representations.
A typical stereo matching pipeline [3, 13, 51, 34] includes four stages: feature extraction, cost volume
generation, cost aggregation, and disparity regression, which is usually trained in an end-to-end way,
supervised by ground-truth disparity. As collecting dense annotations of disparity for real-world
datasets is often costly, large-scale synthetic datasets (e.g., SceneFlow [27]) are widely adopted to
train stereo matching networks. This however often leads to failures while generalizing to unseen
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

