The Poisson Midpoint Method for Langevin Dynamics:
Provably Efficient Discretization for Diffusion Models

Saravanan Kandasamy∗
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
sk3277@cornell.edu

Dheeraj Nagaraj
Google DeepMind
dheerajnagaraj@google.com

Abstract
Langevin Dynamics is a Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE) central to sampling
and generative modeling and is implemented via time discretization. Langevin
Monte Carlo (LMC), based on the Euler-Maruyama discretization, is the simplest
and most studied algorithm. LMC can suffer from slow convergence - requiring
a large number of steps of small step-size to obtain good quality samples. This
becomes stark in the case of diffusion models where a large number of steps gives
the best samples, but the quality degrades rapidly with smaller number of steps.
Randomized Midpoint Method has been recently proposed as a better discretization of Langevin dynamics for sampling from strongly log-concave distributions.
However, important applications such as diffusion models involve non-log concave
densities and contain time varying drift. We propose its variant, the Poisson Midpoint Method, which approximates a small step-size LMC with large step-sizes.
We prove that this can obtain a quadratic speed up of LMC under very weak assumptions. We apply our method to diffusion models for image generation and
show that it maintains the quality of DDPM with 1000 neural network calls with
just 50-80 neural network calls and outperforms ODE based methods with similar
compute.

1

Introduction

The task of sampling from a target distribution is central to Bayesian inference, generative modeling,
differential privacy and theoretical computer science [48, 20, 17, 25]. Sampling algorithms, based on
the discretization of a stochastic differential equation (SDE) called the Langevin Dynamics, are widely
used. The straightforward time discretization (i.e., Euler Maruyama discretization) of Langevin
dynamics, called Langevin Monte Carlo (LMC), is popular due to its simplicity. The convergence
properties of LMC have been studied extensively in the literature under various conditions on the
target distribution [8, 12, 11, 45, 15, 33, 7, 1, 6, 9, 16, 30, 53, 5]. LMC can suffer from slow
convergence to the target distribution, and often requires a large number of steps with a very fine time
discretization (i.e., small step-size), making it prohibitively expensive.
The Poisson Midpoint Method introduced in this paper approximates multiple steps of small step-size
Euler-Maruyama discretization with one step of larger step-size via stochastic approximation. In
the case of LMC, we show that our method (called PLMC) converges to the target as fast as LMC
with a much smaller step-size without any additional assumptions such as isoperimetry or strong log
concavity (up to a small additional error term). This is a variant of the Randomized Midpoint Method
(RLMC) studied in the literature [40, 18, 50] (see Section 1.1 for comparison).
∗

This work was done when SK was a student researcher at Google Research.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

