Automatically Learning Hybrid Digital Twins of
Dynamical Systems
Samuel Holt∗, Tennison Liu∗ & Mihaela van der Schaar
DAMTP, University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
{sih31, tl522, mv472}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Digital Twins (DTs) are computational models that simulate the states and temporal
dynamics of real-world systems, playing a crucial role in prediction, understanding,
and decision-making across diverse domains. However, existing approaches to
DTs often struggle to generalize to unseen conditions in data-scarce settings,
a crucial requirement for such models. To address these limitations, our work
begins by establishing the essential desiderata for effective DTs. Hybrid Digital
Twins (HDTwins) represent a promising approach to address these requirements,
modeling systems using a composition of both mechanistic and neural components.
This hybrid architecture simultaneously leverages (partial) domain knowledge and
neural network expressiveness to enhance generalization, with its modular design
facilitating improved evolvability. While existing hybrid models rely on expertspecified architectures with only parameters optimized on data, automatically
specifying and optimizing HDTwins remains intractable due to the complex search
space and the need for flexible integration of domain priors. To overcome this
complexity, we propose an evolutionary algorithm (HDTwinGen) that employs
Large Language Models (LLMs) to autonomously propose, evaluate, and optimize
HDTwins.2 Specifically, LLMs iteratively generate novel model specifications,
while offline tools are employed to optimize emitted parameters. Correspondingly,
proposed models are evaluated and evolved based on targeted feedback, enabling
the discovery of increasingly effective hybrid models. Our empirical results reveal
that HDTwinGen produces generalizable, sample-efficient, and evolvable models,
significantly advancing DTs’ efficacy in real-world applications.

1

Introduction

Digital Twins (DTs) are computational models that accurately simulate the states and temporal
dynamics of real-world systems [1, 2]. They are particularly useful in modeling dynamical systems,
which consist of multiple interdependent components that evolve over time [3, 4]. Take, for example,
the epidemiological dynamics of a contagious disease containing various components, including
infection rates, recovery rates, population movement, and intervention strategies. DTs can integrate
these factors to simulate future outcomes (e.g. predict disease spread), understand system changes
(e.g. examining shifts in disease dynamics for varying demographics), and evaluate the impact of
control measures (e.g. to curb disease transmission) [5, 6].
Desiderata. A notable differentiator between DTs and general machine learning (ML) models
is the emphasis on generalization. DTs are designed to simulate completely unseen scenarios or
interventions at inference time. Therefore, a crucial consideration is ▶ [P1] out-of-distribution
∗
2

Equal contributions; authors listed in randomized order.
Code is available at https://github.com/samholt/HDTwinGen.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

