What Makes Partial-Label Learning Algorithms
Effective?
Jiaqi Lv1,5 , Yangfan Liu1 , Shiyu Xia1 , Ning Xu1,5 , Miao Xu2 ,
Gang Niu3,1 , Min-Ling Zhang1,5 , Masashi Sugiyama3,4 , Xin Geng1,5∗
1
Southeast University 2 The University of Queensland
3
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project 4 The University of Tokyo
5
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and
Its Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
{is.jiaqi.lv, gang.niu.ml}@gmail.com,
miao.xu@uq.edu.au, sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp,
{liuyangfan, shiyu_xia, xning, zhangml, xgeng}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
A partial label (PL) specifies a set of candidate labels for an instance and partiallabel learning (PLL) trains multi-class classifiers with PLs. Recently, many methods that incorporate techniques from other domains have shown strong potential.
The expectation that stronger techniques would enhance performance has resulted
in prominent PLL methods becoming not only highly complicated but also quite
different from one another, making it challenging to choose the best direction for
future algorithm design. While it is exciting to see higher performance, this leaves
open a fundamental question: what makes a PLL method effective? We present a
comprehensive empirical analysis of this question and summarize the success of
PLL so far into some minimal algorithm design principles. Our findings reveal that
high accuracy on benchmark-simulated datasets with PLs can misleadingly amplify
the perceived effectiveness of some general techniques, which may improve representation learning but have limited impact on addressing the inherent challenges of
PLs. We further identify the common behavior among successful PLL methods as
a progressive transition from uniform to one-hot pseudo-labels, highlighting the
critical role of mini-batch PL purification in achieving top performance. Based on
our findings, we introduce a minimal working algorithm that is surprisingly simple
yet effective, and propose an improved strategy to implement the design principles,
suggesting a promising direction for improvements in PLL.

1

Introduction

Partial-label learning (PLL) [14, 12, 42] has been an established discipline in the weakly supervised
learning field [50, 51] for decades. It aims to train multi-class classifiers from instances with partiallabels (PLs)—a PL for an instance is a set of candidate labels, where a fixed but unknown candidate
is the true label.
As benchmarking on simulated PLL versions of vision datasets becomes standard practice for evaluating PLL methods, new PLL approaches are emerging that integrate diverse advanced techniques
to enhance the performance. While many methods show great promise and some headway has
been made in understanding the methodology against ambiguous label assignments [24], we find
that state-of-the-art (SOTA) approaches look quite complicated and differ significantly from each
other (Table 1), making it challenging to choose the best direction for better algorithm design.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

