VLM4Bio: A Benchmark Dataset to Evaluate
Pretrained Vision-Language Models for Trait
Discovery from Biological Images

M. Maruf1∗ Arka Daw2∗ Kazi Sajeed Mehrab1 Harish Babu Manogaran1
Abhilash Neog1 Medha Sawhney1 Mridul Khurana1 James P. Balhoff3
Yasin Bakış4 Bahadir Altintas4 Matthew J Thompson5 Elizabeth G Campolongo5
Josef C. Uyeda1 Hilmar Lapp6 Henry L. Bart Jr.4 Paula M. Mabee7
Yu Su5 Wei-Lun Chao5 Charles Stewart8 Tanya Berger-Wolf5
Wasila Dahdul9 Anuj Karpatne1
1
Virginia Tech 2 Oak Ridge National Laboratory 3 UNC Chapel Hill
4
Tulane University 5 Ohio State University 6 Duke University 7 Battelle
8
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 9 UC Irvine
{marufm,darka,karpatne}@vt.edu

Biodiversity of Organisms
Bird (10k)

Butterﬂy (10k)

Fish (10k)

Scientiﬁc Tasks
Trait
Identiﬁcation

Trait
Grounding

Trait
Referring

Trait
Counting
Species
Classiﬁcation

Multi-modal Reasoning
Prompting

Tests for
Reasoning

Contextual Prompting

False Conﬁdence
Test (FCT)

Dense Captioning
Chain-of-Thought (CoT)

None of the Above
Test (NOTA)

Figure 1: Overview of our goals and contributions. We analyze the capabilities of 12 state-of-the-art (SOTA)
vision-language models (VLMs) in answering scientific questions using images from three groups of organisms:
fishes, birds, and butterflies, over five groups of biologically relevant tasks. We also explore the effectiveness of
these models for reasoning using various prompting techniques and tests for reasoning hallucination.

Abstract
Images are increasingly becoming the currency for documenting biodiversity on
the planet, providing novel opportunities for accelerating scientific discoveries in
the field of organismal biology, especially with the advent of large vision-language
models (VLMs). We ask if pre-trained VLMs can aid scientists in answering a range
of biologically relevant questions without any additional fine-tuning. In this paper,
we evaluate the effectiveness of 12 state-of-the-art (SOTA) VLMs in the field of
organismal biology using a novel dataset, VLM4Bio, consisting of 469K questionanswer pairs involving 30K images from three groups of organisms: fishes, birds,
and butterflies, covering five biologically relevant tasks. We also explore the effects
of applying prompting techniques and tests for reasoning hallucination on the
performance of VLMs, shedding new light on the capabilities of current SOTA
VLMs in answering biologically relevant questions using images. 1

1
The code and datasets for running all the analyses reported in this paper can be found at https://github.
com/imageomics/VLM4Bio.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

