Breaking the curse of dimensionality in
structured density estimation

Robert A. Vandermeulen∗

Wai Ming Tai†

Bryon Aragam‡

Abstract
We consider the problem of estimating a structured multivariate density, subject
to Markov conditions implied by an undirected graph. In the worst case, without
Markovian assumptions, this problem suffers from the curse of dimensionality.
Our main result shows how the curse of dimensionality can be avoided or greatly
alleviated under the Markov property, and applies to arbitrary graphs. While
existing results along these lines focus on sparsity or manifold assumptions, we
introduce a new graphical quantity called “graph resilience” and show how it
controls the sample complexity. Surprisingly, although one might expect the
sample complexity of this problem to scale with local graph parameters such as the
degree, this turns out not to be the case. Through explicit examples, we compute
uniform deviation bounds and illustrate how the curse of dimensionality in density
estimation can thus be circumvented. Notable examples where the rate improves
substantially include sequential, hierarchical, and spatial data.

1

Introduction

Density estimation is a classical problem in statistical machine learning, and provides the backbone
of modern generative models such as diffusion models, which are now state-of-the-art density
estimators for a variety of applications, as well as normalizing flows, energy-based models, and
implicit generative models. At the same time, density estimation is a notoriously difficult problem
in high-dimensions, known to suffer from the so-called curse of dimensionality. When the density
depends on only a few variables or, more generally, is supported on a low-dimensional manifold, it is
known that the curse of dimensionality can be circumvented by substituting the ambient dimension d
with the effective dimension s (e.g. Lafferty and Wasserman, 2008; Yang and Tokdar, 2015). But
what happens when the distribution is spread over the entire space in a structured manner—is it still
possible to circumvent the curse of dimensionality?
Three representative examples are given in Figure 1, corresponding to sequential, hierarchical, and
spatial (or convolutional) data. In these examples, although both manifold and sparsity assumptions
are violated, there are structured dependencies that one might hope to leverage when estimating the
underlying density. These kinds of structures are pervasive in machine learning applications. For one
example, consider computer vision and imaging. Images have long been modeled as a grid graph
where adjacent pixels correspond to adjacent vertices (see Keener (2010), for example). Such an
assumption is very natural: pixels tend to be strongly dependent on nearby pixels and independent of
far away pixels. See Figure 2 for an example of this.
These examples are particularly appealing in applications, however, we emphasize that our problem
setting is considerably more general, and applies to general dependence structures given by any
∗

Much of this work was conducted at the Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning and Data (BIFOLD),
Technische Universität Berlin. Contact: robert.anton.vandermeulen@gmail.com
†
The work was done when the author was at Nanyang Technological University.
Contact:
taiwaiming2003@gmail.com
‡
University of Chicago. Contact: bryon@chicagobooth.edu
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

