Generative Forests
Richard Nock
Google Research
richardnock@google.com

Mathieu Guillame-Bert
Google
gbm@google.com

Abstract
We focus on generative AI for a type of data that still represent one of the most
prevalent form of data: tabular data. Our paper introduces two key contributions: a
new powerful class of forest-based models fit for such tasks and a simple training
algorithm with strong convergence guarantees in a boosting model that parallels
that of the original weak / strong supervised learning setting. This algorithm can be
implemented by a few tweaks to the most popular induction scheme for decision
tree induction (i.e. supervised learning) with two classes. Experiments on the
quality of generated data display substantial improvements compared to the state
of the art. The losses our algorithm minimize and the structure of our models make
them practical for related tasks that require fast estimation of a density given a
generative model and an observation (even partially specified): such tasks include
missing data imputation and density estimation. Additional experiments on these
tasks reveal that our models can be notably good contenders to diverse state of the
art methods, relying on models as diverse as (or mixing elements of) trees, neural
nets, kernels or graphical models.

1

Introduction

There is a substantial resurgence of interest in the ML community around tabular data, not just
because it is still one of the most prominent kind of data available [6]: it is recurrently a place of
sometimes heated debates on what are the best model architectures to solve related problems. For
example, even for well-posed problems with decades of theoretical formalization like supervised
learning [39], after more than a decade of deep learning disruption [22], there is still much ink spilled
in the debate decision forests vs neural nets [28]. Generative AI* makes no exception. Where the
consensus has long been established on the best categories of architectures for data like image and
text (neural nets), tabular data still flourishes with a variety of model architectures building up – or
mixing – elements from knowledge representation, logics, kernel methods, graph theory, and of
course neural nets [4, 9, 12, 31, 34, 41, 43, 44] (see Section 2). Because of the remarkable nature of
tabular data where a single variable can bring considerable information about a target to model, each
of these classes can be a relevant choice at least in some cases (such is is the conclusion of [28] in the
context of supervised learning). A key differentiator between model classes is then training and the
formal guarantees it can provide [31, 44].
In this paper, we introduce new generative models based on sets of trees that we denote as generative
forests (GF), along with a training algorithm which has two remarkable features: it is extremely
simple and brings strong convergence guarantees in a weak / strong learning model that parallels that
of the original boosting model of Valiant’s PAC learning [18]. These guarantees improve upon the
best state of the art guarantees [44, 31]. Our training algorithm, GF .B OOST, supports training from
data with missing values and is simple enough to be implementable by a few tweaks on the popular
induction scheme for decision tree induction with two classes, which is supported by a huge number
* We use this now common parlance expression on purpose, to avoid confusion with the other "generative"
problem that consists in modelling densities [7, 37].

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

