Deep Graph Neural Networks via
Posteriori-Sampling-based Node-Adaptive
Residual Module
Jingbo Zhou1,2∗, Yixuan Du2,3∗, Ruqiong Zhang2,3∗, Jun Xia1 , Zhizhi Yu3 ,
Zelin Zang1 , Di Jin3 , Carl Yang4 , Rui Zhang2†, Stan Z. Li1†
1
Westlake University, 2 Jilin University, 3 Tianjin University, 4 Emory University
{zhoujingbo, stan.zq.li}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), a type of neural network that can learn from
graph-structured data through neighborhood information aggregation, have shown
superior performance in various downstream tasks. However, as the number of
layers increases, node representations become indistinguishable, which is known
as over-smoothing. To address this issue, many residual methods have emerged.
In this paper, we focus on the over-smoothing issue and related residual methods.
Firstly, we revisit over-smoothing from the perspective of overlapping neighborhood subgraphs, and based on this, we explain how residual methods can alleviate
over-smoothing by integrating multiple orders neighborhood subgraphs to avoid the
indistinguishability of the single high-order neighborhood subgraphs. Additionally,
we reveal the drawbacks of previous residual methods, such as the lack of node
adaptability and severe loss of high-order neighborhood subgraph information, and
propose a Posterior-Sampling-based, Node-Adaptive Residual module (PSNR).
We theoretically demonstrate that PSNR can alleviate the drawbacks of previous
residual methods. Furthermore, extensive experiments verify the superiority of the
PSNR module in fully observed node classification and missing feature scenarios.
Our code is available at https://github.com/jingbo02/PSNR-GNN.

1

Introduction

GNNs have emerged in recent years as the most powerful model for processing graph-structured data
and have demonstrated exceptional performance across various fields, such as social networks [22],
recommender systems [6], and drug discovery [4]. Through the message-passing mechanism that
propagates and aggregates information of neighboring nodes, GNNs provide a general framework
for learning information on graph structure. Despite the remarkable success, according to previous
studies [17, 32], GNNs show significant performance degradation as the number of layers increase.
One of the main reasons for this situation is over-smoothing [17, 21, 32, 15]. Over-smoothing refers
to the phenomenon in which node representations become increasingly similar to each other as
GNNs recursively aggregate more neighborhood information. This indistinguishability will inevitably
degrade the performance of deep GNNs, restricting their ability to effectively model long-range
dependencies among multi-hop neighbors.
Several methods have recently been proposed to alleviate over-smoothing in deep GNNs. According
to [26], these methods fall into three categories: Normalization and Regularization [34, 33], Change
of GNN dynamics [5], and Residual connections [32, 16]. Among all of them, the residual-based
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

