Spectral-Risk Safe Reinforcement Learning
with Convergence Guarantees

Dohyeong Kim1 Taehyun Cho1 Seungyub Han1
Hojun Chung1 Kyungjae Lee2∗ Songhwai Oh1∗
1
Dep. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
2
Dep. of Statistics, Korea University

Abstract
The field of risk-constrained reinforcement learning (RCRL) has been developed
to effectively reduce the likelihood of worst-case scenarios by explicitly handling risk-measure-based constraints. However, the nonlinearity of risk measures makes it challenging to achieve convergence and optimality. To overcome
the difficulties posed by the nonlinearity, we propose a spectral risk measureconstrained RL algorithm, spectral-risk-constrained policy optimization (SRCPO),
a bilevel optimization approach that utilizes the duality of spectral risk measures. In the bilevel optimization structure, the outer problem involves optimizing dual variables derived from the risk measures, while the inner problem
involves finding an optimal policy given these dual variables. The proposed
method, to the best of our knowledge, is the first to guarantee convergence
to an optimum in the tabular setting. Furthermore, the proposed method has
been evaluated on continuous control tasks and showed the best performance
among other RCRL algorithms satisfying the constraints. Our code is available at
https://github.com/rllab-snu/Spectral-Risk-Constrained-RL.

1

Introduction

Safe reinforcement learning (Safe RL) has been extensively researched [2, 15, 25], particularly
for its applications in safety-critical areas such as robotic manipulation [3, 17] and legged robot
locomotion [28]. In safe RL, constraints are often defined by the expectation of the discounted sum
of costs [2, 25], where cost functions are defined to capture safety signals. These expectation-based
constraints can leverage existing RL techniques since the value functions for costs follow the Bellman
equation. However, they inadequately reduce the likelihood of significant costs, which can result in
worst-case outcomes, because expectations do not capture information on the tail distribution. In
real-world applications, avoiding such worst-case scenarios is particularly crucial, as they can lead to
irrecoverable damage.
In order to avoid worst-case scenarios, various safe RL methods [10, 26] attempt to define constraints
using risk measures, such as conditional value at risk (CVaR) [20] and its generalized form, spectral
risk measures [1]. Yang et al. [26] and Zhang and Weng [30] have employed a distributional critic to
estimate the risk constraints and calculate policy gradients. Zhang et al. [32] and Chow et al. [10]
have introduced auxiliary variables to estimate CVaR. These approaches have effectively prevented
worst-case outcomes by implementing risk constraints. However, the nonlinearity of risk measures
makes it difficult to develop methods that ensure optimality. To the best of our knowledge, even for
well-known risk measures such as CVaR, existing methods only guarantee local convergence [10, 32].
This highlights the need for a method that ensures convergence to a global optimum.
∗

Corresponding authors: kyungjae_lee@korea.ac.kr, songhwai@snu.ac.kr.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

