Do LLMs Build World Representations?
Probing Through the Lens of State Abstraction

Zichao Li∗
Mila, McGill University
zichao.li@mail.mcgill.ca

Yanshuai Cao
Borealis AI
yanshuai.cao@borealisai.com

Jackie C.K. Cheung
Mila, McGill University
jackie.cheung@mcgill.ca

Abstract
How do large language models (LLMs) encode the state of the world, including the
status of entities and their relations, as described by a text? While existing work
directly probes for a complete state of the world, our research explores whether and
how LLMs abstract this world state in their internal representations. We propose
a new framework for probing for world representations through the lens of state
abstraction theory from reinforcement learning, which emphasizes different levels
of abstraction, distinguishing between general abstractions that facilitate predicting
future states and goal-oriented abstractions that guide the subsequent actions to
accomplish tasks. To instantiate this framework, we design a text-based planning
task, where an LLM acts as an agent in an environment and interacts with objects
in containers to achieve a specified goal state. Our experiments reveal that finetuning as well as advanced pre-training strengthens LLM-built representations’
tendency of maintaining goal-oriented abstractions during decoding, prioritizing
task completion over recovery of the world’s state and dynamics.1

1

Introduction

Drawing inspiration from human mental models [9, 12, 22], AI researchers have introduced the concept of world models for sample-efficient and robust machine learning systems [13, 25]. Specifically,
a world model is defined to fulfill a dual role: (1) it estimates information about the world state
that may not be directly observable from the input signals, and (2) it distills essential information to
predict future states, thereby informing subsequent actions based on these predictions.
Recently, there has been growing interest in investigating whether pre-trained Transformer models [36], especially large language models (LLMs) [32], construct implicit world models. These
investigations aim to determine whether the state of the world as described in the text, either implicitly or explicitly, can be recovered from the internal representations built by Transformer models.
However, the field has produced studies with conflicting conclusions when examining different tasks.
For example, [27] shows that it is possible to accurately probe the status of entities and their semantic
relations encoded in the representations of LLMs within a discourse. Conversely, [24] report negative
results when attempting a similar yet more challenging setting. In addition, [28] successfully extracts
the board state of a partially played Othello game from the internal representation of a small-scale
GPT model [7] trained to complete game scripts.
∗
1

Work was done during a Mitacs internship at Borealis AI.
Code and dataset: https://github.com/BorealisAI/llm-world-abs

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

