United We Stand, Divided We Fall: Fingerprinting
Deep Neural Networks via Adversarial Trajectories
Tianlong Xu1 , Chen Wang1 , Gaoyang Liu∗ 1 , Yang Yang2 , Kai Peng1 , Wei Liu1
1
Hubei Key Laboratoryof Smart Internet Technology, School of EIC,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 2 School of AI, Hubei University
1
{tianlongxu, chenwang, liugaoyang, pkhust, liuwei}@hust.edu.cn, 2 yangyang@hubu.edu.cn

Abstract
In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have witnessed extensive applications, and protecting their intellectual property (IP) is thus crucial. As a noninvasive way for model IP protection, model fingerprinting has become popular.
However, existing single-point based fingerprinting methods are highly sensitive
to the changes in the decision boundary, and may suffer from the misjudgment of
the resemblance of sparse fingerprinting, yielding high false positives of innocent
models. In this paper, we propose ADV-TRA, a more robust fingerprinting scheme
that utilizes adversarial trajectories to verify the ownership of DNN models. Benefited from the intrinsic progressively adversarial level, the trajectory is capable of
tolerating greater degree of alteration in decision boundaries. We further design
novel schemes to generate a surface trajectory that involves a series of fixed-length
trajectories with dynamically adjusted step sizes. Such a design enables a more
unique and reliable fingerprinting with relatively low querying costs. Experiments
on three datasets against four types of removal attacks show that ADV-TRA exhibits
superior performance in distinguishing between infringing and innocent models,
outperforming the state-of-the-art comparisons.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have witnessed extensive applications, such as autonomous driving [1], AIGC [2] and medical diagnosis [3]. However, training a practical DNN model
requires significant computational resources, data and time. For example, the training of GPT-3 took
about 21 days with a cost of over 2.4 million dollars [4]. It is thus essential to protect the intellectual
property (IP) of DNN models, especially when the models face the risk of being exposed or stolen by
the so-called model extraction attacks [5].
Current technologies to protect model IP can be broadly categorized into two classes: model watermarking [6, 7, 8] and model fingerprinting [9, 10, 11, 12]. While the former embeds the watermark
into the model to verify the identity of suspect models, it inevitably interferes in the training phase,
which sacrifices the utility of the model or even introduces new security threats [7, 13]. So the latest
research trend has shifted toward model fingerprinting, which enables the extraction of a model’s
fingerprint without any modifications to the model itself.
A common practice of model fingerprinting methods is to generate a batch of special adversarial samples near the decision boundary as fingerprinting samples for model verification [14, 12]. However, these single-point fingerprinting samples are generated independently
from each other, and are highly sensitive to the changes in the decision boundary, given their
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

