Lookback Prophet Inequalities

Dorian Baudry
Department of Statistics,
University of Oxford
dorian.baudry@ox.ac.uk

Ziyad Benomar
ENSAE, Ecole Polytechnique,
FairPlay joint team
ziyad.benomar@ensae.fr

Vianney Perchet
CREST, ENSAE, Criteo AI LAB
Fairplay joint team
vianney.perchet@normalesup.org

Abstract
Prophet inequalities are fundamental optimal stopping problems, where a decisionmaker observes sequentially items with values sampled independently from known
distributions, and must decide at each new observation to either stop and gain the
current value or reject it irrevocably and move to the next step. This model is
often too pessimistic and does not adequately represent real-world online selection
processes. Potentially, rejected items can be revisited and a fraction of their value
can be recovered. To analyze this problem, we consider general decay functions
D1 , D2 , . . ., quantifying the value to be recovered from a rejected item, depending
on how far it has been observed in the past. We analyze how lookback improves, or
not, the competitive ratio in prophet inequalities in different order models. We show
that, under mild monotonicity assumptions on the decay functions, the problem
can be reduced to the case where all the decay functions are equal to the same
function x 7→ γx, where γ = inf x>0 inf j≥1 Dj (x)/x. Consequently, we focus on
this setting and refine the analyses of the competitive ratios, with upper and lower
bounds expressed as increasing functions of γ.

1

Introduction

Optimal stopping problems constitute a classical paradigm of decision-making under uncertainty
[Dynkin, 1963] Typically, in online algorithms, these problems are formalized as variations of the
secretary problem [Lindley, 1961] or the prophet inequality [Krengel and Sucheston, 1977]. In the
context of the prophet inequality, the decision-maker observes a finite sequence of items, each having
a value drawn independently from a known probability distribution. Upon encountering a new item,
the decision-maker faces the choice of either accepting it and concluding the selection process or
irreversibly rejecting it, with the objective of maximizing the value of the selected item. However,
while the prophet inequality problem is already used in scenarios such as posted-price mechanism
design [Hajiaghayi et al., 2007] or online auctions [Syrgkanis, 2017], it might present a pessimistic
model of real-world online selection problems. Indeed, it is in general possible in practice to revisit
previously rejected items and potentially recover them or at least recover a fraction of their value.
Consider for instance an individual navigating a city in search of a restaurant. When encountering
one, they have the choice to stop and dine at this place, continue their search, or revisit a previously
passed option, incurring a utility cost that is proportional to the distance of backtracking. In another
example drawn from the real estate market, homeowners receive offers from potential buyers. The
decision to accept or reject an offer can be revisited later, although buyer interest may have changed,
resulting in a potentially lower offer or even a lack of interest. Lastly, in the financial domain, an
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

