IMDL-BenCo: A Comprehensive Benchmark and
Codebase for Image Manipulation Detection &
Localization
Xiaochen Ma1† , Xuekang Zhu1† , Lei Su1† , Bo Du1† , Zhuohang Jiang1† , Bingkui Tong1† ,
Zeyu Lei1,2† , Xinyu Yang1† , Chi-Man Pun2 , Jiancheng Lv1,3 , Jizhe Zhou1,3∗
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, China
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macao, Macao SAR
3
Engineering Research Center of Machine Learning and Industry Intelligence, MOE, China
2

Abstract
A comprehensive benchmark is yet to be established in the Image Manipulation
Detection & Localization (IMDL) field. The absence of such a benchmark leads
to insufficient and misleading model evaluations, severely undermining the development of this field. However, the scarcity of open-sourced baseline models and
inconsistent training and evaluation protocols make conducting rigorous experiments and faithful comparisons among IMDL models challenging. To address these
challenges, we introduce IMDL-BenCo, the first comprehensive IMDL benchmark
and modular codebase. IMDL-BenCo: i) decomposes the IMDL framework into
standardized, reusable components and revises the model construction pipeline,
improving coding efficiency and customization flexibility; ii) fully implements or
incorporates training code for state-of-the-art models to establish a comprehensive
IMDL benchmark; and iii) conducts deep analysis based on the established benchmark and codebase, offering new insights into IMDL model architecture, dataset
characteristics, and evaluation standards. Specifically, IMDL-BenCo includes
common processing algorithms, 8 state-of-the-art IMDL models (1 of which are
reproduced from scratch), 2 sets of standard training and evaluation protocols, 15
GPU-accelerated evaluation metrics, and 3 kinds of robustness evaluation. This
benchmark and codebase represent a significant leap forward in calibrating the
current progress in the IMDL field and inspiring future breakthroughs. Code is
available at: https://github.com/scu-zjz/IMDLBenCo.

1

Introduction

“Experimentation is the ultimate arbiter of scientific truth." - Richard Feynman.
The empowered image manipulation or generation models drive the Image Manipulation Detection
& Localization (IMDL) task to the forefront of information forensics and security [24, 36]. While
the task is occasionally referred to as "forgery detection" [15, 13] or "tamper detection"[32, 31] in
literature, the consensus now favors the term IMDL [13] as the most apt descriptor for this study area.
The scope of "manipulation" within IMDL bounds to partial image alterations that yield semantic
discrepancies from the original content [38]. It does not pertain to purely generated images (e.g.,
images generated from pure text) or the application of image processing techniques that introduce
noise or other non-semantical changes without altering the underlying meaning of the image [5].
†
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author: Jizhe Zhou (jzzhou@scu.edu.cn)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

