QVAE-Mole: The Quantum VAE with Spherical
Latent Variable Learning for 3-D Molecule Generation

Huanjin Wu† , Xinyu Ye† , Junchi Yan∗
Dept. of CSE & School of AI & MOE Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{whj1201,xinyu_ye,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Molecule generation ideally in its 3-D form has enjoyed wide applications in
material, chemistry, life science, etc. We propose the first quantum parametric
circuit for 3-D molecule generation for its potential quantum advantage especially
considering the arrival of Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) era. We
choose the Variational AutoEncoder (VAE) scheme for its simplicity and one-shot
generation ability, which we believe is more quantum-friendly compared with the
auto-regressive generative models or diffusion models as used in classic approaches.
Specifically, we present a quantum encoding scheme designed for 3-D molecules
with qubits complexity O(C log n) (n is the number of atoms) and adopt a von
Mises-Fisher (vMF) distributed latent space to meet the inherent coherence of the
quantum system. We further design to encode conditions into quantum circuits for
property-specified generation. Experimentally, our model could generate plausible
3-D molecules and achieve competitive quantitative performance with significantly
reduced circuit parameters compared with their classic counterparts.

1

Introduction

Beyond molecule graph generation, 3-D molecule generation which can often be more challenging
yet of practical value, e.g. for drug design, has received wide attention in recent years [1]. On
the one hand, the space of possible molecules and chemical compounds is vast, often described
as a “chemical space” with an immense number of dimensions, and data-driven methods relying
on machine learning (ML) have been introduced [2, 3]. On the other hand, quantum computing
has demonstrated strong expressive capabilities in various learning and optimization applications,
including solving [4], classification [5], and discovery [6]. Particularly, it has potential advantages in
tasks related to the microphysical world, such as chemistry simulation [7], prediction of molecular
properties [8], and approximation of ground-state energy [9]. Therefore, beyond classic ML, here
we dive into the quantum world for 3-D molecule generation with the arrival of the so-called NISQ
era. However, limited by the current development of quantum hardware, quantum machine learning
(QML) models, particularly quantum generative models, are still in their infancy stages, especially
when compared to the well-developed classic neural models, thus the current performance of QML
models may not match that of SOTA classic counterparts [10–13].
Recent efforts have been made to introduce quantum methods for molecule design. QGAN-HG [14] is
a hybrid model based on Generative Adversarial Network (GAN), consisting of a classic discriminator
and a hybrid generator. However, hybrid models cannot be implemented on NISQ devices, and
∗
Corresponding author. † Equal contribution. This work was partly supported by NSFC (92370201,
62222607) and Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Major Project under Grant 2021SHZDZX0102.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

