Understanding the Transferability of Representations
via Task-Relatedness
Akshay Mehra, Yunbei Zhang, and Jihun Hamm
Tulane University
{amehra, yzhang111, jhamm3}@tulane.edu

Abstract
The growing popularity of transfer learning, due to the availability of models
pre-trained on vast amounts of data, makes it imperative to understand when the
knowledge of these pre-trained models can be transferred to obtain high-performing
models on downstream target tasks. However, the exact conditions under which
transfer learning succeeds in a cross-domain cross-task setting are still poorly
understood. To bridge this gap, we propose a novel analysis that analyzes the
transferability of the representations of pre-trained models to downstream tasks in
terms of their relatedness to a given reference task. Our analysis leads to an upper
bound on transferability in terms of task-relatedness, quantified using the difference
between the class priors, label sets, and features of the two tasks. Our experiments
using state-of-the-art pre-trained models show the effectiveness of task-relatedness
in explaining transferability on various vision and language tasks. The efficient
computability of task-relatedness even without labels of the target task and its high
correlation with the model’s accuracy after end-to-end fine-tuning on the target
task makes it a useful metric for transferability estimation. Our empirical results of
using task-relatedness on the problem of selecting the best pre-trained model from
a model zoo for a target task highlight its utility for practical problems.

1

Introduction

Transfer learning (TL) [42, 59] is a powerful tool for developing high-performance machine learning
models, especially in current times when large models [45, 11, 12, 18] pre-trained on huge amounts
of data are being fine-tuned for various downstream tasks. While large pre-trained models achieve
impressive performance on downstream tasks even in the zero-shot inference setting [45], their
performance can often be improved by fine-tuning them on data from target tasks. However, our
understanding of when representations from these models lead to classifiers that achieve high
performance (i.e., high transferability) to downstream tasks is still lacking.
Analytical works based on domain adaptation [8, 7, 52, 36, 32, 37, 38] can only explain cross-domain
tasks (i.e., when only features/label priors change across tasks) but in the TL setting, label sets can
also change (i.e., cross-task setting). Recently, [56] showed that the relatedness between the label sets
of the two tasks measured using conditional entropy can explain the difference in their transferability.
However, [56] focused only on the cross-task setting, and analysis for transferability in a general
cross-domain cross-task setting is not addressed. Apart from these analytical works, another line of
work focuses on proposing transferability metrics that correlate well with performance on downstream
tasks after end-to-end fine-tuning. We refer to these works as score-based transferability estimation
(SbTE) metrics [61, 55, 29, 40, 19, 51]. These works focus on developing scores for selecting a
pre-trained model from a model zoo, that achieves the best transferability on a target task. While
these works address a practical problem, they do not focus on providing an analysis of transferability.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

