SM3-Text-to-Query: Synthetic Multi-Model Medical
Text-to-Query Benchmark

Sithursan Sivasubramaniam∗ , Cedric Osei-Akoto∗ , Yi Zhang,
Kurt Stockinger, Jonathan Fürst†
Zurich University of Applied Sciences, Switzerland
{sivassit,oseiaced}@students.zhaw.ch, {zhay,stog,fues}@zhaw.ch

Abstract
Electronic health records (EHRs) are stored in various database systems with different database models on heterogeneous storage architectures, such as relational
databases, document stores, or graph databases. These different database models
have a big impact on query complexity and performance. While this has been
a known fact in database research, its implications for the growing number of
Text-to-Query systems have surprisingly not been investigated so far. In this paper,
we present SM3-Text-to-Query, the first multi-model medical Text-to-Query benchmark based on synthetic patient data from Synthea, following the SNOMED-CT
taxonomy—a widely used knowledge graph ontology covering medical terminology. SM3-Text-to-Query provides data representations for relational databases
(PostgreSQL), document stores (MongoDB), and graph databases (Neo4j and
GraphDB (RDF)), allowing the evaluation across four popular query languages,
namely SQL, MQL, Cypher, and SPARQL. We systematically and manually develop 408 template questions, which we augment to construct a benchmark of 10K
diverse natural language question/query pairs for these four query languages (40K
pairs overall). On our dataset, we evaluate several common in-context-learning
(ICL) approaches for a set of representative closed and open-source LLMs. Our
evaluation sheds light on the trade-offs between database models and query languages for different ICL strategies and LLMs. Last, SM3-Text-to-Query is easily
extendable to additional query languages or real, standard-based patient databases.

1

Introduction

The health sector is being increasingly digitalized, with data stored in electronic health records
(EHR) [25]. In practice, those records can be kept in various forms and systems: (i) traditional
relational databases such as PostgreSQL or Oracle implement the relational data model where data is
organized into relations (tables) that are collections of tuples (rows). Users access data through the
declarative query language SQL; (ii) popular document databases, such as MongoDB, model data as
a collection of documents in the document data model, providing data access through specialized
languages such as the MongoDB Query Language (MQL); (iii) graph databases (triple stores) model
data as property graphs (e.g., Neo4j) or semantic RDF graphs (e.g., Ontotext GraphDB), providing
interfaces through the query languages Cypher and SPARQL, respectively.
While the relational model and the SQL query language are still the primary choice for EHRs [22],
there has been an increased interest in document and graph database models due to their schema
flexibility and natural capacity to interconnect data sources across data silos [37, 11, 7]. E.g.,
AICCELERATE, a recent large-scale European pilot project on digital hospitals, uses a graph model
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

