Interpretable Concept Bottlenecks to Align
Reinforcement Learning Agents

Quentin Delfosse∗,1 Sebastian Sztwiertnia∗,1 Mark Rothermel1
Wolfgang Stammer1,2 Kristian Kersting1,2,3,4
1
Computer Science Department, TU Darmstadt, Germany
2
Hessian Center for Artificial Intelligence (hessian.AI), Darmstadt, Germany
3
Centre for Cognitive Science, TU Darmstadt, Germany
4
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), Darmstadt, Germany
{firstname.lastname}@cs.tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
Goal misalignment, reward sparsity and difficult credit assignment are only a few of
the many issues that make it difficult for deep reinforcement learning (RL) agents to
learn optimal policies. Unfortunately, the black-box nature of deep neural networks
impedes the inclusion of domain experts for inspecting the model and revising
suboptimal policies. To this end, we introduce Successive Concept Bottleneck
Agents (SCoBots), that integrate consecutive concept bottleneck (CB) layers. In
contrast to current CB models, SCoBots do not just represent concepts as properties
of individual objects, but also as relations between objects which is crucial for many
RL tasks. Our experimental results2 provide evidence of SCoBots’ competitive
performances, but also of their potential for domain experts to understand and
regularize their behavior. Among other things, SCoBots enabled us to identify a
previously unknown misalignment problem in the iconic video game, Pong, and
resolve it. Overall, SCoBots thus result in more human-aligned RL agents.

1

Introduction

Deep Reinforcement learning (RL) agents are prone to suffer from a variety of issues that hinder them
from learning optimal or generalizable policies. Prominent examples are reward sparsity [Andrychowicz et al., 2017] and difficult credit assignment [Raposo et al., 2021, Wu et al., 2024]. A more pressing
issue is the goal misalignment problem. It occurs when an agent optimizes a different side-goal,
aligned with the original target goal during training [Koch et al., 2021], but not at test time. Such
misalignments can be difficult to identify [di Langosco et al., 2022]. For instance, in this work
we discover that such a misalignment can occur in the oldest and most iconic video game, Pong
(cf. Fig. 1). In Pong, the agent’s target goal is to catch a ball with its own paddle and to return it
passed the enemy’s one. The enemy is programmed to constantly follow the ball, thus, agents can
learn to focus on the position of the enemy paddle for placing their own, rather than the position of
the ball itself. If left unchecked, such shortcut learning [Geirhos et al., 2020] may lead to a lack of
model generalization and unintuitive failures e.g. at deployment time [Zhang et al., 2021].
Recently eXplainable AI (XAI) methods have emerged to detect such shortcut behavior, by identifying
the reasons behind a model’s decisions [Schramowski et al., 2020, Roy et al., 2022, Saeed and
Omlin, 2023]. However, many XAI methods’ explanations do not faithfully present the model’s
∗
2

Equal contribution
Code available at https://github.com/k4ntz/SCoBots

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

