Controlling Multiple Errors Simultaneously with a
PAC-Bayes Bound

Reuben Adams
Department of Computer Science
University College London
reuben.adams.20@ucl.ac.uk

John Shawe-Taylor
Department of Computer Science
University College London
j.shawe-taylor@ucl.ac.uk

Benjamin Guedj
Department of Computer Science, University College London and Inria
b.guedj@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Current PAC-Bayes generalisation bounds are restricted to scalar metrics of performance, such as the loss or error rate. However, one ideally wants more informationrich certificates that control the entire distribution of possible outcomes, such
as the distribution of the test loss in regression, or the probabilities of different
mis-classifications. We provide the first PAC-Bayes bound capable of providing
such rich information by bounding the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the
empirical and true probabilities of a set of M error types, which can either be
discretized loss values for regression, or the elements of the confusion matrix (or a
partition thereof) for classification. We transform our bound into a differentiable
training objective. Our bound is especially useful in cases where the severity of
different mis-classifications may change over time; existing PAC-Bayes bounds
can only bound a particular pre-decided weighting of the error types. In contrast
our bound implicitly controls all uncountably many weightings simultaneously.

1

Introduction

Generalisation bounds are a core component of the theoretical understanding of machine learning
algorithms. For over two decades now, PAC-Bayesian theory has been at the core of studies on
generalisation abilities of machine learning algorithms. PAC-Bayes originated in the seminal work
of McAllester [1998, 1999] and was further developed by Catoni [2003, 2004, 2007], among other
authors—we refer to the surveys Guedj [2019] and Alquier [2021] for an introduction to the field. The
outstanding empirical success of deep neural networks in the past decade calls for better theoretical
understanding of deep learning, and PAC-Bayes has emerged as one of the few frameworks that
can be used to derive meaningful (and non-vacuous) generalisation bounds for neural networks:
the pioneering work of Dziugaite and Roy [2017] has been followed by a number of contributions,
including Neyshabur et al. [2018], Zhou et al. [2019], Letarte et al. [2019], Pérez-Ortiz et al. [2021],
Perez-Ortiz et al. [2021] and Biggs and Guedj [2022a,b], to name but a few.
Much of the PAC-Bayes literature focuses on the case of binary classification, or of multiclass
classification where one only distinguishes whether each classification is correct or incorrect. This is
in stark contrast to the complexity of contemporary real-world learning problems, such as medical
diagnosis where the severity of Type I and Type II errors may be crucial and context-dependent.
This work aims to bridge this gap by deriving a generalisation bound that provides information-rich
measures of performance at test time by controlling the probabilities of errors of any finite number of
user-specified types. More precisely, we bound the KL-divergence between the empirical and true
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

