Flexible task abstractions emerge in linear networks
with fast and bounded units
Kai Sandbrink∗
Exp. Psychology, Oxford
Brain Mind Institute, EPFL
Andrew M. Saxe
Gatsby Unit, UCL

Jan P. Bauer∗
ELSC, HebrewU
Gatsby Unit, UCL

Alexandra M. Proca∗
Department of Computing
Imperial College London

Christopher Summerfield
Exp. Psychology, Oxford

Ali Hummos∗†
Brain and Cognitive Sciences
MIT

Abstract
Animals survive in dynamic environments changing at arbitrary timescales, but
such data distribution shifts are a challenge to neural networks. To adapt to change,
neural systems may change a large number of parameters, which is a slow process
involving forgetting past information. In contrast, animals leverage distribution
changes to segment their stream of experience into tasks and associate them with
internal task abstractions. Animals can then respond flexibly by selecting the
appropriate task abstraction. However, how such flexible task abstractions may
arise in neural systems remains unknown. Here, we analyze a linear gated network
where the weights and gates are jointly optimized via gradient descent, but with
neuron-like constraints on the gates including a faster timescale, nonnegativity,
and bounded activity. We observe that the weights self-organize into modules
specialized for tasks or sub-tasks encountered, while the gates layer forms unique
representations that switch the appropriate weight modules (task abstractions). We
analytically reduce the learning dynamics to an effective eigenspace, revealing
a virtuous cycle: fast adapting gates drive weight specialization by protecting
previous knowledge, while weight specialization in turn increases the update rate
of the gating layer. Task switching in the gating layer accelerates as a function
of curriculum block size and task training, mirroring key findings in cognitive
neuroscience. We show that the discovered task abstractions support generalization
through both task and subtask composition, and we extend our findings to a nonlinear network switching between two tasks. Overall, our work offers a theory of
cognitive flexibility in animals as arising from joint gradient descent on synaptic
and neural gating in a neural network architecture.

1

Introduction

Humans and other animals show a remarkable capacity for flexible and adaptive behavior in the
face of changes in the environment. Brains leverage change to discover latent factors underlying
their sensory experience [Gershman and Niv, 2010, Yu et al., 2021, Castañón et al., 2021]: they
segment the computations to be learned into discrete units or ‘tasks’. After learning multiple tasks,
low-dimensional task representations emerge that are abstract (represent the task invariant to the
current input) [Bernardi et al., 2020] and compositional [Tafazoli et al., 2024]. The discovery of these
* Equal contribution, randomized order
†

Corresponding author, ahummos@MIT.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

