A Swiss Army Knife for Heterogeneous Federated
Learning: Flexible Coupling via Trace Norm

Tianchi Liao, Lele Fu, Jialong Chen, Zhen Wang, Zibin Zheng, Chuan Chen∗
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
{liaotch, fulle, chenjlong}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
{wangzh665, zhzibin, chenchuan}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
The heterogeneity issue in federated learning (FL) has attracted increasing attention,
which is attempted to be addressed by most existing methods. Currently, due to
systems and objectives heterogeneity, enabling clients to hold models of different
architectures and tasks of different demands has become an important direction in
FL. Most existing FL methods are based on the homogeneity assumption, namely,
different clients have the same architectural models with the same tasks, which are
unable to handle complex and multivariate data and tasks. To flexibly address these
heterogeneity limitations, we propose a novel federated multi-task learning framework with the help of tensor trace norm, FedSAK. Specifically, it treats each client
as a task and splits the local model into a feature extractor and a prediction head.
Clients can flexibly choose shared structures based on heterogeneous situations and
upload them to the server, which learns correlations among client models by mining model low-rank structures through tensor trace norm. Furthermore, we derive
convergence and generalization bounds under non-convex settings. Evaluated on 6
real-world datasets compared to 13 advanced FL models, FedSAK demonstrates
superior performance.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) is an effective machine learning approach that enables decentralized computations and data resources [1]. It is regarded as a promising distributed and privacy-preserving method.
A common challenge in FL is the data heterogeneity problem, in particular when the diversity of
client data distribution increases, the generalization error of the global model increases significantly
as well [2]. Therefore, to address data heterogeneity, common personalized federated learning (pFL)
methods learn a personalized model for each client in addition to the global model [3, 4, 5].
However, current research indicates that the fundamental bottleneck in executing pFL across heterogeneous clients is the misassumption of one global model can fit all clients [6]. Instead, we should
focus on exploring intrinsic collaborations across clients to obtain better local models. Unlike pFL,
the goal of federated multi-task learning (FMTL) is to simultaneously learn separate models, where
each model caters to the heterogeneous needs of each client [7]. Thus, FMTL directly addresses the
issues stemming from client heterogeneity without constructing a global model [8].
Moreover, most of the existing FL methods require all clients to train models with the same architecture (i.e., model homogeneity) [9, 10, 11]. In practical heterogeneous FL scenarios, besides data
heterogeneity, model heterogeneity and task heterogeneity are also present due to varying hardware,
computational capabilities, and requirements across clients [12, 13]. Although some FL methods to
handle model heterogeneity have emerged [14, 15, 16], many of them resort to knowledge distillation
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

