Ask, Attend, Attack: An Effective Decision-Based
Black-Box Targeted Attack for Image-to-Text Models
Qingyuan Zeng1 , Zhenzhong Wang2 , Yiu-ming Cheung3 , and Min Jiang*,4
2

1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
3
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
4
School of Informatics, Xiamen University

Abstract
While image-to-text models have demonstrated significant advancements in various
vision-language tasks, they remain susceptible to adversarial attacks. Existing
white-box attacks on image-to-text models require access to the architecture, gradients, and parameters of the target model, resulting in low practicality. Although
the recently proposed gray-box attacks have improved practicality, they suffer
from semantic loss during the training process, which limits their targeted attack
performance. To advance adversarial attacks of image-to-text models, this paper
focuses on a challenging scenario: decision-based black-box targeted attacks where
the attackers only have access to the final output text and aim to perform targeted
attacks. Specifically, we formulate the decision-based black-box targeted attack as
a large-scale optimization problem. To efficiently solve the optimization problem,
a three-stage process Ask, Attend, Attack, called AAA, is proposed to coordinate
with the solver. Ask guides attackers to create target texts that satisfy the specific
semantics. Attend identifies the crucial regions of the image for attacking, thus
reducing the search space for the subsequent Attack. Attack uses an evolutionary
algorithm to attack the crucial regions, where the attacks are semantically related
to the target texts of Ask, thus achieving targeted attacks without semantic loss.
Experimental results on transformer-based and CNN+RNN-based image-to-text
models confirmed the effectiveness of our proposed AAA.

1

Introduction

Image-to-text models, referring to generating descriptive and accurate textual descriptions of images,
have received increasing attention in various applications, including image-captioning [1, 2], visualquestion-answering [3, 4], and image-retrieval [5, 6]. Despite the remarkable progress, they are
vulnerable to deliberate attacks, giving rise to concerns about the reliability and trustworthiness
of these models in real-world scenarios. For example, one may mislead models to output harmful
content such as political slogans and hate speech by making imperceptible perturbations to images [7,
8, 9, 10, 11].
To gain insight into the reliability and trustworthiness of the image-to-text models, a series of
adversarial attack methods have been proposed to poison the outputted textual descriptions of given
* The corresponding author: Min Jiang, minjiang@xmu.edu.cn
Min Jiang and Qingyuan Zeng are with the Department of Artificial Intelligence, Key Laboratory of
Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China, School of Informatics,
Key Laboratory of Digital Protection and Intelligent Processing of Intangible Cultural Heritage of Fujian and
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

