Theoretical Investigations and Practical Enhancements
on Tail Task Risk Minimization in Meta Learning

Yiqin Lv Qi Wang∗ Dong Liang∗ Zheng Xie∗
College of Science, National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, China
Email to: {lvyiqin98,wangqi15,dongliangnudt,xiezheng81}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Meta learning is a promising paradigm in the era of large models and task distributional robustness has become an indispensable consideration in real-world
scenarios. Recent advances have examined the effectiveness of tail task risk minimization in fast adaptation robustness improvement [1]. This work contributes to
more theoretical investigations and practical enhancements in the field. Specifically,
we reduce the distributionally robust strategy to a max-min optimization problem,
constitute the Stackelberg equilibrium as the solution concept, and estimate the
convergence rate. In the presence of tail risk, we further derive the generalization
bound, establish connections with estimated quantiles, and practically improve the
studied strategy. Accordingly, extensive evaluations demonstrate the significance of
our proposal and its scalability to multimodal large models in boosting robustness.

1

Introduction

The past few years have witnessed a surge of research interest in meta learning due to its great
potential in the academia and industry [2–5]. By leveraging previous experience, such a learning
paradigm can extract knowledge as priors and empower learning models with adaptability to unseen
tasks from a few examples [6].
Nevertheless, the investigation of the robustness needs to be more comprehensive from the task
distribution perspective. In particular, the recently developed large models heavily rely on the fewshot learning capability and demand robustness of prediction in risk-sensitive scenarios [7]. For
example, when the GPT-like dialogue generation system [8–10] comes into medical consultancy
domains, imprecise answers can cause catastrophic consequences to patients, families, and even
societies in real-world scenarios. In light of these considerations, it is desirable to watch adaptation
differences across tasks when deploying meta learning models and promote task robustness study for
meeting substantial practical demands.
Recently, Wang et al. [1] proposes to increase task distributional robustness via employing the tail
risk minimization principle [11] for meta learning. In circumventing the optimization intractability
in the presence of nonconvex risk functions, a two-stage optimization strategy is adopted as the
heuristic to solve the problem. In brief, the strategy consists of two phases in iteration, respectively:
(i) estimating the risk quantile VaRα [11] with the crude Monte Carlo method [12] in the task space;
(ii) updating the meta learning model parameters from the screened subset of tasks. Such a strategy is
simple in implementation, with an improvement guarantee under certain conditions, and empirically
shows improved robustness when faced with task distributional shifts. Despite these advances, there
remain several unresolved theoretical or practical issues in the field.
∗

Correspondence Authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

