Toward Robust Incomplete Multimodal Sentiment
Analysis via Hierarchical Representation Learning

Mingcheng Li1,3∗ Dingkang Yang1,3∗ † Yang Liu1
Shunli Wang1,3
Jiawei Chen1,3
1,3
1,3
1,3
1,3
Shuaibing Wang
Jinjie Wei
Yue Jiang
Qingyao Xu
Xiaolu Hou1,3
Mingyang Sun1,3
Ziyun Qian1,3
Dongliang Kou1,3
Lihua Zhang1,2,3,4,5†
1

Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Institute of Metaverse & Intelligent Medicine, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
3
Cognition and Intelligent Technology Laboratory, Shanghai, China
4
Jilin Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligence Science and Engineering, Changchun, China
5
Engineering Research Center of AI and Robotics, Ministry of Education, Shanghai, China.
mingchengli21@m.fudan.edu.cn, dkyang20@fudan.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Multimodal Sentiment Analysis (MSA) is an important research area that aims to
understand and recognize human sentiment through multiple modalities. The complementary information provided by multimodal fusion promotes better sentiment
analysis compared to utilizing only a single modality. Nevertheless, in real-world
applications, many unavoidable factors may lead to situations of uncertain modality
missing, thus hindering the effectiveness of multimodal modeling and degrading
the model’s performance. To this end, we propose a Hierarchical Representation
Learning Framework (HRLF) for the MSA task under uncertain missing modalities. Specifically, we propose a fine-grained representation factorization module
that sufficiently extracts valuable sentiment information by factorizing modality
into sentiment-relevant and modality-specific representations through crossmodal
translation and sentiment semantic reconstruction. Moreover, a hierarchical mutual
information maximization mechanism is introduced to incrementally maximize the
mutual information between multi-scale representations to align and reconstruct the
high-level semantics in the representations. Ultimately, we propose a hierarchical
adversarial learning mechanism that further aligns and adapts the latent distribution
of sentiment-relevant representations to produce robust joint multimodal representations. Comprehensive experiments on three datasets demonstrate that HRLF
significantly improves MSA performance under uncertain modality missing cases.

1

Introduction

Multimodal sentiment analysis (MSA) has attracted wide attention in recent years. Unlike unimodal
emotion recognition tasks [9, 63, 64, 53, 56], MSA understands and recognizes human emotions
through multiple modalities, including language, audio, and visual [31, 58]. Previous studies have
shown that combining complementary information among different modalities facilitates valuable
semantic generation [41, 40, 61, 55, 62]. MSA has been well studied so far under the assumption
that all modalities are available in the training and inference phases [12, 66, 54, 57, 56, 25, 59,
60]. Nevertheless, in real-world applications, modalities may be missing due to security concerns,
background noises, sensor limitations and so on. Ultimately, these incomplete multimodal data
significantly hinder the performance of MSA. For instance, as shown in Figure 1, the entire visual
* Equal contributions. † Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

