Non-Euclidean Mixture Model for Social Network
Embedding

Roshni G. Iyer
Computer Science Department
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, California, USA
roshnigiyer@cs.ucla.edu

Yewen Wang
Computer Science Department
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, California, USA
wyw10804@gmail.com

Wei Wang
Computer Science Department
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, California, USA
weiwang@cs.ucla.edu

Yizhou Sun
Computer Science Department
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, California, USA
yzsun@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
It is largely agreed that social network links are formed due to either homophily
or social influence. Inspired by this, we aim at understanding the generation of
links via providing a novel embedding-based graph formation model. Different
from existing graph representation learning, where link generation probabilities are
defined as a simple function of the corresponding node embeddings, we model the
link generation as a mixture model of the two factors. In addition, we model the
homophily factor in spherical space and the influence factor in hyperbolic space to
accommodate the fact that (1) homophily results in cycles and (2) influence results
in hierarchies in networks. We also design a special projection to align these two
spaces. We call this model Non-Euclidean Mixture Model, i.e., NMM. We further
integrate NMM with our non-Euclidean graph variational autoencoder (VAE)
framework, NMM-GNN. NMM-GNN learns embeddings through a unified
framework which uses non-Euclidean GNN encoders, non-Euclidean Gaussian
priors, a non-Euclidean decoder, and a novel space unification loss component to
unify distinct non-Euclidean geometric spaces. Experiments on public datasets
show NMM-GNN significantly outperforms state-of-the-art baselines on social
network generation and classification tasks, demonstrating its ability to better
explain how the social network is formed.

1

Introduction

Social networks are omnipresent because they are used for modeling interactions among users on
social platforms. Social network analysis plays a key role in several applications, including detecting
underlying communities among users [1], classifying people into meaningful social classes [2],
and predicting user connectivity [3]. Most existing embedding models are designed based on the
homophily aspect of social networks [4, 5]. They utilize the intuition that associated nodes in a
social network imply feature similarity, and an edge is usually generated between similar nodes.
Prior works have used shallow embedding models to represent homophily, like matrix factorization
and random-walk (Section 2), which are parameter intensive and do not employ message passing.
As an improvement, graph neural network (GNN) models (Section 2) have been proposed to more
effectively capture homophily by representing a node through its local neighborhood context.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

