The Implicit Bias of Heterogeneity towards Invariance:
A Study of Multi-Environment Matrix Sensing

Yang Xu∗
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
xuyang1014@pku.edu.cn
Yihong Gu∗
Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering
Princeton University
yihongg@princeton.edu
Cong Fang†
School of Intelligence Science and Technology
Peking University
fangcong@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Models are expected to engage in invariance learning, which involves distinguishing the core relations that remain consistent across varying environments to ensure
the predictions are safe, robust and fair. While existing works consider specific
algorithms to realize invariance learning, we show that model has the potential to
learn invariance through standard training procedures. In other words, this paper
studies the implicit bias of Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) over heterogeneous
data and shows that the implicit bias drives the model learning towards an invariant
solution. We call the phenomenon the implicit invariance learning. Specifically,
we theoretically investigate the multi-environment low-rank matrix sensing problem where in each environment, the signal comprises (i) a lower-rank invariant
part shared across all environments; and (ii) a significantly varying environmentdependent spurious component. The key insight is, through simply employing
the large step size large-batch SGD sequentially in each environment without any
explicit regularization, the oscillation caused by heterogeneity can provably prevent
model learning spurious signals. The model reaches the invariant solution after
certain iterations. In contrast, model learned using pooled SGD over all data would
simultaneously learn both the invariant and spurious signals. Overall, we unveil
another implicit bias that is a result of the symbiosis between the heterogeneity of
data and modern algorithms, which is, to the best of our knowledge, first in the
literature.

1

Introduction

In real applications, the machine learning models are often heavily over-parameterized, which
means that the number of parameters exceeds the number of data. For over-parameterized models,
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

