LP-3DGS: Learning to Prune 3D Gaussian Splatting

Zhaoliang Zhang
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
zzhan288@jh.edu

Tianchen Song
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
tsong15@jh.edu

Li Yang
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
Charlotte, NC 28223
lyang50@uncc.edu
Rama Chellappa
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
rchella4@jhu.edu

Yongjae Lee
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85281
ylee298@asu.edu
Cheng Peng
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
cpeng26@jhu.edu

Deliang Fan
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85281
dfan@asu.edu

Abstract
Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has become one of the mainstream
methodologies for novel view synthesis (NVS) due to its high quality and fast
rendering speed. However, as a point-based scene representation, 3DGS potentially
generates a large number of Gaussians to fit the scene, leading to high memory
usage. Improvements that have been proposed require either an empirical preset pruning ratio or importance score threshold to prune the point cloud. Such
hyperparameters require multiple rounds of training to optimize and achieve the
maximum pruning ratio while maintaining the rendering quality for each scene.
In this work, we propose learning-to-prune 3DGS (LP-3DGS), where a trainable
binary mask is applied to the importance score to automatically find a favorable
pruning ratio. Instead of using the traditional straight-through estimator (STE)
method to approximate the binary mask gradient, we redesign the masking function
to leverage the Gumbel-Sigmoid method, making it differentiable and compatible
with the existing training process of 3DGS. Extensive experiments have shown
that LP-3DGS consistently achieves a good balance between efficiency and high
quality.

1

Introduction

Novel view synthesis (NVS) takes images and their corresponding camera poses as input and seeks to
render new images from different camera poses after 3D scene reconstruction. Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. [2021]) uses multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to implicitly represent the scene,
fetching the transparency and color of a point from the MLPs. NeRF has gained considerable attention
in the NVS community due to its simple implementation and excellent performance. However, in
order to obtain a point in the space, NeRF needs to perform an MLP inference. Each pixel rendered
requires processing a ray and there are many sample points along each ray. Consequently, rendering
an image requires a large amount of MLP inference operations. Thus, rendering speed becomes a
major drawback of the NeRF method.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

