Accelerated Regularized Learning
in Finite 𝑁-Person Games
Kyriakos Lotidis
Stanford University
klotidis@stanford.edu

Angeliki Giannou
University of Wisconsin–Madison
giannou@wisc.edu

Panayotis Mertikopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP
LIG 38000 Grenoble, France
panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr

Nicholas Bambos
Stanford University
bambos@stanford.edu

Abstract
Motivated by the success of Nesterov’s accelerated gradient algorithm for convex minimization problems, we examine whether it is possible to achieve similar
performance gains in the context of online learning in games. To that end, we
introduce a family of accelerated learning methods, which we call “follow the
accelerated leader” (FTXL), and which incorporates the use of momentum within
the general framework of regularized learning – and, in particular, the exponential / multiplicative weights algorithm and its variants. Drawing inspiration and
techniques from the continuous-time analysis of Nesterov’s algorithm, we show
that FTXL converges locally to strict Nash equilibria at a superlinear rate, achieving in this way an exponential speed-up over vanilla regularized learning methods
(which, by comparison, converge to strict equilibria at a geometric, linear rate).
Importantly, FTXL maintains its superlinear convergence rate in a broad range
of feedback structures, from deterministic, full information models to stochastic,
realization-based ones, and even when run with bandit, payoff-based information,
where players are only able to observe their individual realized payoffs.

1

Introduction

One of the most important milestones in convex optimization was Nesterov’s accelerated gradient
(NAG) algorithm, as proposed by Nesterov [38] in 1983. The groundbreaking achievement of
Nesterov’s algorithm was that it attained an O(1/𝑇 2 ) rate of convergence in Lipschitz smooth convex
minimization problems, thus bridging a decades-old gap between the O(1/𝑇) convergence rate of
ordinary gradient descent and the corresponding Ω(1/𝑇 2 ) lower bound for said class [37]. In this way,
Nesterov’s accelerated gradient algorithm opened the door to acceleration in optimization, leading in
turn to a wide range of other, likewise influential schemes – such as FISTA and its variants [3] – and
jumpstarting a vigorous field of research that remains extremely active to this day.
Somewhat peculiarly, despite the great success that NAG has enjoyed in all fields where optimization
plays a major role – and, in particular, machine learning and data science – its use has not percolated to
the adjoining field of game theory as a suitable algorithm for learning Nash equilibria. Historically, the
reasons for this are easy to explain: despite intense scrutiny by the community and an extensive corpus
of literature dedicated to deconstructing the algorithm’s guarantees, NAG’s update structure remains
quite opaque – and, to a certain extent, mysterious. Because of this, Nesterov’s algorithm could not
be considered as a plausible learning scheme that could be employed by boundedly rational human
agents involved in a repeated game. Given that this was the predominant tenet in economic thought
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

