Unscrambling disease progression at scale: fast
inference of event permutations with optimal transport

Peter A. Wijeratne
Sussex AI Centre
Department of Informatics
University of Sussex
Brighton, BN1 9RH
United Kingdom
p.wijeratne@sussex.ac.uk

Daniel C. Alexander
Hawkes Institute
Department of Computer Science
University College London
London, WC1E 6BT
United Kingdom
d.alexander@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Disease progression models infer group-level temporal trajectories of change in
patients’ features as a chronic degenerative condition plays out. They provide
unique insight into disease biology and staging systems with individual-level clinical utility. Discrete models consider disease progression as a latent permutation
of events, where each event corresponds to a feature becoming measurably abnormal. However, permutation inference using traditional maximum likelihood
approaches becomes prohibitive due to combinatoric explosion, severely limiting
model dimensionality and utility. Here we leverage ideas from optimal transport to
model disease progression as a latent permutation matrix of events belonging to
the Birkhoff polytope, facilitating fast inference via optimisation of the variational
lower bound. This enables a factor of 1000 times faster inference than the current
state of the art and, correspondingly, supports models with several orders of magnitude more features than the current state of the art can consider. Experiments
demonstrate the increase in speed, accuracy and robustness to noise in simulation.
Further experiments with real-world imaging data from two separate datasets, one
from Alzheimer’s disease patients, the other age-related macular degeneration,
showcase, for the first time, pixel-level disease progression events in the brain and
eye, respectively. Our method is low compute, interpretable and applicable to any
progressive condition and data modality, giving it broad potential clinical utility.

1

Introduction

The main aim of disease progression modelling is to learn a hidden underlying disease trajectory from
‘snapshots’ (sets of observations at a single time) of individuals at hidden points along the trajectory.
The classical approach is to treat the problem dynamically, using either discrete [1–9] or continuous
[10–18] models with latent variables to describe the hidden disease stage or time. An abundance of
such models have been proposed (see [19] for a comprehensive review) and have found extensive
success in providing unique interpretability and utility across a wide range of progressive diseases,
including Alzheimer’s disease (AD) [1, 20, 5, 12, 21, 22], Huntington’s disease [23–26], multiple
sclerosis [27, 28], Parkinson’s disease [29], prion disease [30], amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [31],
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder [32].
However all previous approaches make a compromise: they are either i) interpretable in feature
space but sacrifice computational tractability [33, 1, 34, 2, 5, 13, 35, 6, 36–39]; or ii) are made
computationally tractable by encoding to a latent space but sacrifice direct interpretability [40, 41].
Models of type (i) often require preprocessing or dimensionality reduction to extract a modest number
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

