Capturing the Denoising Effect of PCA via
Compression Ratio

Chandra Sekhar Mukherjee ∗
chandrasekhar.mukherjee@usc.edu

Nikhil Deorkar ∗
deorkar@usc.edu

Jiapeng Zhang ∗
jiapengz@usc.edu

Abstract
Principal component analysis (PCA) is one of the most fundamental tools in
machine learning with broad use as a dimensionality reduction and denoising tool.
In the later setting, while PCA is known to be effective at subspace recovery and is
proven to aid clustering algorithms in some specific settings, its improvement of
noisy data is still not well quantified in general.
In this paper, we propose a novel metric called compression ratio to capture
the effect of PCA on high-dimensional noisy data. We show that, for data with
underlying community structure, PCA significantly reduces the distance of data
points belonging to the same community while reducing inter-community distance
relatively mildly. We explain this phenomenon through both theoretical proofs and
experiments on real-world data.
Building on this new metric, we design a straightforward algorithm that could be
used to detect outliers. Roughly speaking, we argue that points that have a lower
variance of compression ratio do not share a common signal with others (hence
could be considered outliers).
We provide theoretical justification for this simple outlier detection algorithm and
use simulations to demonstrate that our method is competitive with popular outlier
detection tools. Finally, we run experiments on real-world high-dimension noisy
data (single-cell RNA-seq) to show that removing points from these datasets via
our outlier detection method improves the accuracy of clustering algorithms. Our
method is very competitive with popular outlier detection tools in this task.

1

Introduction

Principal component analysis, commonly known as PCA, is one of the most fundamental tools in
machine learning. PCA is primarily used as a dimensionality reduction tool that transforms highdimensional data to lower dimensions for better visualization as well as a heuristic that reduces the
complexity of the algorithms that are to be run on the data. On the other hand, it is also known
to have certain denoising effects on high-dimensional data. This denoising phenomenon has been
observed in different domains, including biological data [KAH19, VKS17], speech data [Li18], signal
measurement data [ARS+ 04, KHK19], image data [MBSP12] among others. The denoising effect of
PCA has been extensively studied over the last decades [And58, HR03, Jac05, RVdBB96, Nad08,
Nad14, VN17, MZ23, MZ24].
∗

Thomas Lord Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California. Research supported by
NSF CAREER award 2141536.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

