Action Imitation in Common Action Space for
Customized Action Image Synthesis
Wang Lin1,∗ , Jingyuan Chen1,† , Jiaxin Shi2,∗ , Zirun Guo1 , Yichen Zhu1 , Zehan Wang1 ,
Tao Jin1 , Zhou Zhao1 , Fei Wu1 , Shuicheng YAN3 , Hanwang Zhang4
Zhejiang University1 , Xmax.AI2 , Skywork AI Singapore3 , Nanyang Technological University4
{linwanglw, jingyuanchen, gzr, yc_zhu, wangzehan01,
jint_zju, zhaozhou, wufei}@zju.edu.cn
shijx12@gmail.com, shuicheng.yan@kunlun-inc.com,
hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
We propose a novel method, TwinAct, to tackle the challenge of decoupling actions and actors in order to customize the text-guided diffusion models (TGDMs)
for few-shot action image generation. TwinAct addresses the limitations of existing methods that struggle to decouple actions from other semantics (e.g., the
actor’s appearance) due to the lack of an effective inductive bias with few exemplar images. Our approach introduces a common action space, which is a
textual embedding space focused solely on actions, enabling precise customization
without actor-related details. Specifically, TwinAct involves three key steps: 1)
Building common action space based on a set of representative action phrases; 2)
Imitating the customized action within the action space; and 3) Generating highly
adaptable customized action images in diverse contexts with action similarity loss.
To comprehensively evaluate TwinAct, we construct a novel benchmark, which
provides sample images with various forms of actions. Extensive experiments
demonstrate TwinAct’s superiority in generating accurate, context-independent
customized actions while maintaining the identity consistency of different subjects, including animals, humans, and even customized actors. Project page:
https://twinact-official.github.io/TwinAct/.

1

Introduction

We are interested in customizing Text-Guided Diffusion Models (TGDMs) (e.g., Stable Diffusion [21])
to generate customized actions specified by a few user-provided images. For example, given a few
images of Black Widow’s signature three-point landing action, we can represent this action as a
unique token V ∗ and generate imaginary creation by the prompt like “Leonardo V ∗ ” (the third row in
Figure 1). One might question why we do not condition TGDMs on precise textual descriptions [21]
or sketch images [31] to generate the desired action. The reason is that actions are often unutterable,
and even with finely detailed descriptions (SD column in Figure 1) or skeleton images (ControlNet
column in Figure 1), TGDMs cannot accurately follow these instructions.
Further, can we use existing few-shot customized TGDMs [4, 7, 8, 10, 14, 22, 27] to customize
actions? Unfortunately, the answer is still no. This is because these methods fine-tune the textual
embeddings of V ∗ in prompts like “Black Widow V ∗ ” by reconstructing the corresponding image.
But, except for actions, there are many other semantics in the exemplar images that are coupled in
V ∗ , like the characteristics of the specific actors. Thus, the few-shot action images in those methods
* Equal Contribution.
†

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

