NewTerm: Benchmarking Real-Time New Terms for
Large Language Models with Annual Updates

1

Hexuan Deng1 Wenxiang Jiao Xuebo Liu1∗ Min Zhang1 Zhaopeng Tu
Institute of Computing and Intelligence, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
{hxuandeng,wenxiangjiaonju,tuzhaopeng}@gmail.com,
{liuxuebo,zhangmin2021}@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite their remarkable abilities in various tasks, large language models (LLMs)
still struggle with real-time information (e.g., new facts and terms) due to the
knowledge cutoff in their development process. However, existing benchmarks
focus on outdated content and limited fields, facing difficulties in real-time updating
and leaving new terms unexplored. To address this problem, we propose an adaptive
benchmark, NewTerm, for real-time evaluation of new terms. We design a highly
automated construction method to ensure high-quality benchmark construction
with minimal human effort, allowing flexible updates for real-time information.
Empirical results on various LLMs demonstrate over 20% performance reduction
caused by new terms. Additionally, while updates to the knowledge cutoff of
LLMs can cover some of the new terms, they are unable to generalize to more
distant new terms. We also analyze which types of terms are more challenging and
why LLMs struggle with new terms, paving the way for future research. Finally,
we construct NewTerm 2022 and 2023 to evaluate the new terms updated each
year and will continue updating annually. The benchmark and codes can be found
at https://github.com/hexuandeng/NewTerm.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable progress, achieving impressive performance
on various benchmarks across multiple domains [7, 9, 23, 37, 38]. However, they struggle with
real-time interaction [44, 70], which is crucial and challenging. In the constantly evolving internet
landscape, real-time information like new facts and terms continuously emerge, where LLMs are
expected to perform well.
Recent work has designed benchmarks to evaluate the
performance of LLMs on new facts and the effectiveness of various improvement methods [14, 46, 53, 78].
However, benchmarks based on new terms have not
been well-studied yet, which is a crucial problem that
significantly reduces model performance [43, 49].
We urgently need a real-time benchmark to annually
evaluate the performance of different LLMs and potential improvement methods toward new terms.
Figure 1: The framework for constructing
Besides, as the knowledge cutoff of LLMs is con- the benchmark based on real-time new terms
stantly updated, benchmarks for real-time informa- from the dictionary.
tion will soon become outdated. However, most ex∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

