PaDeLLM-NER: Parallel Decoding in Large Language
Models for Named Entity Recognition
Jinghui Lu 1∗ , Ziwei Yang 1∗ , Yanjie Wang 1∗ , Xuejing Liu 2 , Brian Mac Namee 3 , Can Huang 1
1
ByteDance
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
School of Computer Science, University College Dublin
{lujinghui, yangziwei.1221, wangyanjie.prince, can.huang}@bytedance.com
xuejing931210@gmail.com
brian.macnamee@ucd.ie
2

Abstract
In this study, we aim to reduce generation latency for Named Entity Recognition
(NER) with Large Language Models (LLMs). The main cause of high latency
in LLMs is the sequential decoding process, which autoregressively generates
all labels and mentions for NER, significantly increase the sequence length. To
this end, we introduce Parallel Decoding in LLM for NER (PaDeLLM-NER),
a approach that integrates seamlessly into existing generative model frameworks
without necessitating additional modules or architectural modifications. PaDeLLMNER accelerates decoding by simultaneously generating all mentions at once,
i.e., a label-mention pair per sequence. This results in shorter sequences and
faster inference. Experiments reveal that PaDeLLM-NER significantly increases
inference speed that is 1.76 to 10.22 times faster than the autoregressive approach
for both English and Chinese. Concurrently, it maintains the prediction quality as
evidenced by the micro F-score that is on par with the state-of-the-art approaches
under both zero-shot and supervised setting. All resources are available at https:
//github.com/GeorgeLuImmortal/PaDeLLM_NER.

1

Introduction

Named Entity Recognition (NER), a fundamental task in Natural Language Processing (NLP), aims to
extract structured information from unstructured text data. This includes identifying and categorizing
key elements such as Organization, Geopolitical Entity and so on (referred to as “labels”) in inputs,
and pairing them with relevant text spans extracted from the text (termed “mentions”). Conventionally,
NER tasks are carried out through an extractive paradigm that entails token-level classification and
the subsequent extraction of identified tokens [1, 2].
Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) [8–13] have revolutionized numerous
foundational tasks in NLP, including NER tasks [3–7, 14–17], through the adoption of a generative
paradigm. This paradigm involves instruction-tuning a sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) model.
The model takes a sequence of unstructured text as input and produces a sequence of structured
label-mention pairs as output. Generally, the output structured string should be formatted to meet
two criteria: (1) it should have a clear and straightforward structure that facilitates post-processing
for label and mention extraction, and (2) it needs to be generated fluidly and efficiently from the
perspective of language models [18].
∗

Equal contribution.

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

