Multi-Armed Bandits with Network Interference
Abhineet Agarwal
Department of Statistics
UC Berkeley
aa3797@berkeley.edu

Anish Agarwal
Department of IEOR
Columbia University
aa5194@columbia.edu

Lorenzo Masoero
Amazon
masoerl@amazon.com∗

Justin Whitehouse
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
jwhiteho@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Online experimentation with interference is a common challenge in modern applications such as e-commerce and adaptive clinical trials in medicine. For example,
in online marketplaces, the revenue of a good depends on discounts applied to
competing goods. Statistical inference with interference is widely studied in the
offline setting, but far less is known about how to adaptively assign treatments to
minimize regret. We address this gap by studying a multi-armed bandit (MAB)
problem where a learner (e-commerce platform) sequentially assigns one of possible A actions (discounts) to N units (goods) over T rounds to minimize regret
(maximize revenue). Unlike traditional MAB problems, the reward of each unit
depends on the treatments assigned to other units, i.e., there is interference across
the underlying network of units. With A actions and N units, minimizing regret
is combinatorially difficult since the action space grows as AN . To overcome
this issue, we study a sparse network interference model, where the reward of a
unit is only affected by the treatments assigned to s neighboring units. We use
tools from discrete Fourier analysis to develop a sparse linear representation of the
unit-specific reward rn : [A]N → R, and propose simple, linear regression-based
algorithms to minimize regret. Importantly, our algorithms achieve provably low
regret both when the learner observes the interference neighborhood for all units
and when it is unknown. This significantly generalizes other works on this topic
which impose strict conditions on the strength of interference on a known network,
and also compare regret to a markedly weaker optimal action. Empirically, we
corroborate our theoretical findings via numerical simulations.

1

Introduction

Online experimentation is an indispensable tool for modern decision-makers in settings ranging from
e-commerce marketplaces [Li et al., 2016] to adaptive clinical trials in medicine [Durand et al., 2018].
Despite the wide-spread use of online experimentation to assign treatments to units (e.g., individuals,
subgroups, or goods), a significant challenge in these settings is that outcomes of one unit are often
affected by treatments assigned to other units. That is, there is interference across the underlying
network of units. For example, in e-commerce, the revenue for a given good depends on discounts
applied to related or competing goods. In medicine, an individual’s risk of disease depends not only
on their own vaccination status but also on that of others in their network.
∗
The research presented in this paper was conducted independently and is entirely unrelated to the author’s
current appointment at Amazon.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

