SkipPredict: When to Invest in Predictions for
Scheduling

Rana Shahout
Harvard University

Michael Mitzenmacher
Harvard University

Abstract
Expanding on recent work on scheduling with predicted job sizes, we consider
the effect of the cost of predictions in queueing systems, removing the assumption in prior research that predictions are external to the system’s resources and/or
cost-free. Additionally, we introduce a novel approach to utilizing predictions,
SkipPredict, designed to address their inherent cost. Rather than uniformly applying predictions to all jobs, we propose a tailored approach that categorizes
jobs to improve the effectiveness of prediction on performance. To achieve this,
we employ one-bit “cheap predictions” to classify jobs as either short or long.
SkipPredict prioritizes predicted short jobs over long jobs, and for the long jobs,
SkipPredict applies a second round of more detailed “expensive predictions” to
approximate Shortest Remaining Processing Time for these jobs. Importantly, our
analyses take into account the cost of prediction. We derive closed-form formulas
that calculate the mean response time of jobs with size predictions accounting for
the prediction cost. We examine the effect of this cost for two distinct models in
real-world and synthetic datasets. In the external cost model, predictions are generated by external method without impacting job service times but incur a cost. In
the server time cost model, predictions themselves require server processing time
and are scheduled on the same server as the jobs.

1

Introduction

Machine learning research is advancing rapidly, reshaping even traditional algorithms and data structures. This intersection has led to the rise of “algorithms with predictions”, also called learningaugmented algorithms, where classical algorithms are optimized by incorporating advice or predictions from machine learning models (or other sources). These learning-augmented algorithms have
demonstrated their effectiveness across a range of areas, as shown in the collection of papers (git,
[n. d.]) on the subject and as discussed in the surveys (Mitzenmacher and Vassilvitskii, 2020, 2022).
Queueing systems are an example where the learning-augmented algorithm paradigm has been applied for scheduling. Several studies have examined queues with predicted service times rather
than exact service times, generally with the goal of minimizing the average time a job spends in
the system (Dell’Amico et al., 2015; Dell’Amico, 2019; Mitzenmacher, 2019, 2021; Wierman and
Nuyens, 2008), and additionally some recent works also consider scheduling jobs with deadlines
(Salman et al., 2023b,a). Minimizing response time is crucial in data centers for reduced latency,
in cloud computing for an enhanced user experience and optimized resource utilization, and in realtime telecommunication systems for maintaining reliability and performance through quick task
processing.
However, existing works do not adequately model the resources required to obtain such predictions.
They often assume that predictions are provided “for free” when a job arrives, which may not be a
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

