TFG: Unified Training-Free Guidance
for Diffusion Models
Haotian Ye1∗

Haowei Lin2∗
Yitao Liang2

Jiaqi Han1∗
Jianzhu Ma3
Stefano Ermon1
1
2
Stanford University Peking University

Minkai Xu1
James Zou1
3

Sheng Liu1

Tsinghua University

Abstract
Given an unconditional diffusion model and a predictor for a target property
of interest (e.g., a classifier), the goal of training-free guidance is to generate
samples with desirable target properties without additional training. Existing
methods, though effective in various individual applications, often lack theoretical
grounding and rigorous testing on extensive benchmarks. As a result, they could
even fail on simple tasks, and applying them to a new problem becomes unavoidably
difficult. This paper introduces a novel algorithmic framework encompassing
existing methods as special cases, unifying the study of training-free guidance into
the analysis of an algorithm-agnostic design space. Via theoretical and empirical
investigation, we propose an efficient and effective hyper-parameter searching
strategy that can be readily applied to any downstream task. We systematically
benchmark across 7 diffusion models on 16 tasks with 40 targets, and improve
performance by 8.5% on average. Our framework and benchmark offer a solid
foundation for conditional generation in a training-free manner.1

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in generative models, particularly diffusion models [61, 21, 62, 66], have
demonstrated remarkable effectiveness across vision [65, 48, 52], small molecules [74, 73, 24],
proteins[1, 72], audio [35, 29], 3D objects [40, 41], and many more. Diffusion models estimate the
gradient of log density (i.e., Stein score, [67]) of the data distribution [65] via denoising learning
objectives, and can generate new samples via an iterative denoising process. With impressive
scalability to billions of data [58], future diffusion models have the potential to serve as foundational
generative models across a wide range of applications. Consequently, the problem of conditional
generation based on these models, i.e., tailoring outputs to satisfy user-defined criteria such as labels,
attributes, energies, and spatial-temporal information, is becoming increasingly important [63, 2].
Conditional generation methods like classifier-based guidance [66, 7] and classifier-free guidance [23]
typically require training a specialized model for each conditioning signal (e.g., a noise-conditional
classifier or a text-conditional denoiser). This resource-intensive and time-consuming process greatly
limits their applicability. In contrast, training-free guidance aims to generate samples that align with
certain targets specified through an off-the-shelf differentiable target predictor without involving any
additional training. Here, a target predictor can be any classifier, loss function, probability function,
or energy function used to score the quality of the generated samples.
In classifier-based guidance [66, 7], where a noise-conditional classifier is specifically trained to
predict the target property on both clean and noisy samples, incorporating guidance in the diffusion
∗
1

Equal contribution. Corresponding to mailto:haotianye@stanford.edu.
Code is available at https://github.com/YWolfeee/Training-Free-Guidance.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

