ZOPP: A Framework of Zero-shot Offboard Panoptic
Perception for Autonomous Driving
Tao Ma1,2∗

Hongbin Zhou2∗

Bo Zhang2

Qiusheng Huang2∗

Min Dou2

Xuemeng Yang2

Yu Qiao2

Jianfei Guo2

Botian Shi2

Hongsheng Li1,3
1

Multimedia Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 3 CPII

taoma@link.cuhk.edu.hk, hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
{zhouhongbin, huangqiusheng, yangxuemeng, shibotian}@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
Offboard perception aims to automatically generate high-quality 3D labels for
autonomous driving (AD) scenes. Existing offboard methods focus on 3D object
detection with closed-set taxonomy and fail to match human-level recognition
capability on the rapidly evolving perception tasks. Due to heavy reliance on human
labels and the prevalence of data imbalance and sparsity, a unified framework
for offboard auto-labeling various elements in AD scenes that meets the distinct
needs of perception tasks is not being fully explored. In this paper, we propose a
novel multi-modal Zero-shot Offboard Panoptic Perception (ZOPP) framework for
autonomous driving scenes. ZOPP integrates the powerful zero-shot recognition
capabilities of vision foundation models and 3D representations derived from point
clouds. To the best of our knowledge, ZOPP represents a pioneering effort in
the domain of multi-modal panoptic perception and auto labeling for autonomous
driving scenes. We conduct comprehensive empirical studies and evaluations on
Waymo open dataset to validate the proposed ZOPP on various perception tasks.
To further explore the usability and extensibility of our proposed ZOPP, we also
conduct experiments in downstream applications. The results further demonstrate
the great potential of our ZOPP for real-world scenarios. The source code will be
released at https://github.com/PJLab-ADG/ZOPP.

1

Introduction

Comprehensive perception and understanding of 3D scenes are important for autonomous driving
(AD). We have witnessed the evolution of machine perception at different levels within a short period:
from single-modal [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12] to multi-modal inputs [13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18],
from limited categories to open set [19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25], from 3D box to 3D occupancy [26,
27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32], and from low-level detection to high-level understanding. Though remarkable,
to train a model for different AD perception tasks, huge amounts of high-quality data and labels are
still required, which is time-consuming and expensive. Therefore, it is essential to come up with an
efficient solution to cope with such rapid changes.
∗

Equally contributed to the work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

