Learning Partitions from Context

Simon Buchholz
Department for Empirical Inference
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen AI Center
Tübingen, Germany
sbuchholz@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of learning the structure of a discrete set of
N tokens based on their interactions with other tokens. We focus on a setting
where the tokens can be partitioned into a small number of classes, and there exists
a real-valued function f defined on certain sets of tokens. This function, which
captures the interactions between tokens, depends only on the class memberships
of its arguments. The goal is to recover the class memberships of all tokens from
a finite number of samples of f . We begin by analyzing this problem from both
complexity-theoretic and information-theoretic viewpoints. We prove that it is
NP-complete in general, and for random instances, we show that on the order
of N ln(N ) samples, implying very sparse interactions, suffice to identify the
partition. We then investigate the conditions under which gradient flow dynamics
of token embeddings can reveal the class structure, finding that this is achievable
in certain settings when given on the order of N 2 ln2 (N ) samples.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning systems are able to learn extremely complicated relations from data. They
often rely on learned embeddings of discrete tokens in a continuous space. This is notably true for
Large Language Models (LLMs) [9, 17, 25, 23] which encode their input by converting text into a
sequence of discrete tokens that are embedded in a high dimensional embedding space and those
embeddings are fed into, e.g., a transformer architecture [28] which allows predicting the next token.
But also in the other domains, e.g., in vision, discrete embeddings are frequently used as a component
of deep learning architectures [27, 10] as this enables capturing complex concepts that are often
discrete.
It was observed that after training, these word embeddings exhibit many interesting structures. The
most prominent example probably is the observation that the difference of the Word2Vec embedding
vectors of the nouns ’king’ and ’queen’ approximately equals the difference of the embeddings of
’man’ and ’woman’ [21, 22]. Similarly, it was found that using word similarity as an inductive bias to
structure latent spaces helps downstream performance [4]. Thus, a properly structured latent space
seems to be an important ingredient to capture the intricate correlations in complex data.
A proper theoretical understanding of such complex models currently remains an elusive goal.
However, there have been various attempts to understand various components of deep learning
models. Many works investigated the behavior of feedforward-networks in particular focusing on
shallow networks [2, 8] and asymptotic regimes [15, 29]. More recently, several works investigated
transformer architectures (often focusing on the one layer case with linearized attention mechanism)
[16, 1, 30, 12]. On a technical level [11] is closely related as they study the large depth limit of
transformers through the lens of particle systems (however in their case time corresponds to depth,
while in our case it corresponds to training time). A feature shared by many of those works is that
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

