3D Gaussian Splatting as
Markov Chain Monte Carlo
Shakiba Kheradmand1 , Daniel Rebain1 , Gopal Sharma1 ,
Weiwei Sun1 , Yang-Che Tseng1 , Hossam Isack2 , Abhishek Kar2 ,
Andrea Tagliasacchi3, 4, 5 , Kwang Moo Yi1
1

3

University of British Columbia, 2 Google Research,
Google DeepMind, 4 Simon Fraser University, 5 University of Toronto
https://ubc-vision.github.io/3dgs-mcmc

Abstract
While 3D Gaussian Splatting has recently become popular for neural rendering,
current methods rely on carefully engineered cloning and splitting strategies for
placing Gaussians, which can lead to poor-quality renderings, and reliance on a
good initialization. In this work, we rethink the set of 3D Gaussians as a random
sample drawn from an underlying probability distribution describing the physical
representation of the scene—in other words, Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
samples. Under this view, we show that the 3D Gaussian updates can be converted
as Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics (SGLD) update by simply introducing
noise. We then rewrite the densification and pruning strategies in 3D Gaussian
Splatting as simply a deterministic state transition of MCMC samples, removing
these heuristics from the framework. To do so, we revise the ‘cloning’ of Gaussians
into a relocalization scheme that approximately preserves sample probability. To
encourage efficient use of Gaussians, we introduce a regularizer that promotes the
removal of unused Gaussians. On various standard evaluation scenes, we show that
our method provides improved rendering quality, easy control over the number of
Gaussians, and robustness to initialization.

1

Introduction

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have been at the forefront of these advancements, providing impressive results through implicit modeling via neural networks, the landscape is further evolving with the
introduction of 3D Gaussian splatting.
Neural rendering has seen a significant advancement with the introduction of Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRF) [28], and more recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [19]. 3D Gaussian Splatting
became highly popular thanks to its speed and efficiency—it can render high-quality images in a
fraction of the time required by NeRF. Unsurprisingly, various extensions to 3D Gaussian Splatting
have been proposed, such as extending 3D Gaussians to dynamic scenes [43, 41], making them robust
to aliasing effects [48, 42], and generative 3D content creation [52, 49, 36].
However, despite the various extensions, a common shortcoming of these methods is that they mostly
rely on the same initialization and densification strategy for placing the Gaussians: either the one
originally suggested by [19], or other recently proposed variations [4]. Specifically, they rely on
carefully engineered cloning and splitting heuristics for placing Gaussians [19, see “adaptive density
control”]. Depending on the state of each Gaussian, they are cloned, split, or pruned, which is
the primary way to control the number of Gaussians within the 3DGS representation. Moreover,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

