RFLPA: A Robust Federated Learning Framework
against Poisoning Attacks with Secure Aggregation

Peihua Mai

Ran Yan
National University of Singapore

Yan Pang ∗

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) allows multiple devices to train a model collaboratively
without sharing their data. Despite its benefits, FL is vulnerable to privacy leakage
and poisoning attacks. To address the privacy concern, secure aggregation (SecAgg)
is often used to obtain the aggregation of gradients on sever without inspecting
individual user updates. Unfortunately, existing defense strategies against poisoning
attacks rely on the analysis of local updates in plaintext, making them incompatible
with SecAgg. To reconcile the conflicts, we propose a robust federated learning
framework against poisoning attacks (RFLPA) based on SecAgg protocol. Our
framework computes the cosine similarity between local updates and server updates
to conduct robust aggregation. Furthermore, we leverage verifiable packed Shamir
secret sharing to achieve reduced communication cost of O(M + N ) per user, and
design a novel dot product aggregation algorithm to resolve the issue of increased
information leakage. Our experimental results show that RFLPA significantly
reduces communication and computation overhead by over 75% compared to
the state-of-the-art secret sharing method, BREA, while maintaining competitive
accuracy.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) [1–5] is a promising machine learning technique that has been gaining
attention in recent years. It enables numerous devices to collaborate on building a machine learning
model without sharing their data with each other. Compared with traditional centralized machine
learning, FL preserves the data privacy by ensuring that sensitive data remain on local devices.
Despite its benefits, FL still has two key concerns to be addressed. Firstly, there is a threat of privacy
leakage from local update. Recent works have demonstrated that the individual updates could reveal
sensitive information, such as properties of the training data [6, 7], or even allows the server to
reconstruct the training data [8, 9]. The second issue is that FL is vulnerable to poisoning attacks.
Indeed, malicious users could send manipulated updates to corrupt the global model at their will [10].
The poisoning attacks may degrade the performance of the model, in the case of untargeted attacks,
or bias the model’s prediction towards a specific target labels, in the case of targeted attacks [11].
Secure aggregation (SecAgg) has become a potential solution to address the privacy concern. Under
SecAgg protocol, the server could obtain the sum of gradients without inspecting individual user
updates [12, 13]. However, this protocol poses a significant challenge in resisting poisoning attacks in
FL. Most defense strategies [14, 15] require the server to access local updates to detect the attackers,
which increases the risk of privacy leakage. The contradiction makes it difficult to develop a FL
framework that simultaneously resolves the privacy and robustness concerns.
To our best knowledge, BREA is the state-of-the-art FL framework that defends against poisoning
attacks using secret sharing-based SecAgg protocol [16]. Based on verifiable secret sharing, their
∗

Correspondence to bizpyj@nus.edu.sg

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

