Fairness-Aware Estimation of Graphical Models

Zhuoping Zhou∗, Davoud Ataee Tarzanagh∗, Bojian Hou∗, Qi Long†, Li Shen†
University of Pennsylvania
{zhuopinz@sas., tarzanaq@}upenn.edu
{bojian.hou, qlong, li.shen}@pennmedicine.upenn.edu

Abstract
This paper examines the issue of fairness in the estimation of graphical models
(GMs), particularly Gaussian, Covariance, and Ising models. These models play a
vital role in understanding complex relationships in high-dimensional data. However, standard GMs can result in biased outcomes, especially when the underlying
data involves sensitive characteristics or protected groups. To address this, we
introduce a comprehensive framework designed to reduce bias in the estimation
of GMs related to protected attributes. Our approach involves the integration of
the pairwise graph disparity error and a tailored loss function into a nonsmooth
multi-objective optimization problem, striving to achieve fairness across different
sensitive groups while maintaining the effectiveness of the GMs. Experimental
evaluations on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that our framework
effectively mitigates bias without undermining GMs’ performance.

1

Introduction

Graphical models (GMs) are probabilistic models that use graphs to represent dependencies between
random variables [34]. They are essential in domains such as gene expression [91], social networks [17], computer vision [33], and recommendation systems [8]. The capacity of GMs to handle
complex dependencies makes them crucial across various data-intensive disciplines. Therefore, as
our society’s reliance on machine learning grows, ensuring the fairness of these models becomes
increasingly paramount; see Section 1.1 for further discussions. While significant research has
addressed fairness in supervised learning [29], the domain of unsupervised learning, particularly in
the estimation of GMs, remains less explored.
We address the fair estimation of sparse GMs where the number of variables P is much larger than
the number of observations N [22, 16, 43]. We focus on three types of GMs:
I. Gaussian Graphical Model: Rows X1: , . . . , XN : in the data matrix X ∈ RN ×P are i.i.d.
from a multivariate Gaussian distribution N (0, Σ). The conditional independence graph
is determined by the sparsity of the inverse covariance matrix Σ−1 , where (Σ−1 )jj ′ = 0
indicates conditional independence between the jth and j ′ th variables.
II. Gaussian Covariance Graph Model: Rows X1: , . . . , XN : are i.i.d. from N (0, Σ). The
marginal independence graph is determined by the sparsity of the covariance matrix Σ,
where Σjj ′ = 0 indicates marginal independence between the jth and j ′ th variables.
III. Binary Ising Graphical Model: Rows X1: , . . . , XN : are binary vectors and i.i.d. with
P
X
X

−1
p(x; Θ) = (Z(Θ)) exp
θjj xj +
θjj ′ xj xj ′ .
(1)
j=1

1≤j<j ′ ≤P

Here, Θ is a symmetric matrix, and Z(Θ) normalizes the density. θjj ′ = 0 indicates
conditional independence between the jth and j ′ th variables. The sparsity pattern of Θ
reflects the conditional independence graph.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

