Global Lyapunov functions: a long-standing open
problem in mathematics, with symbolic transformers

Alberto Alfarano∗
FAIR, Meta
albealfa@meta.com

François Charton∗
FAIR, Meta – CERMICS, Ecole des Ponts
fcharton@meta.com

Amaury Hayat∗
CERMICS, Ecole des Ponts — Institut Polytechnique de Paris
amaury.hayat@enpc.fr

Abstract
Despite their spectacular progress, language models still struggle on complex reasoning tasks, such as advanced mathematics. We consider a long-standing open
problem in mathematics: discovering a Lyapunov function that ensures the global
stability of a dynamical system. This problem has no known general solution, and
algorithmic solvers only exist for some small polynomial systems. We propose a
new method for generating synthetic training samples from random solutions, and
show that sequence-to-sequence transformers trained on such datasets perform better than algorithmic solvers and humans on polynomial systems, and can discover
new Lyapunov functions for non-polynomial systems.

1

Introduction

As large language models achieve human-level performance over a broad set of tasks [4, 35, 45],
their capability to reason becomes a focus of discussion and research. There is no single definition
of reasoning, and work in this area encompasses factuality, real world alignment, compositionality,
the discovery and following of rules, &c. Still, mathematics are considered as one of the purest, and
most demanding, forms of reasoning [17]. As such, solving research-level mathematical problems is
a major milestone in demonstrating the reasoning capabilities of language models. Such an advance
in AI would also transform mathematical practice.
There is little research on applying language models to open problems of mathematics. Except a
few papers on combinatorial optimization and graph theory [34, 39], most prior works focus on
problems with known solutions [37, 23, 30, 8]. We believe this lack of results is due to two main
reasons. First, research problems may require specialized work by mathematicians [6] before they
can be handed to language models. Second, most math transformers are trained on sets of problems
and solutions which are hard to generate in the case of open problems, when no generic method for
finding a solution is known.
In this paper, we focus on a long-standing, yet easy to formalize, open problem in mathematics:
discovering the Lyapunov functions that control the global stability of dynamical systems – the
boundedness of their solutions when time goes to infinity with respect to an equilibrium or an orbit. A
famous instance of this problem is the three-body problem: the long-term stability of a system of three
celestial bodies subjected to gravitation. The stability problem was studied by Newton, Lagrange and
Poincaré. Lyapunov discovered that stability is guaranteed if an entropy-like function for the system
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

