ViLCo-Bench: VIdeo Language COntinual learning
Benchmark
Tianqi Tang1 ∗
School of Computer Science Engineering,
University of New South Wales, Australia
tianqi.tang@unsw.edu.au

Shohreh Deldari ∗
School of Computer Science Engineering
University of New South Wales, Australia
s.deldari@unsw.edu.au

Hao Xue
School of Computer Science Engineering
University of New South Wales, Australia
hao.xue1@unsw.edu.au
Celso De Melo
DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory
USA
celso.miguel.de.melo@gmail.com

Flora Salim
School of Computer Science Engineering,
University of New South Wales, Australia
flora.salim@unsw.edu.au

Abstract
Video language continual learning involves continuously adapting to information
from video and text inputs, enhancing a model’s ability to handle new tasks while
retaining prior knowledge. This field is a relatively under-explored area, and
establishing appropriate datasets is crucial for facilitating communication and
research in this field. In this study, we present the first dedicated benchmark,
ViLCo-Bench, designed to evaluate continual learning models across a range of
video-text tasks. The dataset comprises ten-minute-long videos and corresponding
language queries collected from publicly available datasets. Additionally, we
introduce a novel memory-efficient framework that incorporates self-supervised
learning and mimics long-term and short-term memory effects. This framework
addresses challenges including memory complexity from long video clips, natural
language complexity from open queries, and text-video misalignment. We posit that
ViLCo-Bench, with greater complexity compared to existing continual learning
benchmarks, would serve as a critical tool for exploring the video-language domain,
extending beyond conventional class-incremental tasks, and addressing complex
and limited annotation issues. The curated data, evaluations, and our novel method
are available at https://github.com/cruiseresearchgroup/ViLCo.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in large multimodal foundation models have significantly revolutionized the
field of multimodal machine learning. These models are typically trained on static large-scale datasets,
which can be accessed simultaneously. However, real-world applications, such as autonomous driving
and household robots, require continuously incoming data streams and exhibit inevitable shifts
in domain and data distribution. Re-training from scratch for new data is impractical due to the
significant computational resources and time required. Therefore, adopting a Continual Learning
∗

Co-first authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.
Approved for public release: distribution is unlimited.

