Transductive Learning Is Compact

Julian Asilis
USC
asilis@usc.edu

Siddartha Devic
USC
devic@usc.edu

Vatsal Sharan
USC
vsharan@usc.edu

Shaddin Dughmi
USC
shaddin@usc.edu
Shang-Hua Teng
USC
shanghua@usc.edu

Abstract
We demonstrate a compactness result holding broadly across supervised learning
with a general class of loss functions: Any hypothesis class H is learnable with
transductive sample complexity m precisely when all of its finite projections are
learnable with sample complexity m. We prove that this exact form of compactness
holds for realizable and agnostic learning with respect to any proper metric loss
function (e.g., any norm on Rd ) and any continuous loss on a compact space
(e.g., cross-entropy, squared loss). For realizable learning with improper metric
losses, we show that exact compactness of sample complexity can fail, and provide
matching upper and lower bounds of a factor of 2 on the extent to which such
sample complexities can differ. We conjecture that larger gaps are possible for the
agnostic case. Furthermore, invoking the equivalence between sample complexities
in the PAC and transductive models (up to lower order factors, in the realizable case)
permits us to directly port our results to the PAC model, revealing an almost-exact
form of compactness holding broadly in PAC learning.

1

Introduction

Compactness results in mathematics describe the behavior by which, roughly speaking, an infinite
system can be entirely understood by inspecting its finite subsystems: An infinite graph is k-colorable
precisely when its finite subgraphs are all k-colorable [De Bruijn and Erdös, 1951], an infinite
collection of compact sets in Rd has non-empty intersection precisely when the same is true of its
finite subcollections, etc. In each case, compactness reveals a profound and striking structure, by
which local understanding of a problem immediately yields global understanding.
We demonstrate that supervised learning in the transductive model enjoys such structure. First, let us
briefly review the transductive model, a close relative of the PAC model. In the realizable setting with
a class of hypotheses H ⊆ Y X , it is defined by the following sequence of steps:
1. An adversary selects unlabeled data S = (x1 , . . . , xn ) ∈ X n and a hypothesis h ∈ H.
2. The unlabeled datapoints S are displayed to the learner.
3. One datapoint xi is selected uniformly at random from S. The remaining datapoints
S−i = (x1 , . . . , xi−1 , xi+1 , . . . , xn )
and their labels under h are displayed to the learner.
4. The learner is prompted to predict the label of xi , i.e., h(xi ).
The expected error incurred by the learner over the uniformly random choice of xi is its transductive
error on this learning instance, from which one can easily define the transductive sample complexity
of a learner and of a hypothesis class.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

