Byzantine Robustness and Partial Participation Can
Be Achieved at Once: Just Clip Gradient Differences

Grigory Malinovsky∗
KAUST†, MBZUAI‡

Peter Richtárik
KAUST

Samuel Horváth
MBZUAI

Eduard Gorbunov§
MBZUAI

Abstract
Distributed learning has emerged as a leading paradigm for training large machine
learning models. However, in real-world scenarios, participants may be unreliable
or malicious, posing a significant challenge to the integrity and accuracy of the
trained models. Byzantine fault tolerance mechanisms have been proposed to
address these issues, but they often assume full participation from all clients, which
is not always practical due to the unavailability of some clients or communication
constraints. In our work, we propose the first distributed method with client
sampling and provable tolerance to Byzantine workers. The key idea behind the
developed method is the use of gradient clipping to control stochastic gradient
differences in recursive variance reduction. This allows us to bound the potential
harm caused by Byzantine workers, even during iterations when all sampled clients
are Byzantine. Furthermore, we incorporate communication compression into the
method to enhance communication efficiency. Under general assumptions, we
prove convergence rates for the proposed method that match the existing state-ofthe-art (SOTA) theoretical results. We also propose a heuristic on adjusting any
Byzantine-robust method to a partial participation scenario via clipping.

1

Introduction

Distributed optimization problems are a cornerstone of modern machine learning research. They
naturally arise in scenarios where data is distributed across multiple clients; for instance, this is typical
in Federated Learning (FL) (Konečný et al., 2016; Kairouz et al., 2021). Such problems require
specialized algorithms adapted to the distributed setup. Additionally, the adoption of distributed
optimization methods is motivated by the sheer computational complexity involved in training modern
machine learning models. Many models deal with massive datasets and intricate architectures,
rendering training infeasible on a single machine (Li, 2020). Distributed methods, by parallelizing
computations across multiple machines, offer a pragmatic solution to accelerate training and address
these computational challenges, thus pushing the boundaries of machine learning capabilities.
To make distributed training accessible to the broader community, collaborative learning approaches
have been actively studied in recent years (Kijsipongse et al., 2018b; Ryabinin and Gusev, 2020;
Atre et al., 2021; Diskin et al., 2021a). In such applications, there is a high risk of the occurrence
of so-called Byzantine workers (Lamport et al., 1982; Su and Vaidya, 2016)—participants who can
violate the prescribed distributed algorithm/protocol either intentionally or simply because they are
faulty. In general, such workers may even have access to some private data of certain participants and
may collude to increase their impact on the training. Since the ultimate goal is to achieve robustness
∗

Part of the work was done when G. Malinovsky was visiting MBZUAI.
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology.
‡
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence.
§
Corresponding author: eduard.gorbunov@mbzuai.ac.ae.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

