TurboHopp: Accelerated Molecule Scaffold Hopping
with Consistency Models
Kiwoong Yoo1 , Owen Oertell2 , Junhyun Lee3 , Sanghoon Lee1,3 , and Jaewoo Kang∗1,3
1

AIGEN Sciences
Cornell University
3
Korea University

2

kiwoong.yoo@aigensciences.com, ojo2@cornell.edu, ljhyun33@korea.ac.kr,
sanghoon.lee@aigensciences.com, kangj@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Navigating the vast chemical space of druggable compounds is a formidable
challenge in drug discovery, where generative models are increasingly employed
to identify viable candidates. Conditional 3D structure-based drug design (3DSBDD) models, which take into account complex three-dimensional interactions
and molecular geometries, are particularly promising. Scaffold hopping is an
efficient strategy that facilitates the identification of similar active compounds by
strategically modifying the core structure of molecules, effectively narrowing the
wide chemical space and enhancing the discovery of drug-like products. However,
the practical application of 3D-SBDD generative models is hampered by their slow
processing speeds. To address this bottleneck, we introduce TurboHopp, an accelerated pocket-conditioned 3D scaffold hopping model that merges the strategic
effectiveness of traditional scaffold hopping with rapid generation capabilities of
consistency models. This synergy not only enhances efficiency but also significantly boosts generation speeds, achieving up to 30 times faster inference speed as
well as superior generation quality compared to existing diffusion-based models,
establishing TurboHopp as a powerful tool in drug discovery. Supported by faster
inference speed, we further optimize our model, using Reinforcement Learning
for Consistency Models (RLCM), to output desirable molecules. We demonstrate
the broad applicability of TurboHopp across multiple drug discovery scenarios,
underscoring its potential in diverse molecular settings. The code is provided at
https://github.com/orgw/TurboHopp

1

Introduction

The vast chemical space, with up to 1063 potential molecules (molecular weight under 500 Da)
(Kirkpatrick and Ellis [2004]), presents immense challenges in drug discovery, where the process
often extends over a decade and incurs costs in the billions. Recent strides in molecular design
have introduced advanced generative models that excel in de-novo generation and optimization
within 3D molecular space (Isert et al. [2023]). Despite these technological advances, challenges
persist, such as ensuring synthesizability (Gao et al. [2021], Fialková et al. [2021]) and maintaining
desirable drug-like properties. The scarcity of protein-ligand complex data further complicates
these demanding issues. While 1D/2D models attempt to address these challenges though various
methods (Loeffler et al. [2024]), they often fall short in representing true 3D structures, and typically
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

