M A N O: Exploiting Matrix Norm for Unsupervised
Accuracy Estimation Under Distribution Shifts

Renchunzi Xie*
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore

Ambroise Odonnat*
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Inria⋄
Paris, France

renchunzi.xie@ntu.edu.sg

ambroise.odonnat@gmail.com

Vasilii Feofanov*
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Paris, France

Weijian Deng
Australian National University
Canberra, Australia

Jianfeng Zhang
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Shenzhen, China

vasilii.feofanov@gmail.com

weijian.deng@anu.edu.au

zhangjianfeng3@huawei.com

Bo An
Skywork AI
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore
boan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Leveraging the model’s outputs, specifically the logits, is a common approach to
estimating the test accuracy of a pre-trained neural network on out-of-distribution
(OOD) samples without requiring access to the corresponding ground-truth labels. Despite their ease of implementation and computational efficiency, current
logit-based methods are vulnerable to overconfidence issues, leading to prediction
bias, especially under the natural shift. In this work, we first study the relationship between logits and generalization performance from the view of low-density
separation assumption. Our findings motivate our proposed method M A N O that
(1) applies a data-dependent normalization on the logits to reduce prediction bias,
and (2) takes the Lp norm of the matrix of normalized logits as the estimation
score. Our theoretical analysis highlights the connection between the provided
score and the model’s uncertainty. We conduct an extensive empirical study
on common unsupervised accuracy estimation benchmarks and demonstrate that
M A N O achieves state-of-the-art performance across various architectures in the
presence of synthetic, natural, or subpopulation shifts. The code is available at
https://github.com/Renchunzi-Xie/MaNo.

1

Introduction

The deployment of machine learning models in real-world scenarios is frequently challenged by
distribution shifts between the training and test data. These shifts can substantially deteriorate the
model’s performance during testing (Geirhos et al., 2018; Koh et al., 2021; Quionero-Candela et al.,
2009) and introduce significant risks related to AI safety (Deng and Zheng, 2021; Hendrycks and
Mazeika, 2022). To alleviate this issue, it is common to monitor model performance by periodically
collecting the ground truth labels for a subset of the current test dataset (Lu et al., 2023). However,
*

Equal contribution. Correspondence to: Bo An - boan@ntu.edu.sg.

⋄

Univ. Rennes 2, CNRS, IRISA

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

