Identifying and Solving Conditional Image Leakage
in Image-to-Video Diffusion Model

Min Zhao1,3 ∗ , Hongzhou Zhu1,3 ∗ , Chendong Xiang1,3 , Kaiwen Zheng1,3 ,
Chongxuan Li2 † , Jun Zhu1,3,4 †
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., BNRist Center, THU-Bosch ML Center, Tsinghua University
2
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China
3
ShengShu, Beijing, China; 4 Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, China
{gracezhao1997,xiangxyaw,zkwthu}@gmail.com; zhuhz22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
chongxuanli@ruc.edu.cn; dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion models have obtained substantial progress in image-to-video generation.
However, in this paper, we find that these models tend to generate videos with
less motion than expected. We attribute this to the issue called conditional image
leakage, where the image-to-video diffusion models (I2V-DMs) tend to over-rely
on the conditional image at large time steps. We further address this challenge from
both inference and training aspects. First, we propose to start the generation process
from an earlier time step to avoid the unreliable large-time steps of I2V-DMs, as
well as an initial noise distribution with optimal analytic expressions (Analytic-Init)
by minimizing the KL divergence between it and the actual marginal distribution
to bridge the training-inference gap. Second, we design a time-dependent noise
distribution (TimeNoise) for the conditional image during training, applying higher
noise levels at larger time steps to disrupt it and reduce the model’s dependency
on it. We validate these general strategies on various I2V-DMs on our collected
open-domain image benchmark and the UCF101 dataset. Extensive results show
that our methods outperform baselines by producing higher motion scores with
lower errors while maintaining image alignment and temporal consistency, thereby
yielding superior overall performance and enabling more accurate motion control.
The project page: https://cond-image-leak.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Image-to-video (I2V) generation aims to generate videos with dynamic and natural motion while
maintaining the content of the given image. It allows users to guide video creation from the input
image (and optional text), thus increasing controllability and flexibility in content creation. Like
the remarkable progress in text-to-image (T2I) generation [42, 39, 21, 8, 18, 5] and text-to-video
(T2V) generation [10, 46, 6, 11], diffusion models have also obtained promising results for I2V
generation [9, 15, 63, 12, 69, 70]. However, such models are not fully understood.
In this paper, we observe that existing image-to-video diffusion models (I2V-DMs) tend to generate
videos with less motion than expected (see Fig. 1). We attribute this to a previously overlooked
issue called conditional image leakage (see Sec. 3.1). Normally, the noisy input contains the
motion information of the target video, and I2V-DMs should rely on it to predict motion, while the
static conditional image provides content guidance. However, in practice, as the diffusion process
∗

Equal contribution.

†

Correspondence to: C. Li and J. Zhu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

