Evaluating Numerical Reasoning in Text-to-Image
Models
Ivana Kajić
Google DeepMind
Matthias Bauer
Google DeepMind

Olivia Wiles
Google DeepMind
Su Wang
Google DeepMind

Isabela Albuquerque
Google DeepMind

Jordi Pont-Tuset
Google DeepMind

Aida Nematzadeh
Google DeepMind

Abstract
Text-to-image generative models are capable of producing high-quality images
that often faithfully depict concepts described using natural language. In this
work, we comprehensively evaluate a range of text-to-image models on numerical
reasoning tasks of varying difficulty, and show that even the most advanced models
have only rudimentary numerical skills. Specifically, their ability to correctly
generate an exact number of objects in an image is limited to small numbers, it is
highly dependent on the context the number term appears in, and it deteriorates
quickly with each successive number. We also demonstrate that models have
poor understanding of linguistic quantifiers (such as “a few” or “as many as”),
the concept of zero, and struggle with more advanced concepts such as partial
quantities and fractional representations. We bundle prompts, generated images
and human annotations into G ECKO N UM, a novel benchmark for evaluation of
numerical reasoning.

1

Introduction

Recent generative text-to-image models can produce images of impressive quality in a variety of
styles and following the text descriptions provided by users [4, 23, 31]. However, they may still fail
to accurately generate images where the given descriptions contain numbers and quantities (such as
“7 pistachios”, as shown in Figure 1) [20, 22]. While recent work has focused on designing metrics,
benchmarks and methods for evaluating specific capabilities of text-to-image generative models, such
as alignment [33, 15, 9], compositionality [16], or spatial reasoning [13], there is no comprehensive
benchmark for evaluation of numerical reasoning.
We address this gap by proposing G ECKO N UM, a comprehensive and controlled benchmark of text
prompts aimed at evaluating different aspects of numerical reasoning in text-to-image models. We
formalize evaluation as three tasks: exact number generation, approximate number generation, and
reasoning about partial quantities. For each task, we design various template types to control for
different variables such as sentence structure, the context in which the number words occur in, and
the number of attributes/entities in a prompt. Table 1 shows examples of numerical tasks and the
associated prompt types.
Using G ECKO N UM, we evaluate twelve models chosen from five different model families (DALL·E
3, Midjourney, Imagen, Muse and Stable Diffusion): we generate images for these models and
collect human annotations to measure whether the images correctly match the prompts with respect
to numerical reasoning. Our benchmark consists of 1386 text prompts, 52,721 generated images, and
a total of 479,570 human annotations that we release.1
1

https://github.com/google-deepmind/geckonum_benchmark_t2i

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

