Super Consistency of Neural Network Landscapes
and Learning Rate Transfer
Lorenzo Noci∗1

Alexandru Meterez∗3 4 5

Thomas Hofmann 1

Antonio Orvieto 2 3 4

Abstract
Recently, there has been growing evidence that if the width and depth of a neural network are scaled toward the so-called rich feature learning limit (µP and its
depth extension), then some hyperparameters — such as the learning rate — exhibit transfer from small to very large models. From an optimization perspective,
this phenomenon is puzzling, as it implies that the loss landscape is consistently
similar across very different model sizes. In this work, we study the landscape
through the lens of the loss Hessian, with a focus on its largest eigenvalue (i.e.
the sharpness), and ﬁnd that certain spectral properties under µP are largely independent of the size of the network, and remain consistent as training progresses.
We name this property Super Consistency of the landscape. On the other hand,
we show that in the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) and other scaling regimes, the
sharpness exhibits very different dynamics at different scales. But what causes
these differences in the sharpness dynamics? Through a connection between the
Hessian’s and the NTK’s spectrum, we argue that the cause lies in the presence
(for µP) or progressive absence (for the NTK scaling) of feature learning. We
corroborate our claims with a substantial suite of experiments, covering a wide
range of datasets and architectures: from ResNets and Vision Transformers trained
on benchmark vision datasets to Transformers-based language models trained on
WikiText.

1

Introduction

Recent trends in deep learning research have unmistakably shifted towards an increase in model
sizes, with networks comprising of billions of parameters emerging as the standard [1]. However,
as models enlarge, so does the cost incurred in hyperparameter tuning which has led researchers to
look for ways to scale up the architecture — both in terms of width and depth — while preserving
the optimal hyperparameters (such as the learning rate).
While there exist several ways (a.k.a parametrizations) to scale up the width and depth of the network, not all of them facilitate learning rate transfer. For standard deep learning practices, such as
networks parametrized with LeCun/Kaiming initializations [2, 3], a signiﬁcant shift in the optimal
learning rate is usually observed as the width and the depth of the model are increased. Similarly,
under the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) parametrization [4], which provides theoretical insights
into the behavior of very wide neural networks during training, the optimal learning rate also varies
as the width and depth of the network change. Alternatively, Yang and Hu [5] and Yang et al. [6]
propose the µP framework, designed to maximize the gradient update of the representations of the
intermediate layers (i.e. feature learning) as the width increases. Under µP scaling, and its depth extension for residual networks Depth-µP [7, 8], it has been empirically demonstrated that the learning
∗
1

: Equal contribution. Correspondence to: lorenzo.noci@inf.ethz.ch, ameterez@fas.harvard.edu
ETH Zürich, 2 ELLIS Tübingen, 3 MPI for Intelligent Systems, 4 Tübingen AI Center, 5 Harvard University

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

