Efficient Discrepancy Testing for Learning
with Distribution Shift
Gautam Chandrasekaran∗
UT Austin

Adam R. Klivans†
UT Austin

Konstantinos Stavropoulos§
UT Austin

Vasilis Kontonis‡
UT Austin
Arsen Vasilyan¶
UC Berkeley

Abstract
A fundamental notion of distance between train and test distributions from the field
of domain adaptation is discrepancy distance. While in general hard to compute,
here we provide the first set of provably efficient algorithms for testing localized
discrepancy distance, where discrepancy is computed with respect to a fixed output
classifier. These results imply a broad set of new, efficient learning algorithms in
the recently introduced model of Testable Learning with Distribution Shift (TDS
learning) due to Klivans et al. (2023).
Our approach generalizes and improves all prior work on TDS learning: (1)
we obtain universal learners that succeed simultaneously for large classes of
test distributions, (2) achieve near-optimal error rates, and (3) give exponential
improvements for constant depth circuits. Our methods further extend to semiparametric settings and imply the first positive results for low-dimensional convex
sets. Additionally, we separate learning and testing phases and obtain algorithms
that run in fully polynomial time at test time.

1

Introduction

Distribution shift remains a central challenge in machine learning. While practitioners may exert
some level of control over a model’s training distribution, they have far less insight into future,
potentially adversarial, test distributions. Developing algorithms that can predict whether a trained
classifier will perform well on an unseen test set is therefore critical to the widescale deployment of
modern foundation models.
A heavily-studied framework for modeling distribution shift is domain adaptation, where a learner
has access to labeled examples from some training distribution, unlabeled examples from some
test distribution and is asked to output a hypothesis with low error on the test distribution. Over
∗

gautamc@cs.utexas.edu. Supported by the NSF AI Institute for Foundations of Machine Learning
(IFML).
†
klivans@cs.utexas.edu. Supported by NSF award AF-1909204 and the NSF AI Institute for Foundations of Machine Learning (IFML).
‡
vasilis@cs.utexas.edu. Supported by the NSF AI Institute for Foundations of Machine Learning
(IFML).
§
kstavrop@cs.utexas.edu. Supported by the NSF AI Institute for Foundations of Machine Learning
(IFML) and by scholarships from Bodossaki Foundation and Leventis Foundation.
¶
arsenvasilyan@gmail.com. Supported in part by NSF awards CCF-2006664, DMS-2022448, CCF1565235, CCF-1955217, CCF-2310818, Big George Fellowship and Fintech@CSAIL. Work done in part while
visiting UT Austin. Part of this work was conducted while the author was visiting the Simons Institute for the
Theory of Computing.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

