Training Data Attribution via Approximate Unrolling

Juhan Bae1,2 , Wu Lin2 , Jonathan Lorraine1,2,3 , Roger Grosse1,2,4
1
University of Toronto, 2 Vector Institute, 3 NVIDIA, 3 Anthropic
{jbae, lorraine, rgrosse}@cs.toronto.edu
wu.lin@vectorinstitute.ai

Abstract
Many training data attribution (TDA) methods aim to estimate how a model’s behavior would change if one or more data points were removed from the training set.
Methods based on implicit differentiation, such as influence functions, can be made
computationally efficient, but fail to account for underspecification, the implicit
bias of the optimization algorithm, or multi-stage training pipelines. By contrast,
methods based on unrolling address these issues but face scalability challenges.
In this work, we connect the implicit-differentiation-based and unrolling-based
approaches and combine their benefits by introducing S OURCE, an approximate
unrolling-based TDA method that is computed using an influence-function-like
formula. While being computationally efficient compared to unrolling-based
approaches, S OURCE is suitable in cases where implicit-differentiation-based
approaches struggle, such as in non-converged models and multi-stage training
pipelines. Empirically, S OURCE outperforms existing TDA techniques in counterfactual prediction, especially in settings where implicit-differentiation-based
approaches fall short.

1

Introduction

Training data attribution (TDA) techniques are motivated by understanding the relationship between
training data and the properties of trained models [92, 17, 29, 35, 70, 24, 51]. They have diverse
applications in machine learning, such as detecting mislabeled data points [72, 50, 41], crafting data
poisoning attacks [16, 38, 69], and curating datasets [60, 90, 13]. Many TDA methods aim to perform
a counterfactual prediction, which estimates how a trained model’s behavior would change if certain
data points were removed from (or added to) the training dataset. Unlike sampling-based approaches,
which require repeated model retraining with different subsets of the dataset, gradient-based TDA
techniques estimate an infinitesimal version of the counterfactual without model retraining. Two
main strategies for gradient-based counterfactual TDA are implicit differentiation and unrolling.
Implicit-differentiation-based TDA, most notably influence functions [28, 49], uses the Implicit
Function Theorem [52] to estimate the sensitivity of the optimal solution to downweighting a training
data point. These methods are well-motivated for models with strongly convex objectives and
provide convenient estimation algorithms that depend solely on the optimal model parameters rather
than intermediate checkpoints throughout training. However, the classical formulation relies on
assumptions such as the uniqueness of and convergence to the optimal solution, which limits their
applicability to modern neural networks [6, 3, 77].
By contrast, unrolling-based methods, such as S GD -I NFLUENCE [31], approximate the impact of
downweighting a data point’s gradient update on the final model parameters by backpropagating
through the preceding optimization steps. Unrolling is conceptually appealing in modern neural
networks because it does not rely on the uniqueness of or convergence to the optimal solution.
Furthermore, it can incorporate details of the training process, such as the choice of optimizer,
learning rate schedules, or a data point’s position during training. For example, unrolling-based
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

