Unveiling the Potential of Robustness in Selecting
Conditional Average Treatment Effect Estimators

Yiyan Huang ∗
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
yiyhuang3-c@my.cityu.edu.hk
Siyi Wang
City University of Hong Kong
siyi.wang@my.cityu.edu.hk

Cheuk Hang Leung ∗
City University of Hong Kong
chleung87@cityu.edu.hk
Yijun Li
City University of Hong Kong
yijunli5-c@my.cityu.edu.hk

Qi Wu †
City University of Hong Kong
qi.wu@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
The growing demand for personalized decision-making has led to a surge of
interest in estimating the Conditional Average Treatment Effect (CATE). Various
types of CATE estimators have been developed with advancements in machine
learning and causal inference. However, selecting the desirable CATE estimator
through a conventional model validation procedure remains impractical due to the
absence of counterfactual outcomes in observational data. Existing approaches
for CATE estimator selection, such as plug-in and pseudo-outcome metrics, face
two challenges. First, they must determine the metric form and the underlying
machine learning models for fitting nuisance parameters (e.g., outcome function,
propensity function, and plug-in learner). Second, they lack a specific focus
on selecting a robust CATE estimator. To address these challenges, this paper
introduces a Distributionally Robust Metric (DRM) for CATE estimator selection.
The proposed DRM is nuisance-free, eliminating the need to fit models for nuisance
parameters, and it effectively prioritizes the selection of a distributionally robust
CATE estimator. The experimental results validate the effectiveness of the DRM
method in selecting CATE estimators that are robust to the distribution shift incurred
by covariate shift and hidden confounders.

1

Introduction

The escalating demand for decision-making has sparked an increasing interest in Causal Inference
across various research domains, such as economics [23, 13, 43, 1], statistics [70, 49, 26, 41],
healthcare [78, 27, 61, 9, 42], and financial application [11, 15, 37, 21, 35, 24, 50]. The primary
goal in personalized decision-making is to quantify the causal effect of a specific treatment (or
policy/intervention) on the target outcome, and understanding such causal effects is closely connected
with identifying the Conditional Average Treatment Effect (CATE). In observational studies, identifying the CATE faces a significant and fundamental challenge: the absence of counterfactual knowledge.
According to Rubin Causal Model [64], the CATE is determined by comparing potential outcomes
∗
†

The co-first authors.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

