Beyond Efficiency: Molecular Data Pruning for
Enhanced Generalization
Dingshuo Chen1,2 Zhixun Li3 Yuyan Ni4 Guibin Zhang5 Ding Wang1,2
∗
Qiang Liu1,2 Shu Wu1,2 Jeffrey Xu Yu3 Liang Wang1,2
1

New Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Tongji University

# Primary contact: dingshuo.chen@cripac.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
With the emergence of various molecular tasks and massive datasets, how to
perform efficient training has become an urgent yet under-explored issue in the
area. Data pruning (DP), as an oft-stated approach to saving training burdens,
filters out less influential samples to form a coreset for training. However, the
increasing reliance on pretrained models for molecular tasks renders traditional
in-domain DP methods incompatible. Therefore, we propose a Molecular data
Pruning framework for enhanced Generalization (MolPeg), which focuses on the
source-free data pruning scenario, where data pruning is applied with pretrained
models. By maintaining two models with different updating paces during training,
we introduce a novel scoring function to measure the informativeness of samples
based on the loss discrepancy. As a plug-and-play framework, MolPeg realizes
the perception of both source and target domain and consistently outperforms
existing DP methods across four downstream tasks. Remarkably, it can surpass the
performance obtained from full-dataset training, even when pruning up to 60-70%
of the data on HIV and PCBA dataset. Our work suggests that the discovery
of effective data-pruning metrics could provide a viable path to both enhanced
efficiency and superior generalization in transfer learning.

1

Introduction

The research enthusiasm for developing molecular foundation models is steadily increasing [1–5],
attributed to its foreseeable performance gains with ever-larger model and amounts of data, as
observed neural scaling laws [6, 7] and emergence ability [8] in other domains. However, the
computational and storage burdens are daunting in model training [9], hyperparameter tuning, and
model architecture search [10–12]. It is therefore urgent to ask for training-efficient molecular
learning in the community.
Data pruning (DP), in a natural and simple manner, involves the selection of the most influential
samples from the entire training dataset to form a coreset as paragons for model training. The primary
goal is to alleviate training costs by striking a balance point between efficiency and performance
compromise. A trend in this field is developing data influence functions [13–15], training dynamic
metrics [16–19], and coreset selection [20–22] for lossless - although typically compromised - model
∗

Corresponding author: Shu Wu (shu.wu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

