On the Robustness of Spectral Algorithms for
Semirandom Stochastic Block Models
Aditya Bhaskara ∗

Agastya Vibhuti Jha †
Michael Kapralov ‡
Naren Sarayu Manoj §
¶
Davide Mazzali
Weronika Wrzos-Kaminska ∥

Abstract
In a graph bisection problem, we are given a graph G with two equally-sized unlabeled communities, and the goal is to recover the vertices in these communities.
A popular heuristic, known as spectral clustering, is to output an estimated community assignment based on the eigenvector corresponding to the second smallest
eigenvalue of the Laplacian of G. Spectral algorithms can be shown to provably
recover the cluster structure for graphs generated from certain probabilistic models, such as the Stochastic Block Model (SBM). However, spectral clustering is
known to be non-robust to model mis-speciﬁcation. Techniques based on semidefinite programming have been shown to be more robust, but they incur signiﬁcant
computational overheads.
In this work, we study the robustness of spectral algorithms against semirandom
adversaries. Informally, a semirandom adversary is allowed to “helpfully” change
the speciﬁcation of the model in a way that is consistent with the ground-truth solution. Our semirandom adversaries in particular are allowed to add edges inside
clusters or increase the probability that an edge appears inside a cluster. Semirandom adversaries are a useful tool to determine the extent to which an algorithm
has overﬁt to statistical assumptions on the input.
On the positive side, we identify classes of semirandom adversaries under which
spectral bisection using the unnormalized Laplacian is strongly consistent, i.e.,
it exactly recovers the planted partitioning. On the negative side, we show that
in these classes spectral bisection with the normalized Laplacian outputs a partitioning that makes a classiﬁcation mistake on a constant fraction of the vertices.
Finally, we demonstrate numerical experiments that complement our theoretical
ﬁndings.

1

Introduction

Graph partitioning or clustering is a fundamental unsupervised learning primitive. In a graph partitioning problem, one seeks to identify clusters of vertices that are highly internally connected
and sparsely connected to the outside. This task is of particular signiﬁcance when the given graph
presents a latent community structure. In this setting, the goal is to recover the communities as
accurately as possible. Various statistical models that attempt to capture this situation have been proposed and studied in the literature. Perhaps the most popular of these is the Symmetric Stochastic
Block Model (SSBM) [HLL83].
∗

University of Utah. Email: bhaskaraaditya@gmail.com.
University of Chicago. Email: agastyavjha.28@gmail.com.
‡
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne. Email: michael.kapralov@epfl.ch.
§
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago. Email: nsm@ttic.edu.
¶
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne. Email: davide.mazzali@epfl.ch.
∥
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne. Email: weronika.wrzos-kaminska@epfl.ch.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

