UQE: A Query Engine for Unstructured Databases

Hanjun Dai† ˇ “( , Bethany Yixin Wang‡ ˇ “( , Xingchen Wan‡, Bo Dai† ¶, Sherry Yang† ,
Azade Nova† , Pengcheng Yin† , Phitchaya Mangpo Phothilimthana†∗,
Charles Sutton† , Dale Schuurmans†§
†
Google DeepMind ‡ Google Cloud § University of Alberta ¶ Georgia Institute of Technology

Abstract
Analytics on structured data is a mature field with many successful methods.
However, most real world data exists in unstructured form, such as images and
conversations. We investigate the potential of Large Language Models (LLMs)
to enable unstructured data analytics. In particular, we propose a new Universal
Query Engine (UQE) that directly interrogates and draws insights from unstructured data collections. This engine accepts queries in a Universal Query Language
(UQL), a dialect of SQL that provides full natural language flexibility in specifying
conditions and operators. The new engine leverages the ability of LLMs to conduct analysis of unstructured data, while also allowing us to exploit advances in
sampling and optimization techniques to achieve efficient and accurate query execution. In addition, we borrow techniques from classical compiler theory to better
orchestrate the workflow between sampling methods and foundation model calls.
We demonstrate the efficiency of UQE on data analytics across different modalities, including images, dialogs and reviews, across a range of useful query types,
including conditional aggregation, semantic retrieval and abstraction aggregation.

1

Introduction

Data analysis [13] is essential for making well founded decisions and enabling businesses and society
to function more effectively. Relational databases [12, 32] and the Structured Query Language
(SQL) [7] have delivered huge successes in structured data management and analysis. Typically,
such data is collected and organized in a pre-defined schema [14], where the data properties and
relationships have been pre-specified, and downstream analysis is restricted to this schema.
In most real-world applications, however, data exists in unstructured formats, such as images,
documents and audio recordings. Without preprocessing such data into structured forms, traditional
SQL engines can only support limited queries. Preprocessing, including document entity retreival [45]
and form understanding [42], also require training on downstream tasks given a predefined taxonomy.
This naturally motivates the question we consider in this paper:
How can one perform unstructured data analysis in a flexible and efficient way?
In the literature, full-text search engines [20] support scalable regexp-matching search on unstructured
data, but this becomes infeasible for more complex semantic reasoning queries. Retrieval-Augmented
Generation (RAG) [39, 24, 18] allows question answering on a subset of related data, but is not
directly applicable to generic analytical tasks with aggregation and semantic queries that spans
over an entire large database. Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) [4, 2] unlock
the ability to perform flexible question answering, especially with recent long-context models [33].
However, setting aside the cost per query, data analytics can still be challenging for LLMs without
fine-tuning [25] or few-shot demonstrations [9], even given structured tables.
∗

work done while Phitchaya Mangpo Phothilimthana was at Google DeepMind.

ˇ “( Correspondence to hadai@google.com and wyixin@google.com.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

