Are Your Models Still Fair? Fairness Attacks on
Graph Neural Networks via Node Injections

Zihan Luo, Hong Huang† , Yongkang Zhou, Jiping Zhang, Nuo Chen, Hai Jin
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
{zihanluo,honghuang,yongkangzhou ,jipingz,nuo chen,hjin}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite the remarkable capabilities demonstrated by Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) in graph-related tasks, recent research has revealed the fairness vulnerabilities in GNNs when facing malicious adversarial attacks. However, all existing fairness attacks require manipulating the connectivity between existing nodes,
which may be prohibited in reality. To this end, we introduce a Node Injectionbased Fairness Attack (NIFA), exploring the vulnerabilities of GNN fairness in
such a more realistic setting. In detail, NIFA first designs two insightful principles for node injection operations, namely the uncertainty-maximization principle
and homophily-increase principle, and then optimizes injected nodes’ feature matrix to further ensure the effectiveness of fairness attacks. Comprehensive experiments on three real-world datasets consistently demonstrate that NIFA can significantly undermine the fairness of mainstream GNNs, even including fairnessaware GNNs, by injecting merely 1% of nodes. We sincerely hope that our work
can stimulate increasing attention from researchers on the vulnerability of GNN
fairness, and encourage the development of corresponding defense mechanisms.
Our code and data are released at: https://github.com/CGCL-codes/NIFA.

1

Introduction

Due to the strong capability in understanding graph structure, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
have achieved much progress in graph-related domains such as social recommendation [30, 31] and
bioinformatics [4, 27]. Nevertheless, despite the impressive capabilities demonstrated by GNNs,
more and more in-depth research has revealed shortcomings in the fairness of GNN models, which
greatly restricts their applications in the real world.
In fact, studies [5, 42] have found that the biases and prejudices existed in training data would be further amplified through the message propagation mechanism of GNNs, leading to model predictions
being correlated with certain sensitive attributes, such as gender and race. Such correlations are
usually undesired and can result in fairness issues and societal harm. For instance, in online recruitment, a recommender based on GNNs may be associated with the gender of applicants, leading to
differential treatments towards different demographics and consequently giving rise to group unfairness. To address fairness issues in GNNs, researchers have proposed solutions such as adversarial
learning [5, 28], data augmentation [17, 22] and others, which have achieved promising results.
However, recent research in the machine learning domain indicates that fairness is actually susceptible to adversarial attacks [3, 26, 29]. Given this, we cannot help but wonder: “Is the fairness of GNN
†
Hong Huang is the corresponding author. Zihan Luo, Hong Huang, Yongkang Zhou, Jiping Zhang and
Hai Jin are affiliated with the National Engineering Research Center for Big Data Technology and System, Service Computing Technology and Systems Laboratory, Cluster and Grid Computing Lab, School of Computer
Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

