On the Sparsity of the Strong Lottery Ticket
Hypothesis

Emanuele Natale
Université Côte d’Azur,
CNRS, Inria, I3S, France

Davide Ferré
Université Côte d’Azur,
CNRS, Inria, I3S, France

Frédéric Giroire
Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS,
Inria, I3S, France

Giordano Giambartolomei
Department of Informatics,
King’s College London

Frederik Mallmann-Trenn
Department of Informatics,
King’s College London

Abstract
Considerable research efforts have recently been made to show that a random
neural network N contains subnetworks capable of accurately approximating any
given neural network that is sufficiently smaller than N , without any training.
This line of research, known as the Strong Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (SLTH), was
originally motivated by the weaker Lottery Ticket Hypothesis, which states that a
sufficiently large random neural network N contains sparse subnetworks that can
be trained efficiently to achieve performance comparable to that of training the
entire network N . Despite its original motivation, results on the SLTH have so far
not provided any guarantee on the size of subnetworks. Such limitation is due to
the nature of the main technical tool leveraged by these results, the Random Subset
Sum (RSS) Problem. Informally, the RSS Problem asks how large a random i.i.d.
sample Ω should be so that we are able to approximate any number in [−1, 1], up
to an error of ε, as the sum of a suitable subset of Ω.
We provide the first proof of the SLTH in classical settings, such as dense and
equivariant networks, with guarantees on the sparsity of the subnetworks. Central
to our results, is the proof of an essentially tight bound on the Random Fixed-Size
Subset Sum Problem (RFSS), a variant of the RSS Problem in which we only ask
for subsets of a given size, which is of independent interest.

1

Introduction

The Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH) is a research direction that has attracted considerable attention over the years, stemming from the empirical contrast between the fact that, while large neural
networks can be successfully trained to achieve good performance on a given task and successively
pruned to a great level of sparsity without compromising their performance, researchers have struggled to train sparse neural networks from scratch. The authors of [12] observed that, using a simple
pruning strategy (namely Iterative Magnitude Pruning while rewinding the original weights of the
remaining edges to their value at initialization), starting from a sufficiently large random neural networks, it is possible to identify sparse subnetworks that can be trained to achieve the performance
achievable by the starting network (see Figure 2 in the appendix for an illustration). The previous
statement, namely the LTH, soon gave rise to an even stronger one, corroborated by empirical works
[29, 26] which proposed “training-by-pruning” algorithms (see Section 2 for details), providing evidence that starting from a sufficiently large random neural networks, it is possible to identify sparse
subnetworks that exhibit good performance as they are, without changing the original weights (see
Figure 3 in the appendix for an illustration). By removing the need to analyze the dynamics of
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

