Toward Conditional Distribution Calibration in
Survival Prediction
Shi-ang Qi 1 , Yakun Yu 2 , Russell Greiner 1 3
Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
2
Electrical Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
3
Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute, Edmonton, Canada
{shiang, yakun2, rgreiner}@ualberta.ca
1

Abstract
Survival prediction often involves estimating the time-to-event distribution from
censored datasets. Previous approaches have focused on enhancing discrimination
and marginal calibration. In this paper, we highlight the significance of conditional calibration for real-world applications – especially its role in individual
decision-making. We propose a method based on conformal prediction that uses the
model’s predicted individual survival probability at that instance’s observed time.
This method effectively improves the model’s marginal and conditional calibration,
without compromising discrimination. We provide asymptotic theoretical guarantees for both marginal and conditional calibration and test it extensively across 15
diverse real-world datasets, demonstrating the method’s practical effectiveness and
versatility in various settings.

1

Introduction

Individual survival distribution (ISD), or time-to-event distribution, is a probability distribution that
describes the times until the occurrence of a specific event of interest for an instance, based on
information about that individual. Accurately estimating ISD is essential for effective decisionmaking and clinical resource allocation. However, a challenge in learning such survival prediction
models is training on datasets that include censored instances, where we only know a lower bound of
their time-to-event.
Survival models typically focus on two important but distinct properties during optimization and
evaluation: (i) discrimination measures how well a model’s relative predictions between individuals
align with the observed order [1, 2], which is useful for pairwise decisions such as prioritizing
treatments; (ii) calibration assesses how well the predicted survival probabilities match the actual
distribution of observations [3, 4], supporting both individual-level (e.g., determining high-risk
treatments based on the probability) and group-level (e.g., allocating clinical resources) decisions.
Some prior research has sought to improve calibration by integrating a calibration-specific loss during
optimization [5, 6, 4]. However, these often produce models with poor discrimination [7, 8], limiting
their utility in scenarios where precise pairwise decisions are critical.
Furthermore, previous studies have typically addressed calibration in a marginal sense – i.e., assessing
whether probabilities align with the actual distribution across the entire population. However, for
many applications, marginal calibration may be inadequate – we often require that predictions are
correctly calibrated, conditional on any combination of features. This can be helpful for making
more precise clinical decisions for individuals and groups. For example, when treating an overweight
male, a doctor might decide on cardiovascular surgery using a model calibrated for both overweight
and male. Note this might lead to a different decision that one based on a model that was calibrated
for all patients. Similarly, a hospice institution may want to allocate nursing care based on a model
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

