Grokking of Implicit Reasoning in Transformers:
A Mechanistic Journey to the Edge of Generalization
Boshi Wang♠
Xiang Yue3∗ Yu Su♠
Huan Sun♠
3
The Ohio State University
Carnegie Mellon University
{wang.13930,yue.149,su.809,sun.397}@osu.edu
♠

Abstract
We study whether transformers can learn to implicitly reason over parametric knowledge, a skill that even the most capable language models struggle with. Focusing on
two representative reasoning types, composition and comparison, we consistently
find that transformers can learn implicit reasoning, but only through grokking, i.e.,
extended training far beyond overfitting. The levels of generalization also vary
across reasoning types: when faced with out-of-distribution examples, transformers
fail to systematically generalize for composition but succeed for comparison. We
delve into the model’s internals throughout training, conducting analytical experiments that reveal: 1) the mechanism behind grokking, such as the formation of
the generalizing circuit and its relation to the relative efficiency of generalizing
and memorizing circuits, and 2) the connection between systematicity and the
configuration of the generalizing circuit. Our findings guide data and training
setup to better induce implicit reasoning and suggest potential improvements to
the transformer architecture, such as encouraging cross-layer knowledge sharing.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that for a challenging reasoning task with a large
search space, GPT-4-Turbo and Gemini-1.5-Pro based on non-parametric memory
fail badly regardless of prompting styles or retrieval augmentation, while a fully
grokked transformer can achieve near-perfect accuracy, showcasing the power of
parametric memory for complex reasoning.2

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have been shown deficient in implicit reasoning with their parametric
memory of knowledge and rules. For example, a range of LLMs are found to be incapable of robustly
composing internalized facts [48, 71], and even GPT-4 [42] cannot adequately compare entities’
attributes despite knowing them [1].
Deficiency in implicit reasoning has profound implications. It implies the models’ limitations in inducing structured and compressed representations of facts and rules, which lead to redundant knowledge
storage and difficulty in propagating knowledge updates [76], and importantly, fundamentally impede
the model from systematic generalization over knowledge [25]. While explicit verbalizations of
reasoning steps (e.g., chain-of-thought rationales) can improve task performance [67, 64, 73, 55, 31],
they are not available during large-scale (pre-)training where the model’s core capabilities are
acquired [77, 29].
Is implicit reasoning doomed given that even the most capable models struggle? Can it be resolved
by further scaling data and compute, or are there fundamental limitations of the transformer [62]
that prohibit robust acquisition of this skill?
∗
2

Project started when at OSU.
Code and data: https://github.com/OSU-NLP-Group/GrokkedTransformer.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

