Fundamental Limits of Prompt Compression: A RateDistortion Framework for Black-Box Language Models

Alliot Nagle∗
UT Austin

Adway Girish∗
EPFL

Marco Bondaschi
EPFL

Ashok Vardhan Makkuva†
EPFL

Michael Gastpar
EPFL
Hyeji Kim†
UT Austin

Abstract
We formalize the problem of prompt compression for large language models
(LLMs) and present a framework to unify token-level prompt compression methods
which create hard prompts for black-box models. We derive the distortion-rate
function for this setup as a linear program, and provide an efficient algorithm
to compute this fundamental limit via the dual of the linear program. Using the
distortion-rate function as the baseline, we study the performance of existing
compression schemes on a synthetic dataset consisting of prompts generated from
a Markov chain, natural language queries, and their respective answers. Our
empirical analysis demonstrates the criticality of query-aware prompt compression,
where the compressor has knowledge of the downstream task/query for the blackbox LLM. We show that there is a large gap between the performance of current
prompt compression methods and the optimal strategy, and propose Adaptive
QuerySelect, a query-aware, variable-rate adaptation of a prior work to close the
gap. We extend our experiments to a small natural language dataset to further
confirm our findings on our synthetic dataset.

1

Introduction

In spite of the recent success of transformer-based [1] large language models (LLMs) in language
modeling tasks, inference calls to a transformer can be costly in both time and memory usage.
Although significant progress has been made to improve the memory usage and runtime efficiency
via implementation-level optimizations [2, 3, 4] and architecture-level optimizations and alternatives
[5, 6, 7], a third type of optimization that compresses the input (an input-level optimization) has the
benefit that it directly reduces the resource usage of an LLM inference call, and it can be used in
conjunction with the other two types of optimizations for further efficiency gains. In this work, we
offer a framework and analysis for a recent body of literature in this direction, known as prompt
compression [8, 9, 10].
The goal of a prompt compression method is to transform a sequence of input tokens x into a shorter
sequence of tokens m such that the response generated by a target LLM will semantically mean the
same thing regardless of whether x or m is given as input. Using m as the input directly decreases
the memory and runtime requirements necessary for an LLM inference call. Moreover, the additional
benefits to this approach are: (1) redundant or superfluous tokens are removed, making room to fit
more pertinent information in the target LLM’s limited-size context window, (2) it can be used in
addition to implementation and architecture-level optimizations to get further efficiency gains, and (3)
it is the only technique available when seeking to lower costs for black-box API calls to closed-source
∗

Equal contribution. † Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

