Neural Experts: Mixture of Experts for Implicit
Neural Representations

Yizhak Ben-Shabat∗
Roblox, The Australian National University
sitzikbs@gmail.com

Chamin Hewa Koneputugodage∗
The Australian National University
chamin.hewa@anu.edu.au

Sameera Ramasinghe
Amazon, Australia
sameera.ramasinghe@adelaide.edu.au

Stephen Gould
The Australian National University
stephen.gould@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Implicit neural representations (INRs) have proven effective in various tasks including image, shape, audio, and video reconstruction. These INRs typically
learn the implicit field from sampled input points. This is often done using a
single network for the entire domain, imposing many global constraints on a single
function. In this paper, we propose a mixture of experts (MoE) implicit neural
representation approach that enables learning local piece-wise continuous functions
that simultaneously learns to subdivide the domain and fit it locally. We show
that incorporating a mixture of experts architecture into existing INR formulations
provides a boost in speed, accuracy, and memory requirements. Additionally, we
introduce novel conditioning and pretraining methods for the gating network that
improves convergence to the desired solution. We evaluate the effectiveness of
our approach on multiple reconstruction tasks, including surface reconstruction,
image reconstruction, and audio signal reconstruction and show improved performance compared to non-MoE methods. Code is available at our project page
https://sitzikbs.github.io/neural-experts-projectpage/.

1

Introduction

Implicit neural representations (INRs) are a type of neural network that can encode a wide range of
signal types, including images, videos, 3D models, and audio [31, 27, 5, 39, 22]. Instead of storing
discretely sampled signals (e.g., on a uniform grid), INRs approximate signals using a continuous
function defined by a neural network. Given an input coordinate, the network is optimized to estimate
the signal value at that coordinate. These neural representation networks have gained popularity
because they can effectively fit even complex or high-dimensional signals for various tasks, including
3D reconstruction [31, 27, 2, 3, 14, 5], novel-view synthesis [28, 4], neural rendering [43], and pixel
alignment [34].
Current neural representation models, while powerful, are often limited by their architecture, which
typically involves multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs). This design has two inherent drawbacks. The first
is a parallelization and scale limitation: since INRs represented by a MLP process each coordinate
by the whole network, all parameters have to contribute to the output of every point in the domain,
making parameter optimization difficult. The second is a locality limitation: a desirable property of
INRs is for features to change rapidly (to allow modelling of sharp boundaries) which does not arise
naturally in optimized MLPs due to spectral bias [41]. Consequently, pure-MLP networks inhibit the
ability to scale, fit the signal, and perform local operations on signals represented by the network.
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

