LLM-Check: Investigating Detection of Hallucinations
in Large Language Models

Gaurang Sriramanan
gaurangs@cs.umd.edu

Siddhant Bharti
sbharti@cs.umd.edu

Vinu Sankar Sadasivan
vinu@cs.umd.edu

Shoumik Saha
smksaha@cs.umd.edu

Priyatham Kattakinda
pkattaki@umd.edu

Soheil Feizi
sfeizi@cs.umd.edu

Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland, College Park, USA

Abstract
While Large Language Models (LLMs) have become immensely popular due to
their outstanding performance on a broad range of tasks, these models are prone
to producing hallucinations— outputs that are fallacious or fabricated yet often
appear plausible or tenable at a glance. In this paper, we conduct a comprehensive
investigation into the nature of hallucinations within LLMs and furthermore
explore effective techniques for detecting such inaccuracies in various real-world
settings. Prior approaches to detect hallucinations in LLM outputs, such as
consistency checks or retrieval-based methods, typically assume access to multiple
model responses or large databases. These techniques, however, tend to be computationally expensive in practice, thereby limiting their applicability to real-time
analysis. In contrast, in this work, we seek to identify hallucinations within a single
response in both white-box and black-box settings by analyzing the internal hidden
states, attention maps, and output prediction probabilities of an auxiliary LLM.
In addition, we also study hallucination detection in scenarios where ground-truth
references are also available, such as in the setting of Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG). We demonstrate that the proposed detection methods are extremely
compute-efficient, with speedups of up to 45x and 450x over other baselines, while
achieving significant improvements in detection performance over diverse datasets.

1

Introduction

Over the past few years, Large Language Models (LLMs) such as GPT-4 [Achiam et al., 2023] and
Llama [Touvron et al., 2023] have become immensely popular due to their excellent performance
on natural language inference, question-answering and summarization tasks. Nonetheless, it has been
observed that these models often produce outputs that are fallacious, incorporating fictional or insubstantial details that can be partly misleading or entirely fabricated [Ji et al., 2023, Zhang et al., 2023].
Moreover, it is often observed that such model generations seem plausible, appearing tenable before
further scrutiny. This phenomenon in LLMs, known as hallucinations, poses a significant challenge
to their deployment in applications where accuracy and reliability are critical. Thus, the detection and
mitigation of hallucinations in LLMs have been subjects of critical interest. Furthermore, the relative
difficulty of hallucination detection can vary significantly in white-box or black-box settings, depending on the extent to which access is available to the original LLM that was utilized for generation.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

