Interpret Your Decision: Logical Reasoning
Regularization for Generalization in Visual
Classification
Zhaorui Tan1,2 , Xi Yang1∗ , Qiufeng Wang1 , Anh Nguyen2 , Kaizhu Huang3∗
1
Xi’an-Jiaotong Liverpool University
2
University of Liverpool
3
Duke Kunshan University

Abstract
Vision models excel in image classification but struggle to generalize to unseen data,
such as classifying images from unseen domains or discovering novel categories. In
this paper, we explore the relationship between logical reasoning and deep learning
generalization in visual classification. A logical regularization termed L-Reg is derived which bridges a logical analysis framework to image classification. Our work
reveals that L-Reg reduces the complexity of the model in terms of the feature distribution and classifier weights. Specifically, we unveil the interpretability brought
by L-Reg, as it enables the model to extract the salient features, such as faces to
persons, for classification. Theoretical analysis and experiments demonstrate that
L-Reg enhances generalization across various scenarios, including multi-domain
generalization and generalized category discovery. In complex real-world scenarios where images span unknown classes and unseen domains, L-Reg consistently
improves generalization, highlighting its practical efficacy.

1

Introduction
Without L-Reg

Unseen domain

Seen domain

One critical challenge in visual classification models is their ability to generalize effectively to unseen samples
or unknown classes. For instance, a
model trained on real images of various animals should ideally classify animal sketches accurately (referred to
as multi-domain generalization classiWith L-Reg
fication [20, 35, 34, 23, 25, 37, 50]) or
discover novel categories not present Figure 1: GradCAM [45] visualizations for the unknown
in the training set (referred to as gen- class ‘person’ across seen and unseen domains of the GMDG
eralized category discovery [54, 16]). baseline with L2 regularization that is trained without and
These problems are prevalent in real- with L-Reg, respectively. Both experiments share the same
world scenarios, where training data- hyper-parameters, except the latter uses the L-Reg.
target pairs are usually insufficient, and labeling is time-consuming so that not every data is paired
with a label. Meanwhile, test data is likely to contain shifts in both data and targets, making it
essential to propose methods that generalize to border scenarios.
Regularization terms, such as L2 regularization leading to weight decay, are commonly employed
during training to improve a model’s generalization capabilities. However, the L2 regularization
∗

Corresponding authors. <Xi.Yang01@xjtlu.edu.cn; kaizhu.huang@dukekunshan.edu.cn>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

