PowerPM: Foundation Model for Power Systems

Shihao Tu∗
Zhejiang University
shihao.tu@zju.edu.cn
Zhendong Fu
Zhejiang University
zhendongfu@zju.edu.cn

Yupeng Zhang∗
Zhejiang University
yuppzhang@zju.edu.cn

Jing Zhang
Renmin University of China
zhang-jing@ruc.edu.cn

Yin Zhang
Zhejiang University
yinzh@zju.edu.cn

Yang Yang†
Zhejiang University
yangya@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
The proliferation of abundant electricity time series (ETS) data presents numerous
opportunities for various applications within power systems, including demand-side
management, grid stability, and consumer behavior analysis. Deep learning models have advanced ETS modeling by effectively capturing sequence dependence.
However, learning a generic representation of ETS data for various applications
is challenging due to the inherently complex hierarchical structure of ETS data.
Moreover, ETS data exhibits intricate temporal dependencies and is susceptible
to the influence of exogenous variables. Furthermore, different instances exhibit
diverse electricity consumption behavior. In this paper, we propose a foundation
model PowerPM for ETS data, providing a large-scale, off-the-shelf model for
power systems. PowerPM consists of a temporal encoder and a hierarchical encoder.
The temporal encoder captures temporal dependencies within ETS data, taking
into account exogenous variables. The hierarchical encoder models correlations
between different levels of hierarchy. Furthermore, PowerPM leverages a novel
self-supervised pre-training framework consisting of masked ETS modeling and
dual-view contrastive learning. This framework enables PowerPM to capture
temporal dependency within ETS windows and aware the discrepancy across ETS
windows, providing two different perspectives to learn generic representation. Our
experiments span five real-world scenario datasets, including both private and
public data. Through pre-training on massive ETS data, PowerPM achieves SOTA
performance on diverse downstream tasks within the private dataset. Notably, when
transferred to public datasets, PowerPM retains its edge, showcasing its remarkable
generalization ability across various tasks and domains. Moreover, ablation studies
and few-shot experiments further substantiate the effectiveness of our model.

1

Introduction

The volume of Electricity Time Series (ETS) data has recently increased rapidly due to the emergence
of advanced power systems known as smart grids [10]. This abundance of data has paved the way for
diverse applications in power systems, including demand-side management [22], grid stability [2] and
consumer behavior analysis [49], etc. Meanwhile, these applications have spawned various tasks, as
shown in Fig. 1(d). These include load forecasting [27, 4], clock anomaly detection [46], electricity
theft [15] and and the detection of elderly individuals living alone [45].
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
†

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

