Abstract Reward Processes: Leveraging State
Abstraction for Consistent Off-Policy Evaluation

Shreyas Chaudhari
University of Massachusetts
schaudhari@cs.umass.edu

Ameet Deshpande
Princeton University
asd@cs.princeton.edu

Bruno Castro da Silva
University of Massachusetts
bsilva@cs.umass.edu

Philip S. Thomas
University of Massachusetts
pthomas@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Evaluating policies using off-policy data is crucial for applying reinforcement
learning to real-world problems such as healthcare and autonomous driving. Previous methods for off-policy evaluation (OPE) generally suffer from high variance
or irreducible bias, leading to unacceptably high prediction errors. In this work,
we introduce STAR, a framework for OPE that encompasses a broad range of
estimators—which include existing OPE methods as special cases—that achieve
lower mean squared prediction errors. STAR leverages state abstraction to distill
complex, potentially continuous problems into compact, discrete models which
we call abstract reward processes (ARPs). Predictions from ARPs estimated from
off-policy data are provably consistent (asymptotically correct). Rather than proposing a specific estimator, we present a new framework for OPE and empirically
demonstrate that estimators within STAR outperform existing methods. The best
STAR estimator outperforms baselines in all twelve cases studied, and even the
median STAR estimator surpasses the baselines in seven out of the twelve cases.

1

Introduction

Within reinforcement learning (RL), off-policy evaluation (OPE) is the foundational challenge of
evaluating the performance, J(π), of policies π that are different from the ones used to generate data.
OPE methods are a general-purpose tool that can be used as part of a local policy search algorithm
[45] to provide insight about policies similar to the current policy, or as a tool to evaluate policies
without requiring their actual deployment for high-risk applications like those in healthcare [38],
education [35, 15], and recommendation systems [5, 7]. Despite many recent advances in OPE,
existing methods struggle to give accurate predictions for many real-world applications [52], showing
the need for new perspectives on OPE.
Existing methods can be broadly divided into two categories: importance sampling (IS) based
and model-based [58]. IS-based methods are typically consistent (i.e., their predictions converge
probabilistically to the correct value in the limit as the amount of data approaches infinity), but have
variance that increases exponentially with the horizon [29, 31]. Model-based methods have lower
variance but often introduce bias due to model class mismatch and are not generally guaranteed to be
consistent [36, 10]. A third set of methods, which we call mixture methods, combine the predictions
obtained from both of these categories [22, 53]. However, in some cases, combining the predictions
also combines the drawbacks—high variance and bias. This leads us to ask: Can we develop a
framework for OPE that yields predictions that are both consistent and low variance?
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

