Unleashing Region Understanding in Intermediate
Layers for MLLM-based Referring Expression
Generation
Yaoyuan Liang1∗, Zhuojun Cai1∗ , Jian Xu1 , Guanbo Huang1 , Yiran Wang1 , Xiao Liang1 ,
Jiahao Liu2 , Ziran Li2 , Jingang Wang2 , Shao-Lun Huang1†
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Meituan Inc.

Abstract
The Multi-modal Large Language Model (MLLM) based Referring Expression
Generation (REG) task has gained increasing popularity, which aims to generate
an unambiguous text description that applies to exactly one object or region in
the image by leveraging foundation models. We empirically found that there
exists a potential trade-off between the detailedness and the correctness of the
descriptions for the referring objects. On the one hand, generating sentences with
more details is usually required in order to provide more precise object descriptions.
On the other hand, complicated sentences could easily increase the probability
of hallucinations. To address this issue, we propose a training-free framework,
named as “unleash-then-eliminate”, which first elicits the latent information in the
intermediate layers, and then adopts a cycle-consistency-based decoding method to
alleviate the production of hallucinations. Furthermore, to reduce the computational
load of cycle-consistency-based decoding, we devise a Probing-based Importance
Estimation method to statistically estimate the importance weights of intermediate
layers within a subset. These importance weights are then incorporated into the
decoding process over the entire dataset, intervening in the next token prediction
from intermediate layers. Extensive experiments conducted on the RefCOCOg and
PHD benchmarks show that our proposed framework could outperform existing
methods on both semantic and hallucination-related metrics. Code will be made
available in https://github.com/Glupayy/unleash-eliminate.

1

Introduction

Referring expression generation (REG) [11, 29, 31, 53, 54] is a task to generate an unambiguous text
description that applies to exactly one appointed object or region in the image. A good expression
should be distinguishable enough to ensure that the listener can identify the unique target among
various objects within the same image. With the great success achieved by large language models
(LLMs), multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) [1, 9, 12, 27, 56, 61] have been introduced to
perform this task and become increasingly popular in the research community. Some representative
works [6, 37, 52, 55, 57] conduct visual instruction tuning on specialized region-involved multi-modal
corpus and successfully empower MLLMs with the ability of region-level understanding.
Though certain progress has been made, MLLMs themselves suffer from object hallucination [14, 23,
46, 50, 60]. Research suggests that the mechanism behind MLLMs’ hallucinations could be related
to the over-reliance on prior knowledge of LLMs rather than the multi-modal context provided by
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

