Microstructures and Accuracy of Graph Recall
by Large Language Models

Yanbang Wang
Cornell University
ywangdr@cs.cornell.edu

Hejie Cui
Stanford University
hejie.cui@stanford.edu

Jon Kleinberg
Cornell University
kleinberg@cornell.edu

Abstract
Graphs data is crucial for many applications, and much of it exists in the relations
described in textual format. As a result, being able to accurately recall and encode
a graph described in earlier text is a basic yet pivotal ability that large language
models (LLMs) need to demonstrate if they are to perform reasoning tasks that
involve graph-structured information. Human performance at graph recall by has
been studied by cognitive scientists for decades, and has been found to often exhibit
certain structural patterns of bias that align with human handling of social relationships. To date, however, we know little about how LLMs behave in analogous
graph recall tasks: do their recalled graphs also exhibit certain biased patterns, and
if so, how do they compare with humans and affect other graph reasoning tasks?
In this work, we perform the first systematical study of graph recall by LLMs,
investigating the accuracy and biased microstructures (local subgraph patterns) in
their recall. We find that LLMs not only underperform often in graph recall, but
also tend to favor more triangles and alternating 2-paths. Moreover, we find that
more advanced LLMs have a striking dependence on the domain that a real-world
graph comes from — by yielding the best recall accuracy when the graph is narrated
in a language style consistent with its original domain.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) achieve remarkable progress in recent years. In many applications,
LLMs’ success relies on appropriate handing of graph-structured information embedded in text. For
example, to accurately answer questions pertaining to the characters in a story, it is crucial for an
LLM to be able to recognize and analyze the social network of relations among these characters.
In fact, graph-structured information is ubiquitous across many language-based applications, such
as structured commonsense reasoning [32], multi-agent communications [3], multi-hop question
answering [15], and more. LLMs’ graph reasoning ability has thus become an active research topic.
Existing works on LLMs’ graph reasoning ability have been primarily posited in the context of
various graph tasks, from most basic ones such as computing node degree, graph diameter, clustering
coefficient, or checking cycles [48, 20, 18], to more challenging ones such as node/graph classification
[14, 38] and link-based recommendations [55]. Sec. 7 provides a more comprehensive survey.
But all of the tasks above rely on the premise that an LLM is able to start from the graph that is
described in the text it is given. Thus, our key starting observation here is that all of these tasks rely
on a pivotal (and perhaps seemingly trivial) ability of LLMs – to recall and encode a set of relations
described in earlier text. In this paper, we consider a graph recall task which has been extensively
studied in cognitive science [8, 44, 7, 9, 41], and which formalizes this basic goal, illustrated in
Figure 1: a set of pairwise relationships is described in a simple narrative form to the experimental
subject (human or LLM); then at a later point in the experiment, the subject is asked to recall and
describe these relationships explicitly in the form of a graph.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

