Interaction-Force Transport Gradient Flows

Egor Gladin
Humboldt University of Berlin
Berlin, Germany
& HSE University
egorgladin@yandex.ru

Pavel Dvurechensky
Weierstrass Institute for
Applied Analysis and Stochastics
Berlin, Germany
pavel.dvurechensky@wias-berlin.de

Alexander Mielke
Humboldt University of Berlin
& WIAS
Berlin, Germany
alexander.mielke@wias-berlin.de

Jia-Jie Zhu∗
Weierstrass Institute for
Applied Analysis and Stochastics
Berlin, Germany
jia-jie.zhu@wias-berlin.de

Abstract
This paper presents a new gradient flow dissipation geometry over non-negative
and probability measures. This is motivated by a principled construction that
combines the unbalanced optimal transport and interaction forces modeled by
reproducing kernels. Using a precise connection between the Hellinger geometry
and the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD), we propose the interaction-force
transport (IFT) gradient flows and its spherical variant via an infimal convolution
of the Wasserstein and spherical MMD tensors. We then develop a particle-based
optimization algorithm based on the JKO-splitting scheme of the mass-preserving
spherical IFT gradient flows. Finally, we provide both theoretical global exponential
convergence guarantees and improved empirical simulation results for applying
the IFT gradient flows to the sampling task of MMD-minimization. Furthermore,
we prove that the spherical IFT gradient flow enjoys the best of both worlds by
providing the global exponential convergence guarantee for both the MMD and KL
energy.

1

Introduction

Optimal transport (OT) distances between probability measures, including the earth mover’s distance
[Werman et al., 1985, Rubner et al., 2000] and Monge-Kantorovich or Wasserstein distance [Villani,
2008], are one of the cornerstones of modern machine learning as they allow performing a variety
of machine learning tasks, e.g., unsupervised learning [Arjovsky et al., 2017, Bigot et al., 2017],
semi-supervised learning [Solomon et al., 2014], clustering [Ho et al., 2017], text classification
[Kusner et al., 2015], image retrieval, clustering and classification [Rubner et al., 2000, Cuturi,
2013, Sandler and Lindenbaum, 2011], and distributionally robust optimization [Sinha et al., 2020,
Mohajerin Esfahani and Kuhn, 2018]. Many recent works in machine learning adopted the techniques
from PDE gradient flows over optimal transport geometries and interacting particle systems for
inference and sampling tasks. Those tools not only add new interpretations to the existing algorithms,
but also provide a new perspective on designing new algorithms.
∗

Corresponding author: Jia-Jie Zhu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

