CosAE: Learnable Fourier Series for
Image Restoration

Sifei Liu,

Shalini De Mello, Jan Kautz
NVIDIA
{sifeil, shalinig, jkautz}@nvidia.com

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce Cosine Autoencoder (CosAE), a novel, generic Autoencoder that seamlessly leverages the classic Fourier series with a feed-forward
neural network. CosAE represents an input image as a series of 2D Cosine time
series, each defined by a tuple of learnable frequency and Fourier coefficients.
This method stands in contrast to a conventional Autoencoder that often sacrifices detail in their reduced-resolution bottleneck latent spaces. CosAE, however,
encodes frequency coefficients, i.e., the amplitudes and phases, in its bottleneck.
This encoding enables extreme spatial compression, e.g., 64× downsampled feature maps in the bottleneck, without losing detail upon decoding. We showcase
the advantage of CosAE via extensive experiments on flexible-resolution superresolution and blind image restoration, two highly challenging tasks that demand
the restoration network to effectively generalize to complex and even unknown
image degradations. Our method surpasses state-of-the-art approaches, highlighting its capability to learn a generalizable representation for image restoration. The
project page is maintained at https://sifeiliu.net/CosAE-page/.

1

Introduction

Training an image Autoencoder by reconstruction is one of the most commonly adopted approaches
for image representation learning. At the heart of such a learning process is creating an information
bottleneck: the network first downsamples the input image to lower spatial dimensional features,
then upsamples them back to reconstruct the input image. The key motivation of an information
bottleneck is to enhance a network’s ability to capture and preserve key data intrinsic patterns and
structures, thereby representation and generalization, which is particularly vital in vision tasks where
data quality is critical to performance. Introducing a narrow bottleneck in Autoencoder provides an
effective way not only to learn general-purpose representations for recognition tasks [1, 2, 3, 4], but
also to learn disentangled representations for image synthesis and manipulation [5, 6].
To establish an information bottleneck, most existing Autoencoder networks compress input images
into a spatially compact latent space [1, 2, 3, 5, 6]. They learn mid- to high-level representation for
classification and attributes disentanglement, by extracting the main shared structures while sifting
out any noisy components. However, a narrow bottleneck Autoencoder are rarely directly designed
for image restoration task, mainly because the use of a downsampled bottleneck in conventional Autoencoders often results in the loss of spatial details. Thus, these Autoencoders struggle to effectively
represent high-frequency details, such as textures, compared to more coarse-grained structures. In
other applications where pixel regression quality make a key role, e.g., VQVAE [6] or lattent diffusion models (LDM) [7], researchers address this challenge by striking a balance between the spatial
compactness of the bottleneck and its capability to preserve details. For instance, in training the
Autoencoder [6] used for [6, 7], the downsampling stride is typically capped at 16×. Strides higher
than this often result in considerable degradation of image quality [7].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

