Dense Connector for MLLMs
Huanjin Yao1,3* , Wenhao Wu2* , Taojiannan Yang4 , Yuxin Song3 , Mengxi Zhang3
Haocheng Feng3 , Yifan Sun3 , Zhiheng Li1 , Wanli Ouyang5 , Jingdong Wang3
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University 2 The University of Sydney
3
Baidu Inc. 4 Amazon 5 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
∗

Equal Contribution

Corresponding Author

Abstract
Do we fully leverage the potential of visual encoder in Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLMs)? The recent outstanding performance of MLLMs in multimodal
understanding has garnered broad attention from both academia and industry. In the
current MLLM rat race, the focus seems to be predominantly on the linguistic side.
We witness the rise of larger and higher-quality instruction datasets, as well as the
involvement of larger-sized LLMs. Yet, scant attention has been directed towards
the visual signals utilized by MLLMs, often assumed to be the final high-level
features extracted by a frozen visual encoder. In this paper, we introduce the Dense
Connector - a simple, effective, and plug-and-play vision-language connector that
significantly enhances existing MLLMs by leveraging multi-layer visual features,
with minimal additional computational overhead. Building on this, we also propose
the Efficient Dense Connector, which achieves performance comparable to LLaVAv1.5 with only 25% of the visual tokens. Furthermore, our model, trained solely on
images, showcases remarkable zero-shot capabilities in video understanding as well.
Experimental results across various vision encoders, image resolutions, training
dataset scales, varying sizes of LLMs (2.7B→70B), and diverse architectures
of MLLMs (e.g., LLaVA-v1.5, LLaVA-NeXT and Mini-Gemini) validate the
versatility and scalability of our approach, achieving state-of-the-art performance
across 19 image and video benchmarks. We hope that this work will provide
valuable experience and serve as a basic module for future MLLM development.
Code is available at https://github.com/HJYao00/DenseConnector.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Large Language Models (LLMs) led by ChatGPT [1] have made remarkable advancements in text comprehension and generation. Furthermore, cutting-edge Multimodal Large
Language Models (MLLMs) [2, 3] have rapidly expanded the capabilities of LLMs to include visual
understanding, evolving into models capable of integrating both vision and text modalities. This has
elevated MLLMs to become a new focal point for research and discussion [4, 5, 6, 7].
In broad terms, the architecture of existing MLLMs can be delineated into three components: the
pre-trained vision encoder (e.g., CLIP’s ViT-L [8] or EVA-CLIP’s ViT-G [9]), the pre-trained LLM
(e.g., OPT [10], Llama [11], Vicuna [12], etc.), and the connector (e.g., Q-former [13, 14] or linear
projection [15, 16]) trained from scratch to bridge the vision and language models. An intriguing
trend in current MLLM research is that the focus of model learning and performance improvement
seems to primarily center around the language aspect (e.g., utilizing larger-scale and higher-quality
visual instruction data [17, 16, 18], larger-sized LLMs [19, 20]), with less exploration into the visual
signals fed into the connector. Typically, the visual encoder is frozen to extract high-level visual
features, which are then fed into the connector. This leads us to rethink: Have we fully utilized the
existing pre-trained visual encoder?
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

