Motion Consistency Model:
Accelerating Video Diffusion with
Disentangled Motion-Appearance Distillation

Yuanhao Zhai∗† Kevin Lin‡ Zhengyuan Yang‡ Linjie Li‡ Jianfeng Wang‡
Chung-Ching Lin‡ David Doermann† Junsong Yuan† Lijuan Wang‡
†
State University of New York at Buffalo ‡ Microsoft
{yzhai6,doermann,jsyuan}@buffalo.edu
{keli,zhengyang,lindsey.li,jianfw,chungching.lin,lijuanw}@microsoft.com

https://yhzhai.github.io/mcm/

Abstract
Image diffusion distillation achieves high-fidelity generation with very few sampling steps. However, applying these techniques directly to video diffusion often
results in unsatisfactory frame quality due to the limited visual quality in public
video datasets. This affects the performance of both teacher and student video
diffusion models. Our study aims to improve video diffusion distillation while
improving frame appearance using abundant high-quality image data. We propose motion consistency model (MCM), a single-stage video diffusion distillation
method that disentangles motion and appearance learning. Specifically, MCM includes a video consistency model that distills motion from the video teacher model,
and an image discriminator that enhances frame appearance to match high-quality
image data. This combination presents two challenges: (1) conflicting frame learning objectives, as video distillation learns from low-quality video frames while
the image discriminator targets high-quality images; and (2) training-inference
discrepancies due to the differing quality of video samples used during training
and inference. To address these challenges, we introduce disentangled motion
distillation and mixed trajectory distillation. The former applies the distillation
objective solely to the motion representation, while the latter mitigates traininginference discrepancies by mixing distillation trajectories from both the low- and
high-quality video domains. Extensive experiments show that our MCM achieves
the state-of-the-art video diffusion distillation performance. Additionally, our
method can enhance frame quality in video diffusion models, producing frames
with high aesthetic scores or specific styles without corresponding video data.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [22, 54, 42, 23, 28, 45] have significantly advanced the quality of text-to-image
generation [45, 8, 13], enabling the creation of high-fidelity images and allowing for diverse stylistic
variations [3, 2, 1]. The recent development in image diffusion distillation [55, 34, 48, 38, 31]
significantly reduces the inference cost by letting distilled student models to perform high-fidelity
generation with extremely low sampling steps.
Due to the additional temporal dimension, the sampling time for video diffusion models [21, 24, 9,
62, 19, 65] is considerably longer than that for image diffusion models. However, directly extending
image distillation methods to speed up the video diffusion models results in unsatisfactory frame
∗

Work done during an internship at Microsoft.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

