On scalable oversight with weak LLMs judging strong
LLMs
Zachary Kenton∗
Samuel Albanie

Noah Y. Siegel∗

Jannis Bulian

János Kramár

Rishabh Agarwal

Noah D. Goodman

Jonah Brown-Cohen

David Lindner

Yunhao Tang

Rohin Shah

Abstract
Scalable oversight protocols aim to enable humans to accurately supervise superhuman AI. In this paper we study debate, where two AI’s compete to convince a judge;
consultancy, where a single AI tries to convince a judge that asks questions; and
compare to a baseline of direct question-answering, where the judge just answers
outright without the AI. We use large language models (LLMs) as both AI agents
and as stand-ins for human judges, taking the judge models to be weaker than agent
models. We benchmark on a diverse range of asymmetries between judges and
agents, extending previous work on a single extractive QA task with information
asymmetry, to also include mathematics, coding, logic and multimodal reasoning asymmetries. We find that debate outperforms consultancy across all tasks
when the consultant is randomly assigned to argue for the correct/incorrect answer.
Comparing debate to direct question answering, the results depend on the type of
task: in extractive QA tasks with information asymmetry debate outperforms direct
question answering, but in other tasks without information asymmetry the results
are mixed. Previous work assigned debaters/consultants an answer to argue for.
When we allow them to instead choose which answer to argue for, we find judges
are less frequently convinced by the wrong answer in debate than in consultancy.
Further, we find that stronger debater models increase judge accuracy, though more
modestly than in previous studies.

1

Introduction

If the current practice of using human feedback for alignment is to continue, that feedback will need
to be accurate even as AIs reach and eventually exceed expert human levels on important tasks. One
solution to this problem is scalable oversight – identifying training protocols that leverage advancing
AI capabilities to allow humans to provide accurate training signals to superhuman AI [2, 10, 24, 26].
Scalable oversight is especially important for the safety of superhuman AI systems. Denison et al.
[15] recently showed that current large language models (LLMs) can generalise behaviours which
exploit inaccurate training signals: generalising from simple behaviours, such as sycophancy, to more
complex ones, such as reward tampering, in which the model modifies its own reward administration.
One hypothesis is that more powerful AI may generalise these behaviours further to even more
complex and dangerous exploits, such as scheming [23, 14, 31, 8], in which an AI that is performing
well in training will be doing so in order to gain power later; to the extent this is true, improving the
quality of oversight can reduce the chance that scheming arises.
∗

Equal Contribution. Contact {zkenton,siegeln}@google.com. All authors Google DeepMind.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

