Nature-Inspired Local Propagation

Alessandro Betti
IMT School for Advanced Studies
Lucca, Italy
alessandro.betti@imtlucca.it

Marco Gori
DIISM
University of Siena
Siena, Italy
marco.gori@unisi.it

Abstract
The spectacular results achieved in machine learning, including the recent advances
in generative AI, rely on large data collections. On the opposite, intelligent processes in nature arises without the need for such collections, but simply by on-line
processing of the environmental information. In particular, natural learning processes rely on mechanisms where data representation and learning are intertwined
in such a way to respect spatiotemporal locality. This paper shows that such a
feature arises from a pre-algorithmic view of learning that is inspired by related
studies in Theoretical Physics. We show that the algorithmic interpretation of the
derived “laws of learning”, which takes the structure of Hamiltonian equations,
reduces to Backpropagation when the speed of propagation goes to infinity. This
opens the doors to machine learning studies based on full on-line information
processing that are based on the replacement of Backpropagation with the proposed
spatiotemporal local algorithm.

1

Introduction

By and large, the spectacular results of Machine Learning in nearly any application domain strongly
rely on large data collections along with associated professional skills. Interestingly, the successful
artificial schemes that we have been experimenting under this framework are far away from the
solutions that Biology seems to have discovered. We have recently seen a remarkable effort in the
scientific community to explore biologically inspired models (e.g. see [31, 16, 30, 18]) where the
crucial role of temporal information processing it is clearly identified.
While this paper is related to those investigations, it is based on more strict assumptions on environmental interactions that might stimulate efforts towards a more radical transformation of machine
learning with emphasis on the temporal domain. In particular, we assume that learning and inference
develop jointly under a nature based protocol of environmental interactions and then we suggest
developing computational learning schemes regardless of biological solutions. Basically, the agent
is not given the privilege of recording the temporal stream, but only to represent it properly by
appropriate abstraction mechanisms. While the agent can obviously use its internal memory for
storing those representations, we assume that it cannot access data collection. Instead, the agent can
only rely on buffers of limited size to retain the information it acquires. From a cognitive perspective,
these small buffers allow the agent to review recent inputs backward in time, implementing a form of
selective attention.
We propose a pre-algorithmic framework which derives from the formulation of learning as an
Optimal Control problem [19] and propose an approach to its solution that is also inspired by
principles of Theoretical Physics. We formulate the continuous learning problem to emphasize
how optimization theory brings out solutions based on differential equations that recall similar laws
in nature. The discrete counterpart [2, p. 2], which is more similar to recurrent neural network
algorithms that are found in the literature, can be derived as a numerical method and applied in
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

