Multi-turn Reinforcement Learning
from Preference Human Feedback
Lior Shani ∗ 1
liorshani@google.com
Oran Lang 1
Bilal Piot 2

Aviv Rosenberg ∗ 1
avivros@google.com

Daniele Calandriello 2
Idan Szpektor 1

Avital Zipori 1

Avinatan Hassidim 1

Asaf Cassel ∗ 1 3
acassel@mail.tau.ac.il
Hila Noga 1

Orgad Keller 1

Yossi Matias 1

Rémi Munos 2

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) has become the standard
approach for aligning Large Language Models (LLMs) with human preferences,
allowing LLMs to demonstrate remarkable abilities in various tasks. Existing
methods work by emulating the preferences at the single decision (turn) level,
limiting their capabilities in settings that require planning or multi-turn interactions
to achieve a long-term goal. In this paper, we address this issue by developing novel
methods for Reinforcement Learning (RL) from preference feedback between two
full multi-turn conversations. In the tabular setting, we present a novel mirrordescent-based policy optimization algorithm for the general multi-turn preferencebased RL problem, and prove its convergence to Nash equilibrium. To evaluate
performance, we create a new environment, Education Dialogue, where a teacher
agent guides a student in learning a random topic, and show that a deep RL
variant of our algorithm outperforms RLHF baselines. Finally, we show that in an
environment with explicit rewards, our algorithm recovers the same performance as
a reward-based RL baseline, despite relying solely on a weaker preference signal.

1

Introduction

A pinnacle of human intelligence is the ability to communicate with an environment, forming
complex interactions to accomplish challenging goals. Dialogues are one example of such dynamic
communication, where one party reacts to signals from the other parties and dynamically plans ahead
to steer communication towards their purpose. Recent years have seen scientific breakthroughs in
developing Large Language Models (LLMs) that can communicate with humans in natural language
[Ouyang et al., 2022, Anil et al., 2023, Touvron et al., 2023, OpenAI, 2024, Google, 2024]. In order
to align these models to human needs, many efforts have been made to train them with a given
human feedback. In some concordance with human learning, this is usually achieved by reinforcing
behaviors that align with the feedback, using a technique now called Reinforcement Learning from
Human Feedback (RLHF; Christiano et al. [2017], Ziegler et al. [2019], Stiennon et al. [2020]).
RLHF methods build on the long studied field of Reinforcement Learning (RL), which focuses
on learning optimal actions through reward feedback (a numerical signal) from the environment.
However, defining a suitable reward function is challenging, leading to the common practice of
collecting human preferences between choices. In the absence of rewards, a mapping from preference
to reward is typically assumed in the form of the Bradely-Terry (BT; Bradley and Terry [1952]) model
[Stiennon et al., 2020, Rafailov et al., 2023], enabling the use of a wide-variety of well-researched
⋆

Equal contribution. 1 Google Research. 2 Google DeepMind. 3 Tel Aviv University.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

