Gaussian Graph Network: Learning Efficient and
Generalizable Gaussian Representations from
Multi-view Images

Shengjun Zhang, Xin Fei, Fangfu Liu, Haixu Song, Yueqi Duan∗
Tsinghua University
{zhangsj23, feix21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, duanyueqi@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has demonstrated impressive novel view synthesis
performance. While conventional methods require per-scene optimization, more
recently several feed-forward methods have been proposed to generate pixel-aligned
Gaussian representations with a learnable network, which are generalizable to
different scenes. However, these methods simply combine pixel-aligned Gaussians
from multiple views as scene representations, thereby leading to artifacts and extra
memory cost without fully capturing the relations of Gaussians from different
images. In this paper, we propose Gaussian Graph Network (GGN) to generate
efficient and generalizable Gaussian representations. Specifically, we construct
Gaussian Graphs to model the relations of Gaussian groups from different views.
To support message passing at Gaussian level, we reformulate the basic graph
operations over Gaussian representations, enabling each Gaussian to benefit from
its connected Gaussian groups with Gaussian feature fusion. Furthermore, we
design a Gaussian pooling layer to aggregate various Gaussian groups for efficient
representations. We conduct experiments on the large-scale RealEstate10K and
ACID datasets to demonstrate the efficiency and generalization of our method.
Compared to the state-of-the-art methods, our model uses fewer Gaussians and
achieves better image quality with higher rendering speed.

1

Introduction

Novel view synthesis is a fundamental problem in computer vision due to its widespread applications,
such as virtual reality, augmented reality, robotics and so on. Remarkable progress has been made
using neural implicit representations [30, 39, 40], but these methods suffer from expensive time
consumption in training and rendering [26, 12, 1, 37, 60, 10, 15, 31]. Recently, 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS) [19] has drawn increasing attention for explicit Gaussian representations and
real-time rendering performance. Benefiting from rasterization-based rendering, 3DGS avoids dense
points querying in scene space, so that it can maintain high efficiency and quality.
Since 3DGS relies on per-subject [19] or per-frame [28] parameter optimization, several generalizable methods [63, 6, 4, 41] are proposed to directly regress Gaussian parameters with feed-forward
networks. Typically, these methods [6, 4] generate pixel-aligned Gaussians with U-Net architectures,
epipolar transformers or cost volume representations for depth estimation and parameter predictions,
and directly combine Gaussian groups obtained from different views as scene representations. However, such combination of Gaussians leads to superfluous representations, where the overlapped
regions are covered by similar Gaussians predicted separately from multiple images. While a simple
solution is to delete redundant Gaussians, it ignores the connection among Gaussian groups. As
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

