N EUR 2B I LO: Neural Bilevel Optimization

Justin Dumouchelle∗
University of Toronto

Esther Julien
TU Delft

Jannis Kurtz
University of Amsterdam

Elias B. Khalil
University of Toronto

Abstract
Bilevel optimization deals with nested problems in which a leader takes the first
decision to minimize their objective function while accounting for a follower’s
best-response reaction. Constrained bilevel problems with integer variables are particularly notorious for their hardness. While exact solvers have been proposed for
mixed-integer linear bilevel optimization, they tend to scale poorly with problem
size and are hard to generalize to the non-linear case. On the other hand, problemspecific algorithms (exact and heuristic) are limited in scope. Under a data-driven
setting in which similar instances of a bilevel problem are solved routinely, our
proposed framework, N EUR 2B I LO, embeds a neural network approximation of
the leader’s or follower’s value function, trained via supervised regression, into
an easy-to-solve mixed-integer program. N EUR 2B I LO serves as a heuristic that
produces high-quality solutions extremely fast for four applications with linear and
non-linear objectives and pure and mixed-integer variables.

1

Introduction

A motivating application. Consider the following discrete network design problem (DNDP) [47,
48]. A transportation planning authority seeks to minimize the average travel time on a road network
represented by a directed graph of nodes N and links A1 by investing in constructing a set of roads
(i.e., links) from a set of options A2 , subject to a budget B. The planner knows the number of vehicles
that travel between any origin-destination (O-D) pair of nodes. A good selection of links should
take into account the drivers’ reactions to this decision. One common assumption is that drivers will
optimize their O-D paths such that a user equilibrium is reached. This is known as Wardrop’s second
principle in the traffic assignment literature, an equilibrium in which “no driver can unilaterally
reduce their travel costs by shifting to another route” [41]. This is in contrast to the system optimum,
an equilibrium in which a central planner dictates each driver’s route, an unrealistic assumption that
would not require bilevel modeling. A link cost function is used to model the travel time on an edge
as a function of traffic. Let cij ∈ R+ be the capacity (vehicles per hour (vph)) of a link and Tij ∈ R+
the free-flow travel time (i.e., travel time on the link without congestion). The US Bureau of Public
Roads uses the following widely accepted formula to model the travel time t(yij ) on a link used
by yij vehicles per hour: t(yij ) = Tij (1 + 0.15(yij /cij )4 ). As the traffic yij grows to exceed the
capacity cij , a large quartic increase in travel time is incurred [41].
Bilevel optimization (BiLO) [4] models the DNDP and many problems in which an agent (the leader)
makes decisions that minimize their cost function subject to another agent’s (the follower’s) best
response. In the DNDP, the leader is the transportation planner and the follower is the population of

∗

Corresponding author: justin.dumouchelle@mail.utoronto.ca

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

