Stress-Testing Capability Elicitation With
Password-Locked Models
Ryan Greenblatt∗
Redwood Research
ryan@rdwrs.com

Fabien Roger∗
Redwood Research
fabien.d.roger@gmail.com

Dmitrii Krasheninnikov
University of Cambridge
dk655@cam.ac.uk

David Krueger
University of Cambridge
david.scott.krueger@gmail.com

Abstract
To determine the safety of large language models (LLMs), AI developers must
be able to assess their dangerous capabilities. But simple prompting strategies
often fail to elicit an LLM’s full capabilities. One way to elicit capabilities more
robustly is to fine-tune the LLM to complete the task. In this paper, we investigate the conditions under which fine-tuning-based elicitation suffices to elicit
capabilities. To do this, we introduce password-locked models, LLMs fine-tuned
such that some of their capabilities are deliberately hidden. Specifically, these
LLMs are trained to exhibit these capabilities only when a password is present
in the prompt, and to imitate a much weaker LLM otherwise. Password-locked
models enable a novel method of evaluating capabilities elicitation methods, by
testing whether these password-locked capabilities can be elicited without using
the password. We find that a few high-quality demonstrations are often sufficient
to fully elicit password-locked capabilities. More surprisingly, fine-tuning can
elicit other capabilities that have been locked using the same password, or even
different passwords. Furthermore, when only evaluations, and not demonstrations,
are available, approaches like reinforcement learning are still often able to elicit
capabilities. Overall, our findings suggest that fine-tuning is an effective method
of eliciting hidden capabilities of current models, but may be unreliable when
high-quality demonstrations are not available, e.g. as may be the case when models’
(hidden) capabilities exceed those of human demonstrators.

1

Introduction

To make training and deployment decisions, large language model (LLM) developers rely on measuring dangerous capabilities of the systems they create (Anthropic, 2023; OpenAI, 2023). Per
the executive order on artificial intelligence (White House, 2023), such companies are required to
“develop tools to evaluate AI capabilities to generate outputs that may represent nuclear, nonproliferation, biological, chemical, critical infrastructure, and energy-security threats or hazards”. Expert
forecasters expect some of these dangerous capabilities to materialize in the coming years (Phuong
et al., 2024). Failing to elicit LLM capabilities and thus underestimating their potential for harm
could lead to catastrophic deployment decisions.1
*
Equal contribution. Author contributions are listed in Appendix A.
Code available at https://github.com/FabienRoger/sandbagging.
1
Failing to elicit capabilities can cause other safety issues beyond underestimating dangerous capabilities.
We give a more detailed overview of these problems in Appendix D.1.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

