Few-Shot Task Learning through
Inverse Generative Modeling
∗

Aviv Netanyahu1 , Yilun Du1,2 , Antonia Bronars1 , Jyothish Pari1 , Joshua Tenenbaum1 ,
Tianmin Shu3 , and Pulkit Agrawal1
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2
Harvard University
3
Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
Learning the intents of an agent, defined by its goals or motion style, is often
extremely challenging from just a few examples. We refer to this problem as
task concept learning and present our approach, Few-Shot Task Learning through
Inverse Generative Modeling (FTL-IGM), which learns new task concepts by leveraging invertible neural generative models. The core idea is to pretrain a generative
model on a set of basic concepts and their demonstrations. Then, given a few
demonstrations of a new concept (such as a new goal or a new action), our method
learns the underlying concepts through backpropagation without updating the
model weights, thanks to the invertibility of the generative model. We evaluate our
method in five domains – object rearrangement, goal-oriented navigation, motion
caption of human actions, autonomous driving, and real-world table-top manipulation. Our experimental results demonstrate that via the pretrained generative
model, we successfully learn novel concepts and generate agent plans or motion
corresponding to these concepts in (1) unseen environments and (2) in composition
with training concepts.

1

Introduction

The ability to learn concepts about a novel task, such as the goal and motion plans, from a few
demonstrations is a crucial building block for intelligent agents – it allows an agent to learn to
perform new tasks from other agents (including humans) from little data. Humans, even from a young
age, can learn various new tasks from little data and generalize what they learned to perform these
tasks in new situations [1].
In machine learning and robotics, this class of problems is referred to as Few-Shot Learning [2].
Despite being a widely studied problem, it remains unclear how we can enable machine learning
models to learn concepts of a novel task from only a few demonstrations and generalize the concepts
to new situations, just like humans do. Common approaches learn policies either directly, which often
suffer from covariate shift [3], or via rewards [4–6], which are largely limited to previously seen
behavior [7]. In a different vein, other work has relied on pretraining on task families and assumes
that task learning corresponds to learning similar tasks to ones already seen in the task family [8, 9].
Inspired by the success of generative modeling in few-shot visual concept learning [10–12], where
concepts are latent representations, in this work, we investigate whether and how few-shot task
concept learning can benefit from generative modeling as well. Learning concepts from sequential
demonstrations rather than images is by nature more challenging due to sequential data often not
∗

Correspondence to Aviv Netanyahu <avivn@mit.edu>. Project website https://avivne.github.io/ftl-igm.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

