A Combinatorial Algorithm for the Semi-Discrete
Optimal Transport Problem
Pankaj K. Agarwal1 , Sharath Raghvendra2 , Pouyan Shirzadian3 , and Keegan Yao1
1

Duke University, 2 North Carolina State University, 3 Virginia Tech

Abstract
Optimal Transport (OT, also known as the Wasserstein distance) is a popular metric
for comparing probability distributions and has been successfully used in many
machine-learning applications. In the semi-discrete 2-Wasserstein problem, we
wish to compute the cheapest way to transport all the mass from a continuous
distribution µ to a discrete distribution ν in Rd for d ≥ 1, where the cost of
transporting unit mass between points a and b is d(a, b) = ∥a − b∥2 . When both
distributions are discrete, a simple combinatorial framework has been used to
find the exact solution (see e.g. [Orlin, STOC 1988]). In this paper, we propose
a combinatorial framework for the semi-discrete OT, which can be viewed as
an extension of the combinatorial framework for the discrete OT but requires
several new ideas. We present a new algorithm that given µ and ν in R2 and
a parameter ε > 0, computes an ε-additive approximate semi-discrete transport
plan in O(n4 log n log 1ε ) time (in the worst case), where n is the support-size
of the discrete distribution ν and we assume that the mass of µ inside a triangle
can be computed in O(1) time. Our algorithm is significantly faster than the
known algorithms, and unlike many numerical algorithms, it does not make any
assumptions on the smoothness of µ. As an application of our algorithm, we
describe a data structure to store a large discrete distribution µ (with support
size N ) using O(N ) space so that, given a query discrete distribution ν (with
support
√ size k), an ε-additive approximate transport plan can be computed in
O(k 3 N log 1ε ) time in 2 dimensions. Our algorithm and data structure extend to
higher dimensions as well as to p-Wasserstein problem for any p ≥ 1.

1

Introduction

Optimal Transport (OT) is a powerful metric for comparing probability distributions and is used
in many machine-learning applications. The semi-discrete optimal transport problem asks for the
cheapest transport plan to transport mass from (a possibly continuous) distribution µ that is stored
compactly (say, using a deep neural network) to a discrete distribution ν. In recent years, the semidiscrete OT has been used in data mining [31], image processing [28, 29, 33, 40], computational
biology [53], variational inference [7], blue noise generation [21, 51], optics [46], solving PDEs [30,
34], and generative models [8, 9, 19].
More formally, a semi-discrete transport plan τ between a continuous probability distribution µ
defined over a compact support A ⊂ Rd and a discrete distribution ν with a support set B of n points
in Rd is a distribution over A×B whose P
marginals are dominated by µ and ν, i.e.,Rτ : A×B → R≥0 is
a transport plan between µ and ν where b∈B τ (a, b) ≤ µ(a) for all a ⊆ A and A τ (a, b) da ≤ ν(b)
for all b ∈ B. A transport plan τ is complete if τ transports all mass of µ to ν. For any fixed p ≥ 1, in
∗

The authors are listed in alphabetical order.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

