Covariate Shift Corrected Conditional
Randomization Test
Bowen Xu˚
Harvard University
bowenxu@g.harvard.edu

Yiwen Huang˚
Department of Statistics
Peking University
2000010773@stu.pku.edu.cn

Chuan Hong
Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics
Duke University
chuan.hong@duke.edu

Shuangning Li
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
shuangning.li@chicagobooth.edu

Molei Liu:
Department of Biostatistics
Columbia Mailman School of Public Health
ml4890@cumc.columbia.edu

Abstract
Conditional independence tests are crucial across various disciplines in determining
the independence of an outcome variable Y from a treatment variable X, conditioning on a set of confounders Z. The Conditional Randomization Test (CRT) offers
a powerful framework for such testing by assuming known distributions of X | Z;
it controls the Type-I error exactly, allowing for the use of flexible, black-box
test statistics. In practice, testing for conditional independence often involves
using data from a source population to draw conclusions about a target population.
This can be challenging due to covariate shift—differences in the distribution of
X, Z, and surrogate variables, which can affect the conditional distribution of
Y | X, Z—rendering traditional CRT approaches invalid. To address this issue,
we propose a novel Covariate Shift Corrected Pearson Chi-squared Conditional
Randomization (csPCR) test. This test adapts to covariate shifts by integrating
importance weights and employing the control variates method to reduce variance
in the test statistics and thus enhance power. Theoretically, we establish that the
csPCR test controls the Type-I error asymptotically. Empirically, through simulation studies, we demonstrate that our method not only maintains control over
Type-I errors but also exhibits superior power, confirming its efficacy and practical
utility in real-world scenarios where covariate shifts are prevalent. Finally, we
apply our methodology to a real-world dataset to assess the impact of a COVID-19
treatment on the 90-day mortality rate among patients.

1

Introduction

Conditional independence tests are important across diverse fields for determining whether an
outcome variable Y is independent of a treatment variable X, conditioning on a potentially high˚
:

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author. To whom correspondence should be addressed.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

