BACK T IME: Backdoor Attacks on
Multivariate Time Series Forecasting

Xiao Lin
University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
xiaol13@illinois.edu

Zhining Liu
University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
liu326@illinois.edu

Ruizhong Qiu
University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
rq5@illinois.edu

Dongqi Fu
Meta AI
CA, USA
dongqifu@meta.com

Hanghang Tong
University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
htong@illinois.edu

Abstract
Multivariate Time Series (MTS) forecasting is a fundamental task with numerous
real-world applications, such as transportation, climate, and epidemiology. While
a myriad of powerful deep learning models have been developed for this task,
few works have explored the robustness of MTS forecasting models to malicious
attacks, which is crucial for their trustworthy employment in high-stake scenarios.
To address this gap, we dive deep into the backdoor attacks on MTS forecasting
models and propose an effective attack method named BACK T IME. By subtly
injecting a few stealthy triggers into the MTS data, BACK T IME can alter the
predictions of the forecasting model according to the attacker’s intent. Specifically,
BACK T IME first identifies vulnerable timestamps in the data for poisoning, and
then adaptively synthesizes stealthy and effective triggers by solving a bi-level
optimization problem with a GNN-based trigger generator. Extensive experiments
across multiple datasets and state-of-the-art MTS forecasting models demonstrate
the effectiveness, versatility, and stealthiness of BACK T IME attacks. The code is
available at https://github.com/xiaolin-cs/BackTime.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting finds its applications across diverse domains such as climate [72, 42, 7, 32, 27],
epidemiology [17, 15, 66, 24], transportation [63, 77, 45, 37], and financial markets [61, 26, 73, 51].
Multivariate time series (MTS) represent a collection of time series with multiple variables, and MTS
forecasting aims to predict future data for each variable based on their historical data and the complex
inter-variable relationship among them. Due to its wide applications and complexity, it has become
an important research area. The rapid advancement of deep learning [76, 75, 74, 33, 58, 6, 47]
has significantly contributed to solving time series forecasting challenges. Many deep learning
models have been developed to tackle this problem, including Transformer-based [81, 53, 69, 25],
GNN-based [31, 63, 29, 12, 11] and RNN-based [3, 34] models.
Despite the remarkable capacity of deep learning models, there is an alarming concern that they are
susceptible to backdoor attacks [68, 28, 80, 50, 46]. The attack involves the surreptitious injection
of triggers into datasets, causing poisoned models to provide wrong predictions when the inputs
contain malicious triggers. Extensive works have shown that backdoor attack poses a serious risk
across various classification tasks, including time series classification [38, 18]. However, the threat
to time series forecasting remains unexplored and is of great importance to be investigated. For
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

