SciInstruct: a Self-Reflective Instruction Annotated
Dataset for Training Scientific Language Models
Dan Zhang1,2,∗ , Ziniu Hu3 , Sining Zhoubian1,2,∗ , Zhengxiao Du1,2,∗
Kaiyu Yang3 , Zihan Wang1,2,∗ , Yisong Yue3 , Yuxiao Dong1 , Jie Tang1†
1
The Knowledge Engineering Group (KEG), Tsinghua University; 2 Zhipu AI;
3
California Institute of Technology
https://SciGLM.github.io/

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown promise in assisting scientific discovery. However, such applications are currently limited by LLMs’ deficiencies
in understanding intricate scientific concepts, deriving symbolic equations, and
solving advanced numerical calculations. To bridge these gaps, we introduce
SciInstruct, a suite of scientific instructions for training scientific language models capable of college-level scientific reasoning. Central to our approach is a novel
self-reflective instruction annotation framework to address the data scarcity challenge in the science domain. This framework leverages existing LLMs to generate
step-by-step reasoning for unlabelled scientific questions, followed by a process of
self-reflective critic-and-revise. Applying this framework, we curated a diverse and
high-quality dataset encompassing physics, chemistry, math, and formal proofs.
We analyze the curated SciInstruct from multiple interesting perspectives (e.g.,
domain, scale, source, question type, answer length, etc.). To verify the effectiveness of SciInstruct, we fine-tuned different language models with SciInstruct,
i.e., ChatGLM3 (6B and 32B), Llama3-8B-Instruct, and Mistral-7B: MetaMath,
enhancing their scientific and mathematical reasoning capabilities, without sacrificing the language understanding capabilities of the base model. We release all
codes and SciInstruct at https://github.com/THUDM/SciGLM.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have shown potential to assist and accelerate scientific discovery [1;
2], helping tasks like protein prediction [3], weather forecasting [4] and geoscience understanding [5].
Despite these promising proof-of-concept trials, recent studies [6; 7; 8; 9] show that even advanced
LLMs like GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 struggle with basic scientific problems, achieving only 28.52%
accuracy on some college-level textbook questions. These scientific questions, such as calculating
energy with the Planck distribution, require a diverse set of skills, including finding the correct
combination of physical concepts and axioms, choice and deduction of formal equations, and rigorous
numerical computing. Before letting LLMs equip these skills to solve basic scientific questions, all
ambitious visions of building LLM agents to assist scientific discovery could be unreliable. This
brings substantial incentives for building scientific instructions and using them to develop foundational
scientific language models.
* Work done while these authors interned at Zhipu AI.
†

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

