Smoothed Energy Guidance: Guiding Diffusion
Models with Reduced Energy Curvature of Attention

Susung Hong∗
University of Washington

Abstract
Conditional diffusion models have shown remarkable success in visual content
generation, producing high-quality samples across various domains, largely due to
classifier-free guidance (CFG). Recent attempts to extend guidance to unconditional
models have relied on heuristic techniques, resulting in suboptimal generation quality and unintended effects. In this work, we propose Smoothed Energy Guidance
(SEG), a novel training- and condition-free approach that leverages the energybased perspective of the self-attention mechanism to enhance image generation.
By defining the energy of self-attention, we introduce a method to reduce the
curvature of the energy landscape of attention and use the output as the unconditional prediction. Practically, we control the curvature of the energy landscape
by adjusting the Gaussian kernel parameter while keeping the guidance scale parameter fixed. Additionally, we present a query blurring method that is equivalent
to blurring the entire attention weights without incurring quadratic complexity
in the number of tokens. In our experiments, SEG achieves a Pareto improvement in both quality and the reduction of side effects. The code is available at
https://github.com/SusungHong/SEG-SDXL.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [12, 45, 46] have emerged as a promising tool for visual content generation,
producing high-quality and diverse samples across various domains, including image [38, 40, 42,
8, 13, 30, 2, 24, 9, 29, 34, 33, 4, 41, 5, 20, 22], video [11, 50, 23, 18, 15, 3, 19, 44], and 3D
generation [36, 27, 6, 26, 49, 43, 48, 16]. The success of these models can be largely attributed to
the use of classifier-free guidance (CFG) [14], which enables sampling from a sharper distribution,
resulting in improved sample quality. However, CFG is not applicable to unconditional image
generation, where no specific conditions are provided, creating a disparity between the capabilities
of text-conditioned sampling and sampling without text. This disparity results in a restriction in
application, e.g., synthesizing images with ControlNet[51] without a text prompt (see the last two
columns of Fig. 1).
Recent literature [17, 1] has attempted to decouple CFG and image quality by extending guidance
to general diffusion models, leveraging their inherent representations [25, 32, 17]. Self-attention
guidance (SAG) [17] proposes leveraging the intermediate self-attention map of diffusion models to
blur the input pixels and provide guidance, while perturbed attention guidance (PAG) [1] perturbs the
attention map itself by replacing it with an identity attention map. Despite these efforts, these methods
rely on heuristics to make perturbed predictions, resulting in unintended effects such as smoothed-out
details, saturation, color shifts, and significant changes in the image structure when given a large
guidance scale. Notably, the mathematical underpinnings of these unconditional guidance approaches
are not well elucidated.
∗

This work was mostly done at Korea University.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

