Policy Mirror Descent with Lookahead

Kimon Protopapas∗ Anas Barakat∗

Abstract
Policy Mirror Descent (PMD) stands as a versatile algorithmic framework encompassing several seminal policy gradient algorithms such as natural policy gradient,
with connections with state-of-the-art reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms such
as TRPO and PPO. PMD can be seen as a soft Policy Iteration algorithm implementing regularized 1-step greedy policy improvement. However, 1-step greedy
policies might not be the best choice and recent remarkable empirical successes in
RL such as AlphaGo and AlphaZero have demonstrated that greedy approaches
with respect to multiple steps outperform their 1-step counterpart. In this work,
we propose a new class of PMD algorithms called h-PMD which incorporates
multi-step greedy policy improvement with lookahead depth h to the PMD update
rule. To solve discounted infinite horizon Markov Decision Processes with discount factor γ, we show that h-PMD which generalizes the standard PMD enjoys a
faster dimension-free γ h -linear convergence rate, contingent on the computation
of multi-step greedy policies. We propose an inexact version of h-PMD where
lookahead action values are estimated. Under a generative model, we establish
a sample complexity for h-PMD which improves over prior work. Finally, we
extend our result to linear function approximation to scale to large state spaces.
Under suitable assumptions, our sample complexity only involves dependence on
the dimension of the feature map space instead of the state space size.

1

Introduction

Policy Mirror Descent (PMD) is a general class of algorithms for solving reinforcement learning (RL)
problems. Motivated by the surge of interest in understanding popular Policy Gradient (PG) methods,
PMD has been recently investigated in a line of works [25, 53, 29, 20]. Notably, PMD encompasses
several PG methods as particular cases via its flexible mirror map. A prominent example is the
celebrated Natural PG method. PMD has also close connections to state-of-the-art methods such as
TRPO and PPO [50] which have achieved widespread empirical success [41, 42], including most
recently in fine-tuning Large Language Models via RL from human feedback [35]. Interestingly,
PMD has also been inspired by one of the most fundamental algorithms in RL: Policy Iteration (PI).
While PI alternates between policy evaluation and policy improvement, PMD regularizes the latter
step to address the instability issue of PI with inexact policy evaluation.
Policy Iteration and its variants have been extensively studied in the literature, see e.g. [5, 32, 39]. In
particular, PI has been studied in conjunction with the lookahead mechanism [12], i.e. using multistep greedy policy improvement instead of single-step greedy policies. Intuitively, the idea is that the
application of the Bellman operator multiple times before computing a greedy policy leads to a more
accurate approximation of the optimal value function. Implemented via Monte Carlo Tree Search
(MCTS), multi-step greedy policy improvement2 contributed to the empirical success of some of the
∗

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland. Contact: kprotopapas@student.ethz.ch,
barakat9anas@gmail.com. Most of this work was completed when both authors were affiliated with ETH
Zürich, K.P as a Master student and A.B. as a postdoctoral fellow. A.B. is currently affiliated with Singapore
University of Technology and Design as a research fellow.
2
Note that this is different from n-step return approaches which are rather used for policy evaluation [47].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

