RETR: Multi-View Radar Detection Transformer
for Indoor Perception

Ryoma Yataka1,3,∗,† , Adriano Cardace2,∗,‡ , Pu (Perry) Wang1,∗ ,
Petros Boufounos1 , Ryuhei Takahashi3
1
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL), USA
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Bologna, Italy
3
Information Technology R&D Center (ITC), Mitsubishi Electric Corporation, Japan

Abstract
Indoor radar perception has seen rising interest due to affordable costs driven by
emerging automotive imaging radar developments and the benefits of reduced
privacy concerns and reliability under hazardous conditions (e.g., fire and smoke).
However, existing radar perception pipelines fail to account for distinctive characteristics of the multi-view radar setting. In this paper, we propose Radar dEtection TRansformer (RETR), an extension of the popular DETR architecture,
tailored for multi-view radar perception. RETR inherits the advantages of DETR,
eliminating the need for hand-crafted components for object detection and segmentation in the image plane. More importantly, RETR incorporates carefully
designed modifications such as 1) depth-prioritized feature similarity via a tunable positional encoding (TPE); 2) a tri-plane loss from both radar and camera coordinates; and 3) a learnable radar-to-camera transformation via reparameterization, to account for the unique multi-view radar setting. Evaluated on
two indoor radar perception datasets, our approach outperforms existing stateof-the-art methods by a margin of 15.38+ AP for object detection and 11.91+
IoU for instance segmentation, respectively. Our implementation is available at
https://github.com/merlresearch/radar-detection-transformer.

1

Introduction

Perception information encompasses the processes and technologies to detect, interpret, and understand their surroundings. Complementary to the mainstream camera and LiDAR sensors, radar can
enhance the safety and resilience of perception under low light, adversarial weather (e.g., rain, snow,
dust), and hazardous conditions (e.g., smoke, fire) at affordable device and maintenance cost. An
emerging application of radar perception is indoor sensing and monitoring for elderly care, building
energy management, and indoor navigation [7]. A notable limitation of indoor radar perception is the
low semantic features from radar signals.
Earlier efforts use radar detection points [42, 30] to support simple classification tasks such as
fall detection and activity recognition over a limited number of patterns. To support challenging
perception tasks such as object detection, pose estimation, and segmentation, lower-level radar
signal representation such as radar heatmaps is more preferred. Along this line, the earliest work is
RF-Pose [43] using a convolution-based autoencoder network to fuse features from the two radar
views and regress keypoints for 2D image-plane pose estimation. It is later extended to 3D human
∗

Equal contribution.
The work was done as a visiting scientist from ITC in Mitsubishi Electric Corporation.
‡
The work was done during his internship at MERL.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

