Neural Pfaffians: Solving Many Many-Electron
Schrödinger Equations

Nicholas Gao, Stephan Günnemann
{n.gao,s.guennemann}@tum.de
Department of Computer Science & Munich Data Science Institute
Technical University of Munich

Abstract
Neural wave functions accomplished unprecedented accuracies in approximating
the ground state of many-electron systems, though at a high computational cost.
Recent works proposed amortizing the cost by learning generalized wave functions
across different structures and compounds instead of solving each problem independently. Enforcing the permutation antisymmetry of electrons in such generalized
neural wave functions remained challenging as existing methods require discrete
orbital selection via non-learnable hand-crafted algorithms. This work tackles the
problem by defining overparametrized, fully learnable neural wave functions suitable for generalization across molecules. We achieve this by relying on Pfaffians
rather than Slater determinants. The Pfaffian allows us to enforce the antisymmetry
on arbitrary electronic systems without any constraint on electronic spin configurations or molecular structure. Our empirical evaluation finds that a single neural
Pfaffian calculates the ground state and ionization energies with chemical accuracy
across various systems. On the TinyMol dataset, we outperform the ‘gold-standard’
CCSD(T) CBS reference energies by 1.9 mEh and reduce energy errors compared
to previous generalized neural wave functions by up to an order of magnitude.

1

Introduction

Solving the electronic Schrödinger equation is at the heart of computational chemistry and drug
discovery. Its solution provides a molecule’s or material’s electronic structure and energy (Zhang et al.,
2023). While the exact solution is infeasible, neural networks have recently shown unprecedentedly
accurate approximations (Hermann et al., 2023). These neural networks approximate the system’s
ground-state wave function Ψ : RNe ×3 → R, the lowest energy state, by minimizing the energy
hΨ| Ĥ |Ψi, where Ĥ is the Hamiltonian operator, a mathematical description of the system. While
such neural wave functions are highly accurate, training has proven computationally intensive.
Gao & Günnemann (2022) have shown that training a generalized neural wave function on a large
class of systems amortizes the cost. However, their approach is limited to different geometric
arrangements of the same molecule. Subsequent works eliminated this limitation by introducing
hand-crafted algorithms (Gao & Günnemann, 2023a) or heavily relying on classical Hartree-Fock
calculations (Scherbela et al., 2023). Both impose strict, non-learnable mathematical constraints
and prior assumptions that may not always hold, limiting their generalization and accuracies. Handcrafted algorithms only work for a limited set of molecules, in particular organic molecules near
equilibrium, while the reliance on Hartree-Fock empirically results in degraded accuracies.
In this work, we propose the Neural Pfaffian (NeurPf) to overcome these limitations. As suggested
by its name, NeurPf uses Pfaffians to define a superset of the previously used Slater determinants
to enforce the fermionic antisymmetry. The Pfaffian lifts the constraint on the number of molecular
orbitals from Slater determinants (Szabo & Ostlund, 2012), enabling overparametrized wave functions
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

