Towards Multi-dimensional Explanation Alignment
for Medical Classification
Lijie Hu∗,1,2 , Songning Lai∗,1,2,3 , Wenshuo Chen∗,1,2 , Hongru Xiao4
Hongbin Lin3 , Lu Yu6 , Jingfeng Zhang5,7 , and Di Wang1,2
1
Provable Responsible AI and Data Analytics (PRADA) Lab
2
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
3
HKUST(GZ) 4 Tongji University 5 The University of Auckland
6
Ant Group, 7 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP)

Abstract
The lack of interpretability in the field of medical image analysis has significant ethical and legal implications. Existing interpretable methods in this domain encounter
several challenges, including dependency on specific models, difficulties in understanding and visualization, as well as issues related to efficiency. To address these
limitations, we propose a novel framework called Med-MICN (Medical Multidimensional Interpretable Concept Network). Med-MICN provides interpretability
alignment for various angles, including neural symbolic reasoning, concept semantics, and saliency maps, which are superior to current interpretable methods.
Its advantages include high prediction accuracy, interpretability across multiple
dimensions, and automation through an end-to-end concept labeling process that reduces the need for extensive human training effort when working with new datasets.
To demonstrate the effectiveness and interpretability of Med-MICN, we apply it
to four benchmark datasets and compare it with baselines. The results clearly
demonstrate the superior performance and interpretability of our Med-MICN.

1

Introduction

The field of medical image analysis has witnessed remarkable advancements, especially for the deep
learning models. Deep learning models have exhibited exceptional performance in various tasks,
such as image recognition and disease diagnosis [31, 46, 1], with an opaque decision process and
intricate network. However, this lack of transparency is particularly problematic in the medical
domain, making it challenging for physicians and clinical professionals to trust the predictions made
by these deep models. Thus, there is an urgent need for the interpretability of model decisions in the
medical domain [43, 13, 57].
The medical field has strict trust requirements. It not only demands high-performing models but
also emphasizes comprehensibility and earning the trust of practitioners [20]. Thus, Explainable
Artificial Intelligence (XAI) has emerged as a prominent research area in this field. It aims to enhance
the transparency and comprehensibility of decision-making processes in deep learning models and
large language models by incorporating interpretability [65, 21, 22, 64, 63, 25, 8]. Various methods
have been proposed to achieve interpretability, including attention mechanisms [56, 61, 27, 26, 24],
saliency maps [70, 16], DeepLIFT and Shapley values [38, 4], influence functions [34, 55]. These
methods strive to provide users with visual explanations that shed light on the decision-making
process of the model. However, while these post-hoc explanatory methods offer valuable information,
there is still a gap between their explanations and the model decisions [42]. Moreover, these post-hoc
∗

The first three authors contributed equally to this work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

