MO-DDN: A Coarse-to-Fine Attribute-based
Exploration Agent for Multi-object Demand-driven
Navigation

Hongcheng Wang1,3∗ Peiqi Liu2∗
Wenzhe Cai Mingdong Wu 1,3 Zhengyu Qian 2 Hao Dong 1,3†
1
CFCS, School of CS, PKU 2 School of EECS, PKU 3 PKU-Agibot Lab
4
School of Automation, Southeast University
4

Abstract
The process of satisfying daily demands is a fundamental aspect of humans’ daily
lives. With the advancement of embodied AI, robots are increasingly capable
of satisfying human demands. Demand-driven navigation (DDN) is a task in
which an agent must locate an object to satisfy a specified demand instruction,
such as “I am thirsty.” The previous study typically assumes that each demand
instruction requires only one object to be fulfilled and does not consider individual
preferences. However, the realistic human demand may involve multiple objects. In
this paper, we introduce the Multi-object Demand-driven Navigation (MO-DDN)
benchmark, which addresses these nuanced aspects, including multi-object search
and personal preferences, thus making the MO-DDN task more reflective of reallife scenarios compared to DDN. Building upon previous work, we employ the
concept of “attribute” to tackle this new task. However, instead of solely relying
on attribute features in an end-to-end manner like DDN, we propose a modular
method that involves constructing a coarse-to-fine attribute-based exploration agent
(C2FAgent). Our experimental results illustrate that this coarse-to-fine exploration
strategy capitalizes on the advantages of attributes at various decision-making
levels, resulting in superior performance compared to baseline methods. Code and
video can be found at https://sites.google.com/view/moddn.

1

Introduction

In the field of psychology, the creation of demands directs the motivation for human behavior in the
real world, and behavior ultimately leads to the fulfillment of the demand [1–4]. For example, an
individual might crave sweet iced tea, prompting them to search for object such as tea, sugar, ice,
and water, and then combine them to make sweet iced tea. Recently, with the rapid development
of embodied AI and large language models, researchers are interested in using robots to meet
various human demands [5–13]. Demand-driven Navigation (DDN) [14] is a variant of ObjectGoal
Navigation (ON) [15–21], which requires an agent to find an object that satisfies a given demand
instruction. For example, when a user gives the agent an instruction such as “I am thirsty,” the robot
has to search the entire environment for objects such as water, tea, coffee, etc., depending on what is
available within the environment.
In previous work [14], demand instructions often exhibit a low level of complexity, lack consideration
for user preferences, and typically require only one object to fulfill each instruction. However,
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

