Boundary Decomposition for
Nadir Objective Vector Estimation

Ruihao Zheng Zhenkun Wang∗
School of System Design and Intelligent Manufacturing,
Southern University of Science and Technology
12132686@mail.sustech.edu.cn, wangzhenkun90@gmail.com

Abstract
The nadir objective vector plays a key role in solving multi-objective optimization
problems (MOPs), where it is often used to normalize the objective space and
guide the search. The current methods for estimating the nadir objective vector
perform effectively only on specific MOPs. This paper reveals the limitations of
these methods: exact methods can only work on discrete MOPs, while heuristic
methods cannot deal with the MOP with a complicated feasible objective region.
To fill this gap, we propose a general and rigorous method, namely boundary
decomposition for nadir objective vector estimation (BDNE). BDNE scalarizes
the MOP into a set of boundary subproblems. By utilizing bilevel optimization,
boundary subproblems are optimized and adjusted alternately, thereby refining
their optimal solutions to align with the nadir objective vector. We prove that the
bilevel optimization identifies the nadir objective vector under mild conditions. We
compare BDNE with existing methods on various black-box MOPs. The results
conform to the theoretical analysis and show the significant potential of BDNE for
real-world application.

1

Introduction

The multi-objective optimization problem (MOP) can be written as
min. f (x) = (f1 (x), . . . , fm (x))⊺ ,
s.t. x ∈ Ω,

(1)

where x = (x1 , . . . , xn )⊺ is the decision vector (also called solution), and Ω ⊂ Rn denotes the
feasible region. f : Rn → Rm is composed of m objective functions, and f (x) is the objective vector
corresponding to x.
Definition 1. Given two vectors u, v ∈ Rm , u is said to dominate v (denoted as u ≺ v), if and only
if ui ≤ vi for every i ∈ {1, . . . , m} and uj < vj for at least one j ∈ {1, . . . , m}.
Definition 2. A decision vector x∗ and the corresponding objective vector f (x∗ ) are Pareto-optimal,
if there is no x ∈ Ω such that f (x) dominates f (x∗ ) according to Definition 1.
Definition 3. A decision vector x∗ ∈ Ω and the corresponding objective vector f (x∗ ) are weakly
Pareto-optimal, if there does not exist another decision vector x ∈ Ω such that fi (x) < fi (x∗ ) for
all i = 1, . . . , m.
Definition 4. The set of all Pareto-optimal solutions is called the Pareto set (denoted as P S), and
the set of all Pareto-optimal objective vectors is called the Pareto front (denoted as P F ).
Definition 5. The relative complement of the P F in the set of all weakly Pareto-optimal objective
vectors is called the weakly Pareto-optimal boundary (denoted as W P B).
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

