Even Sparser Graph Transformers

Hamed Shirzad
University of British Columbia
shirzad@cs.ubc.ca
Ameya Velingker
Independent Researcher∗
ameyav@gmail.com

Honghao Lin
Carnegie Mellon University
honghaol@andrew.cmu.edu
David P. Woodruff
CMU & Google Research
dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu

Balaji Venkatachalam
Meta∗
bave@meta.com
Danica J. Sutherland
UBC & Amii
dsuth@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
Graph Transformers excel in long-range dependency modeling, but generally
require quadratic memory complexity in the number of nodes in an input graph,
and hence have trouble scaling to large graphs. Sparse attention variants such as
Exphormer can help, but may require high-degree augmentations to the input graph
for good performance, and do not attempt to sparsify an already-dense input graph.
As the learned attention mechanisms tend to use few of these edges, such highdegree connections may be unnecessary. We show (empirically and with theoretical
backing) that attention scores on graphs are usually quite consistent across network
widths, and use this observation to propose a two-stage procedure, which we call
Spexphormer: first, train a narrow network on the full augmented graph. Next, use
only the active connections to train a wider network on a much sparser graph. We
establish theoretical conditions when a narrow network’s attention scores can match
those of a wide network, and show that Spexphormer achieves good performance
with drastically reduced memory requirements on various graph datasets. Code can
be found at https://github.com/hamed1375/Sp_Exphormer.

1

Introduction

The predominant story of the last half-decade of machine learning has been the runaway success
of Transformer models (Vaswani et al., 2017), across domains from natural language processing
(Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin et al., 2018; Zaheer et al., 2020) to computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2020) and, more recently, geometric deep learning (Dwivedi and Bresson, 2020; Kreuzer et al., 2021;
Ying et al., 2021; Rampášek et al., 2022; Shirzad et al., 2023; Müller et al., 2023). Conventional
(“full”) Transformers, however, have a time and memory complexity of O(nd2 + n2 d), where n is the
number of entities (nodes, in the case of graphs), and d is the width of the network. Many attempts
have been made to make Transformers more efficient (see Tay et al. (2020) for a survey on efficient
transformers for sequence modeling). One major line of work involves sparsifying the attention
mechanism, constraining attention from all O(n2 ) pairs to some smaller set of connections. For
instance, for sequential data, BigBird (Zaheer et al., 2020) constructs a sparse attention mechanism
by combining sliding windows, Erdős-Rényi auxiliary graphs, and universal connectors. On the other
hand, for graph data, Exphormer (Shirzad et al., 2023) constructs a sparse interaction graph consisting
of edges from the input graph, an overlay expander graph, and universal connections. We refer to
such a network as a sparse attention network.
Exphormer reduces each layer’s complexity from O(nd2 + n2 d) to O((m + n)d2 ), where n is the
number of nodes, m is the number of interaction edges in the sparse attention mechanism, and d is
∗

Work done in part while at Google.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

