Harnessing Multiple Correlated Networks
for Exact Community Recovery

Miklós Z. Rácz
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
miklos.racz@northwestern.edu

Jifan Zhang
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
jifanzhang2026@u.northwestern.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of learning latent community structure from multiple correlated networks, focusing on edge-correlated stochastic block models with two
balanced communities. Recent work of Gaudio, Rácz, and Sridhar (COLT 2022)
determined the precise information-theoretic threshold for exact community recovery using two correlated graphs; in particular, this showcased the subtle interplay
between community recovery and graph matching. Here we study the natural
setting of more than two graphs. The main challenge lies in understanding how to
aggregate information across several graphs when none of the pairwise latent vertex
correspondences can be exactly recovered. Our main result derives the precise
information-theoretic threshold for exact community recovery using any constant
number of correlated graphs, answering a question of Gaudio, Rácz, and Sridhar
(COLT 2022). In particular, for every K ≥ 3 we uncover and characterize a region
of the parameter space where exact community recovery is possible using K correlated graphs, even though (1) this is information-theoretically impossible using any
K − 1 of them and (2) none of the latent matchings can be exactly recovered.

1

Introduction

Finding communities in networks—that is, groups of nodes that are similar—is one of the fundamental problems in machine learning. This task is crucially important for understanding the underlying
structure and function of networks across diverse applications, including sociology and biology [23].
The increasing availability of network data sets offers the intriguing possibility of improving community recovery algorithms by synthesizing information across correlated networks. However, in
many settings the graphs are not aligned—which may happen for a variety of reasons, including
anonymization, missing or erroneous data, or simply the alignment being unknown—which presents
a challenge. Thus graph matching—the task of recovering the latent vertex alignment between
graphs—plays a central role in efforts to integrate data across networks. Our work follows an exciting
recent line of work at the intersection of community recovery and graph matching.
Recently, Rácz and Sridhar [41] initiated the study of community recovery in correlated stochastic
block models (SBMs), focusing on the simplest setting of two correlated graphs with two balanced
communities. They determined the information-theoretic limits for exact graph matching, which
has applications for community recovery. In particular, they uncovered a region of the parameter
space where exact community recovery is possible using two correlated graphs even though it is
information-theoretically impossible to do so using just a single graph. Subsequently, Gaudio, Rácz,
and Sridhar [22] determined the information-theoretic limits for exact community recovery from two
correlated SBMs. This required going beyond exact graph matching and understanding the subtle
interplay between community recovery and graph matching.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

