SCAFFLSA: Taming Heterogeneity in Federated
Linear Stochastic Approximation and TD Learning

Paul Mangold
CMAP, UMR 7641,
École polytechnique

Sergey Samsonov
HSE University,
Russia

Reda Alami
Technology Innovation Institute,
9639 Masdar City, Abu Dhabi,
United Arab Emirates

Safwan Labbi
CMAP, UMR 7641,
École polytechnique

Alexey Naumov
HSE University,
Steklov Mathematical Institute
of Russian Academy of Sciences

Ilya Levin
HSE University,
Russia
Eric Moulines
CMAP, UMR 7641,
École polytechnique
MZBUAI

Abstract
In this paper, we analyze the sample and communication complexity of the federated linear stochastic approximation (FedLSA) algorithm. We explicitly quantify
the effects of local training with agent heterogeneity. We show that the communication complexity of FedLSA scales polynomially with the inverse of the desired
accuracy ϵ. To overcome this, we propose SCAFFLSA, a new variant of FedLSA
that uses control variates to correct for client drift, and establish its sample and
communication complexities. We show that for statistically heterogeneous agents,
its communication complexity scales logarithmically with the desired accuracy,
similar to Scaffnew [37]. An important finding is that, compared to the existing
results for Scaffnew, the sample complexity scales with the inverse of the number
of agents, a property referred to as linear speed-up. Achieving this linear speed-up
requires completely new theoretical arguments. We apply the proposed method
to federated temporal difference learning with linear function approximation and
analyze the corresponding complexity improvements.

1

Introduction

Heterogeneity has a major impact on communication complexity in federated learning (FL) [28, 36].
In FL, multiple agents use different local oracles to update a global model together. A central server
then performs a consensus step to incrementally update the global model. Since communication with
the server is costly, reducing the frequency of the consensus steps is a central challenge. At the same
time, limiting communications induces client drift when agents are heterogeneous, biasing them
towards their local solutions. This issue has mostly been discussed for FL with stochastic gradient
methods [23, 51]. In this paper, we investigate the impact of heterogeneity in the field of federated
linear stochastic approximation (federated LSA). The goal is to solve a system of linear equations
where (i) the system matrix and the corresponding objective are only accessible via stochastic oracles,
and (ii) these oracles are distributed over an ensemble of heterogeneous agents. This problem can be
solved with the FedLSA method, which performs LSA locally with periodic consensus steps. This
approach suffers from two major drawbacks: heterogeneity bias, and high variance of local oracles.
A popular means of overcoming heterogeneity problems is the method of control variables, which
goes back to the line of research initiated by [23]. However, existing results on the complexity of
these methods tend to neglect the linear decrease of the mean squared error (MSE) of the algorithm
with the number of agents N [37], or they require a lot of communication [23]. In this paper, we
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

