A survey and benchmark of high-dimensional
Bayesian optimization of discrete sequences

Miguel González-Duque∗
University of Copenhagen

Richard Michael
University of Copenhagen

Simon Bartels
Paul Sabatier University Toulouse

Yevgen Zainchkovskyy
Technical University of Denmark

Søren Hauberg∗
Technical University of Denmark

Wouter Boomsma∗
University of Copenhagen

Abstract
Optimizing discrete black box functions is key in several domains, e.g. protein engineering and drug design. Due to the lack of gradient information and
the need for sample efficiency, Bayesian optimization is an ideal candidate for
these tasks. Several methods for high-dimensional continuous and categorical Bayesian optimization have been proposed recently. However, our survey
of the field reveals highly heterogeneous experimental set-ups across methods
and technical barriers for the replicability and application of published algorithms to real-world tasks. To address these issues, we develop a unified framework to test a vast array of high-dimensional Bayesian optimization methods
and a collection of standardized black box functions representing real-world
application domains in chemistry and biology. These two components of the
benchmark are each supported by flexible, scalable, and easily extendable software libraries (poli and poli-baselines), allowing practitioners to readily
incorporate new optimization objectives or discrete optimizers. Project website:
https://machinelearninglifescience.github.io/hdbo_benchmark.

1

Introduction

Optimizing an unknown and expensive-to-evaluate function is a frequent problem across disciplines
(Shahriari et al., 2016), examples are finding the right parameters for machine learning models or
simulators, drug discovery (Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018; Griffiths and Hernández-Lobato, 2020;
Pyzer-Knapp, 2018), protein design (Stanton et al., 2022; Gruver et al., 2023), hyperparameter tuning
in Machine Learning (Snoek et al., 2012; Turner et al., 2021) and train scheduling. In some scenarios,
evaluating the black box involves an expensive process (e.g. training a large model, or running a
physical simulation); Bayesian Optimization (BO, Močkus (1975)) is a powerful method for sample
efficient black box optimization. High dimensional (discrete) problems have long been identified as a
key challenge for Bayesian optimization algorithms (Wang et al., 2013; Snoek et al., 2012) given that
they tend to scale poorly with both dataset size and dimensionality of the input.
High-dimensional BO has been the focus of an entire research field (see Fig. 1), in which methods
are extended to address the curse of dimensionality and its consequences (Binois and Wycoff, 2022;
Santoni et al., 2023). Within this setting, discrete sequence optimization has received particular focus,
∗

emails: miguelgondu@gmail.com, sohau@dtu.dk, wb@di.ku.dk

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

