Detecting Bugs with Substantial Monetary
Consequences by LLM and Rule-based Reasoning

Brian Zhang
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78705
bz5346@utexas.edu

Zhuo Zhang
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47906
zhan3299@purdue.edu

Abstract
Financial transactions are increasingly being handled by automated programs called
smart contracts. However, one challenge in the adaptation of smart contracts is the
presence of vulnerabilities, which can cause significant monetary loss. In 2024,
$247.88 M was lost in 20 smart contract exploits. According to a recent study, accounting bugs (i.e., incorrect implementations of domain-specific financial models)
are the most prevalent type of vulnerability, and are one of the most difficult to find,
requiring substantial human efforts. While Large Language Models (LLMs) have
shown promise in identifying these bugs, they often suffer from lack of generalization of vulnerability types, hallucinations, and problems with representing smart
contracts in limited token context space. This paper proposes a hybrid system combining LLMs and rule-based reasoning to detect accounting error vulnerabilities in
smart contracts. In particular, it utilizes the understanding capabilities of LLMs
to annotate the financial meaning of variables in smart contracts, and employs
rule-based reasoning to propagate the information throughout a contract’s logic
and to validate potential vulnerabilities. To remedy hallucinations, we propose a
feedback loop where validation is performed by providing the reasoning trace of
vulnerabilities to the LLM for iterative self-reflection. We achieve 75.6% accuracy
on the labelling of financial meanings against human annotations. Furthermore, we
achieve a recall of 90.5% from running on 23 real-world smart contract projects
containing 21 accounting error vulnerabilities. Finally, we apply the automated
technique on 8 recent projects, finding 4 known and 2 unknown bugs.

1

Introduction

Blockchains are public, append-only ledgers that record data in a secure manner and provide a
foundation for many financial applications. Two such applications are tokens and smart contracts.
Tokens are cryptocurrencies (e.g., Bitcoin Nakamoto [2008], WETH WETH [2024]). Smart contracts
are programs that perform a service once deployed to the blockchain, typically financial in nature.
Example services include banking, marketplaces, and loaning. With the digitization of finance, smart
contracts have seen increasing usage for financial transactions. For example, the Ethereum blockchain
has over 40 million smart contracts deployed Bitkan [2024]. Smart contracts are implemented in a
Java-like language known as Solidity [2023] They are similar to traditional software applications in
that they are composed of functions, and not all functions can be invoked (due to function modifiers).
Entry functions are those that can be directly invoked by users, which are defined as any entities (e.g.,
humans) interacting with the smart contract.
Our work focuses on one challenge in smart contracts, namely their vulnerability to accounting bugs.
As defined by Zhang et al. [2023], accounting bugs are incorrect implementations of domain-specific
business models. According to the study, accounting bugs are the most popular type of bug, as
well as one of the most difficult for humans to identify. Furthermore, they cause significant damage
if exploited. In 2024, more than $50 M dollars in damages DefiLlama [2024] were caused by 8
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

