A Canonicalization Perspective on
Invariant and Equivariant Learning

George Ma∗1

Yifei Wang∗ 2 Derek Lim2 Stefanie Jegelka3 Yisen Wang4,5†
1
School of EECS, Peking University
2
MIT CSAIL
3
TUM CIT/MCML/MDSI & MIT EECS/CSAIL
4
State Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
5
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University

Abstract
In many applications, we desire neural networks to exhibit invariance or equivariance to certain groups due to symmetries inherent in the data. Recently, frameaveraging methods emerged to be a unified framework for attaining symmetries
efficiently by averaging over input-dependent subsets of the group, i.e., frames.
What we currently lack is a principled understanding of the design of frames. In
this work, we introduce a canonicalization perspective that provides an essential and complete view of the design of frames. Canonicalization is a classic
approach for attaining invariance by mapping inputs to their canonical forms.
We show that there exists an inherent connection between frames and canonical
forms. Leveraging this connection, we can efficiently compare the complexity
of frames as well as determine the optimality of certain frames. Guided by this
principle, we design novel frames for eigenvectors that are strictly superior to
existing methods—some are even optimal—both theoretically and empirically.
The reduction to the canonicalization perspective further uncovers equivalences
between previous methods. These observations suggest that canonicalization
provides a fundamental understanding of existing frame-averaging methods and
unifies existing equivariant and invariant learning methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/PKU-ML/canonicalization.

1

Introduction

When designing machine learning models, incorporating data symmetry provides a strong inductive
bias that facilitates learning and generalization [55, 57, 64], as evidenced in multiple applications
like convolutional neural networks [30], graph neural networks [52], point clouds [47, 48], etc. Often
these symmetry priors require models to be invariant or equivariant to certain groups G. Among
these approaches, model-specific methods restrict every model component to respect data symmetries,
which, however, often sacrifices expressive power [68, 39]. On the other hand, model-agnostic
methods allow the use of arbitrary (non-invariant) base models, and ensure invariance or equivariance
through averaging over group actions [40, 69, 45]. This approach can attain universal expressive
power with first-order backbones, but comes with high computation cost for exponentially large
groups (e.g., permutation).
∗
Equal Contribution. George Ma has graduated from Peking University, and is currently a Ph.D. student at
UC Berkeley.
†
Corresponding Author: Yisen Wang (yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

