No Representation, No Trust: Connecting
Representation, Collapse, and Trust Issues in PPO

Skander Moalla1∗ Andrea Miele1 Daniil Pyatko1 Razvan Pascanu2 Caglar Gulcehre1
1
CLAIRE, EPFL 2 Google DeepMind

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) is inherently rife with non-stationarity since the states
and rewards the agent observes during training depend on its changing policy.
Therefore, networks in deep RL must be capable of adapting to new observations
and fitting new targets. However, previous works have observed that networks
trained under non-stationarity exhibit an inability to continue learning, termed
loss of plasticity, and eventually a collapse in performance. For off-policy deep
value-based RL methods, this phenomenon has been correlated with a decrease
in representation rank and the ability to fit random targets, termed capacity loss.
Although this correlation has generally been attributed to neural network learning under non-stationarity, the connection to representation dynamics has not
been carefully studied in on-policy policy optimization methods. In this work,
we empirically study representation dynamics in Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO) on the Atari and MuJoCo environments, revealing that PPO agents are
also affected by feature rank deterioration and capacity loss. We show that this
is aggravated by stronger non-stationarity, ultimately driving the actor’s performance to collapse, regardless of the performance of the critic. We ask why the
trust region, specific to methods like PPO, cannot alleviate or prevent the collapse and find a connection between representation collapse and the degradation
of the trust region, one exacerbating the other. Finally, we present Proximal
Feature Optimization (PFO), a novel auxiliary loss that, along with other interventions, shows that regularizing the representation dynamics mitigates the
performance collapse of PPO agents. Code and run histories are available at
https://github.com/CLAIRE-Labo/no-representation-no-trust.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) agents are inherently subject to non-stationarity as the states and rewards
they observe change during learning. Therefore, neural networks in deep RL must be capable of
adapting to new inputs and fitting new targets. However, previous works have observed that networks
trained under non-stationarity exhibit an inability to continue learning, termed loss of plasticity,
and a collapse in performance (Dohare et al., 2021; Abbas et al., 2023; Kumar et al., 2023; Dohare
et al., 2023a,b). Kumar et al. (2021); Lyle et al. (2022) connect this phenomenon to representation
dynamics and show that value networks in off-policy value-based RL algorithms exhibit a decrease
in the rank of their representations, termed feature rank collapse, and a decrease in their ability
to regress to arbitrary targets, called capacity loss. Although this deterioration in representation
is more generally attributed to neural networks trained under non-stationarity (Lyle et al., 2023),
the connection to representation dynamics has been overlooked in on-policy policy optimization
methods. In particular, Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017), one of the
most popular policy optimization methods, makes several minibatch updates over non-stationary data,
unlike vanilla policy gradient methods, and optimizes a surrogate loss that depends on a moving old
∗

Correspondence to skander.moalla@epfl.ch.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

