A Method for Evaluating Hyperparameter Sensitivity
in Reinforcement Learning

Jacob Adkins
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta; Amii
Edmonton, Canada
jadkins@ualberta.ca

Michael Bowling
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta; Amii
Edmonton, Canada
mbowling@ualberta.ca

Adam White
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta; Amii
Edmonton, Canada
amw8@ualberta.ca

Abstract
The performance of modern reinforcement learning algorithms critically relies
on tuning ever increasing numbers of hyperparameters. Often, small changes in
a hyperparameter can lead to drastic changes in performance, and different environments require very different hyperparameter settings to achieve state-of-the-art
performance reported in the literature. We currently lack a scalable and widely
accepted approach to characterizing these complex interactions. This work proposes a new empirical methodology for studying, comparing, and quantifying the
sensitivity of an algorithm’s performance to hyperparameter tuning for a given set
of environments. We then demonstrate the utility of this methodology by assessing
the hyperparameter sensitivity of several commonly used normalization variants of
PPO. The results suggest that several algorithmic performance improvements may,
in fact, be a result of an increased reliance on hyperparameter tuning.

1

Introduction

The performance of reinforcement learning algorithms critically relies on the tuning of numerous
hyperparameters. With the introduction of each new algorithm, the number of these critical hyperparameters continues to grow. Consider the progression of value-based reinforcement learning
algorithms, starting from DQN (Mnih et al., 2015), which has 16 hyperparameters that the practitioner must choose, to Rainbow (Hessel et al., 2018) with 25 hyperparameters. This increase can be
observed in Figure 1. This proliferation is problematic because performance can vary drastically with
respect to hyperparameters across environments. Often, small changes in a hyperparameter can lead
to drastic changes in performance, and different environments require very different hyperparameter
settings to achieve the reported good performances (Franke et al., 2021; Eimer et al., 2022, 2023;
Patterson et al., 2024). Generally speaking, hyperparameter tuning requires a combinatorial search
and thus many published results are based on a mix of default hyperparameter settings and informal
hand-tuning of key hyperparameters like the learning rate. Our standard evaluation methodologies do
not reflect the sensitivity of performance to hyperparameter choices, and this is compounded by a
lack of suitable metrics to characterize said sensitivities.
There are many different ways one could characterize performance with respect to hyperparameter
choices in reinforcement learning, but the community lacks an agreed standard. Hyperparameter
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

