How do Large Language Models Handle
Multilingualism?

Yiran Zhao1,2† Wenxuan Zhang2,3‡ Guizhen Chen2,4§ Kenji Kawaguchi1 Lidong Bing2,3
1
National University of Singapore 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, Singapore
3
Hupan Lab, 310023, Hangzhou, China 4 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities across
diverse languages. This study explores how LLMs handle multilingualism. Based
on observed language ratio shifts among layers and the relationships between
network structures and certain capabilities, we hypothesize the LLM’s multilingual
workflow (MWork): LLMs initially understand the query, converting multilingual
inputs into English for task-solving. In the intermediate layers, they employ
English for reasoning and incorporate multilingual knowledge with self-attention
and feed-forward structures, respectively. In the final layers, LLMs generate
responses aligned with the original language of the query. To verify MWork, we
introduce Parallel Language-specific Neuron Detection (PLND) to identify activated
neurons for inputs in different languages without any labeled data. Using PLND,
we validate MWork through extensive experiments involving the deactivation of
language-specific neurons across various layers and structures. Moreover, MWork
allows fine-tuning of language-specific neurons with a small dataset, enhancing
multilingual abilities in a specific language without compromising others. This
approach results in an average improvement of 3.6% for high-resource languages
and 2.3% for low-resource languages across all tasks with just 400 documents.1

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) (OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023;
Team et al., 2023) have dramatically transformed the field of natural language processing (NLP).
Thanks to the extensive pretraining on massive corpora mixed with different languages, these
models demonstrate remarkable capabilities in understanding and generating text across multiple
languages (Huang et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023a; Zhao et al., 2024a). Despite these advancements,
the intricate mechanism of their multilingual processing behavior remains largely unclear, which
leads to an important research question: How do large language models handle multilingualism?
To understand the working mechanism of LLMs, existing studies mainly focus on the relationship
between model architectures and certain capabilities, with some investigating reasoning abilities
with self-attention layers (Hou et al., 2023; Stolfo et al., 2023; Friedman et al., 2023), and others
interpreting feed-forward layers as key-value memories for storing factual knowledge (Geva et al.,
2021; Dai et al., 2022; Meng et al., 2022). However, these works solely center on English and neglect
the multilingual features of LLMs in their interpretations.
†

This work was done during the internship of Yiran Zhao at Alibaba DAMO Academy.
Wenxuan Zhang is the corresponding author: isakzhang@gmail.com
§
Guizhen Chen is under the Joint Ph.D. Program between DAMO Academy and NTU.
1
Our code is available at https://github.com/DAMO-NLP-SG/multilingual_analysis
‡

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

