Can Graph Learning Improve Planning
in LLM-based Agents?

Xixi Wu1,3∗ Yifei Shen2∗
Caihua Shan2 Kaitao Song2 Siwei Wang2 Bohang Zhang4
5
Jiarui Feng
Hong Cheng3
Wei Chen2
Yun Xiong1
Dongsheng Li2
1

Fudan University† 2 Microsoft Research Asia 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Peking University 5 Washington University, Saint Louis

Abstract
Task planning in language agents is emerging as an important research topic alongside the development of large language models (LLMs). It aims to break down
complex user requests in natural language into solvable sub-tasks, thereby fulfilling
the original requests. In this context, the sub-tasks can be naturally viewed as a
graph, where the nodes represent the sub-tasks, and the edges denote the dependencies among them. Consequently, task planning is a decision-making problem that
involves selecting a connected path or subgraph within the corresponding graph
and invoking it. In this paper, we explore graph learning-based methods for task
planning, a direction that is orthogonal to the prevalent focus on prompt design.
Our interest in graph learning stems from a theoretical discovery: the biases of
attention and auto-regressive loss impede LLMs’ ability to effectively navigate
decision-making on graphs, which is adeptly addressed by graph neural networks
(GNNs). This theoretical insight led us to integrate GNNs with LLMs to enhance
overall performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate that GNN-based methods
surpass existing solutions even without training, and minimal training can further
enhance their performance. The performance gain increases with a larger task
graph size. 3

1

Introduction

LLM-based agents have recently emerged as a rapidly growing field of research and are considered
a significant step towards artificial general intelligence (AGI) [61, 7]. These agents have achieved
remarkable successes across a variety of domains, as evidenced by their ability to address complex
AI challenges (e.g., HuggingGPT [46]), excel in gaming environments (e.g., Voyager [58]), and
drive innovation in chemical research (e.g., [5]). Within this burgeoning field, task planning in
language agents emerges as a critical area of study. It involves LLMs autonomously interpreting user
instructions, breaking user’s instructions in natural language into concrete and solvable sub-tasks,
and then fulfilling the user’s request by executing each sub-task [43, 46, 45]. For instance, in the
case of HuggingGPT [46], task planning involves invoking expert AI models from the HuggingFace
website to solve complex AI tasks beyond the capabilities of GPT alone.
Given its practical significance, numerous algorithms have been proposed, with a major focus on
prompt design [45, 46, 33, 30, 60, 49, 71, 4, 63]. This paper proposes to explore an orthogonal
∗

denotes equal contributions. Work was done during Xixi Wu’s (xxwu@se.cuhk.edu.hk) internship at
Microsoft Research Asia. Corresponding authors (yifeishen@microsoft.com, yunx@fudan.edu.cn)
†
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
3
The code and datasets are available at https://github.com/WxxShirley/GNN4TaskPlan
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

