Towards Understanding Evolving Patterns in
Sequential Data

Qiuhao Zeng
Western University
qzeng53@uwo.ca
Qi Chen
Laval University
qi.chen.1@ulaval.ca

Long-Kai Huang
Tencent AI Lab
hlongkai@gmail.com
Charles Ling∗
Western University
charles.ling@uwo.ca

Boyu Wang∗
Western University
bwang@csd.uwo.ca

Abstract
In many machine learning tasks, data is inherently sequential. Most existing algorithms learn from sequential data in an auto-regressive manner, which predicts
the next unseen data point based on the observed sequence, implicitly assuming
the presence of an evolving pattern embedded in the data that can be leveraged.
However, identifying and assessing evolving patterns in learning tasks heavily
relies on human expertise, and lacks a standardized quantitative measure. In this
paper, we show that such a measure enables us to determine the suitability of
employing sequential models, measure the temporal order of time series data, and
conduct feature/data selections, which can be beneficial to a variety of learning
tasks: time-series forecastings, classification tasks with temporal distribution shift,
video predictions, etc. Specifically, we introduce the E VOLVING R ATE (E VO R ATE),
which quantifies the evolving patterns in the data by approximating mutual information between the next data point and the observed sequence. To address cases
where the correspondence between data points at different timestamps is absent, we
develop E VO R ATEW , a simple and efficient implementation that leverages optimal
transport to construct the correspondence and estimate the first-order E VO R ATE.
Experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets including images and tabular
data validate the efficacy of our E VO R ATE method.

1

Introduction

Sequential data is ubiquitous across various machine learning tasks, including multivariate time
series [33, 38, 44], video streams in computer vision [18, 52, 54], textual data in natural language
processing [9, 17, 34], and state-action trajectories in reinforcement learning [5, 45, 56]. Learning
with sequential data usually involves predicting future data points, fostering the development of
auto-regressive techniques that learn to forecast the subsequent unseen entries in a sequence. Despite
the progress in this field, one fundamental challenge persists: the identification of underlying evolving
patterns often depends heavily on the subjective interpretations and prior knowledge of human experts.
This reliance on subjective judgment lacks a robust quantitative method to assess the evolving patterns
over the high-dimensional data in deep learning. For example, when designing a recommendation
system, certain products such as clothing are highly dependent on temporal factors (e.g., seasons,
fashion trends), while others, like computers, are more influenced by individual customer preferences.
Therefore, it is critical to identify and quantify the underlying evolving patterns for different products
and integrate this information into the algorithmic design.
∗

Corresponding authors: Boyu Wang, Charles X. Ling.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

