Improved Distribution Matching Distillation
for Fast Image Synthesis

Tianwei Yin1
Michaël Gharbi2
Taesung Park2
Richard Zhang2
2
1
Eli Shechtman
Frédo Durand
William T. Freeman1
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

2

Adobe Research

https://tianweiy.github.io/dmd2/

Abstract
Recent approaches have shown promises distilling expensive diffusion models into
efficient one-step generators. Amongst them, Distribution Matching Distillation
(DMD) produces one-step generators that match their teacher in distribution, i.e.,
the distillation process does not enforce a one-to-one correspondence with the
sampling trajectories of their teachers. However, to ensure stable training in
practice, DMD requires an additional regression loss computed using a large set
of noise–image pairs, generated by the teacher with many steps of a deterministic
sampler. This is not only computationally expensive for large-scale text-to-image
synthesis, but it also limits the student’s quality, tying it too closely to the teacher’s
original sampling paths. We introduce DMD2, a set of techniques that lift this
limitation and improve DMD training. First, we eliminate the regression loss and
the need for expensive dataset construction. We show that the resulting instability
is due to the “fake” critic not estimating the distribution of generated samples with
sufficient accuracy and propose a two time-scale update rule as a remedy. Second,
we integrate a GAN loss into the distillation procedure, discriminating between
generated samples and real images. This lets us train the student model on real
data, thus mitigating the imperfect “real” score estimation from the teacher model,
and thereby enhancing quality. Third, we introduce a new training procedure that
enables multi-step sampling in the student, and addresses the training–inference
input mismatch of previous work, by simulating inference-time generator samples
during training. Taken together, our improvements set new benchmarks in onestep image generation, with FID scores of 1.28 on ImageNet-64×64 and 8.35 on
zero-shot COCO 2014, surpassing the original teacher despite a 500× reduction
in inference cost. Further, we show our approach can generate megapixel images
by distilling SDXL, demonstrating exceptional visual quality among few-step
methods, and surpassing the teacher. We release our code and pretrained models.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have achieved unprecedented quality in visual generation tasks [1–8]. But their
sampling procedure typically requires dozens of iterative denoising steps, each of which is a forward
pass through a neural network. This makes high resolution text-to-image synthesis slow and expensive.
To address this issue, numerous distillation methods have been developed to convert a teacher diffusion
model into an efficient, few-step student generator [9–20]. However, they often result in degraded
quality, as the student model is typically trained with a loss to learn the pairwise noise-to-image
mapping of the teacher, but struggles to perfectly mimic its behavior.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

