A Bayesian Approach to Data Point Selection

Xinnuo Xu†∗
Microsoft Research Cambridge
xinnuoxu@microsoft.com

Minyoung Kim†
Samsung AI Center Cambridge, UK
mikim21@gmail.com

Royson Lee
Samsung AI Center Cambridge, UK
royson.lee@samsung.com

Brais Martinez
Samsung AI Center Cambridge, UK
brais.mart@samsung.com

Timothy Hospedales
Samsung AI Center Cambridge, UK
University of Edinburgh, UK
t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Data point selection (DPS) is becoming a critical topic in deep learning due to the
ease of acquiring uncurated training data compared to the difficulty of obtaining
curated or processed data. Existing approaches to DPS are predominantly based on
a bi-level optimisation (BLO) formulation, which is demanding in terms of memory
and computation, and exhibits some theoretical defects regarding minibatches.
Thus, we propose a novel Bayesian approach to DPS. We view the DPS problem
as posterior inference in a novel Bayesian model where the posterior distributions
of the instance-wise weights and the main neural network parameters are inferred
under a reasonable prior and likelihood model. We employ stochastic gradient
Langevin MCMC sampling to learn the main network and instance-wise weights
jointly, ensuring convergence even with minibatches. Our update equation is
comparable to the widely used SGD and much more efficient than existing BLObased methods. Through controlled experiments in both the vision and language
domains, we present the proof-of-concept. Additionally, we demonstrate that
our method scales effectively to large language models and facilitates automated
per-task optimization for instruction fine-tuning datasets.

1

Introduction

Practical machine learning efficacy is heavily dependent on the choice, quality and quantity of training
data, especially so in the case of neural networks that can easily fit every detail of the training set.
This leads to challenges from how to learn reliably with imbalanced data [22], noisy data, noisy labels
[46], and so on. Similarly there is often a key subset of data, which is most informative for a given
learning problem, but buried among a much larger set of less relevant data. If the most salient data
could be efficiently identified, learning could potentially be accelerated [15]. All these challenges are
only growing in the era of large scale training on web-scraped data, where curation and gold-standard
quality control are not feasible.
Data Point Selection (DPS) algorithms aim to address these challenges by filtering or re-weighting the
training data to reduce noise, imbalance, irrelevant background data and so on. The most established
∗
†

Part of this work was completed while Xinnuo was affiliated with Samsung AI Center Cambridge, UK.
Equal Contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

