Learning to Understand:
Identifying Interactions via the Möbius Transform

Justin Singh Kang
UC Berkeley
justin kang@berkeley.edu

Yigit Efe Erginbas
UC Berkeley
erginbas@berkeley.edu

Ramtin Pedarsani
UC Santa Barbara
ramtin@ece.ucsb.edu

Landon Butler
UC Berkeley
landonb@berkeley.edu

Kannan Ramchandran
UC Berkeley
kannanr@berkeley.edu

Abstract
One of the key challenges in machine learning is to find interpretable representations of learned functions. The Möbius transform is essential for this purpose, as
its coefficients correspond to unique importance scores for sets of input variables.
This transform is closely related to widely used game-theoretic notions of importance like the Shapley and Bhanzaf value, but it also captures crucial higher-order
interactions. Although computing the Möbius Transform of a function with n inputs involves 2n coefficients, it becomes tractable when the function is sparse and
of low degree as we show is the case for many real-world functions. Under these
conditions, the complexity of the transform computation is significantly reduced.
When there are K non-zero coefficients, our algorithm recovers the Möbius transform in O(Kn) samples and O(Kn2 ) time asymptotically under certain assumptions, the first non-adaptive algorithm to do so. We also uncover a surprising connection between group testing and the Möbius transform. For functions where all
interactions involve at most t inputs, we use group testing results to compute the
Möbius transform with O(Kt log n) sample complexity and O(K poly(n)) time.
A robust version of this algorithm withstands noise and maintains this complexity.
This marks the first n sub-linear query complexity, noise-tolerant algorithm for the
Möbius transform. In several examples, we observe that representations generated
via sparse Möbius transform are up to twice as faithful to the original function, as
compared to Shapley and Banzhaf values, while using the same number of terms.

1

Introduction

As machine learning models become increasingly complex, our ability to interpret them has not
kept pace. A natural question to ask is: What is the most fundamental interpretable representation
of the functions we learn? The Shapley value [1], a concept from cooperative game theory, has
become a popular way to interpret model predictions [2] by assigning importance scores to individual
inputs such as features, data samples or tokens. This value represents the weighted average marginal
contribution of an input, quantifying the change in the function’s output when that input is included.
Recent research has expanded the scope of interpretability to encompass sets of inputs [3, 4], capturing
the collective influence of input combinations and their synergies on model predictions. Central to
this advancement is the Möbius Transform [5], a mathematical transformation that projects functions
onto a fundamental interpretable basis known in game theory as the unanimity function basis.
The Möbius transform has a more powerful and nuanced explanation capability than the Shapley
value. Consider a sentiment analysis model (BERT [6] fine-tuned on the IMDB dataset [7]) explained
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

