Selective Explanations

Lucas Monteiro Paes
Harvard University
lucaspaes@g.harvard.edu

Dennis Wei
IBM Research
dwei@us.ibm.com

Flavio P. Calmon
Harvard University
flavio@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Feature attribution methods explain black-box machine learning (ML) models by
assigning importance scores to input features. These methods can be computationally expensive for large ML models. To address this challenge, there have
been increasing efforts to develop amortized explainers, where a ML model is
trained to efficiently approximate computationally expensive feature attribution
scores. Despite their efficiency, amortized explainers can produce misleading
explanations. In this paper, we propose selective explanations to (i) detect when
amortized explainers generate inaccurate explanations and (ii) improve the approximation of the explanation using a technique we call explanations with initial guess.
Selective explanations allow practitioners to specify the fraction of samples that
receive explanations with initial guess, offering a principled way to bridge the gap
between amortized explainers (one inference) and more computationally costly
approximations (multiple inferences). Our experiments on various models and
datasets demonstrate that feature attributions via selective explanations strike a
favorable balance between explanation quality and computational efficiency.

1

Introduction

Large black-box models are increasingly used to support decisions in applications ranging from
online content moderation [26], hiring [12], and medical diagnostics [35]. In such high-stakes
settings, the need to explain “why” a model produces a given output has led to a growing number
of perturbation-based feature attribution methods [22, 29, 27, 23, 2, 40]. These methods use input
perturbations to assign numerical values to each input feature (e.g., words in a text) a model uses,
indicating their influence on the model prediction. They are widely adopted in part because they work
in the black-box setting with access only to model output (i.e., without gradients). However, existing
feature attribution methods can be prohibitively expensive for the large models used in the current
machine learning landscape (e.g., language models with billions of parameters) since they require a
significant number of inferences for each individual explanation.
Recent literature has introduced two main approximation strategies to speed up existing feature
attribution methods for large models: (i) employing Monte Carlo methods to approximate explanations
with fewer computations [22, 29, 5, 24], and (ii) adopting an amortized approach, training a separate
model to “mimic” the outputs of a reference explanation method [16, 6, 38, 32, 3, 33]. Monte Carlo
approximations can yield accurate approximations for attributions but may converge slowly, limiting
their practicality for and online applications. In contrast, amortized explainers require only one
inference per explanation, making them efficient for large black-box models and online explanations.
However, as shown in Figure 1, amortized explainers can produce highly diverging explanations from
their reference due to lack of precision in approximations. Aiming to benefit from Monte Carlo and
amortized explainers, we propose selective explanations to answer the questions:
(Q1) When are amortized explanations inaccurate ?
(Q2) How can we improve inaccurate amortized explanations using additional computations?
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

