Integrating Deep Metric Learning with Coreset for
Active Learning in 3D Segmentation

Arvind Murari Vepa
UCLA
amvepa@ucla.edu

Zukang Yang
UC Berkeley
zukangy@berkeley.edu

Andrew Choi
Horizon Robotics
asjchoi@ucla.edu

Jungseock Joo
UCLA
jjoo@comm.ucla.edu

Fabien Scalzo
UCLA
fab@cs.ucla.edu

Yizhou Sun
UCLA
yzsun@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Deep learning has seen remarkable advancements in machine learning, yet it
often demands extensive annotated data. Tasks like 3D semantic segmentation
impose a substantial annotation burden, especially in domains like medicine, where
expert annotations drive up the cost. Active learning (AL) holds great potential
to alleviate this annotation burden in 3D medical segmentation. The majority of
existing AL methods, however, are not tailored to the medical domain. While
weakly-supervised methods have been explored to reduce annotation burden, the
fusion of AL with weak supervision remains unexplored, despite its potential
to significantly reduce annotation costs. Additionally, there is little focus on
slice-based AL for 3D segmentation, which can also significantly reduce costs in
comparison to conventional volume-based AL. This paper introduces a novel metric
learning method for Coreset to perform slice-based active learning in 3D medical
segmentation. By merging contrastive learning with inherent data groupings in
medical imaging, we learn a metric that emphasizes the relevant differences in
samples for training 3D medical segmentation models. We perform comprehensive
evaluations using both weak and full annotations across four datasets (medical
and non-medical). Our findings demonstrate that our approach surpasses existing
active learning techniques on both weak and full annotations and obtains superior
performance with low-annotation budgets which is crucial in medical imaging.
Source code for this project is available in the supplementary materials and on
GitHub: https://github.com/arvindmvepa/al-seg.

1

Introduction

In the field of 3D medical segmentation, manual annotation of entire volumes, despite being laborious
and time-consuming, has been the gold standard. Annotating a single 2D image can take minutes
to hours depending on the complexity of the image (75; 73; 15; 71; 6), and a 3D medical volume,
containing up to 200 slices, can require a significant amount of expert labor. Annotating a full dataset
not only imposes a significant time burden on medical experts but also incurs high costs. Therefore,
active learning (AL) is urgently needed to optimize annotation efforts.
Surprisingly, the potential of AL in the context of 3D medical segmentation has not been extensively
explored. Traditional AL techniques typically focus on either diversity or model uncertainty, often
neglecting relevant groupings within the data. For example, slices from the same patient or volume
tend to show consistent characteristics. We propose a deep metric learning strategy that identifies and
utilizes these similarities to better highlight diversity in the active learning process. Diverse samples
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

