Two-way Deconfounder for Off-policy Evaluation in
Causal Reinforcement Learning

Shuguang Yu∗
School of Statistics and Management
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
Shanghai, China
Ruixin Peng
School of Statistics and Management
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
Shanghai, China

Shuxing Fang∗
Department of Applied Mathematics
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hong Kong, China
Zhengling Qi
Department of Decision Sciences
George Washington University
Washington D.C., USA

Fan Zhou†
School of Statistics and Management
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
Shanghai, China
Chengchun Shi†
Department of Statistics
London School of Economics and Political Science
London, UK

Abstract
This paper studies off-policy evaluation (OPE) in the presence of unmeasured
confounders. Inspired by the two-way fixed effects regression model widely
used in the panel data literature, we propose a two-way unmeasured confounding
assumption to model the system dynamics in causal reinforcement learning and
develop a two-way deconfounder algorithm that devises a neural tensor network to
simultaneously learn both the unmeasured confounders and the system dynamics,
based on which a model-based estimator can be constructed for consistent policy
value estimation. We illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed estimator through
theoretical results and numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Before deploying any newly developed policy, it is important to assess its impact. In many highstakes domains, it is risky or unethical to implement such policies directly for online evaluation. This
challenge highlights the essential role of off-policy evaluation (OPE).
There is a vast body of literature on OPE. Most studies assume there are no unmeasured confounders
(NUC), also known as unconfoundedness (see e.g., Thomas et al. 2015, Jiang and Li 2016, Thomas
and Brunskill 2016, Farajtabar et al. 2018, Liu et al. 2018, Irpan et al. 2019, Schlegel et al. 2019, Tang
et al. 2019, Xie et al. 2019, Dai et al. 2020, Chandak et al. 2021, Hao et al. 2021, Liao et al. 2021b,
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors: zhoufan@mail.shufe.edu.cn, c.shi7@lse.ac.uk.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

