Autonomous Driving with Spiking Neural Networks

Rui-Jie Zhu1∗, Ziqing Wang2∗ , Leilani Gilpin1 , Jason K. Eshraghian1†
1

University of California, Santa Cruz, USA
2
Northwestern University, USA

Abstract
Autonomous driving demands an integrated approach that encompasses perception, prediction, and planning, all while operating under strict energy constraints
to enhance scalability and environmental sustainability. We present Spiking Autonomous Driving (SAD), the first unified Spiking Neural Network (SNN) to
address the energy challenges faced by autonomous driving systems through its
event-driven and energy-efficient nature. SAD is trained end-to-end and consists
of three main modules: perception, which processes inputs from multi-view cameras to construct a spatiotemporal bird’s eye view; prediction, which utilizes a
novel dual-pathway with spiking neurons to forecast future states; and planning,
which generates safe trajectories considering predicted occupancy, traffic rules,
and ride comfort. Evaluated on the nuScenes dataset, SAD achieves competitive
performance in perception, prediction, and planning tasks, while drawing upon the
energy efficiency of SNNs. This work highlights the potential of neuromorphic
computing to be applied to energy-efficient autonomous driving, a critical step
toward sustainable and safety-critical automotive technology. Our code is available
at https://github.com/ridgerchu/SAD.

1

Introduction

Autonomous driving, often considered the ‘holy grail’ of computer vision, integrates complex
processes such as perception, prediction, and planning to achieve higher levels of vehicle automation
as classified by the SAE J3016 standard [1]. Many new vehicles now feature Level 2 autonomy,
with transitions to Level 3 marking notable advancements. However, these systems must adhere to
energy constraints of 50-60 W/h [2] and face increasing environmental concerns. Sudhakar et al.
highlight the need for hardware efficiency to double every 1.1 years to maintain 2050 emissions from
autonomous vehicles below those of 2018 data center levels [3].
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) offer a promising solution for energy-efficient intelligence by
using sparse, event-driven, single-bit spiking activations for inter-neuron communication, mimicking
biological neurons [4, 5, 6, 7]. Such workloads can be accelerated for low latency and low energy,
when processed on neuromorphic hardware that utilizes asynchronous, fine-grain processing to
efficiently handle spiking signals and parallel operations [8]. Much like in the brain, spikes are thought
to encode information over time, and have shown improvements in the energy efficiency of sequencebased computer vision tasks by several orders of magnitude in a variety of workloads [9, 10, 11].
In the past several years, SNNs have rapidly improved in performance across various tasks, including
image classification [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17], object detection [18, 19, 20], semantic segmentation [21],
low-level image reconstruction [22, 23, 24, 25, 26], and language modeling [27, 28, 29], with most
of these works focused on computer vision. These advancements have brought SNN performance
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author, jsn@ucsc.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

