ConMe: Rethinking Evaluation of Compositional
Reasoning for Modern VLMs

Irene Huang∗1
Sivan Doveh3
Hilde Kuehne5,6

Wei Lin∗2
M. Jehanzeb Mirza∗†1
Jacob A. Hansen1
1
4
Victor Ion Butoi
Roei Herzig
Assaf Arbelle3
4
5,7
Trevor Darrell
Chuang Gan
Aude Oliva1,5
5
5
Rogerio Feris
Leonid Karlinsky

∗
Equally Contributing Authors.
MIT, USA. 2 JKU, Austria. 3 IBM Research, Israel. 4 UC Berkeley, USA.
5
MIT-IBM, USA. 6 Tuebingen AI Center, Germany. 7 UMass Amherst, USA.
1

Dataset: https://huggingface.co/conme/ConMe
Code: https://github.com/jmiemirza/ConMe

Abstract
Compositional Reasoning (CR) entails grasping the significance of attributes, relations, and word order. Recent Vision-Language Models (VLMs), comprising a
visual encoder and a Large Language Model (LLM) decoder, have demonstrated
remarkable proficiency in such reasoning tasks. This prompts a crucial question:
have VLMs effectively tackled the CR challenge? We conjecture that existing
CR benchmarks may not adequately push the boundaries of modern VLMs due to
the reliance on an LLM only negative text generation pipeline. Consequently, the
negatives produced either appear as outliers from the natural language distribution
learned by VLMs’ LLM decoders or as improbable within the corresponding image
context. To address these limitations, we introduce ConMe1 – a compositional
reasoning benchmark and a novel data generation pipeline leveraging VLMs to produce ‘hard CR Q&A’. Through a new concept of VLMs conversing with each other
to collaboratively expose their weaknesses, our pipeline autonomously generates,
evaluates, and selects challenging compositional reasoning questions, establishing
a robust CR benchmark, also subsequently validated manually. Our benchmark provokes a noteworthy, up to 33%, decrease in CR performance compared to preceding
benchmarks, reinstating the CR challenge even for state-of-the-art VLMs.

1

Introduction

Present day Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [1–12] have recently emerged as the default choice
for many computer vision tasks. However, these models also have their Achilles’ heel. Several
recent studies have highlighted important VLM failure modes, especially their lacking ability to
perform Compositional Reasoning (CR) [13–17]. CR is the ability of the VLM to recognize and
attend to the language concepts beyond objects (i.e., nouns), such as attributes, relations, finegrained object alternatives, and more, in both the image and text of a VL pair. As noted in [13–
17], earlier dual-encoder VLMs (e.g., CLIP [1]) have especially low, even close to chance, CR
performance. However, more modern VLMs, which combine a pre-trained vision encoder with a
strong LLM decoder (e.g., LLaVA [10]) and employ both architectural (projection layer/MLP, tuning
†
1

The work was done while being at TU Graz, Austria. Correspondence: jmirza@mit.edu
ConMe is an abbreviation for ‘Confuse Me’.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

