On the Expressive Power of Tree-Structured
Probabilistic Circuits
Lang Yin
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
langyin2@illinois.edu

Han Zhao
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
hanzhao@illinois.edu

Abstract
Probabilistic circuits (PCs) have emerged as a powerful framework to compactly
represent probability distributions for efficient and exact probabilistic inference. It
has been shown that PCs with a general directed acyclic graph (DAG) structure can
be understood as a mixture of exponentially (in its height) many components, each
of which is a product distribution over univariate marginals. However, existing
structure learning algorithms for PCs often generate tree-structured circuits or
use tree-structured circuits as intermediate steps to compress them into DAGstructured circuits. This leads to the intriguing question of whether there exists
an exponential gap between DAGs and trees for the PC structure. In this paper,
we provide a negative answer to this conjecture by proving that, for n variables,
there exists a quasi-polynomial upper bound nO(log n) on the size of an equivalent
tree computing the same probability distribution. On the other hand, we also show
that given a depth restriction on the tree, there is a super-polynomial separation
between tree and DAG-structured PCs. Our work takes an important step towards
understanding the expressive power of tree-structured PCs, and our techniques may
be of independent interest in the study of structure learning algorithms for PCs.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic circuits (PCs) [7, 29], also commonly known as sum product networks (SPNs) [24],
are a type of deep graphical model that allow exact probabilistic inference efficiently in linear time
with respect to the size of the circuit. Like other deep models, the parameters of a PC can be learned
from data samples [38]. Because of these desirable properties, they have been increasingly applied
in various contexts, including generative modeling [35], image processing [2, 34], robotics [30],
planning [25] and sequential data including both textual and audio signals [6, 23]. Compared with
deep neural networks, the sum and product nodes in PCs admit clear probabilistic interpretation [36]
of marginalization and context-specific statistical independence [3], which opens the venue of designing efficient parameter learning algorithms for PCs, including the expectation-maximization (EM)
algorithm [12], the convex-concave procedure (CCCP) [38], and the variational EM algorithm [37].
Perhaps one of the most important properties of PCs is that they can be understood as a mixture of
exponentially (in its height) many components, each of which is a product distribution over univariate
marginals [38]. Intuitively, each sum node in PC can be viewed as a hidden variable that encodes
a mixture model [36] and thus a hierarchy of sum nodes corresponds to an exponential number of
components. This probabilistic interpretation of PCs has led to a number of interesting structure
learning algorithms [1, 9, 13, 17, 22, 27]. However, almost all of the existing structure learning
algorithms for PCs output tree-structured circuits, or use tree-structured circuits as intermediates
to compress them into DAG-structured circuits. Because of the restricted structure of trees, such
algorithms do not fully exploit the expressive power of PCs with general DAG structures, and often
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

