Trans-LoRA: towards
data-free Transferable Parameter Efficient Finetuning

Runqian Wang∗ † ‡
raywang4@mit.edu
Diego Antognini‡
diego.antognini@ibm.com

Soumya Ghosh†
ghoshso@us.ibm.com
Aude Oliva∗
oliva@mit.edu

David Cox†
david.d.cox@ibm.com

Rogerio Feris†
rsferis@us.ibm.com

Leonid Karlinsky†
leonidka@ibm.com

Abstract
Low-rank adapters (LoRA) and their variants are popular parameter-efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT) techniques that closely match full model fine-tune performance while requiring
only a small number of additional parameters. These additional LoRA parameters are
specific to the base model being adapted. When the base model needs to be deprecated
and replaced with a new one, all the associated LoRA modules need to be re-trained.
Such re-training requires access to the data used to train the LoRA for the original
base model. This is especially problematic for commercial cloud applications where
the LoRA modules and the base models are hosted by service providers who may not
be allowed to host proprietary client task data. To address this challenge, we propose
Trans-LoRA— a novel method for lossless, nearly data-free transfer of LoRAs across
base models. Our approach relies on synthetic data to transfer LoRA modules. Using
large language models, we design a synthetic data generator to approximate the datagenerating process of the observed task data subset. Training on the resulting synthetic
dataset transfers LoRA modules to new models. We show the effectiveness of our
approach using both LLama and Gemma model families. Our approach achieves lossless
(mostly improved) LoRA transfer between models within and across different base
model families, and even between different PEFT methods, on a wide variety of tasks.

1 Introduction
The remarkable progress in language modeling has led to the development of Large Language Models
(LLMs) [16, 13, 4, 2], achieving high performance on general language tasks via scaling model parameters
to multi-billion sizes. Despite their great progress, even the largest and strongest LLMs [16] still
significantly benefit from fine-tuning to downstream tasks for enhanced specialization and consequent
performance improvement [50]. However, it is commonly difficult to gain the computational, memory,
and disk resources needed for fine-tuning and later hosting fine-tuned large-scale models, especially when
serving model customization APIs to numerous clients. Thus, a common approach to LLM finetuning
is to use parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT) methods, the most widespread of which are Low-Rank
Adapters (LoRA) [31, 43], which only train a small number of additional parameters while freezing the
base pre-trained model. Using PEFT can lead to more efficient and compute-friendly training without
sacrificing final performance [31], as well as allowing efficient serving of large quantities of LoRA models
‘orbiting’ a common base model ‘core’ [56]. However, a LoRA model fine-tuned for a specific task is
tied to its base model and cannot be used without it, and also cannot be directly transferred to another
base model. This is quite problematic in commercial cloud model serving scenarios, where after the base
∗

MIT
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
‡
Work done while at MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

