Revisiting Ensembling
in One-Shot Federated Learning

Youssef Allouah1

Akash Dhasade1∗ Rachid Guerraoui1

Anne-Marie Kermarrec1

Rafael Pinot3

Rafael Pires1

Nirupam Gupta2
Rishi Sharma1

1

3

EPFL 2 University of Copenhagen
Sorbonne Université and Université Paris Cité, CNRS, LPSM

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is an appealing approach to training machine learning
models without sharing raw data. However, standard FL algorithms are iterative and
thus induce a significant communication cost. One-shot federated learning (OFL)
trades the iterative exchange of models between clients and the server with a
single round of communication, thereby saving substantially on communication
costs. Not surprisingly, OFL exhibits a performance gap in terms of accuracy with
respect to FL, especially under high data heterogeneity. We introduce F ENS, a
novel federated ensembling scheme that approaches the accuracy of FL with the
communication efficiency of OFL. Learning in F ENS proceeds in two phases: first,
clients train models locally and send them to the server, similar to OFL; second,
clients collaboratively train a lightweight prediction aggregator model using FL.
We showcase the effectiveness of F ENS through exhaustive experiments spanning
several datasets and heterogeneity levels. In the particular case of heterogeneously
distributed CIFAR-10 dataset, F ENS achieves up to a 26.9% higher accuracy over
state-of-the-art (SOTA) OFL, being only 3.1% lower than FL. At the same time,
F ENS incurs at most 4.3× more communication than OFL, whereas FL is at least
10.9× more communication-intensive than F ENS.

1

Introduction

FL is a widely adopted distributed machine learning (ML) approach, enabling clients to collaboratively train a common model over their collective data without sharing raw data with a central
server [27]. Clients in FL engage in iterative parameter exchanges with the server over several communication rounds to train a model. While providing high accuracy, this process incurs substantial
communication cost [19]. One-shot federated learning (OFL) [11] has been introduced to address
the communication challenges in FL by reducing the exchange of models to a single round. Not
surprisingly, this came with a loss of accuracy with respect to FL.
Typical OFL methods execute local training at the clients up to completion and form an ensemble
of locally trained models at the server [7, 10, 46, 11]. The ensemble is distilled into a single
model, through means of either auxiliary public dataset [10, 11] or synthetic data generated at the
server [7, 14, 46]. While these OFL methods address communication challenges by reducing model
exchanges to a single round, they often achieve lower accuracy compared to iterative FL. This is
especially true when data distribution across clients is highly heterogeneous as OFL methods typically
∗

Corresponding author <akash.dhasade@epfl.ch>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

