Achieving Tractable Minimax Optimal Regret in
Average Reward MDPs

Victor Boone
victor.boone@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LIG, 38000 Grenoble, France
Zihan Zhang
zz5478@princeton.edu
Princeton University

Abstract
In recent years, significant attention has been directed towards learning averagereward Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). However, existing algorithms either
suffer from sub-optimal regret guarantees or computational inefficiencies. In this
paper,
 the first tractable algorithm with minimax optimal regret of
p we present
e sp (h∗ )S AT ,1 where sp (h∗ ) is the span of the optimal bias function h∗ , S × A
O
is the size of the state-action space and T the number of learning steps. Remarkably,
our algorithm does not require prior information on sp (h∗ ).
Our algorithm relies on a novel subroutine, Projected Mitigated Extended Value
Iteration (PMEVI), to compute bias-constrained optimal policies efficiently. This
subroutine can be applied to various previous algorithms to improve regret bounds.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) Burnetas and Katehakis [1997], Sutton and Barto [2018] has become a
popular approach for solving complex sequential decision-making tasks and has recently achieved
notable advancements in diverse fields of application. RL problems are generally formulated with
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) Puterman [1994], where a learning agent seeks to maximize the
rewards that are gathered by interacting with an unknown environment.
This paper focuses on average reward MDPs where the learning agent must maximize the sum of
rewards in the long run without any reset mechanism. In this setting, the proper balancing between
exploration (i.e., playing sub-optimally to learn the unknown environment) and exploitation (i.e.,
planning optimally according to the current knowledge), usually known as the exploration-exploitation
trade-off, is key to learn efficiently. The measure of learning performance that we adopt throughout is
the regret, that compares the aggregate rewards collected by the learning agent during the learning
process to the expected performance of an omniscient agent that knows everything√in advance.
 The
seminal work of Auer et al. [2009] provides a minimax regret lower bound of Ω DS AT , where
D is the diameter (the maximal distance between two different states), S the number of states, A
the√number of actions and T the learning horizon. They also provide an algorithm achieving regret
e D2 S 2 AT , where e
O
O(−). Ever since Auer et al. [2009], many works have been devoted to close
the gap between the regret lower and upper bounds in the average reward setting Auer et al. [2009],
Bartlett and Tewari [2009], Filippi et al. [2010], Talebi and Maillard [2018], Fruit et al. [2018,
2020], Bourel et al. [2020], Zhang and Ji [2019], Ouyang et al. [2017], Agrawal and Jia [2023],
O(·) hides logarithmic factors of (S , A, T ).

1e

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

