Spiking Neural Network as
Adaptive Event Stream Slicer

Jiahang Cao1∗ Mingyuan Sun2∗ Ziqing Wang3∗ Hao Cheng1
Qiang Zhang1,4 Shibo Zhou5 Renjing Xu1
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
Northeastern University 3 Northwestern University
4
Beijing Innovation Center of Humanoid Robotics Co. Ltd. 5 Brain Mind Innovation
{jcao248, hcheng046, qzhang749}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn
mingyuansun20@gmail.com, ziqingwang2029@u.northwestern.edu
bob@brain-mind.com.cn, renjingxu@hkust-gz.edu.cn

Abstract
Event-based cameras are attracting significant interest as they provide rich edge information, high dynamic range, and high temporal resolution. Many state-of-the-art
event-based algorithms rely on splitting the events into fixed groups, resulting in the
omission of crucial temporal information, particularly when dealing with diverse
motion scenarios (e.g., high/low speed). In this work, we propose SpikeSlicer, a
novel-designed plug-and-play event processing method capable of splitting events
stream adaptively. SpikeSlicer utilizes a low-energy spiking neural network (SNN)
to trigger event slicing. To guide the SNN to fire spikes at optimal time steps, we
propose the Spiking Position-aware Loss (SPA-Loss) to modulate the neuron’s state.
Additionally, we develop a Feedback-Update training strategy that refines the slicing decisions using feedback from the downstream artificial neural network (ANN).
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method yields significant performance
improvements in event-based object tracking and recognition. Notably, SpikeSlicer
provides a brand-new SNN-ANN cooperation paradigm, where the SNN acts as an
efficient, low-energy data processor to assist the ANN in improving downstream
performance, injecting new perspectives and potential avenues of exploration. Our
code is available at https://github.com/AndyCao1125/SpikeSlicer.
Sparse Texture with
low-speed/small object

(a)
Event slicing by
fixed duration

(b)
Event slicing by
fixed count

t

= 20ms

Redundant Texture with
low-speed/small object

Unstable Texture with
high-speed/large object

= 20ms

Sparse Texture with
high-speed/large object

Object Tracking
Detection

Event-camera
Data

t

= 10000

= 10000

Recognition

...

Robust Information

(c)
Adaptive event
slicing by SNN

Robust Information

Downstream Task

t
1

2

3

Event representation

Figure 1: Comparison of event slicing methods. Traditional methods slice event streams based on
prefixed time intervals (a) or event counts (b). In contrast, our approach (c) utilizes SNN as a dynamic
event processor for adaptive event slicing. The sliced sub-event streams can be converted into various
event representations with robust information and then applied to multiple downstream tasks.
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

