Robust Fine-tuning of Zero-shot Models via Variance
Reduction
Beier Zhu

Jiequan Cui

Hanwang Zhang

Nanyang Technological University
beier002@e.ntu.edu.sg, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
When fine-tuning zero-shot models like CLIP, our desideratum is for the fine-tuned
model to excel in both in-distribution (ID) and out-of-distribution (OOD). Recently,
ensemble-based models (ESM) have been shown to offer significant robustness
improvement, while preserving high ID accuracy. However, our study finds that
ESMs do not solve the ID-OOD trade-offs: they achieve peak performance for
ID and OOD accuracy at different mixing coefficients. When optimized for OOD
accuracy, the ensemble model exhibits a noticeable decline in ID accuracy, and
vice versa. In contrast, we propose a sample-wise ensembling technique that
can simultaneously attain the best ID and OOD accuracy without the trade-offs.
Specifically, we construct a Zero-Shot Failure (ZSF) set containing training samples
incorrectly predicted by the zero-shot model. For each test sample, we calculate
its distance to the ZSF set and assign a higher weight to the fine-tuned model in
the ensemble if the distance is small. We term our method Variance Reduction
Fine-tuning (VRF), as it effectively reduces the variance in ensemble predictions,
thereby decreasing residual error. On ImageNet and five derived distribution shifts,
our VRF further improves the OOD accuracy by 1.5 - 2.0 pp over the ensemble
baselines while maintaining or increasing ID accuracy. VRF achieves similar large
robustness gains (0.9 - 3.1 pp) on other distribution shifts benchmarks. Codes are
available in https://github.com/BeierZhu/VRF.

1

Introduction

To ensure the reliability of machine learning systems, it is essential to develop models that can
generalize to unseen, out-of-distribution environments. Large pre-trained models such as CLIP [20]
and ALIGN [10] have recently shown remarkable robustness against challenging distribution shifts.
However, it is widely acknowledged that these improvements in robustness are most pronounced in
the zero-shot setting, while conventional fine-tuning on these models often compromises robustness
when compared to zero-shot performance [28, 15, 14]. This phenomenon is known as the ID-OOD
trade-offs, i.e., improving performance on in-distribution (ID) data can sometimes lead to decreased
performance on out-of-distribution (OOD) data [12, 25].
In recent years, ensemble-based models (ESMs) have demonstrated significant success in addressing
the ID-OOD dilemma [17, 28, 14, 31]. Specifically, denote the input as x, the zero-shot model
as P̂(y|x; θzs ) and the fine-tuned model as P̂(y|x; θft ), existing ESMs typically employ the outputspace ensemble (OSE) [14, 31], which outputs P̂(y|x; θose ) = αP̂(y|x; θft ) + (1 − α)P̂(y|x; θzs ),
and the weight-space ensemble (WSE) [28, 17], which outputs P̂(y|x; θwse ) = P̂(y|x; αθft + (1 −
α)θzs ), where α ∈ [0, 1]. Compared to fine-tuned models, ESMs offer significant accuracy enhancements under distribution shift, while maintaining high ID accuracy.
However, ESM cannot fully address the ID-OOD trade-offs. In Figure 1 (a), by varying the mixing
coefficient α, we plot the ID-OOD frontier curves (pink line) for the CLIP ViT-B/16 model on
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

