Neural Conditional Probability for Uncertainty
Quantification
Vladimir R. Kostic1,2 Karim Lounici3 Grégoire Pacreau3
Giacomo Turri1 Pietro Novelli1 Massimiliano Pontil1,4
1

3

CSML, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia 2 University of Novi Sad
CMAP-Ecole Polytechnique 4 AI Centre, University College London

Abstract
We introduce Neural Conditional Probability (NCP), an operator-theoretic approach
to learning conditional distributions with a focus on statistical inference tasks. NCP
can be used to build conditional confidence regions and extract key statistics such
as conditional quantiles, mean, and covariance. It offers streamlined learning via a
single unconditional training phase, allowing efficient inference without the need
for retraining even when conditioning changes. By leveraging the approximation
capabilities of neural networks, NCP efficiently handles a wide variety of complex probability distributions. We provide theoretical guarantees that ensure both
optimization consistency and statistical accuracy. In experiments, we show that
NCP with a 2-hidden-layer network matches or outperforms leading methods. This
demonstrates that a a minimalistic architecture with a theoretically grounded loss
can achieve competitive results, even in the face of more complex architectures.

1

Introduction

This paper studies the problem of estimating the conditional distribution associated with a pair of
random variables, given a finite sample from their joint distribution. This problem is fundamental
in machine learning, and instrumental for various purposes such as building prediction intervals,
performing downstream analysis, visualizing data, and interpreting outcomes. This entails predicting
the probability of an event given certain conditions or variables, which is a crucial task across
various domains, ranging from finance (Markowitz, 1958) to medicine (Ray et al., 2017), to climate
modeling (Harrington, 2017) and beyond. For instance, in finance, it is essential for risk assessment to
estimate the probability of default given economic indicators. Similarly, in healthcare, predicting the
likelihood of a disease, given patient symptoms, aids in diagnosis. In climate modeling, estimating
the conditional probability of extreme weather events such as hurricanes or droughts, given specific
climate indicators, helps in disaster preparedness and mitigation efforts.
According to Gao and Hastie (2022), there exist four main strategies to learn the conditional distribution. The first one relies on the Bayes formula for densities and proposes to apply non-parametric
statistics to learn the joint and marginal densities separately. However, most of non-parametric
techniques face a significant challenge known as the curse of dimensionality (Scott, 1991; Nagler and
Czado, 2016). The second strategy, also known as Localization method, involves training a model
unconditionally on reweighted samples, where weights are determined by their proximity to the
desired conditioning point (Hall et al., 1999; Yu and Jones, 1998). These methods require retraining
the model whenever the conditioning changes and may also suffer from the curse of dimensionality if
the weighting strategy treats all covariates equally. The third strategy, known as Direct Learning of
the conditional distribution involves finding the best linear approximation of the conditional density
on a dictionary of base functions or a kernel space (Sugiyama et al., 2010; Li et al., 2007). The
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

