IKEA Manuals at Work: 4D Grounding of
Assembly Instructions on Internet Videos

Yunong Liu1
Juan Carlos Niebles1
1

Cristobal Eyzaguirre1
Manling Li1
Shubh Khanna1
2
2
Vineeth Ravi
Saumitra Mishra
Weiyu Liu1∗ Jiajun Wu1∗
Stanford University

2

J.P. Morgan AI Research

Abstract
Shape assembly is a ubiquitous task in daily life, integral for constructing complex
3D structures like IKEA furniture. While significant progress has been made
in developing autonomous agents for shape assembly, existing datasets have not
yet tackled the 4D grounding of assembly instructions in videos, essential for a
holistic understanding of assembly in 3D space over time. We introduce IKEA
Video Manuals, a dataset that features 3D models of furniture parts, instructional
manuals, assembly videos from the Internet, and most importantly, annotations of
dense spatio-temporal alignments between these data modalities. To demonstrate
the utility of IKEA Video Manuals, we present five applications essential for
shape assembly: assembly plan generation, part-conditioned segmentation, partconditioned pose estimation, video object segmentation, and furniture assembly
based on instructional video manuals. For each application, we provide evaluation
metrics and baseline methods. Through experiments on our annotated data, we
highlight many challenges in grounding assembly instructions in videos to improve
shape assembly, including handling occlusions, varying viewpoints, and extended
assembly sequences.

1

Introduction

The autonomous assembly of complex 3D structures requires an understanding at multiple levels of
abstraction. The top level is task planning—decomposing the task into subtasks and computing their
dependency and ordering, as outlined in an instruction manual; the middle level is visual grounding—
registering each part with perceptual input at the pixel level, identifying their geometry and pose, so
that the manual instructions get translated to actionable steps; the bottom level is motion planning and
control—executing the steps based on the instructions and the identified states, avoiding collisions
given the specific embodiment. A successful assembly requires solving all of these problems together,
which is difficult. Thus, assembly remains a significant challenge in AI and robotics.
When developing assembly benchmarks, researchers often choose IKEA furniture as target objects
due to its ubiquity and standardization. However, existing benchmarks and datasets focus only on
part of the assembly problem. Classic work on designing assembly instructions provides step-by-step
guidance for task planning, but they are not visually grounded [1]; recent work has attempted to
ground assembly steps to 3D part models and register them at the pixel level [2], but it does not include
action trajectories of how the assembly may actually happen; datasets that provide 3D groundings
in the form RGB-D videos are collected in controlled lab environments [3, 4]; a video dataset of
IKEA furniture assembly from the Internet includes more diverse demonstrations [5], but it lacks
correspondence with 3D part models and alignment with the instruction manuals.
To address these limitations, we introduce the IKEA Video Manuals dataset, a large-scale multimodal
dataset with high-quality, spatial-temporal alignments of step-by-step instructions, 3D models, and
∗

Equal advising. Project page: yunongliu1.github.io/ikea-video-manual

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

