Learning to Assist Humans without Inferring Rewards
Vivek Myers1
Sergey Levine1
1

Evan Ellis1

Benjamin Eysenbach2

UC Berkeley

2

Anca Dragan1

Princeton University

Abstract
Assistive agents should make humans’ lives easier. Classically, such assistance is
studied through the lens of inverse reinforcement learning, where an assistive agent
(e.g., a chatbot, a robot) infers a human’s intention and then selects actions to help
the human reach that goal. This approach requires inferring intentions, which can
be difficult in high-dimensional settings. We build upon prior work that studies
assistance through the lens of empowerment: an assistive agent aims to maximize
the influence of the human’s actions such that they exert a greater control over the
environmental outcomes and can solve tasks in fewer steps. We lift the major limitation of prior work in this area — scalability to high-dimensional settings — with
contrastive successor representations. We formally prove that these representations
estimate a similar notion of empowerment to that studied by prior work and provide
a mechanism for optimizing it. Empirically, our proposed method outperforms
prior methods on synthetic benchmarks, and scales to Overcooked, a cooperative
game setting. Theoretically, our work connects ideas from information theory,
neuroscience, and reinforcement learning, and charts a path for representations to
play a critical role in solving assistive problems.1

1

Introduction

AI agents deployed in the real world should be helpful to humans. When we know the utility
function of the humans an agent could interact with, we can directly train assistive agents through
reinforcement learning with the known human objective as the agent’s reward. In practice, agents
rarely have direct access to a scalar reward corresponding to human preferences (if such a consistent
model even exists) [1], and must infer them from human behavior [2, 3]. This inference can be
challenging, as humans may act suboptimally with respect to their stated goals, not know their
goals, or have changing preferences [4]. Optimizing a misspecified reward function can have poor
consequences [5].
An alternative paradigm for assistance is to train agents that are intrinsically motivated to assist
humans, rather than directly optimizing a model of their preferences. An analogy can be drawn to
a parent raising a child. A good parent will empower the child to make impactful decisions and
flourish, rather than proscribing an “optimal” outcome for the child. Likewise, AI agents might
seek to empower the human agents they interact with, maximizing their capacity to change the
environment [6]. In practice, concrete notions of empowerment can be difficult to optimize as an
objective, requiring extensive modeling assumptions that don’t scale well to the high-dimensional
settings deep reinforcement learning agents are deployed in.
What is a good intrinsic objective for assisting humans that doesn’t require these assumptions? We
propose a notion of assistance based on maximizing the influence of the human’s actions on the
1

Code: https://github.com/vivekmyers/empowerment_successor_representations
Website: https://empowering-humans.github.io

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

