GS-Blur: A 3D Scene-Based Dataset
for Realistic Image Deblurring

1

Dongwoo Lee1 Joonkyu Park1 Kyoung Mu Lee1,2
Dept. of ECE&ASRI, 2 IPAI, Seoul National University, Korea
{dongwoo.lee, jkpark0825, kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
To train a deblurring network, an appropriate dataset with paired blurry and sharp
images is essential. Existing datasets collect blurry images either synthetically by
aggregating consecutive sharp frames or using sophisticated camera systems to
capture real blur. However, these methods offer limited diversity in blur types (blur
trajectories) or require extensive human effort to reconstruct large-scale datasets,
failing to fully reflect real-world blur scenarios. To address this, we propose
GS-Blur, a dataset of synthesized realistic blurry images created using a novel
approach. To this end, we first reconstruct 3D scenes from multi-view images using
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS), then render blurry images by moving the camera
view along the randomly generated motion trajectories. By adopting various camera
trajectories in reconstructing our GS-Blur, our dataset contains realistic and diverse
types of blur, offering a large-scale dataset that generalizes well to real-world blur.
Using GS-Blur with various deblurring methods, we demonstrate its ability to
generalize effectively compared to previous synthetic or real blur datasets, showing
significant improvements in deblurring performance. The dataset is available at:
https://github.com/dongwoohhh/GS-Blur

1

Introduction

Single-image deblurring is a crucial challenge in image restoration, focusing on removing blur caused
by motion between the camera and objects. To address this, pioneering approaches [23, 11, 37, 3]
have proposed paired datasets, consisting of blurry images and their corresponding sharp images,
designed for training deep neural networks. Specifically, their efforts to create deblurring datasets
have primarily relied on two methods: synthetic [23, 22, 46] and real [47, 30, 29] data generation.
However, both approaches heavily depend on heuristic human capture techniques, often leading
to limitations such as incomplete coverage of large-scale datasets and inadequate representation of
diverse blur types (i.e., blur length and directions).
Since capturing blurry and sharp images simultaneously with a single sensor is challenging, earlier
methods [35, 22, 33, 14] have resorted to synthetically generating blurry images from consecutive
sharp frames. They achieve this by capturing consecutive sharp frames using high-speed cameras and
then aggregating these neighboring frames to create synthetic blurry images. Although this allows for
easy generation of blurry images, the resulting blur is derived from highly discrete frames, which
leads to differences from real-world blur and fails to generalize well to real-world blurry images.
Later methods [47, 30, 29] have introduced specialized camera systems equipped with beam-splitters.
These systems divide the light entering the camera lens into two image sensors with varying exposure
times, producing sharp images from the shorter and blurry images from the longer-exposed sensor.
While they generate a more realistic blur, making it better suited for real-world applications, they
present several challenges. First, they require precise camera system design, complicating the use of
diverse camera models. Indeed, [47] and [30] obtained their datasets from a single camera model, the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

