Compact Proofs of Model Performance via
Mechanistic Interpretability

Jason Gross∗

Rajashree Agrawal

Alex Gibson‡

Thomas Kwa†

Euan Ong†

Soufiane Noubir‡

Chun Hei Yip†

Lawrence Chan

Abstract
We propose using mechanistic interpretability – techniques for reverse engineering
model weights into human-interpretable algorithms – to derive and compactly
prove formal guarantees on model performance. We prototype this approach by
formally proving accuracy lower bounds for a small transformer trained on Max-ofK, validating proof transferability across 151 random seeds and four values of K.
We create 102 different computer-assisted proof strategies and assess their length
and tightness of bound on each of our models. Using quantitative metrics, we find
that shorter proofs seem to require and provide more mechanistic understanding.
Moreover, we find that more faithful mechanistic understanding leads to tighter
performance bounds. We confirm these connections by qualitatively examining a
subset of our proofs. Finally, we identify compounding structureless errors as a
key challenge for using mechanistic interpretability to generate compact proofs on
model performance.

1

Introduction

One approach to ensuring the safety and reliability of powerful AI systems is via formally verified
proofs of model performance [48, 11]. If we hope to deploy formal verification on increasingly
large models [24, 27] with powerful emergent capabilities [56] across more diverse and broader
domains [5, 46], we will need compact proofs of generalization bounds on specific models that certify
global robustness. However, existing approaches tend to use proof strategies that suffer from bad
asymptotic complexity, while verifying either generalization properties of training procedures or local
robustness properties of specific models.
One key challenge to verification is that neural network architectures are highly expressive [51, 58],
and models with similar training procedure and performance may still have learned significantly
different weights [38, 9]. This expressivity makes it difficult to adequately compress explanations of
global model behavior in ways that correspond closely enough to the model’s actual mechanisms to
be useful for efficient verification without being too lossy, especially when using only knowledge of
the architecture or training procedure. We propose verifying model performance using understanding
derived from mechanistic interpretability (Section 2) – that is, reverse engineering the specific
implementation of the algorithm from the learned weights of particular models. Knowledge of the
specific implementation allows us to construct less lossy simplifications of the model, and more
efficiently reason about model performance over possible inputs.
In this work, we provide a case study of translating mechanistic interpretations into compact proofs.
We train an attention-only transformer on a Max-of-K task with 151 random seeds (Section 3), and
∗

Corresponding author. Please direct correspondence to jgross@mit.edu.
These authors contributed equally to this work.
‡
These authors contributed equally to this work.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

