Minimax Optimal and Computationally Efficient
Algorithms for Distributionally Robust Offline
Reinforcement Learning

Zhishuai Liu
Duke University
zhishuai.liu@duke.edu

Pan Xu
Duke University
pan.xu@duke.edu

Abstract
Distributionally robust offline reinforcement learning (RL), which seeks robust
policy training against environment perturbation by modeling dynamics uncertainty,
calls for function approximations when facing large state-action spaces. However,
the consideration of dynamics uncertainty introduces essential nonlinearity and
computational burden, posing unique challenges for analyzing and practically
employing function approximation. Focusing on a basic setting where the nominal
model and perturbed models are linearly parameterized, we propose minimax
optimal and computationally efficient algorithms realizing function approximation
and initiate the study on instance-dependent suboptimality analysis in the context of
robust offline RL. Our results uncover that function approximation in robust offline
RL is essentially distinct from and probably harder than that in standard offline
RL. Our algorithms and theoretical results crucially depend on a novel function
approximation mechanism incorporating variance information, a new procedure
of suboptimality and estimation uncertainty decomposition, a quantification of
the robust value function shrinkage, and a meticulously designed family of hard
instances, which might be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) [17, 18], which aims to learn an optimal policy achieving
maximum expected cumulative reward from a pre-collected dataset, plays an important role in critical
domains where online exploration is infeasible due to high cost or ethical issues, such as precision
medicine [49, 11, 22, 21] and autonomous driving [32, 43]. The foundational assumption of offline RL
[18, 15, 53] is that the offline dataset is collected from the same environment where learned policies
are intended to be deployed. However, this assumption can be violated in practice due to temporal
changes in dynamics. In such cases, standard offline RL could face catastrophic failures [10, 31, 64].
To address this issue, the robust offline RL [28, 30] focuses on robust policy training against the
environment perturbation, which serves as a promising solution. Existing empirical successes of
robust offline RL rely heavily on expressive function approximations [37, 36, 25, 45, 63, 16], as the
omnipresence of applications featuring large state and action spaces necessitates powerful function
representations to enhance generalization capability of decision-making in RL.
To theoretically understand robust offline RL with function approximation, the distributionally robust
Markov decision process (DRMDP) [39, 30, 13] provides an established framework. In stark contrast
to the standard MDP, DRMDP specifically tackles the model uncertainty by forming an uncertainty
set around the nominal model, and takes a max-min formulation aiming to maximize the value
function corresponding to a policy, uniformly across all perturbed models in the uncertainty set
[55, 52, 57, 35, 41, 59, 40]. The core of DRMDPs lies in achieving an amenable combination
of uncertainty set design and corresponding techniques to solve the inner optimization over the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

