Embedding Dimension of Contrastive Learning and
k-Nearest Neighbors

Dmitrii Avdiukhin
Computer Science Department
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60657, USA
dmitrii.avdiukhin@northwestern.edu

Vaggos Chatziafratis
Computer Science and Engineering Department
University of California at Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA
vaggos@ucsc.edu

Orr Fischer
Computer Science Department
Bar-Ilan University
Ramat-Gan, Israel
fischeo@biu.ac.il

Grigory Yaroslavtsev
Computer Science Department
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA 22030, USA
grigory@gmu.edu

Abstract
We study the embedding dimension of distance comparison data in two settings:
contrastive learning and k-nearest neighbors (k-NN). Our goal is to find the smallest dimension d of an ℓp -space in which a given dataset can be represented. We
show that the arboricity of the associated graphs plays a key role in designing
embeddings. For the most popular ℓ2 -space, we get tight bounds in both settings.
In contrastive learning, we are given m labeled samples (xi , yi+ , zi− ) representing
the fact that the positive example yi is closer to the anchor xi than the negative
example zi (we also give results for t negatives). For representing such dataset in:
√
• ℓ2 : d = Θ( m) is necessary and sufficient, consistent with our experiments.
√
• ℓp for p ≥ 1: d = O(m) is sufficient and d = Ω̃( m) is necessary.
√
• ℓ∞ : d = O(m2/3 ) is sufficient and d = Ω̃( m) is necessary.
In k-NN, for each of the n data points we are given an ordered set of the closest k
points. We show that for preserving the ordering of the k-NN for every point in:
• ℓ2 : d = Θ(k) is necessary and sufficient.
• ℓp for p ≥ 1: d = Õ(k 2 ) is sufficient and d = Ω̃(k) is necessary.
• ℓ∞ : d = Ω̃(k) is necessary.
Furthermore, if the goal is to not just preserve the ordering of the k-NN but also
keep them as the nearest neighbors, then d = Õ(poly(k)) suffices in ℓp for p ≥ 1.

1

Introduction

Embedding vectors play an important role in machine learning, with the embedding dimension being
a key parameter of interest when choosing a deep learning architecture. In this paper, we ask the
following question: given a dataset labeled with distance relationships between its points, what is
the smallest embedding dimension required to represent it? We answer this question for two types
of distance comparison data: contrastive labels and k-NN.
Contrastive Learning Contrastive learning [GH10] has recently become a popular technique
for learning representations, see e.g. [SE05, MCCD13, DSRB14, SKP15a, WG15, WXYL18,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

