Gradient Guidance for Diffusion Models:
An Optimization Perspective

Yingqing Guo ∗

Hui Yuan ∗

Yukang Yang

Minshuo Chen

Mengdi Wang

Princeton University

Abstract
Diffusion models have demonstrated empirical successes in various applications
and can be adapted to task-specific needs via guidance. This paper studies a form
of gradient guidance for adapting a pre-trained diffusion model towards optimizing
user-specified objectives. We establish a mathematical framework for guided
diffusion to systematically study its optimization theory and algorithmic design.
Our theoretical analysis spots a strong link between guided diffusion models and
optimization: gradient-guided diffusion models are essentially sampling solutions
to a regularized optimization problem, where the regularization is imposed by the
pre-training data. As for guidance design, directly bringing in the gradient of an
external objective function as guidance would jeopardize the structure in generated
samples. We investigate a modified form of gradient guidance based on a forward
prediction loss, which leverages the information in pre-trained score functions
and provably preserves the latent structure. We further consider an iteratively
fine-tuned version of gradient-guided diffusion where guidance and score network
are both updated with newly generated samples. This process mimics a first-order
optimization iteration in expectation, for which we proved Õ(1/K) convergence
rate to the global optimum when the objective function is concave. Our code is
released at https://github.com/yukang123/GGDMOptim.git.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have emerged as a significant advancement in the field of generative artificial
intelligence, offering state-of-the-art performance in image generation [58, 56, 22]. These models
operate by gradually transforming a random noise into a structured output, utilizing the score function
learned from data. One of the key advantages of diffusion models is their flexibility which allows
controlled sample generation for task-specific interest, excelling diffusion models in a wide range of
applications, such as content creation, sequential decision making, protein engineering [38, 1, 29, 11].
Controlling the generation of large generative models stands at the forefront of AI. Guidance and
fine-tuning are two most prevalent approaches for controlling the generation of diffusion models.
Unlike fine-tuning which changes the weights of pre-trained models, guidance mechanism enables a
more directed and flexible control. Adding gradient-based guidance during inference was pioneered
by classifier guidance [60, 22], which involves training a time-dependent classifier. Diffusion
Posterior Sampling (DPS) [16] introduced a fully training-free form of gradient-based guidance,
which removes the dependence on time. This method has since been explored in numerous empirical
studies [17, 37, 43, 65, 57, 70, 4, 35]. However, despite these empirical successes, significant gaps
∗

Equal contribution. Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University. Authors’
emails are: {yg6736, huiyuan, yy1325, minshuochen, mengdiw}@princeton.edu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

