Learning to be Smooth:
An End-to-End Differentiable Particle Smoother
Ali Younis and Erik B. Sudderth
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Irvine, CA 92617
ayounis@uci.edu, sudderth@uci.edu

Abstract
For challenging state estimation problems arising in domains like vision and
robotics, particle-based representations attractively enable temporal reasoning
about multiple posterior modes. Particle smoothers offer the potential for more accurate offline data analysis by propagating information both forward and backward
in time, but have classically required human-engineered dynamics and observation
models. Extending recent advances in discriminative training of particle filters, we
develop a framework for low-variance propagation of gradients across long time
sequences when training particle smoothers. Our “two-filter” smoother integrates
particle streams that are propagated forward and backward in time, while incorporating stratification and importance weights in the resampling step to provide
low-variance gradient estimates for neural network dynamics and observation models. The resulting mixture density particle smoother is substantially more accurate
than state-of-the-art particle filters, as well as search-based baselines, for city-scale
global vehicle localization from real-world videos and maps.

1

Introduction

Global localization of the state of a moving vehicle using a city-scale map is challenging due to the
large area, as well as the inherent ambiguity in urban landscapes, where many street intersections and
buildings appear similar. Recent work on global localization [1–11] has typically localized each time
point independently during training, sometimes followed by temporal post-processing, often with
demanding requirements like near-exact external estimation of relative vehicle poses [11].
For a broader range of state estimation problems in fields like vision and robotics, a number of
methods for end-to-end particle filter (PF) training have been proposed [8, 12–16]. Learnable PFs are
suitable for global localization because they can represent multi-modal posterior densities, propagate
uncertainty over time, and learn models of real vehicle dynamics and complex sensors directly from
data. However, most learnable PF methods have only been applied to simulated environments [12–14],
with only a few preliminary applications to real-world data [8, 15].
Particle filters [17–21] only use past observations to estimate the current state. For offline inference
from complete time series, more powerful particle smoothing (PS) algorithms [22–27] may in
principle perform better by integrating past and future data. But to our knowledge, recent advances in
end-to-end differentiable training of PFs have not been generalized to the more complex PS scenario,
requiring error-prone human engineering of PS dynamics and observation models. Classical work on
generative parameter estimation via PS [28] is limited to parametric models with few parameters. In
contrast, we develop differentiable PS that scale to complex models defined by deep neural networks.
After introducing differentiable particle filters (Sec. 2) and classical particle smoothers (Sec. 3), we
develop our differentiable, discriminative Mixture Density Particle Smoother (MDPS, see Fig. 1) in
Sec. 4. Thorough experiments in Sec. 5 then highlight the advantages of our MDPS over differential
PFs on a synthetic bearings-only tracking task, and also show substantial advantages over search-based
and retrieval-based baselines for challenging real-world, city-scale global localization problems.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

