Constrained Sampling with
Primal-Dual Langevin Monte Carlo

Luiz F. O. Chamon
University of Stuttgart
luiz.chamon@simtech.uni-stuttgart.de

Mohammad Reza Karimi
ETH Zürich
mkarimi@inf.ethz.ch

Anna Korba
CREST, ENSAE, IP Paris
anna.korba@ensae.fr

Abstract
This work considers the problem of sampling from a probability distribution known
up to a normalization constant while satisfying a set of statistical constraints
specified by the expected values of general nonlinear functions. This problem
finds applications in, e.g., Bayesian inference, where it can constrain moments to
evaluate counterfactual scenarios or enforce desiderata such as prediction fairness.
Methods developed to handle support constraints, such as those based on mirror
maps, barriers, and penalties, are not suited for this task. This work therefore relies
on gradient descent-ascent dynamics in Wasserstein space to put forward a discretetime primal-dual Langevin Monte Carlo algorithm (PD-LMC) that simultaneously
constrains the target distribution and samples from it. We analyze the convergence
of PD-LMC under standard assumptions on the target distribution and constraints,
namely (strong) convexity and log-Sobolev inequalities. To do so, we bring
classical optimization arguments for saddle-point algorithms to the geometry of
Wasserstein space. We illustrate the relevance and effectiveness of PD-LMC in
several applications.

1

Introduction

Sampling is a fundamental task in statistics, with applications to estimation and decision making, and
of growing interest in machine learning (ML), motivated by the need for uncertainty quantification
and its success in generative tasks [1–3]. In these settings, the distribution we wish to sample
from (target distribution) is often known only up to its normalization constant. This is the case, for
instance, of score functions learned from data or posterior distributions of complex Bayesian models.
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms can be used to tackle this problem [4, 5] and
Langevin Monte Carlo (LMC), in particular, has attracted considerable attention due to its simplicity,
theoretical grounding, and effectiveness in practice [3, 6–9]. These sampling algorithms, however, do
not naturally incorporate requirements on the samples they generate. Specifically, standard MCMC
methods do not enforce restrictions on the target distributions, such as support (e.g., truncated
Gaussian), conditional probabilities (e.g., fairness), or moments (e.g., portfolio return) constraints.
This limitation is often addressed by post-processing, transforming variables, or by introducing
penalties in the target distribution. Though successful in specific settings, these approaches have
considerable downsides. Post-processing techniques such as rejection sampling (see, e.g., [10, 11])
may substantially reduce the effective number of samples (number of samples generated per iteration
of the algorithm). Variable transformations based on link functions, projections, or mirror/proximal
maps (see, e.g., [12–18]) only accommodate (deterministic) support constraints and are not suited
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

