Learning 3D Garment Animation from Trajectories of
A Piece of Cloth
Yidi Shao1 Chen Change Loy1
Bo Dai2,3
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
2
The University of Hong Kong, 3 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
yidi001@e.ntu.edu.sg, ccloy@ntu.edu.sg, bdai@hku.hk

Figure 1: Given the observed piece of cloth as shown on the left, we aim to animate various garments
inheriting the attributes from the observations as shown in the middle and right. We disentangle the
garment-wise learning into two sub-tasks: 1) learning constitutive relations by our proposed EUNet;
2) animating diverse garments through energy optimization constrained by EUNet.

Abstract
Garment animation is ubiquitous in various applications, such as virtual reality, gaming, and film production. Learning-based approaches obtain compelling
performance in animating diverse garments under versatile scenarios. Nevertheless, to mimic the deformations of the observed garments, data-driven methods
often require large-scale garment data, which are both resource-expensive and
time-consuming. In addition, forcing models to match the dynamics of observed
garment animation may hinder the potential to generalize to unseen cases. In this
paper, instead of using garment-wise supervised learning we adopt a disentangled
scheme to learn how to animate observed garments: 1) learning constitutive behaviors from the observed cloth; 2) dynamically animate various garments constrained
by the learned constitutive laws. Specifically, we propose an Energy Unit network
(EUNet) to model the constitutive relations in the form of energy. Without the
priors from analytical physics models and differentiable simulation engines, EUNet is able to directly capture the constitutive behaviors from the observed piece
of cloth and uniformly describes the change of energy caused by deformations,
such as stretching and bending. We further apply the pre-trained EUNet to animate various garments based on energy optimizations. The disentangled scheme
alleviates the need for garment data and enables us to utilize the dynamics of
a piece of cloth for animating garments. Experiments show that EUNet effectively delivers the energy gradients due to the deformations. Models constrained
by EUNet achieve more stable and physically plausible performance compared
Corresponding Author.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

