The Importance of Online Data:
Understanding Preference Fine-tuning via Coverage

Yuda Song
Carnegie Mellon University
yudas@cs.cmu.edu

Gokul Swamy
Carnegie Mellon University
gswamy@cs.cmu.edu

J. Andrew Bagnell
Aurora Innovation, Carnegie Mellon University
dbagnell@aurora.tech

Aarti Singh
Carnegie Mellon University
aarti@cs.cmu.edu
Wen Sun
Cornell University
ws455@cornell.edu

Abstract
Learning from human preference data has emerged as the dominant paradigm
for fine-tuning large language models (LLMs). The two most common families
of techniques – online reinforcement learning (RL) such as Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) and offline contrastive methods such as Direct Preference
Optimization (DPO) – were positioned as equivalent in prior work due to the
fact that both have to start from the same offline preference dataset. To further
expand our theoretical understanding of the similarities and differences between
online and offline techniques for preference fine-tuning, we conduct a rigorous
analysis through the lens of dataset coverage, a concept that captures how the
training data covers the test distribution and is widely used in RL. We prove that
a global coverage condition is both necessary and sufficient for offline contrastive
methods to converge to the optimal policy, but a weaker partial coverage condition
suffices for online RL methods. This separation provides one explanation of why
online RL methods can perform better than offline methods, especially when the
offline preference data is not diverse enough. Finally, motivated by our preceding
theoretical observations, we derive a hybrid preference optimization (HyPO)
algorithm that uses offline data for contrastive-based preference optimization and
online unlabeled data for KL regularization. Theoretically and empirically, we
demonstrate that HyPO is more performant than its pure offline counterpart DPO,
while still preserving its computation and memory efficiency.

1

Introduction

Due to the difficulty of manually specifying reward functions for complex tasks [7], preference-based
learning has emerged as a critical component in the fine-tuning procedure for large language models
(LLMs) [40, 30, 45, 44]. There are two predominant flavors of preference learning for LLMs: online
reinforcement learning (RL) methods such as PPO [11, 30] and offline contrastive methods like
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) [33] and Identity Preference Optimization (IPO) [3].
Online RL methods usually follow the two-stage procedure prescribed in [30]: one first trains a
reward model (classifier) on a fixed offline preference dataset before using it to provide reward labels
for on-policy generations, which are then fed to a downstream RL algorithm like Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) [36]. Since the reward model is learned from static offline preference data, to
avoid over-optimizing the reward model [17], one typically adds a reverse KL penalty to encourage
the model to stay close to some reference policy. We will refer to this procedure as reinforcement
learning from human feedback (RLHF) in this paper. While empirically performant, RLHF requires
repeated querying of the reward model (which is often itself an LLM) as well as sampling from
the current policy. In response to the computational expense and relatively complex nature of this
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

