Optimistic Verifiable Training by Controlling
Hardware Nondeterminism
Megha Srivastava∗
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
megha@cs.stanford.edu

Simran Arora
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
simarora@stanford.edu

Dan Boneh
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
dabo@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
The increasing compute demands of AI systems have led to the emergence of
services that train models on behalf of clients lacking necessary resources. However, ensuring correctness of training and guarding against potential training-time
attacks, such as data poisoning and backdoors, poses challenges. Existing works on
verifiable training largely fall into two classes: proof-based systems, which are difficult to scale, and “optimistic” methods that consider a third-party auditor who can
replicate the training process and contest the trainer. A key challenge with the latter
is that nondeterminism between GPU types during training prevents exact replication of the training process, resulting in schemes that are non-robust. We propose a
method that combines training in a higher precision than the target, rounding after
intermediate computations, and sharing rounding decisions based on an adaptive
thresholding procedure, to successfully control for nondeterminism. Across three
different NVIDIA GPUs (A40, Titan XP, RTX 2080 Ti), we achieve exact training
replication at FP32 precision for both full-training and fine-tuning of ResNet-50
(23M) and GPT-2 (117M) models. Our verifiable training scheme significantly decreases the storage and time costs compared to proof-based systems, and is publicly
released at https://github.com/meghabyte/verifiable-training.

1

Introduction

We are currently in the “large-scale era” of machine learning (ML), where the exciting capabilities of
modern AI systems have required a dramatic increase in training compute needs [Sevilla et al., 2022].
In turn, several model training services, such as Replicate, OpenAI’s Finetuning API, Together AI,
Amazon Sagemaker, MosaicML Training, and Gensyn, have been created to support clients who
lack the resources to train a model themselves. However, these services require clients to place a
significant degree of trust in them to train the model correctly, without introducing a training-time
attack such as data poisoning or undetectable backdoors [Wan et al., 2023, Goldwasser et al., 2022].
How can we help a client, such as an individual or a small company, hold the service provider
accountable in case of misbehavior during training?
Consider an education start-up that wishes to finetune the Llama-70b language model (70B parameters) on their own curated dataset to support student learning. This task requires significant resources,
∗

Correspondence to megha@cs.stanford.edu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

