AGENT P OISON: Red-teaming LLM Agents via
Poisoning Memory or Knowledge Bases

Zhaorun Chen1∗ , Zhen Xiang2 , Chaowei Xiao3 , Dawn Song4 , Bo Li12∗
1
University of Chicago, 2 University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
3
University of Wisconsin, Madison 4 University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
LLM agents have demonstrated remarkable performance across various applications, primarily due to their advanced capabilities in reasoning, utilizing external
knowledge and tools, calling APIs, and executing actions to interact with environments. Current agents typically utilize a memory module or a retrieval-augmented
generation (RAG) mechanism, retrieving past knowledge and instances with similar embeddings from knowledge bases to inform task planning and execution.
However, the reliance on unverified knowledge bases raises significant concerns
about their safety and trustworthiness. To uncover such vulnerabilities, we propose
a novel red teaming approach AGENT P OISON, the first backdoor attack targeting
generic and RAG-based LLM agents by poisoning their long-term memory or
RAG knowledge base. In particular, we form the trigger generation process as a
constrained optimization to optimize backdoor triggers by mapping the triggered
instances to a unique embedding space, so as to ensure that whenever a user instruction contains the optimized backdoor trigger, the malicious demonstrations
are retrieved from the poisoned memory or knowledge base with high probability.
In the meantime, benign instructions without the trigger will still maintain normal
performance. Unlike conventional backdoor attacks, AGENT P OISON requires no
additional model training or fine-tuning, and the optimized backdoor trigger exhibits superior transferability, resilience, and stealthiness. Extensive experiments
demonstrate AGENT P OISON’s effectiveness in attacking three types of real-world
LLM agents: RAG-based autonomous driving agent, knowledge-intensive QA
agent, and healthcare EHRAgent. We inject the poisoning instances into the RAG
knowledge base and long-term memories of these agents, respectively, demonstrating the generalization of AGENT P OISON. On each agent, AGENT P OISON
achieves an average attack success rate of ≥ 80% with minimal impact on benign
performance (≤ 1%) with a poison rate < 0.1%. The code and data is available at
https://github.com/BillChan226/AgentPoison.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) have facilitated the extensive deployment
of LLM agents in various applications, including safety-critical applications such as finance [37],
healthcare [1, 25, 33, 27, 20], and autonomous driving [6, 12, 22]. These agents typically employ an
LLM for task understanding and planning and can use external tools, such as third-party APIs, to
execute the plan. The pipeline of LLM agents is often supported by retrieving past knowledge and
instances from a memory module or a retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) knowledge base [18].
Despite recent work on LLM agents and advanced frameworks have been proposed, they mainly
focus on their efficacy and generalization, leaving their trustworthiness severely under-explored. In
particular, the incorporation of potentially unreliable knowledge bases raises significant concerns
∗

Correspondence to Zhaorun Chen <zhaorun@uchicago.edu> and Bo Li <bol@uchicago.edu>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

