Fair Kernel K-Means: from Single Kernel to Multiple
Kernel
Peng Zhou ∗
School of Computer Science and Technology
Anhui University
Hefei, 230601
zhoupeng@ahu.edu.cn

Rongwen Li
School of Computer Science and Technology
Anhui University
Hefei, 230601
e22301284@stu.ahu.edu.cn

Liang Du
School of Computer and Information Technology
Shanxi University
Taiyuan, 237016
duliang@sxu.edu.cn

Abstract
Kernel k-means has been widely studied in machine learning. However, existing
kernel k-means methods often ignore the fairness issue, which may cause discrimination. To address this issue, in this paper, we propose a novel Fair Kernel
K-Means (FKKM) framework. In this framework, we first propose a new fairness
regularization term that can lead to a fair partition of data. The carefully designed
fairness regularization term has a similar form to the kernel k-means which can be
seamlessly integrated into the kernel k-means framework. Then, we extend this
method to the multiple kernel setting, leading to a Fair Multiple Kernel K-Means
(FMKKM) method. We also provide some theoretical analysis of the generalization
error bound, and based on this bound we give a strategy to set the hyper-parameter,
which makes the proposed methods easy to use. At last, we conduct extensive experiments on both the single kernel and multiple kernel settings to compare the proposed methods with state-of-the-art methods to demonstrate their effectiveness. Our
code is available at https://github.com/rongwenli/NeurIPS24-FMKKM.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a fundamental unsupervised machine learning task. In clustering, kernel methods,
such as Kernel K-Means (KKM), can effectively separate nonlinear data into different clusters.
Therefore, KKM has been widely studied in both the single kernel setting and multiple kernel setting
[39, 50, 14, 15].
Notice that, in real-world applications, clustering is often used in some scenarios involving humans
such as social networks [36] and crime analysis [32]. In these scenarios, since the humans are
involved, we should guarantee the fairness of the clustering result, so that the clustering result will
not cause discrimination to some specific groups. In the clustering task, we often consider the group
fairness, where we have some pre-given groups that may suffer from the potential discrimination,
called protected groups. Group fairness aims to partition data into some clusters and guarantee that
no clusters contain a disproportionately small or large number of data in some specific protected
∗
Peng Zhou is the corresponding author. Peng Zhou and Rongwen Li are also with Anhui Provincial
International Joint Research Center for Advanced Technology in Medical Imaging.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

