Block Transformer: Global-to-Local
Language Modeling for Fast Inference

Namgyu Ho1,2†∗ Sangmin Bae1∗ Taehyeon Kim1 Hyunjik Jo2 Yireun Kim2
Tal Schuster3 Adam Fisch3 James Thorne1‡ Se-Young Yun1‡
1
KAIST AI 2 LG AI Research 3 Google DeepMind
{itsnamgyu, bsmn0223, thorne, yunseyoung}@kaist.ac.kr
https://github.com/itsnamgyu/block-transformer

Abstract
We introduce the Block Transformer which adopts hierarchical global-to-local
modeling to autoregressive transformers to mitigate the inference bottlenecks
associated with self-attention. Self-attention requires the key-value (KV) cache
of all previous sequences to be retrieved from memory at every decoding step
to retrieve context information, leading to two primary bottlenecks during batch
inference. First, there is a significant delay in obtaining the first token, as the
information of the entire prompt must first be processed to prefill the KV cache.
Second, computation of subsequent tokens is bottlenecked by the high memory I/O
demand of fetching the entire KV cache, which grows linearly with sequence length,
incurring quadratic memory reads overall. We design the Block Transformer to
strategically mitigate these costs, by incorporating coarsity and locality into an
integrated global-to-local architecture. At the lower layers, we aggregate tokens
into fixed size blocks to apply attention across the entire sequence at coarse-grained
detail, to capture the global context while minimizing KV cache overhead. At upper
layers, we apply attention within each block to decode individual tokens, to model
fine-grained details with a lightweight local KV cache. We pretrain vanilla and
Block Transformers from scratch and demonstrate that Block Transformers reach
10–20x inference throughput compared to vanilla transformers with equivalent
perplexity and zero-shot task performance.

1

Introduction

Generating tokens with transformer-based autoregressive language models (LMs) is costly due to the
self-attention mechanism that attends to all preceding tokens [6, 77]. To minimize computation, it is
common to cache the key-value (KV) states of all tokens during decoding. However, significant initial
latency remains from processing the KV states of all prompt tokens during the first decoding step.
Also, while subsequent decoding steps only need to compute a single token, this is often bottlenecked
by the memory access required to retrieve the KV states of all previous tokens. While numerous
techniques have been proposed to reduce attention costs [23, 42, 2], there has been limited research
on effective architectures that structurally mitigate attention overheads in transformer-based LMs.
Hierarchical architectures [59, 36, 22, 56, 54, 57, 28, 50, 84] have shown potential in efficiently
modeling long sequences such as character-level text or pixel-level images by pooling inputs into
coarser units. While most of these employ upsampling to regress back to a finer level for attention
computation, several approaches [50, 84] further enhance efficiency through local processing within
each pooled unit. Nevertheless, they have not recognized or explored the potential of applying local
processing to alleviate the overheads of autoregressive inference, explained above.
†

Work done during an internship at LG AI Research.

∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

‡

Corresponding authors.

