ECMamba: Consolidating Selective State Space Model
with Retinex Guidance for Efficient Multiple Exposure
Correction
Wei Dong1,∗ , Han Zhou1,∗ , Yulun Zhang2 , Xiaohong Liu2,† , Jun Chen1
1
McMaster University 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{dongw22, zhouh115, chenjun}@mcmaster.ca yulun100@gmail.com xiaohongliu@sjtu.edu.cn
∗
Equal Contribution † Corresponding Author

Abstract
Exposure Correction (EC) aims to recover proper exposure conditions for images captured under over-exposure or under-exposure scenarios. While existing
deep learning models have shown promising results, few have fully embedded
Retinex theory into their architecture, highlighting a gap in current methodologies.
Additionally, the balance between high performance and efficiency remains an
under-explored problem for exposure correction task. Inspired by Mamba which
demonstrates powerful and highly efficient sequence modeling, we introduce a
novel framework based on Mamba for Exposure Correction (ECMamba) with
dual pathways, each dedicated to the restoration of reflectance and illumination
map, respectively. Specifically, we firstly derive the Retinex theory and we train a
Retinex estimator capable of mapping inputs into two intermediary spaces, each
approximating the target reflectance and illumination map, respectively. This setup
facilitates the refined restoration process of the subsequent Exposure Correction
Mamba Module (ECMM). Moreover, we develop a novel 2D Selective Statespace layer guided by Retinex information (Retinex-SS2D) as the core operator of
ECMM. This architecture incorporates an innovative 2D scanning strategy based
on deformable feature aggregation, thereby enhancing both efficiency and effectiveness. Extensive experiment results and comprehensive ablation studies demonstrate
the outstanding performance and the importance of each component of our proposed
ECMamba. Code is available at https://github.com/LowlevelAI/ECMamba.

1

Introduction

Images captured under over-exposure and under-exposure conditions suffer from various degradations,
including reduced contrast, color distortion, and information loss in extremely dark or bright regions.
The objective of exposure correction is to enhance the visibility, contrast, and structural details for
images with various illumination conditions, which is pivotal for improving the performance of a
plethora of downstream applications such as object detection, tracking, and segmentation systems
[10, 39, 31] in scenarios with improper exposure.
Similar to other image restoration tasks [3, 2, 32, 25, 26, 23, 42, 12], many deep learning models [38,
6, 34, 44] have been proposed for under-exposed image enhancement and demonstrate commendable
results. However, our preliminary experiments indicate that these methods generally perform poorly
in multi-exposure correction. This inadequacy stems from the distinct mapping flow between OverExposed (OE) and Normal-Exposed (NE) images compared to that between Under-Exposed (UE)
and NE images. Recently, some promising works [20, 21, 1, 19] have introduced several interesting
deep learning networks to learn consistent exposure representations for multi-exposure correction.
However, despite its widespread adoption and outstanding performance in under-exposure correction,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

