Memory-Efficient LLM Training with Online
Subspace Descent

Kaizhao Liang† , Bo Liu† , Lizhang Chen† , Qiang Liu†
†The University of Texas at Austin
{kaizhaol,bliu,lzchen,lqiang}@utexas.edu

Abstract
Recently, a wide range of memory-efficient LLM training algorithms have gained
substantial popularity. These methods leverage the low-rank structure of gradients
to project optimizer states into a subspace using projection matrix found by singular
value decomposition (SVD). However, convergence of these algorithms is highly
dependent on the update rules of their projection matrix. In this work, we provide
the first convergence guarantee for arbitrary update rules of projection matrix. This
guarantee is generally applicable to optimizers that can be analyzed with Hamiltonian Descent, including most common ones, such as LION, Adam. Inspired by our
theoretical understanding, we propose Online Subspace Descent, a new family of
subspace descent optimizer without SVD. Instead of updating the projection matrix
with eigenvectors, Online Subspace Descent updates the projection matrix with
online PCA. Online Subspace Descent is flexible and introduces only minimum
overhead to training. We show that for the task of pretraining LLaMA models
ranging from 60M to 7B parameters on the C4 dataset, Online Subspace Descent
achieves lower perplexity and better downstream tasks performance than state-ofthe-art low-rank training methods across different settings and narrows the gap
with full-rank baselines.1

1

Introduction

The continual advancement in training large language models (LLMs) presents a compelling challenge
in balancing computational efficiency with model performance. As the scope and complexity of these
models grow, so does the necessity for innovative strategies that optimize memory usage without
compromising the learning capabilities of the model. Recent approaches in low-rank adaptation
strategies, including Stochastic Subspace Descent [13], LoRA [11], ReLoRA [15], Gradient LowRank Projection (GaLore) [25] and Sketchy [9] , have paved the way for memory-efficient training
by utilizing a periodically updated low-rank projection matrix to manage parameter updates. In
particular, GaLore and Sketchy both utilize expensive singular value decomposition to determine the
projection matrix, whereas stochastic subspace descent suggests using random matrices as projection
matrices and provides convergence analysis on convex functions and objectives. However, to the
best of our knowledge, no one has offered any guarantee of convergence for this class of methods on
non-convex functions and objectives.
In this work, we provide the first convergence guarantee for arbitrary update rules of the projection
matrix. This guarantee is significant because it is broadly applicable to a wide range of optimizers that
can be analyzed within the Hamiltonian descent framework [18]. By establishing this convergence
guarantee, we demonstrate that our approach is not limited to specific or narrowly defined update
rules, but can be extended to include many commonly used optimizers in the field. In particular, this
1

Code is available at https://github.com/kyleliang919/Online-Subspace-Descent.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

