Single Image Unlearning: Efficient Machine
Unlearning in Multimodal Large Language Models

Jiaqi Li1,3∗, Qianshan Wei1,3∗, Chuanyi Zhang2 , Guilin Qi3,4†, Miaozeng Du3,4 , Yongrui Chen3,4 ,
Sheng Bi3,4 , Fan Liu2
1
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
2
College of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Hohai University, Nanjing, China
3
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its
Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
jqli@seu.edu.cn, 213223283@seu.edu.cn, 20231104@hhu.edu.cn, gqi@seu.edu.cn
miaozengdu@seu.edu.cn,yrchen@seu.edu.cn,shengbi@seu.edu.cn,fanliu@hhu.edu.cn

Abstract
Machine unlearning (MU) empowers individuals with the ‘right to be forgotten’
by removing their private or sensitive information encoded in machine learning
models. However, it remains uncertain whether MU can be effectively applied
to Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs), particularly in scenarios of
forgetting the leaked visual data of concepts. To overcome the challenge, we
propose an efficient method, Single Image Unlearning (SIU), to unlearn the visual
recognition of a concept by fine-tuning a single associated image for few steps.
SIU consists of two key aspects: (i) Constructing Multifaceted fine-tuning data.
We introduce four targets, based on which we construct fine-tuning data for the
concepts to be forgotten; (ii) Joint training loss. To synchronously forget the visual
recognition of concepts and preserve the utility of MLLMs, we fine-tune MLLMs
through a novel Dual Masked KL-divergence Loss combined with Cross Entropy
loss. Alongside our method, we establish MMUBench, a new benchmark for MU
in MLLMs and introduce a collection of metrics for its evaluation. Experimental
results on MMUBench show that SIU completely surpasses the performance of
existing methods. Furthermore, we surprisingly find that SIU can avoid invasive
membership inference attacks and jailbreak attacks. To the best of our knowledge,
we are the first to explore MU in MLLMs. We will release the code and benchmark
in the near future.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed the great success of Large Language Models (LLMs) [33, 3] and
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [47, 49]. They play dominant roles in NLP [5, 37]
and multimodal applications [50, 17] ascribed to the large-scale pre-training data [2, 35, 29].
Unfortunately, these data may contain overlooked elements of personal privacy and copyright
infringement, posing potential risks of data leakage [32, 36]. Retraining the models from scratch
to exclude the risky data is a waste of resource and practically untenable due to the inaccessible
pre-training data. To address the issue, prior works [12, 46, 45, 27, 31] have shown that approximate
machine unlearning (MU) methods can forget specific pieces of knowledge embedded within LLMs.
∗
†

J. Li and Q. Wei contributed equally to this work and should be considered co-first authors.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

