Plan-on-Graph: Self-Correcting Adaptive Planning of
Large Language Model on Knowledge Graphs

Liyi Chen1,2† , Panrong Tong2 , Zhongming Jin2 , Ying Sun3 , Jieping Ye2∗ , Hui Xiong3,4∗
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Alibaba Cloud Computing,
3
Thrust of Artificial Intelligence, The Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology (Guangzhou), 4 Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
liyichencly@gmail.com, yings@hkust-gz.edu.cn, xionghui@ust.hk,
{panrong.tpr, zhongming.jinzm, yejieping.ye}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown remarkable reasoning capabilities
on complex tasks, but they still suffer from out-of-date knowledge, hallucinations,
and opaque decision-making. In contrast, Knowledge Graphs (KGs) can provide
explicit and editable knowledge for LLMs to alleviate these issues. Existing
paradigm of KG-augmented LLM manually predefines the breadth of exploration
space and requires flawless navigation in KGs. However, this paradigm cannot
adaptively explore reasoning paths in KGs based on the question semantics and
self-correct erroneous reasoning paths, resulting in a bottleneck in efficiency and
effect. To address these limitations, we propose a novel self-correcting adaptive
planning paradigm for KG-augmented LLM named Plan-on-Graph (PoG), which
first decomposes the question into several sub-objectives and then repeats the
process of adaptively exploring reasoning paths, updating memory, and reflecting
on the need to self-correct erroneous reasoning paths until arriving at the answer.
Specifically, three important mechanisms of Guidance, Memory, and Reflection
are designed to work together, to guarantee the adaptive breadth of self-correcting
planning for graph reasoning. Finally, extensive experiments on three real-world
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of PoG.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have manifested outstanding performance in various natural
language processing and data science tasks, such as question answering [42, 25, 62], text generation [18, 13, 8, 15], recommender systems [60, 59, 51, 44], and domain-specific applications [46, 45, 14, 50, 36]. They leverage advanced deep learning techniques and immense amounts of
pre-existing text data to understand and generate human language with impressive fluency and coherence. Despite their success in numerous applications, LLMs still suffer from out-of-date knowledge,
hallucinations, and opaque decision-making, highlighting the ongoing need for further investigation
in this rapidly evolving field.
Intuitively, as large-scale structural knowledge bases, Knowledge Graphs (KGs) [5, 1, 12, 43] provide
explicit and editable depictions of massive real-world knowledge, which have the potential to be a
promising complement to the drawbacks of LLMs. Previous studies manage to integrate KGs into
LLM pre-training [61, 47] or fine-tuning [53, 27] stage. However, these methods mainly compress
structured knowledge in KGs into LLMs’ parameters in a black-box fashion and still cannot fully
†This work was accomplished when Liyi Chen was an intern at Alibaba Cloud Computing.
*Corresponding authors.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

