Dynamics of Supervised and Reinforcement Learning
in the Non-Linear Perceptron

Christian Schmid
Institute of Neuroscience
University of Oregon
cschmid9@uoregon.edu
James M. Murray
Institute of Neuroscience
University of Oregon
jmurray9@uoregon.edu

Abstract
The ability of a brain or a neural network to efficiently learn depends crucially
on both the task structure and the learning rule. Previous works have analyzed
the dynamical equations describing learning in the relatively simplified context of
the perceptron under assumptions of a student-teacher framework or a linearized
output. While these assumptions have facilitated theoretical understanding, they
have precluded a detailed understanding of the roles of the nonlinearity and inputdata distribution in determining the learning dynamics, limiting the applicability
of the theories to real biological or artificial neural networks. Here, we use a
stochastic-process approach to derive flow equations describing learning, applying
this framework to the case of a nonlinear perceptron performing binary classification. We characterize the effects of the learning rule (supervised or reinforcement
learning, SL/RL) and input-data distribution on the perceptron’s learning curve and
the forgetting curve as subsequent tasks are learned. In particular, we find that the
input-data noise differently affects the learning speed under SL vs. RL, as well as
determines how quickly learning of a task is overwritten by subsequent learning.
Additionally, we verify our approach with real data using the MNIST dataset. This
approach points a way toward analyzing learning dynamics for more-complex
circuit architectures.

Introduction
Learning, which is typically implemented in both biological and artificial neural networks with
iterative update rules that are noisy due to the noisiness of input data and possibly of the update
rule itself, is characterized by stochastic dynamics. Understanding these dynamics and how they
are affected by task structure, learning rule, and neural-circuit architecture is an important goal for
designing efficient artificial neural networks (ANNs), as well as for gaining insight into the means by
which the brain’s neural circuits implement learning.
As a step toward developing a full mathematical characterization of the dynamics of learning for
multilayer ANNs solving complex tasks, recent work has made progress by making simplifying
assumptions about the task structure and/or neural-circuit architecture. One fruitful approach has
been to study learning dynamics in what is perhaps the simplest non-trivial ANN architecture: the
individual perceptron. Even with this simplification, however, fully characterizing the mathematics
of learning has been challenging for complex tasks, and further simplifications have been required.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

