GeoLRM: Geometry-Aware Large Reconstruction
Model for High-Quality 3D Gaussian Generation

Chubin Zhang1,3 Hongliang Song3 Yi Wei2
Yu Chen3 Jiwen Lu2 Yansong Tang1,‡
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
3
Alibaba Group
{zcb24, y-wei19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
{hongliang.shl, chenyu.cheny}@alibaba-inc.com,
lujiwen@tsinghua.edu.cn, tang.yansong@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn.
‡

corresponding author

Abstract
In this work, we introduce the Geometry-Aware Large Reconstruction Model (GeoLRM), an approach which can predict high-quality assets with 512k Gaussians and
21 input images in only 11 GB GPU memory. Previous works neglect the inherent
sparsity of 3D structure and do not utilize explicit geometric relationships between
3D and 2D images. This limits these methods to a low-resolution representation
and makes it difficult to scale up to the dense views for better quality. GeoLRM
tackles these issues by incorporating a novel 3D-aware transformer structure that
directly processes 3D points and uses deformable cross-attention mechanisms to
effectively integrate image features into 3D representations. We implement this
solution through a two-stage pipeline: initially, a lightweight proposal network generates a sparse set of 3D anchor points from the posed image inputs; subsequently,
a specialized reconstruction transformer refines the geometry and retrieves textural
details. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that GeoLRM significantly
outperforms existing models, especially for dense view inputs. We also demonstrate the practical applicability of our model with 3D generation tasks, showcasing
its versatility and potential for broader adoption in real-world applications. The
project page: https://linshan-bin.github.io/GeoLRM/.

1

Introduction

In fields ranging from robotics to virtual reality, the quality and diversity of 3D assets can dramatically
influence both user experience and system efficiency. Historically, the creation of these assets has
been a labour-intensive process, demanding the skills of expert artists and developers. While recent
years have witnessed groundbreaking advancements in 2D image generation technologies, such as
diffusion models [43, 44, 42] which iteratively refine images, their adaptation to 3D asset creation
remains challenging. Directly applying diffusion models to 3D generation [20, 36] is less than
satisfactory, primarily due to a dearth of large-scale and high-quality data. DreamFusion [40]
innovatively optimize a 3D representation [2] by distilling the score of image distribution from
pre-trained image diffusion models [43, 44]. However, this approach lacks a deep integration of
3D-specific knowledge, such as geometric consistency and spatial coherence, leading to significant
issues such as the multi-head problem and the inconsistent 3D structure. Additionally, these methods
require extensive per-scene optimizations, which severely limits their practical applications.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

