Localizing Memorization in SSL Vision Encoders

Wenhao Wang1 , Adam Dziedzic1 , Michael Backes1 , Franziska Boenisch1∗
1
CISPA, Helmholtz Center for Information Security

Abstract
Recent work on studying memorization in self-supervised learning (SSL) suggests
that even though SSL encoders are trained on millions of images, they still memorize individual data points. While effort has been put into characterizing the
memorized data and linking encoder memorization to downstream utility, little is
known about where the memorization happens inside SSL encoders. To close this
gap, we propose two metrics for localizing memorization in SSL encoders on a
per-layer (LayerMem) and per-unit basis (UnitMem). Our localization methods are
independent of the downstream task, do not require any label information, and can
be performed in a forward pass. By localizing memorization in various encoder
architectures (convolutional and transformer-based) trained on diverse datasets
with contrastive and non-contrastive SSL frameworks, we find that (1) while SSL
memorization increases with layer depth, highly memorizing units are distributed
across the entire encoder, (2) a significant fraction of units in SSL encoders experiences surprisingly high memorization of individual data points, which is in contrast
to models trained under supervision, (3) atypical (or outlier) data points cause
much higher layer and unit memorization than standard data points, and (4) in
vision transformers, most memorization happens in the fully-connected layers.
Finally, we show that localizing memorization in SSL has the potential to improve
fine-tuning and to inform pruning strategies.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning (SSL) ([16, 17, 13, 4, 30, 27, 29]) enables pre-training large encoders on
unlabeled data to generate feature representations for a multitude of downstream tasks. Recently, it
was found that, even though their training datasets are large, SSL encoders still memorize individual
data points ([36, 47]). While prior work characterizes the memorized data and studies the effect
of memorization to improve downstream generalization ([47]), little is known about where in SSL
encoders memorization happens.
The few works on localizing memorization are usually confined to supervised learning (SL) ([3,
45, 35]), or operate in the language domain ([55, 37, 7, 44, 14]). In particular, most results are
coarse-grained and localize memorization on a per-layer basis [3, 45] and/or require labels [3, 35].
To close the gap, we propose two novel metrics for localizing memorization in SSL encoders in the
vision domain. Our LayerMem localizes memorization of the training data within the SSL encoders
on a layer-level. For a more fine-grained localization, we turn to memorization in individual units
(i.e., neurons in fully-connected layers or channels in convolutional layers). We propose UnitMem
which measures memorization of individual training data points through the units’ sensitivity to these
points. Both our metrics can be computed independently of a downstream task, in a forward pass
without gradient calculation, and without labels, which makes them computationally efficient and
well-suited for the large SSL encoders pretrained on unlabeled data. By performing a systematic study
on localizing memorization with our two metrics on various encoder architectures (convolutional
∗

Correspondence to boenisch@cispa.de

Accepted for publication at: 38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

