CV-VAE: A Compatible Video VAE for Latent
Generative Video Models
Sijie Zhao

Yong Zhang
Xiaoyu Li

Xiaodong Cun
Wenbo Hu

Shaoshu Yang

Muyao Niu

Ying Shan

Tencent AI Lab
https://github.com/AILab-CVC/CV-VAE

Abstract
Spatio-temporal compression of videos, utilizing networks such as Variational
Autoencoders (VAE), plays a crucial role in OpenAI’s SORA and numerous other
video generative models. For instance, many LLM-like video models learn the distribution of discrete tokens derived from 3D VAEs within the VQVAE framework,
while most diffusion-based video models capture the distribution of continuous
latent extracted by 2D VAEs without quantization. The temporal compression
is simply realized by uniform frame sampling which results in unsmooth motion
between consecutive frames. Currently, there lacks of a commonly used continuous
video (3D) VAE for latent diffusion-based video models in the research community.
Moreover, since current diffusion-based approaches are often implemented using
pre-trained text-to-image (T2I) models, directly training a video VAE without
considering the compatibility with existing T2I models will result in a latent space
gap between them, which will take huge computational resources for training to
bridge the gap even with the T2I models as initialization. To address this issue,
we propose a method for training a video VAE of latent video models, namely
CV-VAE, whose latent space is compatible with that of a given image VAE, e.g.,
image VAE of Stable Diffusion (SD). The compatibility is achieved by the proposed novel latent space regularization, which involves formulating a regularization
loss using the image VAE. Benefiting from the latent space compatibility, video
models can be trained seamlessly from pre-trained T2I or video models in a truly
spatio-temporally compressed latent space, rather than simply sampling video
frames at equal intervals. To improve the training efficiency, we also design a
novel architecture for the video VAE. With our CV-VAE, existing video models can
generate four times more frames with minimal finetuning. Extensive experiments
are conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed video VAE.

1

Introduction

Video generation has gained significant public attention, especially after the announcement of OpenAI
SORA [2]. Current popular video models can be divided into two categories based on the modeling
space, i.e., pixel and latent space. Imagen Video [17], Make-a-video [29], and Show-1 [42] are
representative video diffusion models that directly learn the distribution of pixels. On the other hand,
Phenaki [33], MAGVIT [41], VideoCrafter [6], AnimateDiff [15], VideoPeot [20], and SORA, etc,
are representative latent generative video models that are trained in the latent space formed using
variational autoencoders (VAEs). The latter category is more prevalent due to its training efficiency.
Corresponding author
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

