BELM: Bidirectional Explicit Linear Multi-step
Sampler for Exact Inversion in Diffusion Models

Fangyikang Wang1∗ Hubery Yin2∗ Yuejiang Dong3 Huminhao Zhu1
Chao Zhang1† Hanbin Zhao1 Hui Qian1 Chen Li2
1
Zhejiang University 2 WeChat, Tencent Inc. 3 Tsinghua University
{wangfangyikang,zhuhuminhao,zczju,zhaohanbin,qianhui}@zju.edu.cn
{hubery,chaselli}@tencent.com
dongyj21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The inversion of diffusion model sampling, which aims to find the corresponding
initial noise of a sample, plays a critical role in various tasks. Recently, several
heuristic exact inversion samplers have been proposed to address the inexact
inversion issue in a training-free manner. However, the theoretical properties
of these heuristic samplers remain unknown and they often exhibit mediocre
sampling quality. In this paper, we introduce a generic formulation, Bidirectional
Explicit Linear Multi-step (BELM) samplers, of the exact inversion samplers, which
includes all previously proposed heuristic exact inversion samplers as special cases.
The BELM formulation is derived from the variable-stepsize-variable-formula
linear multi-step method via integrating a bidirectional explicit constraint. We
highlight this bidirectional explicit constraint is the key of mathematically exact
inversion. We systematically investigate the Local Truncation Error (LTE) within
the BELM framework and show that the existing heuristic designs of exact inversion
samplers yield sub-optimal LTE. Consequently, we propose the Optimal BELM (OBELM) sampler through the LTE minimization approach. We conduct additional
analysis to substantiate the theoretical stability and global convergence property
of the proposed optimal sampler. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate our
O-BELM sampler establishes the exact inversion property while achieving highquality sampling. Additional experiments in image editing and image interpolation
highlight the extensive potential of applying O-BELM in varying applications.

1

Introduction

The emerging diffusion models (DMs) [52, 20, 55, 56], generating samples of data distribution from
initial noise by learning a reverse diffusion process, have been proven to be an effective technique
for modeling data distribution, especially in generating high-quality images [44, 10, 50, 46, 48, 21].
The diffusion process along with its sampling processes in DMs can be delineated as the forward and
corresponding backward stochastic differential equations (SDE) [56, 1]. Furthermore, the sampling
process can also be represented as a deterministic diffusion ordinary differential equation (ODE)
[56, 53], which is also called Probability Flow ODE (PF-ODE) in some papers. Notably, the backward
SDE and diffusion ODE share the same marginal distribution[56].
The inversion of the diffusion sampling, which aims to elucidate the correspondences between
samples and initial noise, plays a critical role in various tasks of DMs. The diffusion inversion has
∗
†

Equal contribution. This work was done when Fangyikang Wang was an intern at WeChat.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

