TinyLUT: Tiny Look-Up Table for Efficient Image
Restoration at the Edge

Huanan Li1,2 , Juntao Guan1,2,3 , Rui Lai1,2∗, Sijun Ma1,2 , Lin Gu4,5∗ , Zhangming Zhu1,2
1
Key Laboratory of Analog Integrated Circuits and Systems (Ministry of Education)
2
School of Integrated Circuits, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
3
Hangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian University, Hangzhou, China
4
RIKEN AIP, Tokyo103-0027, Japan
5
The University of Tokyo, Japan
{huananli,sijunma}@stu.xidian.edu.cn
{guanjuntao,zhangmingzhu}@xidian.edu.cn
rlai@mail.xidian.edu.cn, lin.gu@riken.jp

Abstract
Look-up tables(LUTs)-based methods have recently shown enormous potential
in image restoration tasks, which are capable of significantly accelerating the
inference. However, the size of LUT exhibits exponential growth with the convolution kernel size, creating a storage bottleneck for its broader application on
edge devices. Here, we address the storage explosion challenge to promote the
capacity of mapping the complex CNN models by LUT. We introduce an innovative
separable mapping strategy to achieve over 7× storage reduction, transforming
the storage from exponential dependence on kernel size to a linear relationship.
Moreover, we design a dynamic discretization mechanism to decompose the activation and compress the quantization scale that further shrinks the LUT storage by
4.48×. As a result, the storage requirement of our proposed TinyLUT is around
4.1% of MuLUT-SDY-X2 and amenable to on-chip cache, yielding competitive
accuracy with over 5× lower inference latency on Raspberry 4B than FSRCNN.
Our proposed TinyLUT enables superior inference speed on edge devices with
new state-of-the-art accuracy on both of image super-resolution and denoising,
showcasing the potential of applying this method to various image restoration tasks
at the edge. The codes are available at: https://github.com/Jonas-KD/TinyLUT.

1

Introduction

With image sensors widely used in IoT applications, the demand for image restoration on edge
devices has been stimulated. For decades, classic methods including interpolation [1, 2], sparse
coding [3, 4, 5] and domain transformation [6] have been proposed. In recent years, deep learning
based algorithms [7, 8, 9, 10, 11] have made encouraging progress in restoration quality, while
suffering from high computational load and long inference latency. These issues limit their extensive
applications in resource-constrained IoT terminals. Thus it can be seen, the growing demand for
edge devices (e.g. smartphones and Raspberry Pi) calls for an extremely lightweight solution for
image restoration with high quality. Given this, researchers develop LUT-based methods [12, 13, 14]
to supplant the intensive convolutional computations with direct memory access operation for
accelerating the inference, and exhibiting enormous potential.
In recent research, SRLUT [15] initially transfers the output values of a small trained deep network
with receptive field (RF) size 4 to uniformly sampled LUT. To further improve the super resolution
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

