arXiv:2412.04469v1 [cs.CV] 5 Dec 2024

QUEEN: QUantized Efficient ENcoding of Dynamic
Gaussians for Streaming Free-viewpoint Videos

Sharath Girish∗
University of Maryland
sgirish@cs.umd.edu

Tianye Li†
NVIDIA
tianyel@nvidia.com

Amrita Mazumdar†
NVIDIA
amritam@nvidia.com

Abhinav Shrivastava
University of Maryland
abhinav@cs.umd.edu

David Luebke
NVIDIA
dluebke@nvidia.com

Shalini De Mello
NVIDIA
shalinig@nvidia.com

Abstract
Online free-viewpoint video (FVV) streaming is a challenging problem, which is
relatively under-explored. It requires incremental on-the-fly updates to a volumetric
representation, fast training and rendering to satisfy real-time constraints and a
small memory footprint for efficient transmission. If achieved, it can enhance user
experience by enabling novel applications, e.g., 3D video conferencing and live
volumetric video broadcast, among others. In this work, we propose a novel framework for QUantized and Efficient ENcoding (QUEEN) for streaming FVV using
3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS). QUEEN directly learns Gaussian attribute residuals between consecutive frames at each time-step without imposing any structural
constraints on them, allowing for high quality reconstruction and generalizability.
To efficiently store the residuals, we further propose a quantization-sparsity framework, which contains a learned latent-decoder for effectively quantizing attribute
residuals other than Gaussian positions and a learned gating module to sparsify
position residuals. We propose to use the Gaussian viewspace gradient difference
vector as a signal to separate the static and dynamic content of the scene. It acts
as a guide for effective sparsity learning and speeds up training. On diverse FVV
benchmarks, QUEEN outperforms the state-of-the-art online FVV methods on all
metrics. Notably, for several highly dynamic scenes, it reduces the model size to
just 0.7 MB per frame while training in under 5 sec and rendering at ∼350 FPS.

1

Introduction

The dynamic world that we perceive around us is not 2D, but rather 3D. Unlike 2D videos, which
are ubiquitous, the question of how to effectively capture, encode and disseminate free-viewpoint
videos (FVV) of dynamic 3D scenes, which can be viewed at any instance of time and from any
viewpoint, has intrigued computer vision and graphics researchers for much time. Free-viewpoint
video transmission, if achieved, has the potential to transform and enrich user experience in profound
ways by offering novel immersive experiences, e.g., FVV video playback and live streaming, 3D
video conferencing and telepresence, gaming, virtual spatial tutoring and teleoperation, among others.
The underlying problem of reconstructing FVV involves learning a 6D plenoptic function of a dynamic
scene P (x, d, t) from sparse multiple views acquired over a window of time, with x ∈ R3 being a
position in 3D space, d = (θ, ϕ) a viewing direction and t an instance of time. Neural volumetric
representations, which learn a 5D plenoptic function of a scene P (x, d) at a fixed time instance, e.g.,
∗
SG’s work was done during an internship at NVIDIA. † TL and AM contributed equally to this project.
Project website: https://research.nvidia.com/labs/amri/projects/queen.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

