PERIA: Perceive, Reason, Imagine, Act via Holistic
Language and Vision Planning for Manipulation

Fei Ni1

Jianye Hao1,2∗ Shiguang Wu2 Longxin Kou1 Yifu Yuan1 Zibin Dong1
Jinyi Liu1 Mingzhi Li1 Yuzheng Zhuang2 Yan Zheng1∗
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
Long-horizon manipulation tasks with general instructions often implicitly encapsulate multiple sub-tasks, posing significant challenges in instruction following.
While language planning is a common approach to decompose general instructions
into stepwise sub-instructions, text-only guidance may lack expressiveness and
lead to potential ambiguity. Considering that humans often imagine and visualize
sub-instructions reasoning out before acting, the imagined subgoal images can provide more intuitive guidance and enhance the reliability of decomposition. Inspired
by this, we propose PERIA(PErceive, Reason, Imagine, Act), a novel framework
that integrates holistic language planning and vision planning for long-horizon
manipulation tasks with complex instructions, leveraging both logical and intuitive
aspects of task decomposition. Specifically, we first perform a lightweight multimodal alignment on the encoding side to empower the MLLM to perceive visual
details and language instructions. The MLLM is then jointly instruction-tuned with
a pretrained image-editing model to unlock capabilities of simultaneous reasoning
of language instructions and generation of imagined subgoals. Furthermore, we
introduce a consistency alignment loss to encourage coherent subgoal images and
align with their corresponding instructions, mitigating potential hallucinations and
semantic conflicts between the two planning manners. Comprehensive evaluations across three task domains demonstrate that PERIA, benefiting from holistic
language and vision planning, significantly outperforms competitive baselines in
both instruction following accuracy and task success rate on complex manipulation
tasks. The details and visualizations are available at the homepage.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in vision-language models (VLMs), such as BLIP [1] and LIV [2], enable openvocabulary visual recognition and multi-modal alignment, showing promise in robotic manipulation
tasks specified human-provided language instructions [3, 4, 5, 6]. For semantically clear and concise
instructions, such as "pick the red block on the green one", robotic agents can easily understand
and complete the task in a single step using action primitives. However, when instructions become
more general and complex, such as "stack the blocks as a pyramid and each layer in one color", the
manipulation task can span long horizons and implicitly encapsulate multiple sub-tasks separated by
action primitives, posing a major obstacle in instruction following. Current approaches often resort to
decomposing complex instructions into manageable subtasks, either through language planning or
vision planning based on the decomposed modality. Language planning, the more common approach,
decomposes into progressive stepwise sub-instructions, which can be either predefined skill libraries
∗

Corresponding authors: jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn, yanzheng@tju.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

