Mitigating Partial Observability in Sequential
Decision Processes via the Lambda Discrepancy

Cameron Allen∗
UC Berkeley†
Sam Lobel
Brown University
Ronald Parr
Duke University

Aaron Kirtland∗
Brown University
Daniel Scott
Georgia Tech

Nicholas Petrocelli
Brown University

Michael L. Littman
Brown University

Ruo Yu Tao∗
Brown University
Omer Gottesman
Amazon‡
George Konidaris
Brown University

Abstract
Reinforcement learning algorithms typically rely on the assumption that the environment dynamics and value function can be expressed in terms of a Markovian
state representation. However, when state information is only partially observable,
how can an agent learn such a state representation, and how can it detect when it
has found one? We introduce a metric that can accomplish both objectives, without
requiring access to—or knowledge of—an underlying, unobservable state space.
Our metric, the λ-discrepancy, is the difference between two distinct temporal difference (TD) value estimates, each computed using TD(λ) with a different value of
λ. Since TD(λ=0) makes an implicit Markov assumption and TD(λ=1) does not,
a discrepancy between these estimates is a potential indicator of a non-Markovian
state representation. Indeed, we prove that the λ-discrepancy is exactly zero for
all Markov decision processes and almost always non-zero for a broad class of
partially observable environments. We also demonstrate empirically that, once detected, minimizing the λ-discrepancy can help with learning a memory function
to mitigate the corresponding partial observability. We then train a reinforcement
learning agent that simultaneously constructs two recurrent value networks with
different λ parameters and minimizes the difference between them as an auxiliary
loss. The approach scales to challenging partially observable domains, where the
resulting agent frequently performs significantly better (and never performs worse)
than a baseline recurrent agent with only a single value network.

1

Introduction

The dominant modeling frameworks for reinforcement learning [Sutton and Barto, 2018] define
environments in terms of an underlying Markovian state representation. This modeling choice, called
the Markov assumption, is nearly ubiquitous in reinforcement learning, because it allows environment
dynamics, rewards, value functions, and policies all to be expressed as functions that are independent
of the past given the most recent state. In principle, an environment can be modeled as either a
Markov decision process (MDP) [Puterman, 1994], or its partially observable counterpart, a POMDP
∗

These authors contributed equally and are ordered alphabetically. Please send any correspondence to
camallen@berkeley.edu, aaron kirtland@brown.edu, and ruoyutao@brown.edu.
†
Some of this work was completed while at Brown University.
‡
Work completed while outside of Amazon.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

