DiffTORI: Differentiable Trajectory Optimization for
Deep Reinforcement and Imitation Learning

Weikang Wan1∗ , Ziyu Wang2∗ , Yufei Wang3∗,
Zackory Erickson3 , David Held3
1

Computer Science and Engineering Department, University of California San Diego
2
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
3
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
w2wan@ucsd.edu, ziyu-wan21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
yufeiw2@andrew.cmu.edu, zackory@cmu.edu, dheld@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
This paper introduces DiffTORI, which utilizes Differentiable Trajectory
Optimization as the policy representation to generate actions for deep
Reinforcement and Imitation learning. Trajectory optimization is a powerful
and widely used algorithm in control, parameterized by a cost and a dynamics
function. The key to our approach is to leverage the recent progress in differentiable trajectory optimization, which enables computing the gradients of the loss
with respect to the parameters of trajectory optimization. As a result, the cost and
dynamics functions of trajectory optimization can be learned end-to-end. DiffTORI
addresses the “objective mismatch” issue of prior model-based RL algorithms, as
the dynamics model in DiffTORI is learned to directly maximize task performance
by differentiating the policy gradient loss through the trajectory optimization process. We further benchmark DiffTORI for imitation learning on standard robotic
manipulation task suites with high-dimensional sensory observations and compare
our method to feed-forward policy classes as well as Energy-Based Models (EBM)
and Diffusion. Across 15 model-based RL tasks and 35 imitation learning tasks
with high-dimensional image and point cloud inputs, DiffTORI outperforms prior
state-of-the-art methods in both domains.

1

Introduction

Recent works have shown that the representation of a policy can have a substantial impact on
the learning performance [1; 2; 3; 4]. Prior works have explored the use of feed-forward neural
networks [4], energy-based models [2], or diffusion [1; 5] as the policy representation. In this paper,
we propose to use differentiable trajectory optimization [3; 6; 7; 8; 9] as the policy representation
to generate actions for deep reinforcement learning (RL) and imitation learning (IL) with highdimensional sensory observations (images/point clouds).
Trajectory optimization is an effective and widely used algorithm in control, defined with a cost
function and a dynamics function. It can be viewed as a policy [3; 6], where the parameters of the
policy specify the cost function and the dynamics function. Given the learned cost and dynamics
functions as well as the input state (e.g., images, point clouds, robot joint states), the policy then
computes the actions by solving the trajectory optimization problem. Trajectory optimization can
also be made to be differentiable, which allows back-propagating through the trajectory optimization
process [3; 8; 10; 6; 9; 11; 12; 13]. In prior work, differentiable trajectory optimization has been
∗

Equal contribution. This work was performed when Weikang Wan and Ziyu Wang were interning at CMU.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

