Maximum Entropy Reinforcement Learning via
Energy-Based Normalizing Flow

Chen-Hao Chao∗1,2

Chien Feng∗1

Wei-Fang Sun2

Cheng-Kuang Lee2

Simon See2

Chun-Yi Lee†1

1

2

Elsa Lab, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu City, Taiwan
NVIDIA AI Technology Center, NVIDIA Corporation, Santa Clara, CA, USA

Abstract
Existing Maximum-Entropy (MaxEnt) Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods
for continuous action spaces are typically formulated based on actor-critic frameworks and optimized through alternating steps of policy evaluation and policy
improvement. In the policy evaluation steps, the critic is updated to capture the
soft Q-function. In the policy improvement steps, the actor is adjusted in accordance with the updated soft Q-function. In this paper, we introduce a new MaxEnt
RL framework modeled using Energy-Based Normalizing Flows (EBFlow). This
framework integrates the policy evaluation steps and the policy improvement steps,
resulting in a single objective training process. Our method enables the calculation of the soft value function used in the policy evaluation target without Monte
Carlo approximation. Moreover, this design supports the modeling of multi-modal
action distributions while facilitating efficient action sampling. To evaluate the
performance of our method, we conducted experiments on the MuJoCo benchmark
suite and a number of high-dimensional robotic tasks simulated by Omniverse
Isaac Gym. The evaluation results demonstrate that our method achieves superior
performance compared to widely-adopted representative baselines.

1

Introduction

Maximum-Entropy (MaxEnt) Reinforcement Learning (RL) [1–17] has emerged as a prominent
method for modeling stochastic policies. Different from standard RL, MaxEnt RL integrates the entropy of policies as rewards, which leads to a balanced exploration-exploitation trade-off during training. This approach has demonstrated improved robustness both theoretically and empirically [17–19].
Building on this foundation, many studies leveraging MaxEnt RL have shown superior performance
on continuous-control benchmark environments [8, 9] and real-world applications [20–22].
An active research domain in MaxEnt RL concentrates on the learning of the soft Q-function [8–15].
These methods follow the paradigm introduced in soft Q-learning (SQL) [8]. They parameterize
the soft Q-function as an energy-based model [23] and optimize it based on the soft Bellman
error [8] calculated from rewards and the soft value function. However, this approach presents two
challenges. First, sampling from an energy-based model requires a costly Monte Carlo Markov Chain
(MCMC) [24, 25] or variational inference [26] process, which can result in inefficient interactions
with environments. Second, the calculation of the soft value function can involve computationally
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author. Email: cylee@cs.nthu.edu.tw

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

