Neural Localizer Fields for Continuous
3D Human Pose and Shape Estimation
István Sárándi,1,2 Gerard Pons-Moll1,2,3
University of Tübingen, Germany, 2 Tübingen AI Center, Germany,
3
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
https://istvansarandi.com/nlf
1

Abstract
With the explosive growth of available training data, single-image 3D human
modeling is ahead of a transition to a data-centric paradigm. A key to successfully
exploiting data scale is to design flexible models that can be supervised from
various heterogeneous data sources produced by different researchers or vendors.
To this end, we propose a simple yet powerful paradigm for seamlessly unifying
different human pose and shape-related tasks and datasets. Our formulation is
centered on the ability – both at training and test time – to query any arbitrary
point of the human volume, and obtain its estimated location in 3D. We achieve
this by learning a continuous neural field of body point localizer functions, each
of which is a differently parameterized 3D heatmap-based convolutional point
localizer (detector). For generating parametric output, we propose an efficient
post-processing step for fitting SMPL-family body models to nonparametric joint
and vertex predictions. With this approach, we can naturally exploit differently
annotated data sources including mesh, 2D/3D skeleton and dense pose, without
having to convert between them, and thereby train large-scale 3D human mesh and
skeleton estimation models that considerably outperform the state-of-the-art on
several public benchmarks including 3DPW, EMDB, EHF, SSP-3D and AGORA.

1

Introduction

Along with the wider field of computer vision, the human pose and shape estimation community
has recently started a transition towards leveraging large-scale training data to produce robust
models [93, 30, 12, 83, 60]. When assembling large training sets from different sources, it is inevitable
that they will use different types of annotations, including different parametric mesh models, 3D
skeletal joints and markers from different motion capture vendors and manual 2D keypoint annotations.
Re-annotation to a single format for training is a costly and error-prone process, and therefore difficult
to scale. Similarly, current models are trained to output a specific format, such as pre-defined joints,
keypoints, or parametric body meshes, which is limiting for downstream applications which require
other formats. We therefore argue that a good model design should be able to ingest and output highly
heterogeneous forms of annotations in a unified manner.
Despite the different kinds of labels, these tasks all share a common underlying factor: the
correspondence problem of mapping from a canonical human body space to the observation space of
the camera. Hence, if a model could localize arbitrary human points (both surface and body-internal
ones, e.g., joints), its predictions could be supervised from any human-centric data source with point
labels and could be customized to new landmark sets even after deployment. In this work, we propose
a method that is able to achieve exactly this.
To localize individual points, we leverage the machinery of volumetric heatmap estimation with
soft-argmax decoding, which has worked well in skeletal keypoint estimation methods [86, 104, 92].
However, generalizing this to arbitrary points is nontrivial. In prior work, each body joint heatmap is
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

