SHED: Shapley-Based Automated Dataset Refinement
for Instruction Fine-Tuning

Yexiao He1

Ziyao Wang1 Zheyu Shen1 Guoheng Sun1 Yucong Dai2
Yongkai Wu2 Hongyi Wang3 Ang Li1
1
University of Maryland 2 Clemson University 3 Rutgers University
{yexiaohe,ziyaow,zyshen,ghsun,angliece}@umd.edu
{yucongd,yongkaw}@clemson.edu
hongyi.wang.001@rutgers.edu

Abstract
The pre-trained Large Language Models (LLMs) can be adapted for many downstream tasks and tailored to align with human preferences through fine-tuning.
Recent studies have discovered that LLMs can achieve desirable performance with
only a small amount of high-quality data, suggesting that a large portion of the
data in these extensive datasets is redundant or even harmful. Identifying highquality data from vast datasets to curate small yet effective datasets has emerged
as a critical challenge. In this paper, we introduce SHED, an automated dataset
refinement framework based on Shapley value for instruction fine-tuning. SHED
eliminates the need for human intervention or the use of commercial LLMs. Moreover, the datasets curated through SHED exhibit transferability, indicating they
can be reused across different LLMs with consistently high performance. We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the datasets curated by SHED. The results
demonstrate SHED’s superiority over state-of-the-art methods across various tasks
and LLMs; notably, datasets comprising only 10% of the original data selected by
SHED achieve performance comparable to or surpassing that of the full datasets.

1

Introduction

The development of LLMs marks a major leap in machine learning, transforming how we approach
natural language processing (NLP) and artificial intelligence (AI) research [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. LLMs such
as GPT-3 [2], Mistral [6], and LLaMA/LLaMA2 [3, 4] highlight the benefits of pre-training on large
and diverse mixtures of data corpora, empowering these LLMs with a wealth of knowledge[7, 8].
Moreover, one of the pivotal strengths of LLMs lies in their adaptability to specific tasks through
fine-tuning. Fine-tuning, a process that involves adapting LLMs to one or multiple task-specific
datasets, enables the pre-trained LLM to acquire task-specific information. Furthermore, it facilitates
the alignment of LLMs to more accurately follow human instructions through fine-tuning on a dataset
comprised of instructions paired with appropriate responses[9], which is known as instruction tuning.
However, fine-tuning LLMs also raises challenges. A primary concern is that noisy data or harmful instances in the fine-tuning dataset can significantly degrade the performance of pre-trained
LLMs [10]. While many works have developed large and diverse datasets for fine-tuning purposes,
recent research suggests that meticulously curated datasets of high quality, even if smaller in size, can
be more effective in harnessing the full potential of LLMs [11, 12, 13]. Indiscriminately increasing
the volume of data can lead to ineffective performance improvements and might even deteriorate LLM
performance due to the introduction of noisy and harmful instances. Additionally, for instruction
tuning, the LLM has already learned the necessary knowledge in the pre-training stage. The dataset
used in the fine-tuning stage merely aims to better align the LLM to follow human instructions,
indicating that this process does not necessitate extensive data [14]. Furthermore, fine-tuning LLMs
on extensive datasets incurs significant computational costs. The necessity for considerable GPU
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

