Probing the Decision Boundaries of In-context
Learning in Large Language Models

Siyan Zhao, Tung Nguyen, Aditya Grover
Department of Computer Science
University of California Los Angeles
{siyanz,tungnd,adityag}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
In-context learning is a key paradigm in large language models (LLMs) that enables
them to generalize to new tasks and domains by simply prompting these models
with a few exemplars without explicit parameter updates. Many attempts have
been made to understand in-context learning in LLMs as a function of model scale,
pretraining data, and other factors. In this work, we propose a new mechanism
to probe and understand in-context learning from the lens of decision boundaries
for in-context binary classification. Decision boundaries are straightforward to
visualize and provide important information about the qualitative behavior of the
inductive biases of standard classifiers. To our surprise, we find that the decision
boundaries learned by current LLMs in simple binary classification tasks are
often irregular and non-smooth, regardless of linear separability in the underlying
task. This paper investigates the factors influencing these decision boundaries and
explores methods to enhance their generalizability. We assess various approaches,
including training-free and fine-tuning methods for LLMs, the impact of model
architecture, and the effectiveness of active prompting techniques for smoothing
decision boundaries in a data-efficient manner. Our findings provide a deeper
understanding of in-context learning dynamics and offer practical improvements
for enhancing robustness and generalizability of in-context learning.1

1

Introduction

Recent language models, such as GPT-3+ [Brown et al., 2020, Achiam et al., 2023], have demonstrated
the ability to scale performance with increased training dataset size and model capacity through
the simple objective of next token prediction [Kaplan et al., 2020]. A key emergent behavior of
these transformer-based models is in-context learning, which allows the model to learn tasks by
conditioning on a sequence of demonstrations without explicit training [Wei et al., 2022]. This unique
capability allows LLMs to adapt seamlessly to new tasks, often achieving superior performance in
few-shot settings [Brown et al., 2020]. Despite significant successes, the underlying mechanisms of
how in-context learning works remain partially understood.
Recent attempts to understand in-context learning have focused on various aspects. From a theoretical
standpoint, studies by Von Oswald et al. [2023] and Dai et al. [2023] have linked the mechanisms
of in-context learning to gradient descent, suggesting that transformers can emulate optimization
processes. On the practical side, research has investigated the impact of different factors on in-context
learning. Works by Min et al. [2022b] and Shi et al. [2023] reveal that accurate demonstrations are not
essential for effective in-context learning. On the other hand, factors such as the prompt structure and
model size [Wei et al., 2023, Webson and Pavlick, 2022], or the order of in-context examples [Chen
et al., 2024] greatly affect outcomes. More recently, with the development of LLMs supporting longer
1

Our code is released at https://github.com/siyan-zhao/ICL_decision_boundary.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

