Vivid-ZOO: Multi-View Video Generation with
Diffusion Model
Bing Li∗ †

Cheng Zheng∗ Wenxuan Zhu∗ Jinjie Mai
Peter Wonka Bernard Ghanem

Biao Zhang

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
https://hi-zhengcheng.github.io/vividzoo/

Abstract
While diffusion models have shown impressive performance in 2D image/video
generation, diffusion-based Text-to-Multi-view-Video (T2MVid) generation remains underexplored. The new challenges posed by T2MVid generation lie in the
lack of massive captioned multi-view videos and the complexity of modeling such
multi-dimensional distribution. To this end, we propose a novel diffusion-based
pipeline that generates high-quality multi-view videos centered around a dynamic
3D object from text. Specifically, we factor the T2MVid problem into viewpointspace and time components. Such factorization allows us to combine and reuse
layers of advanced pre-trained multi-view image and 2D video diffusion models
to ensure multi-view consistency as well as temporal coherence for the generated
multi-view videos, largely reducing the training cost. We further introduce alignment modules to align the latent spaces of layers from the pre-trained multi-view
and the 2D video diffusion models, addressing the reused layers’ incompatibility
that arises from the domain gap between 2D and multi-view data. In support
of this and future research, we further contribute a captioned multi-view video
dataset. Experimental results demonstrate that our method generates high-quality
multi-view videos, exhibiting vivid motions, temporal coherence, and multi-view
consistency, given a variety of text prompts.

1

Introduction

Multi-view videos capture a scene/object from multiple cameras with different poses simultaneously,
which are critical for numerous downstream applications [5, 55, 62, 39, 40] such as AR/VR, 3D/4D
modeling, media production, and interactive entertainment. More importantly, the availability of such
data holds substantial promise for facilitating progress in research areas such as 4D reconstruction [44,
48], 4D generation [3, 49], and long video generation [9, 101] with 3D consistency. However,
collecting multi-view videos often requires sophisticated setups [1] to synchronize and calibrate
multiple cameras, resulting in a significant absence of datasets and generative techniques for multiview videos.
In the meantime, diffusion models have shown great success in 2D image/video generation. For
example, 2D video diffusion models [6, 23, 28, 81] generate high-quality 2D videos by extending
image diffusion models [74, 83]. Differently, multi-view image diffusion models [80, 34, 53, 93]
are proposed to generate multi-view images of 3D objects, which have demonstrated significant
impact in 3D object generation [45], 3D reconstruction [66], and related fields. However, to the
best of our knowledge, no other works have explored Text-to-Multi-view-Video (T2MVid) diffusion
∗

Equal contributions. † Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

