Few-shot Algorithms for Consistent Neural Decoding
(FALCON) Benchmark

Brianna M. Karpowicz1,2∗ Joel Ye3∗ Chaofei Fan4 Pablo Tostado-Marcos5
Fabio Rizzoglio6 Clay Washington1,2 Thiago Scodeler7 Diogo de Lucena7
Samuel R. Nason-Tomaszewski1,2 Matthew J. Mender8 Xuan Ma6
Ezequiel Matias Arneodo5,9 Leigh R. Hochberg10−12 Cynthia A. Chestek8
Jaimie M. Henderson4 Timothy Q. Gentner5 Vikash Gilja5 Lee E. Miller6
Adam G. Rouse13 Robert A. Gaunt14 Jennifer L. Collinger3,14 Chethan Pandarinath1,2†
1
Emory University 2 Georgia Tech 3 Carnegie Mellon University 4 Stanford University
5
University of California San Diego 6 Northwestern University 7 Agency Enterprise Studios
8
University of Michigan 9 Instituto de Física La Plata 10 Harvard Medical School
11
Department of Veterans Affairs 12 Brown University
13
University of Kansas Medical Center 14 University of Pittsburgh

Abstract
Intracortical brain-computer interfaces (iBCIs) can restore movement and communication abilities to individuals with paralysis by decoding their intended behavior
from neural activity recorded with an implanted device. While this activity yields
high-performance decoding over short timescales, neural data are often nonstationary, which can lead to decoder failure if not accounted for. To maintain performance,
users must frequently recalibrate decoders, which requires the arduous collection of
new neural and behavioral data. Aiming to reduce this burden, several approaches
have been developed that either limit recalibration data requirements (few-shot
approaches) or eliminate explicit recalibration entirely (zero-shot approaches).
However, progress is limited by a lack of standardized datasets and comparison
metrics, causing methods to be compared in an ad hoc manner. Here we introduce the FALCON benchmark suite (Few-shot Algorithms for COnsistent Neural
decoding) to standardize evaluation of iBCI robustness. FALCON curates five
datasets of neural and behavioral data that span movement and communication
tasks to focus on behaviors of interest to modern-day iBCIs. Each dataset includes
calibration data, optional few-shot recalibration data, and private evaluation data.
We implement a flexible evaluation platform which only requires user-submitted
code to return behavioral predictions on unseen data. We also seed the benchmark
by applying baseline methods spanning several classes of possible approaches.
FALCON aims to provide rigorous selection criteria for robust iBCI decoders,
easing their translation to real-world devices. https://snel-repo.github.io/falcon/

1

Introduction

Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) provide a path to restore movement and communication in individuals with paralysis by decoding neuronal population activity to uncover the user’s intention. BCIs
have recently achieved many promising demonstrations, including high degree of freedom robot arm
control [1, 2], computer use and communication [3–8], and speech decoding [9–13]. A specific class
of BCIs known as intracortical BCIs (iBCIs) have enabled many of these impressive technological
feats. However, many of these demonstrations have required decoders to be recalibrated daily or
∗

Equal contributions.

Correspondence to † chethan@gatech.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

