Private Edge Density Estimation for Random
Graphs: Optimal, Efficient and Robust

Hongjie Chen
ETH Zürich

Jingqiu Ding
ETH Zürich

Yiding Hua
ETH Zürich

David Steurer
ETH Zürich

Abstract
We give the first polynomial-time, differentially node-private, and robust
algorithm for estimating the edge density of Erdős-Rényi random graphs
and their generalization, inhomogeneous random graphs. We further prove
information-theoretical lower bounds, showing that the error rate of our
algorithm is optimal up to logarithmic factors. Previous algorithms incur
either exponential running time or suboptimal error rates.
Two key ingredients of our algorithm are (1) a new sum-of-squares algorithm
for robust edge density estimation, and (2) the reduction from privacy
to robustness based on sum-of-squares exponential mechanisms due to
Hopkins et al. (STOC 2023).

1

Introduction

Privacy has nowadays become a major concern in large-scale data processing. Releasing
seemingly harmless statistics of a dataset could unexpectedly leak sensitive information
of individuals (see e.g. [NS09, DSSU17] for privacy attacks). Differential privacy (DP)
[DMNS06] has emerged as a by-now standard technique for protecting the privacy of
individuals with rigorous guarantees. An algorithm is said to be differentially private if the
distribution of its output remains largely unchanged under the change of a single data point
in the dataset.
For datasets represented by graphs (e.g. social networks), two notions of differential privacy
have been investigated in the literature: edge differential privacy [NRS07, KRSY11], where
each edge is regarded as a data point; and node differential privacy [BBDS13, KNRS13], where
each node along with its incident edges is regarded as a data point. Node differential privacy
is an arguably more desirable notion than edge differential privacy. On the other hand, node
differential privacy is also in general more difficult to achieve without compromising on
utility, as many graph statistics usually have high sensitivity in the worst case. It turns out
that many graph statistics can have significantly smaller sensitivity on typical graphs under
natural distributional assumptions. Several recent works could thus manage to achieve
optimal or nearly-optimal utility guarantees in a number of random graph parameter
estimation problems [BCS15, BCSZ18, SU19, CDd+ 24].
In this paper, we continue this line of work and study perhaps the most elementary statistical
task in graph data analysis: Given an 𝑛-node Erdős-Rényi random graph of which each
edge is present with probability 𝑝 ◦ independently, output an estimate 𝑝ˆ of the edge density
parameter 𝑝 ◦ , subject to node differential privacy. We consider the error metric | ˆ𝑝/𝑝 ◦ − 1|
which can reflect the fact that, the task is more difficult for smaller 𝑝 ◦ .
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

