Parametric model reduction of mean-field and
stochastic systems via higher-order action
matching

Jules Berman∗
Courant Institute of
Mathematical Sciences
New York University
New York, NY 10012
jmb1174@nyu.edu

Tobias Blickhan∗
Courant Institute of
Mathematical Sciences
New York University
New York, NY 10012
tobias.blickhan@nyu.edu

Benjamin Peherstorfer
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
New York, NY 10012
pehersto@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
The aim of this work is to learn models of population dynamics of physical
systems that feature stochastic and mean-field effects and that depend on
physics parameters. The learned models can act as surrogates of classical
numerical models to efficiently predict the system behavior over the physics
parameters. Building on the Benamou-Brenier formula from optimal transport and action matching, we use a variational problem to infer parameterand time-dependent gradient fields that represent approximations of the
population dynamics. The inferred gradient fields can then be used to
rapidly generate sample trajectories that mimic the dynamics of the physical
system on a population level over varying physics parameters. We show
that combining Monte Carlo sampling with higher-order quadrature rules is
critical for accurately estimating the training objective from sample data
and for stabilizing the training process. We demonstrate on Vlasov-Poisson
instabilities as well as on high-dimensional particle and chaotic systems that
our approach accurately predicts population dynamics over a wide range of
parameters and outperforms state-of-the-art diffusion-based and flow-based
modeling that simply condition on time and physics parameters.

1

Introduction

Predicting the behavior of time-dependent processes Xt,µ over time t and across varying
physics parameters µ is a key challenge in computational science and engineering [46, 65].
The dynamics of Xt,µ typically are described by systems of (stochastic) differential equations,
which are derived from physics models and can be computationally expensive to simulate
[40, 32]. Thus, it is desirable to learn reduced or surrogate models that can be rapidly
evaluated to predict the system behavior across varying physics parameters [72, 10, 11, 45].
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

