CLIPLoss and Norm-Based Data Selection Methods
for Multimodal Contrastive Learning

Yiping Wang∗
University of Washington

Yifang Chen∗
University of Washington

Wendan Yan
University of Washington

Alex Fang
University of Washington

Wenjing Zhou
University of Michigan

Kevin Jamieson
University of Washington

Simon Shaolei Du
University of Washington

Abstract
Data selection has emerged as a core issue for large-scale visual-language model
pretraining (e.g., CLIP), particularly with noisy web-curated datasets. Three
main data selection approaches are: (1) leveraging external non-CLIP models to
aid data selection, (2) training new CLIP-style embedding models that are more
effective at selecting high-quality data than the original OpenAI CLIP model,
and (3) designing better metrics or strategies universally applicable to any CLIP
embedding without requiring specific model properties (e.g., CLIPScore is one
popular metric). While the first two approaches have been extensively studied,
the third remains under-explored. In this paper, we advance the third approach by
proposing two new methods. Firstly, instead of classical CLIP scores that only
consider the alignment between two modalities from a single sample, we introduce
negCLIPLoss, a method inspired by CLIP training loss that adds the alignment
between one sample and its contrastive pairs as an extra normalization term to
CLIPScore for better quality measurement. Secondly, when downstream tasks are
known, we propose a new norm-based metric, NormSim, to measure the similarity
between pretraining data and target data. We test our methods on the data selection
benchmark, DataComp [1]. Compared to the best baseline using only OpenAI’s
CLIP-L/14, our methods achieve a 5.3% improvement on ImageNet-1k and a 2.8%
improvement on 38 downstream evaluation tasks. Moreover, both negCLIPLoss
and NormSim are compatible with existing techniques. By combining our methods
with the current best methods DFN [2] and HYPE [3], we can boost average
performance on downstream tasks by 0.9%, achieving a new state-of-the-art on the
DataComp-medium benchmark2 .

1

Introduction

Curating large-scale visual-language datasets from web-sourced data has become common for
pretraining multi-modal models. However, the quality of these web-curated data pairs remains
a critical bottleneck. Research has shown that the choice of dataset significantly impacts model
performance, irrespective of the models and training techniques employed [4–11], and this motivates
∗
Equal contribution. Correspondence to ypwang61@cs.washington.edu. Codes are available at
https://github.com/ypwang61/negCLIPLoss_NormSim.
2
DataComp benchmark: https://www.datacomp.ai/dcclip/leaderboard.html.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

