SpecExec: Massively Parallel Speculative Decoding
for Interactive LLM Inference on Consumer Devices
Ruslan Svirschevski∗†♡ Avner May∗♣ Zhuoming Chen∗‡
Beidi Chen‡♢ Zhihao Jia‡ Max Ryabinin♣
† Yandex ♡ HSE University ♣ Together AI ‡ Carnegie Mellon University ♢ Meta AI
ruslansv@gmail.com, avner@together.ai, zhuominc@andrew.cmu.edu,
{zhihaoj2,beidic}@andrew.cmu.edu, mryab@together.ai

Abstract
As large language models gain widespread adoption, running them efficiently
becomes a crucial task. Recent works on LLM inference use speculative decoding
to achieve extreme speedups. However, most of these works implicitly design their
algorithms for high-end datacenter hardware. In this work, we ask the opposite
question: how fast can we run LLMs on consumer machines? Consumer GPUs can
no longer fit the largest available models and must offload them to RAM or SSD.
With parameter offloading, hundreds or thousands of tokens can be processed in
batches within the same time as just one token, making it a natural fit for speculative
decoding. We propose S PEC E XEC (Speculative Execution), a simple parallel
decoding method that can generate up to 20 tokens per target model iteration for
popular LLM families. SpecExec takes the most probable continuations from the
draft model to build a “cache” tree for the target model, which then gets validated
in a single pass. Using SpecExec, we demonstrate inference of 50B+ parameter
LLMs on consumer GPUs with RAM offloading at 4–6 tokens per second with
4-bit quantization or 2–3 tokens per second with 16-bit weights. 1

1

Introduction

Open-access large language models (LLMs), such as Llama [Touvron et al., 2023] and Mistral [Jiang
et al., 2023], have become increasingly capable in the past years, and their adoption has grown
dramatically. Although these models are openly available, users who are interested in running these
models on consumer-grade GPUs (for example, due to privacy or cost reasons) face significant
challenges. Many open-access LLMs are too large to fit on consumer GPUs, which necessitates
offloading them onto CPU RAM to perform inference. Given the limited memory bandwidth between
the CPU and the GPU, as well as the fact that all model parameters must be transferred to the GPU
for the LLM to generate each new token, offloading is extremely slow and bandwidth-bound. For
example, generating a single token using Llama 2-70B in 16 bit with offloading on an RTX 3090
GPU takes at least 4.5 seconds2 .
A recent line of work that aims to speed up LLM inference is speculative decoding [Leviathan et al.,
2023, Chen et al., 2023a], which uses a small draft model to predict the next tokens and a larger
target model to verify which of those tokens to accept in parallel. Although speculative decoding
is a promising direction, the speedups that existing methods can attain in the offloading setting are
relatively modest. While studying existing approaches [Leviathan et al., 2023, Miao et al., 2023,
Sun et al., 2023], we discovered that these methods do not scale well with the draft model token
budget. In particular, as shown in Figure 1 (left), the number of tokens accepted by the target model is
∗

Equal contribution.
The code is available at github.com/yandex-research/specexec.
2
Assuming PCIe-4.0 and at least 140GB of DDR5 RAM with an efficient offloading implementation.
1

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

