ControlMLLM: Training-Free Visual Prompt
Learning for Multimodal Large Language Models

Mingrui Wu1 , Xinyue Cai1 , Jiayi Ji1∗, Jiale Li1 , Oucheng Huang1 ,
Gen Luo1 , Hao Fei2 , Guannan Jiang3 , Xiaoshuai Sun1 , Rongrong Ji1
1 Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China
2 National University of Singapore 3 CATL
mingrui0001@gmail.com

Abstract
In this work, we propose a training-free method to inject visual prompts into
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) through learnable latent variable
optimization. We observe that attention, as the core module of MLLMs, connects
text prompt tokens and visual tokens, ultimately determining the final results. Our
approach involves adjusting visual tokens from the MLP output during inference,
controlling the attention response to ensure text prompt tokens attend to visual
tokens in referring regions. We optimize a learnable latent variable based on
an energy function, enhancing the strength of referring regions in the attention
map. This enables detailed region description and reasoning without the need
for substantial training costs or model retraining. Our method offers a promising
direction for integrating referring abilities into MLLMs, and supports referring with
box, mask, scribble and point. The results demonstrate that our method exhibits
out-of-domain generalization and interpretability. Code: https://github.
com/mrwu-mac/ControlMLLM.

1

Introduction

In recent times, there has been a surge in the development and adoption of large language models (LLMs), such as GPT-4 [1] and Llama [53], showcasing remarkable capabilities in addressing a
wide range of human-generated questions. The success of these models has sparked interest among
researchers in exploring the integration of LLMs with visual inputs. Consequently, a new class of
models known as Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) has emerged [36, 33, 17, 67, 81, 38].
However, despite their widespread adoption, traditional MLLMs often face limitations due to their
reliance on coarse image-level alignments. This restricts users to guiding MLLMs solely through
text prompts for detailed region description and reasoning. However, text often fails to capture the
intricate visual nuances present in an image.
Addressing this challenge, recent efforts [68, 5, 75, 12, 37] have pioneered the integration of referring
abilities within MLLMs, which enables users to provide input by pointing to specific coordinates
of the objects or regions, as shown in Figure 1 (left). However, these endeavors typically entail
substantial training costs to equip MLLMs with referring capabilities. Additionally, the model must
undergo retraining to adapt to new data domains or new base MLLMs.
In this work, we propose a training-free method to inject the visual prompts into the Multimodal
Large Language Models via learnable latent variable optimization. The method originates from our
observation of the attention maps from the MLLM decoder, which model the relationship between
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

