To Believe or Not to Believe Your LLM: Iterative
Prompting for Estimating Epistemic Uncertainty

Yasin Abbasi Yadkori
Google DeepMind
yadkori@google.com

Ilja Kuzborskij
Google DeepMind
iljak@google.com

András György
Google DeepMind
agyorgy@google.com

Csaba Szepesvári
Google DeepMind and University of Alberta
szepi@google.com

Abstract
We explore uncertainty quantification in large language models (LLMs), with
the goal to identify when uncertainty in responses given a query is large. We
simultaneously consider both epistemic and aleatoric uncertainties, where the
former comes from the lack of knowledge about the ground truth (such as about
facts or the language), and the latter comes from irreducible randomness (such
as multiple possible answers). In particular, we derive an information-theoretic
metric that allows to reliably detect when only epistemic uncertainty is large, in
which case the output of the model is unreliable. This condition can be computed
based solely on the output of the model obtained simply by some special iterative
prompting based on the previous responses. Such quantification, for instance,
allows to detect hallucinations (cases when epistemic uncertainty is high) in both
single- and multi-answer responses. This is in contrast to many standard uncertainty
quantification strategies (such as thresholding the log-likelihood of a response)
where hallucinations in the multi-answer case cannot be detected. We conduct a
series of experiments which demonstrate the advantage of our formulation. Further,
our investigations shed some light on how the probabilities assigned to a given
output by an LLM can be amplified by iterative prompting, which might be of
independent interest.

1

Introduction

Language models too occasionally suffer from hallucinations, or responses with low truthfulness, that
do not match our own common or textbook knowledge (Bubeck et al., 2023; Gemini Team, Google,
2023). At the same time, since LLMs work by modeling a probability distribution over texts, it is
natural to view the problem of truthfulness through the lens of statistical uncertainty. In this paper
we explore uncertainty quantification in LLMs. We distinguish between two sources of uncertainty:
epistemic and aleatoric (Wen et al., 2022; Osband et al., 2023; Johnson et al., 2024). Epistemic
uncertainty arises from the lack of knowledge about the ground truth (e.g., facts or grammar in the
language), stemming from various reasons such as insufficient amount of training data or model
capacity. Aleatoric uncertainty comes from irreducible randomness in the prediction problem, such
as multiple valid answers to the same query. Hence, truthfulness can be directly analyzed via looking
at the epistemic uncertainty of a model in the sense that when the epistemic uncertainty is low, the
model predictions must be close to the ground truth.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

