CNCA: Toward Customizable and Natural Generation
of Adversarial Camouflage for Vehicle Detectors

Linye Lyu, Jiawei Zhou, Daojing He, Yu Li
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
{lyulinye, zhoujiawei6666, yu.li.sallylee}@gmail.com
hedaojinghit@163.com

Abstract

Prior works on physical adversarial camouflage against vehicle detectors mainly
focus on the effectiveness and robustness of the attack. The current most successful
methods optimize 3D vehicle texture at a pixel level. However, this results in
conspicuous and attention-grabbing patterns in the generated camouflage, which
humans can easily identify. To address this issue, we propose a Customizable and
Natural Camouflage Attack (CNCA) method by leveraging an off-the-shelf pretrained diffusion model. By sampling the optimal texture image from the diffusion
model with a user-specific text prompt, our method can generate natural and customizable adversarial camouflage while maintaining high attack performance. With
extensive experiments on the digital and physical worlds and user studies, the results
demonstrate that our proposed method can generate significantly more naturallooking camouflage than the state-of-the-art baselines while achieving competitive
attack performance. Our code is available at https://github.com/SeRAlab/CNCA.

1

Introduction

Over the past years, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have revolutionized a wide range of research
domains, especially in computer vision tasks, such as image classification, object detection, and
semantic segmentation. DNNs are widely used in real-world systems, such as face recognition and
autonomous driving. Despite their impressive success, DNNs are found vulnerable to adversarial
examples [20], which are carefully crafted to deceive DNNs.
Generally, adversarial attacks can be classified into two categories: digital attacks, which primarily
add small pixel-level perturbations to the input images; physical attacks, which manipulate the
object’s physical properties, such as its shape, surface, or surroundings, to deceive the target model
in the real world. Physical attacks are more challenging than digital attacks, as they must remain
effective under various complex physical conditions, including different viewing angles, distances,
and lighting conditions. This paper focuses on physical attacks against vehicle detection models since
they play critical roles in real-world applications like surveillance and autonomous driving systems.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

