Vision Model Pre-training on Interleaved
Image-Text Data via Latent Compression Learning

Chenyu Yang1,3∗ , Xizhou Zhu1,2∗ , Jinguo Zhu3,6∗ , Weijie Su2,5 , Junjie Wang3,7 , Xuan Dong1,3 ,
Wenhai Wang2,4 , Lewei Lu3 , Bin Li5 , Jie Zhou1 , Yu Qiao2 , Jifeng Dai1,2B
1

Tsinghua University 2 OpenGVLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory
SenseTime Research 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
5
University of Science and Technology of China 6 Xi’an Jiaotong University
7
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3

{yangcy23,x-dong21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
{zhuxizhou, jzhou, daijifeng}@tsinghua.edu.cn,
lechatelia@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, jackroos@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jjwang@bupt.edu.cn,
whwang@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, binli@ustc.edu.cn, qiaoyu@pjlab.org.cn, luotto@sensetime.com

Abstract
Recently, vision model pre-training has evolved from relying on manually annotated
datasets to leveraging large-scale, web-crawled image-text data. Despite these
advances, there is no pre-training method that effectively exploits the interleaved
image-text data, which is very prevalent on the Internet. Inspired by the recent
success of compression learning in natural language processing, we propose a
novel vision model pre-training method called Latent Compression Learning (LCL)
for interleaved image-text data. This method performs latent compression learning
by maximizing the mutual information between the inputs and outputs of a causal
attention model. The training objective can be decomposed into two basic tasks:
1) contrastive learning between visual representation and preceding context, and
2) generating subsequent text based on visual representation. Our experiments
demonstrate that our method not only matches the performance of CLIP on paired
pre-training datasets (e.g., LAION), but can also leverage interleaved pre-training
data (e.g., MMC4) to learn robust visual representations from scratch, showcasing
the potential of vision model pre-training with interleaved image-text data. Code is
released at https://github.com/OpenGVLab/LCL.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, ImageNet [34] pre-trained vision models have significantly advanced computer
vision, continuously achieving breakthroughs in various vision tasks [7, 24, 10]. The success of
ImageNet has inspired further exploration of better methods for pre-training vision models from
scratch. Recently, the focus of pre-training has shifted from manually annotated data to large-scale,
web-crawled image-text data. A key milestone in this shift is CLIP [55], which utilizes image-text
pair data hundreds of times larger than ImageNet, delivering superior performance across various
tasks and progressively becoming the mainstream method for vision model pre-training. Building
on this trend, there is increasing interest in exploring interleaved image-text data, which is more
prevalent on the Internet. Unlike the structured image-text pairs used in CLIP, this interleaved data is
free-format and non-paired, larger in scale, and richer in textual information. Fully exploiting these
interleaved image-text data is necessary for further improving vision model pre-training at scale.
∗

Equal contribution. This work is done when Chenyu Yang, Jinguo Zhu, Junjie Wang and Xuan Dong are
interns at SenseTime Research.B Corresponding author: Jifeng Dai <daijifeng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

