Theoretical Foundations of Deep Selective
State-Space Models

Nicola Muca Cirone
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London

Antonio Orvieto
MPI for Intelligent Systems,
Tübingen AI Center
ELLIS Institute Tübingen

Cristopher Salvi
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London

Benjamin Walker
Mathematical Institute
University of Oxford

Terry Lyons
Mathematical Institute
University of Oxford

Abstract
Structured state-space models (SSMs) are gaining popularity as effective foundational architectures for sequential data, demonstrating outstanding performance
across a diverse set of domains alongside desirable scalability properties. Recent
developments show that if the linear recurrence powering SSMs allows for a selectivity mechanism leveraging multiplicative interactions between inputs and hidden
states (e.g. Mamba, GLA, Hawk/Griffin, HGRN2), then the resulting architecture
can surpass attention-powered foundation models trained on text in both accuracy
and efficiency, at scales of billion parameters. In this paper, we give theoretical
grounding to the selectivity mechanism, often linked to in-context learning, using
tools from Rough Path Theory. We provide a framework for the theoretical analysis
of generalized selective SSMs, fully characterizing their expressive power and
identifying the gating mechanism as the crucial architectural choice. Our analysis
provides a closed-form description of the expressive powers of modern SSMs, such
as Mamba, quantifying theoretically the drastic improvement in performance from
the previous generation of models, such as S4. Our theory not only motivates the
success of modern selective state-space models, but also provides a solid framework to understand the expressive power of future SSM variants. In particular, it
suggests cross-channel interactions could play a vital role in future improvements.

1

Introduction

Sequence-to-sequence blocks are fundamental components of modern deep learning models for
language, images, video, audio, time series, and genomics. For the last five years,attention [Vaswani
et al., 2017, Dosovitskiy et al., 2020] has been the dominant mechanism powering these architectures.
However, competitive results have recently been achieved without attention, by using state-space
models (SSMs): GPU-efficient linear recurrent sequence-to-sequence blocks stemming from S4 [Gu
et al., 2021]. SSMs achieve state-of-the-art results on long-range-reasoning benchmarks [Tay et al.,
2020] and show outstanding performance in various domain including vision [Nguyen et al., 2022],
audio [Goel et al., 2022], biological signals [Gu et al., 2021], reinforcement learning [Lu et al., 2023]
and online learning [Zucchet et al., 2023]. SSMs recently have gained significant interest in the
community since their computational complexity scales linearly in sequence length, while attention
scales quadratically; moreover, unlike other recurrent mechanisms such as LSTMs [Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber, 1997] and GRUs [Cho et al., 2014], they can be efficiently parallelized on GPUs during
training using parallel scans [Martin and Cundy, 2017, Smith et al., 2023].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

