Optimal Parallelization of Boosting

Mikael Møller Høgsgaard
Department of Computer Science
Aarhus University
hogsgaard@cs.au.dk

Arthur da Cunha
Department of Computer Science
Aarhus University
dac@cs.au.dk

Kasper Green Larsen
Department of Computer Science
Aarhus University
larsen@cs.au.dk

Abstract
Recent works on the parallel complexity of Boosting have established strong lower
bounds on the tradeoff between the number of training rounds p and the total parallel work per round t. These works have also presented highly non-trivial parallel
algorithms that shed light on different regions of this tradeoff. Despite these advancements, a significant gap persists between the theoretical lower bounds and
the performance of these algorithms across much of the tradeoff space. In this
work, we essentially close this gap by providing both improved lower bounds on
the parallel complexity of weak-to-strong learners, and a parallel Boosting algorithm whose performance matches these bounds across the entire p vs. t compromise spectrum, up to logarithmic factors. Ultimately, this work settles the parallel
complexity of Boosting algorithms that are nearly sample-optimal.

1

Introduction

Boosting is an extremely powerful and elegant idea that allows one to combine multiple inaccurate classifiers into a highly accurate voting classifier. Algorithms such as AdaBoost [Freund and
Schapire, 1997] work by iteratively running a base learning algorithm on reweighted versions of the
training data to produce a sequence of classifiers h1 , . . . , hp . After obtaining hi , the weighting of the
training data is updated to put larger weights on samples misclassified by hi , and smaller weights on
samples classified correctly. This effectively forces the next training iteration to focus on points with
which the previous classifiers struggle. After sufficiently many rounds, the classifiers h1 , . . . , hp are
finally combined by taking a (weighted) majority vote among their predictions. Many Boosting algorithms have been developed over the years, for example Grove and Schuurmans [1998], Rätsch
et al. [2005], Servedio [2003], Friedman [2001], with modern Gradient Boosting [Friedman, 2001]
algorithms like XGBoost [Chen and Guestrin, 2016] and LightGBM [Ke et al., 2017] often achieving state-of-the-art performance on learning tasks while requiring little to no data cleaning. See e.g.
the excellent survey by Natekin and Knoll [2013] for more background on Boosting.
While Boosting enjoys many advantages, it does have one severe drawback, also highlighted in
Natekin and Knoll [2013]: Boosting is completely sequential as each of the consecutive training
steps requires the output of previous steps to determine the reweighted learning problem. This
property is shared by all Boosting algorithms and prohibits the use of computationally heavy training
by the base learning algorithm in each iteration. For instance, Gradient Boosting algorithms often
require hundreds to thousands of iterations to achieve the best accuracy. The crucial point is that
even if you have access to thousands of machines for training, there is no way to parallelize the steps
of Boosting and distribute the work among the machines (at least beyond the parallelization possible
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

