Model Reconstruction Using Counterfactual
Explanations: A Perspective From Polytope Theory

Pasan Dissanayake
University of Maryland
College Park, MD
pasand@umd.edu

Sanghamitra Dutta
University of Maryland
College Park, MD
sanghamd@umd.edu

Abstract
Counterfactual explanations provide ways of achieving a favorable model outcome
with minimum input perturbation. However, counterfactual explanations can also
be leveraged to reconstruct the model by strategically training a surrogate model to
give similar predictions as the original (target) model. In this work, we analyze how
model reconstruction using counterfactuals can be improved by further leveraging
the fact that the counterfactuals also lie quite close to the decision boundary. Our
main contribution is to derive novel theoretical relationships between the error
in model reconstruction and the number of counterfactual queries required using
polytope theory. Our theoretical analysis leads us to propose a strategy for model
reconstruction that we call Counterfactual Clamping Attack (CCA) which trains a
surrogate model using a unique loss function that treats counterfactuals differently
than ordinary instances. Our approach also alleviates the related problem of decision boundary shift that arises in existing model reconstruction approaches when
counterfactuals are treated as ordinary instances. Experimental results demonstrate that our strategy improves fidelity between the target and surrogate model
predictions on several datasets.

1

Introduction

Counterfactual explanations (also called counterfactuals) have emerged as a burgeoning area of
research [Wachter et al., 2017, Guidotti, 2022, Barocas et al., 2020, Verma et al., 2022, Karimi et al.,
2022] for providing guidance on how to obtain a more favorable outcome from a machine learning
model, e.g., increase your income by 10K to qualify for the loan. Interestingly, counterfactuals
can also reveal information about the underlying model, posing a nuanced interplay between model
privacy and explainability [Aïvodji et al., 2020, Wang et al., 2022]. Our work provides the first
theoretical analysis between the error in model reconstruction using counterfactuals and the number
of counterfactuals queried for, through the lens of polytope theory.
Model reconstruction using counterfactuals can have serious implications in Machine Learning as
a Service (MLaaS) platforms that allow users to query a model for a specified cost [Gong et al.,
2020]. An adversary may be able to “steal” the model by querying for counterfactuals and training a
surrogate model to provide similar predictions as the target model, a practice also referred to as model
extraction. On the other hand, model reconstruction could also be beneficial for preserving applicant
privacy, e.g., if an applicant wishes to evaluate their chances of acceptance from crowdsourced
information before formally sharing their own application information with an institution, often due
to resource constraints or having a limited number of attempts to apply (e.g., applying for credit
cards reduces the credit score [Capital One, 2024]). Our goal is to formalize how faithfully can one
reconstruct an underlying model given a set of counterfactual queries.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

