Scanning Trojaned Models Using Out-of-Distribution
Samples

Hossein Mirzaei1

Ali Ansari1 ∗ Bahar Dibaei Nia1 ∗

Mojtaba Nafez1 † Moein Madadi 1 † Sepehr Rezaee2 †
Zeinab Sadat Taghavi1
Jafar Habibi1
1

Arad Maleki1

Kian Shamsaie1

Mohammad Sabokrou3

Mahdi Hajialilue1

Mohammad Hossein Rohban1

Sharif University of Technology 2 Shahid Beheshti University
3
Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology

Abstract
Scanning for trojan (backdoor) in deep neural networks is crucial due to their significant real-world applications. There has been an increasing focus on developing
effective general trojan scanning methods across various trojan attacks. Despite
advancements, there remains a shortage of methods that perform effectively without
preconceived assumptions about the backdoor attack method. Additionally, we
have observed that current methods struggle to identify classifiers trojaned using
adversarial training. Motivated by these challenges, our study introduces a novel
scanning method named TRODO (TROjan scanning by Detection of adversarial
shifts in Out-of-distribution samples). TRODO leverages the concept of "blind
spots"—regions where trojaned classifiers erroneously identify out-of-distribution
(OOD) samples as in-distribution (ID). We scan for these blind spots by adversarially shifting OOD samples towards in-distribution. The increased likelihood
of perturbed OOD samples being classified as ID serves as a signature for trojan
detection. TRODO is both trojan and label mapping agnostic, effective even against
adversarially trained trojaned classifiers. It is applicable even in scenarios where
training data is absent, demonstrating high accuracy and adaptability across various
scenarios and datasets, highlighting its potential as a robust trojan scanning strategy.
The code repository is available at https://github.com/rohban-lab/TRODO.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Network (DNN)-based models are extensively utilized in many critical applications,
including image classification, face recognition [1], and autonomous driving [2]. However, the
reliability of DNNs is being challenged by the emergence of various threats [3], with one of the most
significant being trojan (backdoor) attacks. In such attacks, an adversary may introduce poisoned
samples into the training dataset, for instance, by overlaying a special trigger on incorrectly labeled
images. Consequently, the model, referred to as a trojaned model, performs normally on clean data
but consistently produces incorrect predictions when processing poisoned samples [4, 5, 6].
Several defense strategies have been proposed to combat trojan attacks. Trojaned model scanning is
among such remedies that deal with distinguishing between trojaned and clean models by finding a
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

