Harmony4D: A Video Dataset for In-The-Wild Close
Human Interactions
Rawal Khirodkar∗ , Jyun-Ting Song∗ , Jinkun Cao, Zhengyi Luo, Kris Kitani
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Understanding how humans interact with each other is key to building realistic
multi-human virtual reality systems. This area remains relatively unexplored
due to the lack of large-scale datasets. Recent datasets focusing on this issue
mainly consist of activities captured entirely in controlled indoor environments
with choreographed actions, significantly affecting their diversity. To address
this, we introduce Harmony4D, a multi-view video dataset for human-human
interaction featuring in-the-wild activities such as wrestling, dancing, MMA, and
more. We use a flexible multi-view capture system to record these dynamic
activities and provide annotations for human detection, tracking, 2D/3D pose
estimation, and mesh recovery for closely interacting subjects. We propose a
novel markerless algorithm to track 3D human poses in severe occlusion and
close interaction to obtain our annotations with minimal manual intervention.
Harmony4D consists of 1.66 million images and 3.32 million human instances
from more than 20 synchronized cameras with 208 video sequences spanning
diverse environments and 24 unique subjects. We rigorously evaluate existing stateof-the-art methods for mesh recovery and highlight their significant limitations
in modeling close interaction scenarios. Additionally, we fine-tune a pre-trained
HMR2.0 model on Harmony4D and demonstrate an improved performance of
54.8% PVE in scenes with severe occlusion and contact. Code and data are
available at https://jyuntins.github.io/harmony4d/.
“Harmony—a cohesive alignment of human behaviors.”

1

Introduction

As social beings, humans frequently interact with each other using physical touch [73, 64, 35].
By studying these interactions, one can potentially unravel various aspects of human behavior,
including emotions [24], intentions [13], and dynamics [59]. As with most problems in computer
vision [36], a first step in modeling contact interactions involves building large-scale 3D multi-human
datasets. Many such datasets [15, 74, 20, 80, 87, 57] have emerged in recent years. However,
similar to most existing single-human datasets [28], contact interaction datasets lack subject and
environment diversity and are captured under controlled indoor conditions with choreographed
activities. Learning-based methods [42, 70, 43, 38] trained on such biased benchmarks struggle to
generalize to real-world conditions. The core issue is that recovering high-quality ground-truth mesh
for scenarios with frequent human-human contact is challenging due to severe occlusion, truncation,
and dynamic movements [58]. Existing methods typically rely on extensive RGBD motion capture
systems [80] or a large number of high-end wired camera systems (over 100) [31] to achieve accurate
annotations. This reliance on extensive static capture systems makes in-the-wild data collection
impractical [60]. Therefore, we ask: can we develop a markerless capture system that uses only a few
cameras, is mobile, and is capable of accurately extracting 3D ground truth for in-the-wild scenarios
involving contact interactions? To tackle this challenge, we introduce the Harmony4D dataset.
*

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

