Controlled maximal variability along with reliable
performance in recurrent neural networks

Chiara Mastrogiuseppe
Center for Brain and Cognition, Department of Engineering
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
chiara.mastrogiuseppe@upf.edu
Rubén Moreno-Bote
Center for Brain and Cognition, Department of Engineering,
Serra Húnter Fellow Programme
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
ruben.moreno@upf.edu

Abstract
Natural behaviors, even stereotyped ones, exhibit variability. Despite its role in exploring and learning, the function and neural basis of this variability is still not well
understood. Given the coupling between neural activity and behavior, we ask what
type of neural variability does not compromise behavioral performance. While
previous studies typically curtail variability to allow for high task performance in
neural networks, our approach takes the reversed perspective. We investigate how
to generate maximal neural variability while at the same time having high network
performance. To do so, we extend to neural activity the maximum occupancy
principle (MOP) developed for behavior, and refer to this new neural principle
as NeuroMOP. NeuroMOP posits that the goal of the nervous system is to maximize future action-state entropy, a reward-free, intrinsic motivation that entails
creating all possible activity patterns while avoiding terminal or dangerous ones.
We show that this goal can be achieved through a neural network controller that
injects currents (actions) into a recurrent neural network of fixed random weights
to maximize future cumulative action-state entropy. High activity variability can
be induced while adhering to an energy constraint or while avoiding terminal states
defined by specific neurons’ activities, also in a context-dependent manner. The
network solves these tasks by flexibly switching between stochastic and deterministic modes as needed and projecting noise onto a null space. Based on future
maximum entropy production, NeuroMOP contributes to a novel theory of neural
variability that reconciles stochastic and deterministic behaviors within a single
framework.

1

Introduction

From opening a door to crossing the street, everyday life hinges on reliably executing actions. Despite
that, natural behaviors, including repetitive movements from expert athletes [1, 2, 3, 4], exhibit
variability [5, 6, 7]. The mechanisms governing the emergence of this variability from the central and
peripheral nervous systems remain unclear. Variability of neural activity in motor cortex [8, 9, 10] and
subcortical structures [11, 12] controlling muscle movements, as well as state changes of the effectors
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

