Stratified Prediction-Powered Inference
for Hybrid Language Model Evaluation

Adam Fisch†,∗

Joshua Maynez†,∗

R. Alex Hofer†

Bhuwan Dhingra†

Amir Globerson‡

William W. Cohen†

†

Google DeepMind

‡

Google Research

{fisch,joshuahm,rofer,bdhingra,amirg,wcohen}@google.com

Abstract
Prediction-powered inference (PPI) is a method that improves statistical estimates
based on limited human-labeled data. PPI achieves this by combining small
amounts of human-labeled data with larger amounts of data labeled by a reasonably
accurate—but potentially biased—automatic system, in a way that results in tighter
confidence intervals for certain parameters of interest (e.g., the mean performance
of a language model). In this paper, we propose a method called Stratified
Prediction-Powered Inference (StratPPI), in which we show that the basic PPI
estimates can be considerably improved by employing simple data stratification
strategies. Without making any assumptions on the underlying automatic labeling
system or data distribution, we derive an algorithm for computing provably valid
confidence intervals for population parameters (such as averages) that is based
on stratified sampling. In particular, we show both theoretically and empirically
that, with appropriate choices of stratification and sample allocation, our approach
can provide substantially tighter confidence intervals than unstratified approaches.
Specifically, StratPPI is expected to improve in cases where the performance
of the autorater varies across different conditional distributions of the target data.

1

Introduction

Evaluating machine learning models requires evaluation data. In particular, to iteratively improve
on a method during development, or to reliably report an improvement, one needs to confidently and
quantitatively assess the performance of the method. This is especially challenging for large language
models (LLMs), where gathering high-quality annotations for generations can be difficult and timeconsuming—and can ultimately become quite costly if gathering more than a few hundred examples.
One often-proposed approach to avoiding the evaluation bottleneck is to use a secondary LLM-based
system to judge the output of the primary one. For instance, if the primary task is developing an
LLM-based question-answering (QA) system, one can use a second LLM-based system that rates
question/answer pairs as acceptable or not [6; 8; 17]. However, automated raters (i.e., autoraters) may
be biased relative to the human raters they are intended to model, as others have noted [1; 9; 18; 23].
This can become substantially worse when models are tailored to hill climb on the autorater metrics,
and eventually cease to become a good metric at all—a phenomenon commonly referred to as Goodhart’s law, or reward hacking in the context of reinforcement learning from human feedback [13; 24].
We thus have two signals for assessing model performance. The first is human labels, which are typically accurate, but expensive to collect. As a result, usually only a small sample size is available, and
* Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

