Active Set Ordering

Quoc Phong Nguyen1,3 , Sunil Gupta1 ,
Svetha Venkatesh1 , Bryan Kian Hsiang Low2 , Patrick Jaillet3
1
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute, Deakin University, Australia
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
3
LIDS and EECS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
qphongmp@gmail.com, sunil.gupta@deakin.edu.au,
svetha.venkatesh@deakin.edu.au, lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg, jaillet@mit.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we formalize the active set ordering problem, which involves actively
discovering a set of inputs based on their orderings determined by expensive evaluations of a blackbox function. We then propose the mean prediction (MP) algorithm
and theoretically analyze it in terms of the regret of predicted pairwise orderings
between inputs. Notably, as a special case of this framework, we can cast Bayesian
optimization as an active set ordering problem by recognizing that maximizers can
be identified solely by comparison rather than by precisely estimating the function
evaluations. As a result, we are able to construct the popular Gaussian process
upper confidence bound (GP-UCB) algorithm through the lens of ordering with
several nuanced insights. We empirically validate the performance of our proposed
solution using various synthetic functions and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

In real-world applications, we often encounter the problem of estimating an unknown function,
known as a blackbox function, (i.e., those without closed-form expressions or derivatives) using
their expensive and noisy evaluations. Under these circumstances, an efficient sequential process of
evaluating the function is desired. On one extreme, experimental design (ED) aims to estimate the
function in its entire input domain, e.g., by decreasing the uncertainty of the function globally in
Bayesian ED [4, 18]. On the other extreme, the renowned Bayesian optimization (BO) targets inputs
with the extreme function values such as the maximizers and the minimizers [2, 6, 7].
While the connection between ED and BO is studied in the classic work of [19], we still lack a problem
formulation that strikes a balance between the prohibitively expensive process of estimating the entire
function globally in ED and the lack of information about the function away from extreme locations
in BO. One may consider a related problem, called level set estimation (LSE), which focuses on
estimating inputs with function evaluations above or below a given (or implicit) threshold [1, 3, 8, 14].
However, without domain knowledge of the blackbox function, it is easy to set a threshold that leads
to undesirably large or small level sets.
Let us consider an environmental monitoring problem of estimating a chemical concentration in a
field. The blackbox function is the mapping from locations of the field to the chemical concentration
measurement. It can be of a greater interest to estimate the maximizers, the minimizers, the top-k
locations (with the highest chemical concentration) and the bottom-k locations. On one hand,
these estimates provide more information about the blackbox function than just the maximizers or
minimizers in BO. On the other hand, they may require less resource (i.e., evaluations of the blackbox
function) than estimating the entire function in ED. Besides, as the top-k locations consist of exactly k
locations in the field, it circumvents the issue of undesirably large or small level sets in LSE.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

