Rethinking Reconstruction-based Graph-Level
Anomaly Detection: Limitations and a Simple Remedy

Sunwoo Kim1 , Soo Yong Lee1 , Fanchen Bu2 , Shinhwan Kang1 ,
Kyungho Kim1 , Jaemin Yoo2 , Kijung Shin1,2
1
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, 2 School of Electrical Engineering
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{kswoo97, syleetolow, boqvezen97, shinhwan.kang,
kkyungho, jaemin, kijungs}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Graph autoencoders (Graph-AEs) learn representations of given graphs by aiming
to accurately reconstruct them. A notable application of Graph-AEs is graph-level
anomaly detection (GLAD), whose objective is to identify graphs with anomalous
topological structures and/or node features compared to the majority of the graph
population. Graph-AEs for GLAD regard a graph with a high mean reconstruction
error (i.e. mean of errors from all node pairs and/or nodes) as anomalies. Namely,
the methods rest on the assumption that they would better reconstruct graphs with
similar characteristics to the majority. We, however, report non-trivial counterexamples, a phenomenon we call reconstruction flip, and highlight the limitations
of the existing Graph-AE-based GLAD methods. Specifically, we empirically and
theoretically investigate when this assumption holds and when it fails. Through our
analyses, we further argue that, while the reconstruction errors for a given graph
are effective features for GLAD, leveraging the multifaceted summaries of the
reconstruction errors, beyond just mean, can further strengthen the features. Thus,
we propose a novel and simple GLAD method, named M U SE. The key innovation
of M U SE involves taking multifaceted summaries of reconstruction errors as graph
features for GLAD. This surprisingly simple method obtains SOTA performance
in GLAD, performing best overall among 14 methods across 10 datasets.

1

Introduction

Graph autoencoders (Graph-AEs) are a family of graph neural networks (GNNs) that learn latent
representations of given graphs by aiming to accurately reconstruct them. Representative examples of
Graph-AEs include GAE [22] and GraphMAE [15], which respectively aim to accurately reconstruct
graph structure and node features. Graph-AEs have a broad spectrum of applications, such as anomaly
detection [38, 33, 6] and link prediction [13, 22, 24].
Graph-AEs are trained to capture the structural information of graphs used for training (i.e., training
graphs). Thus, intuitively, Graph-AEs are expected to better reconstruct graphs that are similar to
the training graphs. However, to our surprise, this expectation is not always true. Given Graph-AEs
trained to reconstruct the graphs in Figure 1(a), which share common structural characteristics, one
would expect that the Graph-AEs would reconstruct the training graphs with smaller reconstruction
errors than a dissimilar counterpart (e.g., in Figure 1 (b)). We, however, report the opposite. The
reconstruction error is lower for the graph in Figure 1(b) than the training graphs. While similar
observations were reported in computer vision application [31], which we elaborate on in Section 2.1,
the existing literature does not clearly explain the aforementioned phenomenon.
This counterintuitive phenomenon guides our analysis, implication, and the proposed method. First,
we aim to understand this counterintuitive phenomenon, which we refer to as the reconstruction flip.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

