Neural P3M: A Long-Range Interaction Modeling
Enhancer for Geometric GNNs
Yusong Wang1∗, Chaoran Cheng2∗, Shaoning Li3∗, Yuxuan Ren4
Bin Shao5 , Ge Liu2 , Pheng-Ann Heng3 , Nanning Zheng1†
1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
and Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
University of Science and Technology of China
5
Microsoft Research AI4Science
wangyusong2000@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {chaoran7, geliu}@illinois.edu
{snli24, pheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, binshao@microsoft.com
nnzheng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Geometric graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged as powerful tools for
modeling molecular geometry. However, they encounter limitations in effectively capturing long-range interactions in large molecular systems due to the
localization assumption of GNN. To address this challenge, we introduce Neural P3 M, a versatile enhancer of geometric GNNs to expand the scope of their
capabilities by incorporating mesh points alongside atoms and reimaging traditional mathematical operations in a trainable manner. Neural P3 M exhibits flexibility across a wide range of molecular systems and demonstrates remarkable
accuracy in predicting energies and forces, outperforming on benchmarks such
as the MD22 dataset. It also achieves an average improvement of 22% on the
OE62 dataset while integrating with various architectures. Codes are available at
https://github.com/OnlyLoveKFC/Neural_P3M.

1

Introduction

Prevailing geometric graph neural networks (GNNs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in
capturing the geometric information inherent within molecular graphs. Not only do they accelerate
the computational efficiency compared to traditional Density Functional Theory (DFT) methods for
molecules, but also hold the promise of achieving high-level accuracy in predicting crucial molecular
properties such as energy and forces [2, 18, 23]. Despite their success in modeling small molecules,
limitations still persist in extending these methods to larger molecular structures and systems governed
by periodic boundary conditions (PBC). Current methods [16, 1] excel in approximating the shortrange interactions, which encapsulate interactions among local atom groups within a defined distance
cutoff, characterized by a rapid decay in real space. The primary obstacle lies in effectively capturing
long-range interactions within these complex systems.
Several attempts have been undertaken to incorporate long-range physical interactions into geometric
GNNs. Early studies [19, 21] combined physical equations, such as Coulomb’s law, with models
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

