Interpolating Item and User Fairness in Multi-Sided
Recommendations
Qinyi Chen1

Jason Cheuk Nam Liang1 Negin Golrezaei1 Djallel Bouneffouf2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 IBM Research
{qinyic,jcnliang,golrezae}@mit.edu djallel.bouneffouf@ibm.com
1

Abstract
Today’s online platforms heavily lean on algorithmic recommendations for bolstering user engagement and driving revenue. However, these recommendations can
impact multiple stakeholders simultaneously—the platform, items (sellers), and
users (customers)—each with their unique objectives, making it difficult to find
the right middle ground that accommodates all stakeholders. To address this, we
introduce a novel fair recommendation framework, Problem (FAIR), that flexibly
balances multi-stakeholder interests via a constrained optimization formulation.
We next explore Problem (FAIR) in a dynamic online setting where data uncertainty
further adds complexity, and propose a low-regret algorithm FORM that concurrently
performs real-time learning and fair recommendations, two tasks that are often at
odds. Via both theoretical analysis and a numerical case study on real-world data,
we demonstrate the efficacy of our framework and method in maintaining platform
revenue while ensuring desired levels of fairness for both items and users.

1

Introduction

Online recommendation systems have become essential components of various digital platforms and
marketplaces, playing a critical role in user experience and revenue generation. These platforms
usually operate as multi-sided entities, recommending items (services, products, contents) to users
(consumers). Examples include e-commerce (Amazon, eBay, Etsy), service platforms (Airbnb,
Google Local Services), job portals (LinkedIn, Indeed), streaming services (Netflix, Spotify), and social media (Facebook, TikTok). On the platform, there are typically two main groups of stakeholders:
items (products, services, contents) and users (those engaging with items), with the platform itself
acting as an independent stakeholder due to its unique objectives.
However, as these platforms play a more vital role in societal and economic realms, fairness concerns
have prompted increasing regulatory action. Notably, the European Union proposed the Digital
Markets Act [54], which emphasizes the need for contestable and fair markets in the digital sector,
designating recommendation systems as a key area of focus; the U.S. Algorithmic Accountability Act
[47] requires companies to assess the impacts of their automated decision systems to ensure they are
not biased or discriminatory. It has also become increasingly evident, to the platforms, that upholding
fairness across their stakeholder groups not only strengthens relationships with these stakeholders,
but also enhances long-term platform sustainability [67].
Fairness concerns within digital platforms significantly impact both users and items, manifesting
in various forms of disparities. For users, issues like racial discrimination in Airbnb’s host-guest
matching [25] and gender disparity in career ads [43] highlight the critical need for enforcing user
fairness. Similarly, items on the platforms also experience unfair allocation of opportunities induced
by algorithmic decisions, such as e-commerce platforms favoring their own private-label products
[19] and social media prioritizing influencers’ contents over others [63], indicating a disparity that
affects items (sellers, content creators) alike. These underscore the necessity to address biases and
create a more inclusive environment for all stakeholders involved.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

