Globally Q-linear Gauss-Newton Method for
Overparameterized Non-convex Matrix Sensing

Xixi Jia1∗ Fangchen Feng2 Deyu Meng3,4 Defeng Sun5†
1
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xidian University
2
L2TI Laboratory, University Sorbonne Paris Nord
3
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
4
Macao Institute of Systems Engineering, Macau University of Science and Technology
5
Department of Applied Mathematics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
hsijiaxidian@gmail.com, fangchen.feng@univ-paris13.fr,
dymeng@xjtu.edu.cn, defeng.sun@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
This paper focuses on the optimization of overparameterized, non-convex low-rank
matrix sensing (LRMS)—an essential component in contemporary statistics and
machine learning. Recent years have witnessed significant breakthroughs in firstorder methods, such as gradient descent, for tackling this non-convex optimization
problem. However, the presence of numerous saddle points often prolongs the time
required for gradient descent to overcome these obstacles. Moreover, overparameterization can markedly decelerate gradient descent methods, transitioning its convergence rate from linear to sub-linear. In this paper, we introduce an approximated
Gauss-Newton (AGN) method for tackling the non-convex LRMS problem. Notably, AGN incurs a computational cost comparable to gradient descent per iteration
but converges much faster without being slowed down by saddle points. We prove
that, despite the non-convexity of the objective function, AGN achieves Q-linear
convergence from random initialization to the global optimal solution. The global
Q-linear convergence of AGN represents a substantial enhancement over the convergence of the existing methods for the overparameterized non-convex LRMS. The
code for this paper is available at https://github.com/hsijiaxidian/AGN.

1

Introduction

Matrix sensing aims to recover an unknown low-rank matrix M ∈ Rn×n from its linear measurement
b = A(M ). Here each elements bi is defined as bi = ⟨Ai , M ⟩, with i = 1, · · · , m, and A(·) is a
nearly isometric linear operator. It holds significance not only in practical applications but also in the
realm of non-convex optimization [1–6]. As the problem often involves finding the optimal solution
of a non-convex minimization problem
min

U ∈Rn×d ,V ∈Rn×d

f (U, V ) :=

1
∥A(U V ⊤ ) − b∥2F ,
2

(1)

where rank(M ) = r ≪ n, of particular interest is the overparameterized case where d > r. The
objective function f (U, V ) to be minimized is non-convex, non-smooth3 and meanwhile lacks
∗

Part of this work was completed while Xixi Jia was a research fellow in the Department of Applied
Mathematics at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University.
†
Corresponding author.
3
The non-smoothness pertains to (U, V ), as the magnitudes of these matrices can be highly unbalanced.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

