Stepping Forward on the Last Mile

Chen Feng
Qualcomm AI Research ∗
Qualcomm Canada ULC
chenf@qti.qualcomm.com
Xiaopeng Zhang
Qualcomm AI Research ∗
Qualcomm Canada ULC
xiaopeng@qti.qualcomm.com
Zhaocong Yuan
Qualcomm AI Research ∗
Qualcomm Canada ULC
zhaocong@qti.qualcomm.com

Shaojie Zhuo
Qualcomm AI Research ∗
Qualcomm Canada ULC
shaojiez@qti.qualcomm.com
Ramchalam Kinattinkara Ramakrishnan
Qualcomm AI Research ∗
Qualcomm Canada ULC
rkinatti@qti.qualcomm.com
Andrew Zou Li
University of Toronto
andrewzou.li@mail.utoronto.ca

Abstract
Continuously adapting pre-trained models to local data on resource constrained
edge devices is the last mile for model deployment. However, as models increase
in size and depth, backpropagation requires a large amount of memory, which
becomes prohibitive for edge devices. In addition, most existing low power neural
processing engines (e.g., NPUs, DSPs, MCUs, etc.) are designed as fixed-point
inference accelerators, without training capabilities. Forward gradients, solely
based on directional derivatives computed from two forward calls, have been
recently used for model training, with substantial savings in computation and
memory. However, the performance of quantized training with fixed-point forward
gradients remains unclear. In this paper, we investigate the feasibility of ondevice training using fixed-point forward gradients, by conducting comprehensive
experiments across a variety of deep learning benchmark tasks in both vision
and audio domains. We propose a series of algorithm enhancements that further
reduce the memory footprint, and the accuracy gap compared to backpropagation.
An empirical study on how training with forward gradients navigates in the loss
landscape is further explored. Our results demonstrate that on the last mile of
model customization on edge devices, training with fixed-point forward gradients
is a feasible and practical approach.

1

Introduction

On-device training allows pre-trained models to be continuously adapted to newly collected personal
data after deployment. Moving model training from the cloud to local devices is essential for model
customization and protecting users’ privacy (Moon et al. [2024]). However, the constraint on power
and memory makes training on edge devices extremely challenging (Dhar et al. [2019]). Traditional
backpropagation involves a forward step, which computes activations given an input, and a backward
step which computes the gradients. Intermediate activation values must be stored in memory prior to
∗

Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

