Safe Exploitative Play with Untrusted Type Beliefs

Tongxin Li1∗

Tinashe Handina2

Shaolei Ren3

Adam Wierman2

1

School of Data Science
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
litongxin@cuhk.edu.cn
2
Computing + Mathematical Sciences
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, USA
{thandina, adamw}@caltech.edu
3
Electrical & Computer Engineering
University of California, Riverside, USA
shaolei@ucr.edu

Abstract
The combination of the Bayesian game and learning has a rich history, with the
idea of controlling a single agent in a system composed of multiple agents with
unknown behaviors given a set of types, each specifying a possible behavior for
the other agents. The idea is to plan an agent’s own actions with respect to those
types which it believes are most likely to maximize the payoff. However, the
type beliefs are often learned from past actions and likely to be incorrect. With
this perspective in mind, we consider an agent in a game with type predictions of
other components, and investigate the impact of incorrect beliefs to the agent’s
payoff. In particular, we formally define a tradeoff between risk and opportunity
by comparing the payoff obtained against the optimal payoff, which is represented
by a gap caused by trusting or distrusting the learned beliefs. Our main results
characterize the tradeoff by establishing upper and lower bounds on the Pareto
front for both normal-form and stochastic Bayesian games, with numerical results
provided.

1

Introduction
“The Chinese symbol for crisis is composed of two elements: one signifies danger
and the other opportunity.” — Lewis Mumford, 1944

The famous interpretation of the Chinese word for ‘crisis’ (known as 危機), although based on
mistaken etymology, captures the dual nature of risk and opportunity. It provides an interesting
metaphor for the inherent complexities within real-world multi-agent systems. These systems, where
risk and opportunity are often inextricably linked, play a pivotal role across diverse domains, ranging
from human-AI collaboration [1] and cyber-physical systems [2], to highly competitive environments
like real-time strategy games [3] and poker [4].
In conventional applied and theoretical frameworks, it is typically assumed that all agents either
cooperate or adhere to pre-defined policies [5, 6, 7, 8]. However, real-world scenarios often defy these
simplifications, presenting agents that display a spectrum of behaviors ranging from cooperative, to
heterogeneous, irrational, or even adversarial [9]. This deviation from expected behavior patterns
∗

Correspondence to: Tongxin Li <litongxin@cuhk.edu.cn>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

