MemoryFormer: Minimize Transformer
Computation by Removing Fully-Connected Layers

Ning Ding1∗ , Yehui Tang2∗ , Haochen Qin2 , Zhenli Zhou1 , Chao Xu1 , Lin Li3 ,
Kai Han2 , Heng Liao3 , Yunhe Wang2†
1

State Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
Huawei HiSilicon
dingning@stu.pku.edu.cn
xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn
{yehui.tang, yunhe.wang}@huawei.com

Abstract
In order to reduce the computational complexity of large language models, great
efforts have been made to to improve the efficiency of transformer models such as
linear attention and flash-attention. However, the model size and corresponding
computational complexity are constantly scaled up in pursuit of higher performance. In this work, we present MemoryFormer, a novel transformer architecture
which significantly reduces the computational complexity (FLOPs) from a new
perspective. We eliminate nearly all the computations of the transformer model
except for the necessary computation required by the multi-head attention operation.
This is made possible by utilizing an alternative method for feature transformation
to replace the linear projection of fully-connected layers. Specifically, we first
construct a group of in-memory lookup tables that store a large amount of discrete
vectors to replace the weight matrix used in linear projection. We then use a
hash algorithm to retrieve a correlated subset of vectors dynamically based on the
input embedding. The retrieved vectors combined together will form the output
embedding, which provides an estimation of the result of matrix multiplication
operation in a fully-connected layer. Compared to conducting matrix multiplication, retrieving data blocks from memory is a much cheaper operation which
requires little computations. We train MemoryFormer from scratch and conduct
extensive experiments on various benchmarks to demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed model.

1

Introduction

The Transformer model has made magnificent achievement in deep learning community since it
was made public. The Transformer not only successfully leads the revolution in the field of natural
language processing due to its excellent performance, but also motivates the innovation in model
architecture in other fields such as computer vision and speech recognition. Recently, large language
models (LLMs), transformers that are extremely scaled up in size, have drawn remarkable attention
of both researchers and non-researchers across the globe. The unprecedented emergent abilities that
LLMs demonstrate attract an increasing number of investments and researches, which point out a
potential pathway for the artificial general intelligence.
However, what comes along with the scaling lay is not only more intelligence, but also greater
consumption of computing resources. The ever-increasing computational complexity is currently the
main obstacle hindering the application and popularization of LLMs. In response to this situation,
∗

Equal Contribution.

†

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

