Demystify Mamba in Vision: A Linear Attention
Perspective

Dongchen Han1 Ziyi Wang1 Zhuofan Xia1 Yizeng Han1 Yifan Pu1 Chunjiang Ge1
Jun Song2 Shiji Song1 Bo Zheng2 Gao Huang1∗
1

Tsinghua University

2

Alibaba Group

Abstract
Mamba is an effective state space model with linear computation complexity. It
has recently shown impressive efficiency in dealing with high-resolution inputs
across various vision tasks. In this paper, we reveal that the powerful Mamba model
shares surprising similarities with linear attention Transformer, which typically
underperform conventional Transformer in practice. By exploring the similarities
and disparities between the effective Mamba and subpar linear attention Transformer, we provide comprehensive analyses to demystify the key factors behind
Mamba’s success. Specifically, we reformulate the selective state space model and
linear attention within a unified formulation, rephrasing Mamba as a variant of
linear attention Transformer with six major distinctions: input gate, forget gate,
shortcut, no attention normalization, single-head, and modified block design. For
each design, we meticulously analyze its pros and cons, and empirically evaluate its
impact on model performance in vision tasks. Interestingly, the results highlight the
forget gate and block design as the core contributors to Mamba’s success, while the
other four designs are less crucial. Based on these findings, we propose a MambaInspired Linear Attention (MILA) model by incorporating the merits of these two
key designs into linear attention. The resulting model outperforms various vision
Mamba models in both image classification and high-resolution dense prediction
tasks, while enjoying parallelizable computation and fast inference speed. Code is
available at https://github.com/LeapLabTHU/MLLA.

1

Introduction

Recently, state space models, exemplified by Mamba, have rapidly gained wide research interest. In
contrast to the quadratic complexity of prevailing Transformer models, the state-space-based Mamba
offers effective sequence modeling with linear complexity. This crucial property allows Mamba
to handle extremely long sequences with manageable computational costs, making it a promising
architecture for both natural language processing [14, 29] and visual recognition [57, 31].
However, Mamba is not the first model to achieve global modeling with linear complexity. Linear
attention [26], an early work, was proposed as an computationally efficient alternative to the widely
adopted Softmax attention [42], namely dot-product attention. Specifically, linear attention replaces
the non-linear Softmax function in attention operation with linear normalization. This enables a
change in computation order from (QK ⊤ )V to Q(K ⊤ V ), thus reducing computation complexity
from O(N 2 ) to O(N ). Despite its efficiency, previous works [4, 39, 15, 16] proved that linear
attention suffers from insufficient expressive power, making it impractical for real applications.
Surprisingly, we find a very close relationship between the formulas of high-performance Mamba
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

