Constrained Adaptive Attack: Effective Adversarial
Attack Against Deep Neural Networks for Tabular
Data
Thibault Simonetto
University of Luxembourg
Luxembourg
thibault.simonetto@uni.lu

Salah Ghamizi
LIST / RIKEN AIP
Luxembourg
salah.ghamizi@list.lu

Maxime Cordy
University of Luxembourg
Luxembourg
maxime.cordy@uni.lu

Abstract
State-of-the-art deep learning models for tabular data have recently achieved acceptable performance to be deployed in industrial settings. However, the robustness
of these models remains scarcely explored. Contrary to computer vision, there are
no effective attacks to properly evaluate the adversarial robustness of deep tabular
models due to intrinsic properties of tabular data, such as categorical features,
immutability, and feature relationship constraints. To fill this gap, we first propose
CAPGD, a gradient attack that overcomes the failures of existing gradient attacks
with adaptive mechanisms. This new attack does not require parameter tuning and
further degrades the accuracy, up to 81% points compared to the previous gradient
attacks. Second, we design CAA, an efficient evasion attack that combines our
CAPGD attack and MOEVA, the best search-based attack. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of our attacks on five architectures and four critical use cases. Our
empirical study demonstrates that CAA outperforms all existing attacks in 17 over
the 20 settings, and leads to a drop in the accuracy by up to 96.1% points and
21.9% points compared to CAPGD and MOEVA respectively while being up to
five times faster than MOEVA. Given the effectiveness and efficiency of our new
attacks, we argue that they should become the minimal test for any new defense or
robust architectures in tabular machine learning.

1

Introduction

Evasion attack is the process of slightly altering an original input into an adversarial example
designed to force a machine learning (ML) model to output a wrong decision. Robustness to
adversarial examples is a problem of growing concern among the secure ML community, with
over 10,000 publications on the subject since 2014 [7]. Recent studies also report real-world
occurrences of evasion attacks, which demonstrate the importance of studying and defending against
this phenomenon [20].
While research has studied the robustness of deep learning models in Computer Vision (CV) and
Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks, many real-world applications instead deal with tabular
data, including in critical fields like finance, energy, and healthcare. If classical “shallow” models (e.g.
random forests) have been the go-to solution to learn from tabular data [21], deep learning models
are becoming competitive [5]. This raises anew the need to study the robustness of these models.
However, robustness assessment for tabular deep learning models brings a number of new challenges
that previous solutions — because they were originally designed for CV or NLP tasks — do not
consider. One such challenge is the fact that tabular data exhibit feature constraints, i.e. complex
relationships and constraints across features. The satisfaction of these feature constraints can be a
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

