Stochastic Optimization Algorithms for Instrumental
Variable Regression with Streaming Data

Xuxing Chen♯
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Davis
xuxchen@ucdavis.edu

Abhishek Roy♯
Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute
University of California, San Diego
a2roy@ucsd.edu

Yifan Hu
College of Management, EPFL
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
yifan.hu@epfl.ch

Krishnakumar Balasubramanian
Department of Statistics
University of California, Davis
kbala@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
We develop and analyze algorithms for instrumental variable regression by viewing
the problem as a conditional stochastic optimization problem. In the context of
least-squares instrumental variable regression, our algorithms neither require matrix
inversions nor mini-batches and provides a fully online approach for performing
instrumental variable regression with streaming data. When the true model is linear,
we derive rates of convergence in expectation, that are of order O(log T /T ) and
O(1/T 1−ι ) for any ι > 0, respectively under the availability of two-sample and
one-sample oracles, where T is the number of iterations. Importantly, under the
availability of the two-sample oracle, our procedure avoids explicitly modeling
and estimating the relationship between the independent and the instrumental
variables, demonstrating the benefit of the proposed approach over recent works
based on reformulating the problem as minimax optimization problems. Numerical
experiments are provided to corroborate the theoretical results.

1

Introduction

Instrumental variable analysis is widely used in fields like econometrics, health care [TM17], social
science [Bol12], and online advertisement to estimate the causal effect of a random variable, X,
on an outcome variable, Y , when an unobservable confounder influences both. By identifying an
instrumental variable correlated with the variable X but unrelated to the confounders, researchers
can isolate the exogenous variation in X and estimate a causal relationship between X and Y . In
the context of regression, Instrumental Variable Regression (IVaR) addresses endogeneity issues
when an independent variable is correlated with the error term in the regression model, leveraging an
instrument variable Z such that Y is independent of X|Z. In this paper, we focus on the following
statistical model:
Y = gθ∗ (X) + ϵ1

with X = hγ ∗ (Z) + ϵ2

(1)

where X ∈ Rdx and ϵ1 are correlated and ϵ2 is a centered unobserved noise (independent of Z ∈ Rdz ),
leading to confounding in the model between X and Y ∈ R. Here ϵ1 and ϵ2 are dependent, and
θ∗ and γ ∗ are true parameters for the respective function g and h. Our goal is to design efficient
algorithms that recovers θ∗ from the data.
♯

XC and AR contributed equally to this work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

