DeNetDM: Debiasing by Network Depth Modulation

Silpa Vadakkeeveetil Sreelatha∗ 1 Adarsh Kappiyath∗ 1 Abhra Chaudhuri1,2,3 Anjan Dutta1
1
University of Surrey 2 University of Exeter 3 Fujitsu Research of Europe
{s.vadakkeeveetilsreelatha, a.kappiyath, anjan.dutta}@surrey.ac.uk, abhra.chaudhuri@fujitsu.com

Abstract
Neural networks trained on biased datasets tend to inadvertently learn spurious
correlations, hindering generalization. We formally prove that (1) samples that
exhibit spurious correlations lie on a lower rank manifold relative to the ones that
do not; and (2) the depth of a network acts as an implicit regularizer on the rank
of the attribute subspace that is encoded in its representations. Leveraging these
insights, we present DeNetDM, a novel debiasing method that uses network depth
modulation as a way of developing robustness to spurious correlations. Using a
training paradigm derived from Product of Experts, we create both biased and
debiased branches with deep and shallow architectures and then distill knowledge
to produce the target debiased model. Our method requires no bias annotations or
explicit data augmentation while performing on par with approaches that require
either or both. We demonstrate that DeNetDM outperforms existing debiasing
techniques on both synthetic and real-world datasets by 5%. The project page is
available at https://vssilpa.github.io/denetdm/.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have made remarkable progress across various domains by delivering
superior performance on large-scale datasets. However, while the benefits of training DNNs on
large-scale datasets are undeniable, these algorithms also tend to inadvertently acquire unwanted
biases Shah et al. (2020), hampering their generalization. For instance, a classifier predominantly
trained to recognize camels in desert landscapes could encounter difficulties when attempting to
identify a camel situated on a road Kim et al. (2021). While a certain degree of bias can enhance
model performance, as exemplified by the assumption that cars usually travel on roads Choi et al.
(2020), it remains critical to identify and address unwanted biases. Previous methods to address
this problem rely on bias annotations as suggested in Majumdar et al. (2021); Kim et al. (2019);
Sagawa et al. (2020); Wang et al. (2020), and may involve predefined bias types, such as texture bias
mitigation approach in Geirhos et al. (2019). However, acquiring bias labels with human resources is
expensive and time-consuming. Recent studies, including Nam et al. (2020) and Lee et al. (2021),
have shifted towards debiasing methods without bias labels, with approaches like Nam et al. (2020)
emphasizing bias-aligned samples and reweighting bias-conflicting samples, while others like Lee
et al. (2021); Kim et al. (2021) introduce augmentation strategies to diversify bias-conflicting points.
We propose DeNetDM (Debiasing by Network Depth Modulation), a novel approach to automatically
identify and mitigate spurious correlations in image classifiers without relying on explicit data
augmentation or reweighting. We start by showing that a sample set that exhibits bias through
spurious correlation of attributes lies on a manifold with an effective dimensionality (rank) lower than
its bias-free counterpart. We then leverage this finding to formally derive a relationship between the
depth of a network and the true rank of the attribute (not sample) subspace that it encodes. We find
for a set of attributes that are equally likely to minimize the empirical risk, a deeper network prefers
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

