AdaSociety: An Adaptive Environment with Social
Structures for Multi-Agent Decision-Making

3

Yizhe Huang*2,1

Xingbo Wang*†2

Hao Liu†3

Fanqi Kong2,1

Min Tang5,1

Song-Chun Zhu1,2

Mingjie Bi1

Siyuan Qi1

Aoyang Qin4,1
Xue Feng

1

1
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI 2 Peking University
New York University 4 Tsinghua University 5 University of Science and Technology of China
szhyz@pku.edu.cn, jacksimbol@stu.pku.edu.cn, fengxue@bigai.ai

Abstract
Traditional interactive environments limit agents’ intelligence growth with fixed
tasks. Recently, single-agent environments address this by generating new tasks
based on agent actions, enhancing task diversity. We consider the decision-making
problem in multi-agent settings, where tasks are further influenced by social connections, affecting rewards and information access. However, existing multi-agent
environments lack a combination of adaptive physical surroundings and social
connections, hindering the learning of intelligent behaviors. To address this, we
introduce AdaSociety, a customizable multi-agent environment featuring expanding
state and action spaces, alongside explicit and alterable social structures. As agents
progress, the environment adaptively generates new tasks with social structures for
agents to undertake. In AdaSociety, we develop three mini-games showcasing distinct social structures and tasks. Initial results demonstrate that specific social structures can promote both individual and collective benefits, though current reinforcement learning and LLM-based algorithms show limited effectiveness in leveraging
social structures to enhance performance. Overall, AdaSociety serves as a valuable
research platform for exploring intelligence in diverse physical and social settings.
The code is available at https://github.com/bigai-ai/AdaSociety.

1

Introduction

Classic learning environments [55, 41, 9, 42, 34] have agents trained in small and stationary worlds,
which hinders the improvement of agents’ intelligence. The learning process stagnates once the
environments can no longer provide novel data for agents’ explorations. Additionally, agents
trained on a fixed task set may suffer from a loss of generalization ability [13]. Single-agent
environments [18, 25, 61] set out to solve this problem by constructing adaptive environments that
continuously generate new tasks based on agent actions, providing a multitudinous task set.
In multi-agent settings, however, the task set is determined by not only physical surroundings but also
social connections among agents. Social connections dramatically impact agents’ decision-making
by shaping their reward structures and information access [20], and different social structures endow
the environments with radically different research problems. For example, centralized scenarios focus
on issues like credit assignment and consensus establishment [21, 44], while decentralized settings
require agents to address opponent modeling issues and non-stationarity [3, 21, 29, 33].
∗
Equal contribution. † This work was conducted while XW and HL were interns at BIGAI. Corresponding
author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

