ReFT: Representation Finetuning
for Language Models

Zhengxuan Wu∗† Aryaman Arora∗† Zheng Wang† Atticus Geiger‡
Dan Jurafsky† Christopher D. Manning† Christopher Potts†
†
Stanford University ‡ Pr(Ai)2 R Group
{wuzhengx,aryamana,peterwz,atticusg}@stanford.edu
{jurafsky,manning,cgpotts}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT) methods seek to adapt large neural models
via updates to a small number of weights. However, much prior interpretability
work has shown that representations encode rich semantic information, suggesting
that editing representations might be a more powerful alternative. We pursue
this hypothesis by developing a family of Representation Finetuning (ReFT)
methods. ReFT methods operate on a frozen base model and learn task-specific
interventions on hidden representations. We define a strong instance of the ReFT
family, Low-rank Linear Subspace ReFT (LoReFT), and we identify an ablation of
this method that trades some performance for increased efficiency. Both are drop-in
replacements for existing PEFTs and learn interventions that are 15×–65× more
parameter-efficient than LoRA. We showcase LoReFT on eight commonsense reasoning tasks, four arithmetic reasoning tasks, instruction-tuning, and GLUE. In all
these evaluations, our ReFTs deliver the best balance of efficiency and performance,
and almost always outperform state-of-the-art PEFTs. We release a generic ReFT
training library publicly at https://github.com/stanfordnlp/pyreft.

1

Introduction

Pretrained language models (LMs) are frequently finetuned to adapt them to new domains or tasks
[Dai and Le, 2015]. With finetuning, a single base model can be adapted to a variety of tasks given
only small amounts of in-domain data. However, finetuning large LMs is expensive. Parameterefficient finetuning (PEFT) methods propose to address the high costs of full finetuning by updating a
small number of weights. This reduces memory usage and training time, and PEFTs achieve similar
performance to full finetuning in many settings [Hu et al., 2023].
A hallmark of current state-of-the-art PEFTs is that they modify weights rather than representations.
However, much prior interpretability work has shown that representations encode rich semantic
information, suggesting that editing representations might be a more powerful alternative to weight
updates. In this paper, we pursue this hypothesis by developing and motivating Representation
Finetuning (ReFT). Instead of adapting model weights, ReFT methods train interventions that
manipulate a small fraction of model representations in order to steer model behaviours to solve
downstream tasks at inference time. ReFT methods are drop-in replacements for weight-based PEFTs.
This approach is inspired by recent work in LM interpretability that intervenes on representations to
find faithful causal mechanisms [Geiger et al., 2023] and to steer model behaviours at inference time
[Turner et al., 2023, Li et al., 2024], and it can be seen as a generalisation of the representation-editing
work of Wu et al. [2024a], Turner et al. [2023], and Zou et al. [2023] (see appendix B for details).
We focus on a strong and highly efficient instance of the ReFT family that we call Low-rank
Linear Subspace ReFT (LoReFT). LoReFT is a parametrisation of ReFT that intervenes on hidden
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

