Curriculum Fine-tuning of Vision Foundation Model
for Medical Image Classification Under Label Noise

Minhwan Ko Sungho Shin Kangmin Kim Kyoobin Lee∗
Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology
{yeon_guk, mhko1998, hogili89, kgmin156}@gm.gist.ac.kr kyoobinlee@gist.ac.kr
Yeonguk Yu

Abstract
Deep neural networks have demonstrated remarkable performance in various vision
tasks, but their success heavily depends on the quality of the training data. Noisy
labels are a critical issue in medical datasets and can significantly degrade model
performance. Previous clean sample selection methods have not utilized the well
pre-trained features of vision foundation models (VFMs) and assumed that training
begins from scratch. In this paper, we propose CUFIT, a curriculum fine-tuning
paradigm of VFMs for medical image classification under label noise. Our method
is motivated by the fact that linear probing of VFMs is relatively unaffected by
noisy samples, as it does not update the feature extractor of the VFM, thus robustly
classifying the training samples. Subsequently, curriculum fine-tuning of two
adapters is conducted, starting with clean sample selection from the linear probing
phase. Our experimental results demonstrate that CUFIT outperforms previous
methods across various medical image benchmarks. Specifically, our method
surpasses previous baselines by 5.0%, 2.1%, 4.6%, and 5.8% at a 40% noise
rate on the HAM10000, APTOS-2019, BloodMnist, and OrgancMnist datasets,
respectively. Furthermore, we provide extensive analyses to demonstrate the impact
of our method on noisy label detection. For instance, our method shows higher
label precision and recall compared to previous approaches. Our work highlights
the potential of leveraging VFMs in medical image classification under challenging
conditions of noisy labels.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have demonstrated remarkable performance across various tasks, including
classification, detection, and segmentation [20, 16, 19, 57]. In medical imaging, these neural networks
leverage large amounts of labeled data to train models capable of accurately detecting or classifying
medical conditions from images such as dermatoscopes, X-rays, MRIs, and CT scans. However,
in practical settings, data often contain noisy labels and it is well established that neural networks
perform well only when the quality of training data is sufficiently high [42, 29, 5]. Noisy labels occur
when the data annotations—the labels assigned to training images—are incorrect or inconsistent.
This issue is particularly problematic in medical imaging, where annotating images is more complex
compared to natural images [53, 25]. Consequently, improving the robustness of neural networks
against noisy labels is a crucial area of research, directly affecting the effectiveness and reliability of
medical imaging technologies.
A large number of algorithms have been developed to address the issue of performance degradation
caused by noisy samples [42]. In particular, clean sample selection methods, such as MentorNet [24],
Co-teaching [17], Co-teaching+ [56], JoCor [47], and CoDis [50], have demonstrated superior
performance without requiring modifications to the model architecture or training loss. The core
∗

Corresponding author: Kyoobin Lee. Our code is available at github.com/gist-ailab/CUFIT.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

