TrackIME: Enhanced Video Point Tracking via
Instance Motion Estimation
Seong Hyeon Park1

Huiwon Jang1
Byungwoo Jeon1
Sukmin Yun2
Paul Hongsuck Seo3
Jinwoo Shin1
1
2
3
KAIST
Hanyang University ERICA
Korea University
{seonghyp, huiwoen0516, imbw2024, jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr
sukminyun@hanyang.ac.kr
phseo@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Tracking points in video frames is essential for understanding video content. However, the task is fundamentally hindered by the computation demands for brute-force
correspondence matching across the frames. As the current models down-sample
the frame resolutions to mitigate this challenge, they fall short in accurately representing point trajectories due to information truncation. Instead, we address the
challenge by pruning the search space for point tracking and let the model process
only the important regions of the frames without down-sampling. Our first key
idea is to identify the object instance and its trajectory over the frames, then prune
the regions of the frame that do not contain the instance. Concretely, to estimate
the instance’s trajectory, we track a group of points on the instance and aggregate
their motion trajectories. Furthermore, to deal with the occlusions in complex
scenes, we propose to compensate for the occluded points while tracking. To this
end, we introduce a unified framework that jointly performs point tracking and
segmentation, providing synergistic effects between the two tasks. For example,
the segmentation results enable a tracking model to avoid the occluded points
referring to the instance mask, and conversely, the improved tracking results can
help to produce more accurate segmentation masks. Our framework can be easily
incorporated with various tracking models, and we demonstrate its efficacy for
enhanced point tracking throughout extensive experiments. For example, on the
recent TAP-Vid benchmark, our framework consistently improves all baselines,
e.g., up to 13.5% improvement on the average Jaccard metric. The project url is
https://trackime.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Obtaining accurate point trajectories over the video frames is crucial for understanding complex
dynamics in video data, a necessity for advanced spatial-temporal tasks like action recognition [2],
novel-view rendering [3], video frame prediction/interpolation [4], and video depth estimation [5].
Recently, video point tracking task [6, 7, 8, 9, 10] has witnessed rapid progress, which aims to predict
the trajectory and visibility1 of a given query point, proving long-term trajectories robust to partial
occlusions of objects in real video scenes.
Despite their success, we find current point tracking models are fundamentally challenged by an
excessive computation demand since the task requires brute-force comparisons over every spatial
location in every frame in a given video. As a result, to meet the computation constraints, the models
1
The confidence whether the trajectory is visible in each frame; i.e., the point is not out-of-frame and not
occluded by different objects.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

