The PRISM Alignment Dataset: What Participatory,
Representative and Individualised Human Feedback
Reveals About the Subjective and Multicultural
Alignment of Large Language Models

Hannah Rose Kirk1∗ Alexander Whitefield2 Paul Röttger3 Andrew Bean1
Katerina Margatina4‡ Juan Ciro5,11 Rafael Mosquera5,6 Max Bartolo7,8
Adina Williams9 He He10 Bertie Vidgen1,11† Scott A. Hale1,12†
1
University of Oxford 2 University of Pennsylvania 3 Bocconi University
4
6
AWS AI Labs 5 ML Commons
Factored AI 7 UCL 8 Cohere
9
10
MetaAI
New York University 11 Contextual AI 12 Meedan

Abstract
Human feedback is central to the alignment of Large Language Models (LLMs).
However, open questions remain about methods (how), domains (where), people
(who) and objectives (to what end) of feedback processes. To navigate these questions, we introduce P RISM, a dataset that maps the sociodemographics and stated
preferences of 1,500 diverse participants from 75 countries, to their contextual
preferences and fine-grained feedback in 8,011 live conversations with 21 LLMs.
With P RISM, we contribute (i) wider geographic and demographic participation in
feedback; (ii) census-representative samples for two countries (UK, US); and (iii)
individualised ratings that link to detailed participant profiles, permitting personalisation and attribution of sample artefacts. We target subjective and multicultural
perspectives on value-laden and controversial issues, where we expect interpersonal
and cross-cultural disagreement. We use P RISM in three case studies to demonstrate
the need for careful consideration of which humans provide what alignment data.
Data & Code: github.com/HannahKirk/prism-alignment
Data & Dataset Card: huggingface.co/datasets/HannahRoseKirk/prism-alignment

1

Introduction

Human feedback serves a direct role for the alignment of large language models (LLMs), defined as
the steering of AI behaviour towards a set of preferences or values. This increased emphasis on human
feedback raises unresolved questions: how we collect human feedback when designing methodologies
that rely on ordinal or cardinal scales, broad or fine-grained desiderata, and explicit or implicit signals;
where we focus human labour when selecting domains, topics or tasks to collect feedback over; who
we ask for feedback when recruiting participants to voice their idiosyncratic preferences, values, or
beliefs [1]; and to what end when specifying an objective to pursue personalised alignment [2–4] or
to aggregate individual preferences into collective outcomes favourable for societies at large [5–9].
Despite the success of human feedback learning [10, 11], answering these questions is constrained by
gaps in existing datasets, such as (i) over-reliance on binary A/B comparisons, without fine-grained
ratings or explanations [12]; (ii) small or biased samples recruited from narrow crowdwork or tech
communities [10, 13] (iii) limited sample information (annotator IDs or sociodemographics) [14];
and (iv) scarce documentation for how values are operationalised [15, 16]. Most datasets rely only on
∗

{hannah.kirk,scott.hale}@oii.ox.ac.uk †Joint last authors; ‡Work done at University of Sheffield

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

