ClavaDDPM: Multi-relational Data Synthesis with
Cluster-guided Diffusion Models
Wei Pang1,2 , Masoumeh Shafieinejad2 , Lucy Liu3 , Stephanie Hazlewood3 , and Xi He 1,2∗
1

University of Waterloo
2
Vector Institute
3
Royal Bank of Canada
w3pang@uwaterloo.ca, masoumeh@vectorinstitute.ai, lucy.z.liu@rbc.com,
stephanie.hazlewood@rbc.com, xi.he@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
Recent research in tabular data synthesis has focused on single tables, whereas realworld applications often involve complex data with tens or hundreds of interconnected tables. Previous approaches to synthesizing multi-relational (multi-table)2
data fall short in two key aspects: scalability for larger datasets and capturing
long-range dependencies, such as correlations between attributes spread across different tables. Inspired by the success of diffusion models in tabular data modeling,
we introduce Cluster Latent Variable guided Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic
Models (ClavaDDPM). This novel approach leverages clustering labels as intermediaries to model relationships between tables, specifically focusing on foreign key
constraints. ClavaDDPM leverages the robust generation capabilities of diffusion
models while incorporating efficient algorithms to propagate the learned latent variables across tables. This enables ClavaDDPM to capture long-range dependencies
effectively. Extensive evaluations on multi-table datasets of varying sizes show
that ClavaDDPM significantly outperforms existing methods for these long-range
dependencies while remaining competitive on utility metrics for single-table data.

1

Introduction

Motivation. Synthetic data has attracted significant interest for its ability to tackle key challenges
in accessing high-quality training datasets. These challenges include: i) data scarcity [14, 53], ii)
privacy [2, 19], and iii) bias and fairness [46]. The interest in synthetic data has extended to various
commercial settings as well, notably in healthcare [18] and finance [36] sectors. The synthesis of
tabular data, among all data modalities, is a critical task with approximately 79% of data scientists
working with it on a daily basis [45]. While the literature on tabular data synthesis has predominantly
focused on single table (relation) data, datasets in real-world scenarios often comprise multiple
interconnected tables and raise new challenges to traditional single-table learning [38, 3, 12, 22].
These challenges have even enforced a join-as-one approach [15, 17], where the multi relations are
first joined as a single table. However, with more than a couple of relations (let alone tens or hundreds
of them as in the finance sector) this approach is neither desirable nor feasible.
Challenges. Synthetic Data Vault [35] and PrivLava [5] are recent efforts to synthesize multirelational data using hierarchical and marginal-based approaches. These methods exhibit significant
∗

Corresponding author.
In the context of databases, a table is formally referred to as a relation. Throughout this work, we use these
terms interchangeably.
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

