Iteratively Refined Early Interaction Alignment for
Subgraph Matching based Graph Retrieval

Ashwin Ramachandran1∗ Vaibhav Raj2∗ Indrayumna Roy2
Soumen Chakrabarti2 Abir De2
1
UC San Diego 2 IIT Bombay
ashwinramg@ucsd.edu
{vaibhavraj, indraroy15, soumen, abir}@cse.iitb.ac.in

Abstract
Graph retrieval based on subgraph isomorphism has several real-world applications
such as scene graph retrieval, molecular fingerprint detection and circuit design.
Roy et al. [35] proposed IsoNet, a late interaction model for subgraph matching,
which first computes the node and edge embeddings of each graph independently
of paired graph and then computes a trainable alignment map. Here, we present
IsoNet++, an early interaction graph neural network (GNN), based on several
technical innovations. First, we compute embeddings of all nodes by passing
messages within and across the two input graphs, guided by an injective alignment
between their nodes. Second, we update this alignment in a lazy fashion over
multiple rounds. Within each round, we run a layerwise GNN from scratch, based
on the current state of the alignment. After the completion of one round of GNN,
we use the last-layer embeddings to update the alignments, and proceed to the next
round. Third, IsoNet++ incorporates a novel notion of node-pair partner interaction.
Traditional early interaction computes attention between a node and its potential
partners in the other graph, the attention then controlling messages passed across
graphs. In contrast, we consider node pairs (not single nodes) as potential partners.
Existence of an edge between the nodes in one graph and non-existence in the other
provide vital signals for refining the alignment. Our experiments on several datasets
show that the alignments get progressively refined with successive rounds, resulting
in significantly better retrieval performance than existing methods. We demonstrate
that all three innovations contribute to the enhanced accuracy. Our code and
datasets are publicly available at https://github.com/structlearning/isonetpp.

1

Introduction

In graph retrieval based on subgraph isomorphism, the goal is to identify a subset of graphs from
a corpus, denoted {Gc }, wherein each retrieved graph contains a subgraph isomorphic to a given
query graph Gq . Numerous real-life applications, e.g., molecular fingerprint detection [6], scene
graph retrieval [16], circuit design [29] and frequent subgraph mining [43], can be formulated using
subgraph isomorphism. Akin to other retrieval systems, the key challenge is to efficiently score
corpus graphs against queries.
Recent work on neural graph retrieval [1, 2, 11, 22, 23, 35, 31, 46] has shown significant promise.
Among them, Lou et al. [23, Neuromatch] and Roy et al. [35, IsoNet] focus specifically on subgraph
isomorphism. They employ graph neural networks (GNNs) to obtain embeddings of query and corpus
graphs and compute the relevance score using a form of order embedding [39]. In addition, IsoNet
also approximates an injective alignment between the query and corpus graphs. These two models
operate in a late interaction paradigm, where the representations of the query and corpus graphs are
*

Equal contribution. Ashwin Ramachandran did this work while at IIT Bombay.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

