Reinforcement Learning with Adaptive
Regularization for Safe Control of Critical Systems

Haozhe Tian∗ Homayoun Hamedmoghadam Robert Shorten Pietro Ferraro
Dyson School of Design Engineering
Imperial College London
SW7 2AZ, London, UK
{haozhe.tian21, h.hamed, r.shorten, p.ferraro}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a powerful method for controlling dynamic systems, but its learning mechanism can lead to unpredictable actions that undermine
the safety of critical systems. Here, we propose RL with Adaptive Regularization
(RL-AR), an algorithm that enables safe RL exploration by combining the RL policy with a policy regularizer that hard-codes the safety constraints. RL-AR performs policy combination via a “focus module,” which determines the appropriate
combination depending on the state—relying more on the safe policy regularizer
for less-exploited states while allowing unbiased convergence for well-exploited
states. In a series of critical control applications, we demonstrate that RL-AR not
only ensures safety during training but also achieves a return competitive with the
standards of model-free RL that disregards safety.

1

Introduction

A wide array of control applications, ranging from medical to engineering, fundamentally deals
with critical systems, i.e., systems of vital importance where the control actions have to guarantee
no harm to the system functionality. Examples include managing nuclear fusion [Degrave et al.,
2022], performing robotic surgeries [Datta et al., 2021], and devising patient treatment strategies
[Komorowski et al., 2018]. Due to the critical nature of these systems, the optimal control policy
must be explored while ensuring the safety and reliability of the control algorithm.
Reinforcement Learning (RL) aims to identify the optimal policy by learning from an agent’s interactions with the controlled environment. RL has been widely used to control complex systems
[Silver et al., 2016, Ouyang et al., 2022]; however, the learning of an RL agent involves trial and
error, which can violate safety constraints in critical system applications [Henderson et al., 2018,
Recht, 2019, Cheng et al., 2019b]. To date, developing reliable and efficient RL-based algorithms
for real-world “single-life” applications, where the control must avoid unsafety from the first trial
[Chen et al., 2022], remains a challenge. The existing safe RL algorithms either fail to ensure safety
during the training phase [Achiam et al., 2017, Yu et al., 2022a] or require significant computational
overhead for action verification [Cheng et al., 2019a, Anderson et al., 2020]. As a result, classic
control methods are often favored in critical applications, even though their performance heavily
relies on the existence of an accurate model of the environment.
Here, we address the safety issue of RL in scenarios where “estimated” environment models are
available (or can be built) to derive sub-optimal control policy priors. These scenarios are representative of many real-world critical applications [Hovorka et al., 2002, Liepe et al., 2014, Hippisley-Cox
et al., 2017, Rathi et al., 2021]. Consider the example of devising a control policy that prescribes the
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

