Towards Dynamic Message Passing on Graphs

Junshu Sun1,2 Chenxue Yang3 Xiangyang Ji4 Qingming Huang1,2,5 Shuhui Wang1,5∗
1
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Agriculture Information Institute, CAAS 4 Tsinghua University 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory
{sunjunshu21s,wangshuhui}@ict.ac.cn
yangchenxue@caas.cn xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Message passing plays a vital role in graph neural networks (GNNs) for effective
feature learning. However, the over-reliance on input topology diminishes the
efficacy of message passing and restricts the ability of GNNs. Despite efforts to
mitigate the reliance, existing study encounters message-passing bottlenecks or
high computational expense problems, which invokes the demands for flexible
message passing with low complexity. In this paper, we propose a novel dynamic
message-passing mechanism for GNNs. It projects graph nodes and learnable
pseudo nodes into a common space with measurable spatial relations between
them. With nodes moving in the space, their evolving relations facilitate flexible
pathway construction for a dynamic message-passing process. Associating pseudo
nodes to input graphs with their measured relations, graph nodes can communicate
with each other intermediately through pseudo nodes under linear complexity. We
further develop a GNN model named N2 based on our dynamic message-passing
mechanism. N2 employs a single recurrent layer to recursively generate the
Uniform connection
Dynamic
connection
displacements of
nodes and
construct optimal dynamic pathways. Evaluation on
eighteen benchmarks demonstrates the superior performance of N2 over popular
GNNs. N2 successfully scales to large-scale benchmarks and requires significantly
fewer parameters for graph classification with the shared recurrent layer.
class-0 graph node

class-1 graph node
Introduction

1

pseudo node

Uniform pathway
The inherent irregular structure of graphs poses nontrivial challenges in graph learning [77]. To enable effective
learning on graphs, graph neural networks (GNNs) [33, 64]
Uniform designed
connection
have been specifically
for graph-structured data.
Within GNN models, message passing serves as a crucial
function in extracting informative graph features [22, 63].
Dynamic pathway
The vanilla message passing [33, 66] applies node-centric
class-0
aggregation constrained between the adjacent
nodes. During
graph node
this aggregation process, central nodes access their neighclass-1 multi-hop
bors in an isotropic
[29] and aggregate
Dynamicmanner
connection
graph node
features iteratively. In consequence, the vanilla message
class-0 graph node
pseudo node leading
pseudo node
passing relies heavily on the input graph structure,
class-1 graph node
to over-smoothing [46] or over-squashing [2, 14, 15] issues
on GNNs.
Figure 1: Comparison between
To further improve the effectiveness of GNNs for graph different connection patterns for
representation learning, one straightforward solution is to pseudo nodes and graph nodes.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

