MutaPLM: Protein Language Modeling for Mutation
Explanation and Engineering

Yizhen Luo1,2,† , Zikun Nie1,2,† , Massimo Hong1,2 ,
Suyuan Zhao1,2 , Hao Zhou1,∗, Zaiqing Nie1,3,∗
1
Institute of AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
3
Pharmolix Inc.
{yz-luo22,nzk24,hongcd21,zhaosy23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{zhouhao,zaiqing}@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Studying protein mutations within amino acid sequences holds tremendous significance in life sciences. Protein language models (PLMs) have demonstrated
strong capabilities in broad biological applications. However, due to architectural
design and lack of supervision, PLMs model mutations implicitly with evolutionary
plausibility, which is not satisfactory to serve as explainable and engineerable tools
in real-world studies. To address these issues, we present MutaPLM, a unified
framework for interpreting and navigating protein mutations with protein language
models. MutaPLM introduces a protein delta network that captures explicit protein
mutation representations within a unified feature space, and a transfer learning
pipeline with a chain-of-thought (CoT) strategy to harvest protein mutation knowledge from biomedical texts. We also construct MutaDescribe, the first large-scale
protein mutation dataset with rich textual annotations, which provides cross-modal
supervision signals. Through comprehensive experiments, we demonstrate that
MutaPLM excels at providing human-understandable explanations for mutational
effects and prioritizing novel mutations with desirable properties. Our code, model,
and data are open-sourced at https://github.com/PharMolix/MutaPLM.

1

Introduction

Studying protein evolution through mutations within amino acid sequences is a central research
topic in life sciences [1–3]. Despite immense research efforts, a large number of protein mutations
with biological significance remain under-explored, highlighting the demand for in-silico tools to
model these mutations. Practically, the tool should meet two requirements. First, it should be
explainable, providing insightful and human-understandable interpretations for mutational effects.
This is crucial for broad biological applications ranging from identifying immune-escape pathogens
[4, 5] to interpreting the mechanisms of human diseases [6, 7]. Additionally, the tool should be
engineerable, proposing protein mutations that satisfy desirable properties such as catalytic activity
and thermostability. This process is known as directed evolution [8, 9], the most prevailing approach
for protein design in the laboratory, which offers substantial benefits across various application fields,
including industry [10], biotechnology [11], and therapeutics [12].
To achieve these goals, deep learning models [13–15] have emerged to capture evolutionary information from protein sequences. Recently, the development of protein language models (PLMs)
†
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

