Label Noise: Ignorance Is Bliss

Yilun Zhu
EECS
University of Michigan
allanzhu@umich.edu

Jianxin Zhang
EECS
University of Michigan
jianxinz@umich.edu

Aditya Gangrade
ECE
Boston University
gangrade@bu.edu

Clayton Scott
EECS, Statistics
University of Michigan
clayscot@umich.edu

Abstract
We establish a new theoretical framework for learning under multi-class, instancedependent label noise. This framework casts learning with label noise as a form
of domain adaptation, in particular, domain adaptation under posterior drift. We
introduce the concept of relative signal strength (RSS), a pointwise measure that
quantifies the transferability from noisy to clean posterior. Using RSS, we establish
nearly matching upper and lower bounds on the excess risk. Our theoretical
findings support the simple Noise Ignorant Empirical Risk Minimization (NI-ERM)
principle, which minimizes empirical risk while ignoring label noise. Finally, we
translate this theoretical insight into practice: by using NI-ERM to fit a linear
classifier on top of a self-supervised feature extractor, we achieve state-of-the-art
performance on the CIFAR-N data challenge.

1

Introduction

The problem of classification with label noise can be stated in terms of random variables X, Y , and Ye ,
where X is the feature vector, Y ∈ {1, . . . , K} is the true label associated to X, and Ye ∈ {1, . . . , K}
is a noisy version of Y . The learner has access to i.i.d. realizations of (X, Ye ), and the objective is to
learn a classifier that optimizes the risk associated with (X, Y ).
In recent years, there has been a surge of interest in the challenging setting of instance (i.e., feature)
dependent label noise, in which Ye can depend on both Y and X. While several algorithms have been
developed, there remains relatively little theory regarding algorithm performance and the fundamental
limits of this learning paradigm.

This work develops a theoretical framework for learning under multi-class, instance-dependent label
noise. Our framework hinges on the concept of relative signal strength, which is a point-wise measure
of “noisiness” in a label noise problem. Using relative signal strength to charachterize the difficulty
of a label noise problem, we establish nearly matching upper and lower bounds for excess risk. We
further identify distributional assumptions that ensure that the lower and upper bounds tend to zero as
the sample size n grows, implying that consistent learning is possible.
Surprisingly, Noise Ignorant Empirical Risk Minimization (NI-ERM) principle, which conducts
empirical risk minimization as if no label noise exists, is (nearly) minimax optimal. To translate
this insight into practice, we use NI-ERM to fit a linear classifier on top of a self-supervised feature
extractor, achieving state-of-the-art performance on the CIFAR-N data challenge.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

