Neural Isometries:
Taming Transformations for Equivariant ML

Thomas W. Mitchel
PlayStation
tommy.mitchel@sony.com

Michael Taylor
PlayStation
mike.taylor@sony.com

Vincent Sitzmann
MIT
sitzmann@mit.edu

Abstract
Real-world geometry and 3D vision tasks are replete with challenging symmetries
that defy tractable analytical expression. In this paper, we introduce Neural Isometries, an autoencoder framework which learns to map the observation space to a
general-purpose latent space wherein encodings are related by isometries whenever
their corresponding observations are geometrically related in world space. Specifically, we regularize the latent space such that maps between encodings preserve
a learned inner product and commute with a learned functional operator, in the
same manner as rigid-body transformations commute with the Laplacian. This
approach forms an effective backbone for self-supervised representation learning,
and we demonstrate that a simple off-the-shelf equivariant network operating in the
pre-trained latent space can achieve results on par with meticulously-engineered,
handcrafted networks designed to handle complex, nonlinear symmetries. Furthermore, isometric maps capture information about the respective transformations in
world space, and we show that this allows us to regress camera poses directly from
the coefficients of the maps between encodings of adjacent views of a scene.

1

Introduction

We constantly capture lossy observations of our world – images, for
instance, are 2D projections of the 3D world. Observations captured consecutively in time are often related by transformations which are easily
described in world space, but are intractable in the space of observations.
For instance, video frames captured by a camera moving through a static
scene are fully described by a combination of the 3D scene geometry
and SE(3) camera poses. In contrast, the image space transformations
between these frames can only be characterized by optical flow, a highdimensional vector field that does not itself have any easily tractable
low-dimensional representation.
Geometric deep learning seeks to build neural network architectures that
are provably robust to transformations acting on their inputs, such as rotations [1–3], dilations [4, 5], and projective transformations [6, 7]. However, such approaches are only tractable for transformations that have
group structure, and, even in those cases, still require meticulously handcrafted and complex architectures. Yet, many real-world transformations
of interest, for instance in vision and geometry processing, altogether
lack identifiable group structure, such as the effect of camera motion
in image space—see Fig. 1 to the right. Even when group-structured,
they are often non-linear and non-compact, such as is the case of image
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

Encoder
Latent Space

Isometry

Input to generic equivariant NN

Figure 1: Neural Isometries find latent spaces
where complex transformations become tractable.

