Contextual Active Model Selection
Xuefeng Liu1∗, Fangfang Xia2 , Rick L. Stevens1,2 , Yuxin Chen1
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago
2
Argonne National Laboratory

Abstract
While training models and labeling data are resource-intensive, a wealth of pretrained models and unlabeled data exists. To effectively utilize these resources, we
present an approach to actively select pre-trained models while minimizing labeling
costs. We frame this as an online contextual active model selection problem: At
each round, the learner receives an unlabeled data point as a context. The objective
is to adaptively select the best model to make a prediction while limiting label
requests. To tackle this problem, we propose CAMS, a contextual active model
selection algorithm that relies on two novel components: (1) a contextual model
selection mechanism, which leverages context information to make informed
decisions about which model is likely to perform best for a given context, and (2)
an active query component, which strategically chooses when to request labels for
data points, minimizing the overall labeling cost. We provide rigorous theoretical
analysis for the regret and query complexity under both adversarial and stochastic
settings. Furthermore, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm on a
diverse collection of benchmark classification tasks. Notably, CAMS requires
substantially less labeling effort (less than 10%) compared to existing methods on
CIFAR10 and DRIFT benchmarks, while achieving similar or better accuracy.

1

Introduction

As pre-trained models become increasingly prevalent in a variety of real-world machine learning
applications [2, 11, 53], there is a growing demand for label-efficient approaches for model selection,
especially when facing varying data distributions and contexts at run time. Oftentimes, no single
pre-trained model achieves the best performance for every context, and a proper approach is to
construct a policy for adaptively selecting models for specific contexts [48]. For instance, in medical
diagnosis and drug discovery, accurate predictions are of paramount importance. The diagnosis
of diseases through pathologist or the determination of compound chemical properties through lab
testing can be costly and time-consuming. Different models may excel in analyzing different types of
pathological images [1, 3, 23] or chemical compounds [17, 32, 46]. Furthermore, in many real-world
applications, the collection of labels for model evaluation can be expensive and data instances may
arrive as a stream rather than all at once. This scenario necessitates cost-effective and robust online
algorithms capable of determining the most efficient model selection policy even when faced with
a limited supply of labels, a scenario not fully addressed by previous works that typically assume
access to all labels [6, 7, 27, 54].
Recently, the problem of online model selection with the consideration of label acquisition costs was
studied in a context-free setting by Karimi et al. [39]. However, this approach doesn’t fully capture the
dynamics of data contexts that are essential in many applications. Recognizing this gap, in this paper,
we consider a more general problem setting that incorporates context information for adaptive model
selection. We introduce CAMS, an algorithm for active model selection that dynamically adapts to
the data context to choose the most suitable models for an arbitrary data stream. As highlighted in
∗

Correspondence to: Xuefeng Liu <xuefeng@uchicago.edu>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

