Enhancing vision-language models for medical
imaging: bridging the 3D gap with innovative slice
selection
Yuli Wang1 , Jian Peng2 , Yuwei Dai1 , Craig Jones1 , Haris Sair1 , Jinglai Shen3 ,
Nicolas Loizou1 , Jing Wu2 , Wen-Chi Hsu1 , Maliha Imami1 , Zhicheng Jiao4 ,
Paul Zhang5 , Harrison Bai1
1
Johns Hopkins University
2
Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University
3
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
4
Brown University
5
University of Pennsylvania
{ywang687,ydai55,craigj,hsair1,nloizou,whsu20,mimami1,hbai7}@jhu.edu
{pengjian666@csu,wujing622}@csu.edu
shenj@umbc.edu
zhichengjiao@brown.edu
paul.zhang2@pennmedicine.upenn.edu

Abstract
Recent approaches to vision-language tasks are built on the remarkable capabilities
of large vision-language models (VLMs). These models excel in zero-shot and
few-shot learning, enabling them to learn new tasks without parameter updates.
However, their primary challenge lies in their design, which primarily accommodates 2D input, thus limiting their effectiveness for medical images, particularly
radiological images like MRI and CT, which are typically 3D. To bridge the gap
between state-of-the-art 2D VLMs and 3D medical image data, we developed an
innovative, one-pass, unsupervised representative slice selection method called
Vote-MI, which selects representative 2D slices from 3D medical imaging. To
evaluate the effectiveness of Vote-MI when implemented with VLMs, we introduce BrainMD, a robust, multimodal dataset comprising 2,453 annotated 3D MRI
brain scans with corresponding textual radiology reports and electronic health
records. Based on BrainMD, we further develop two benchmarks, BrainMD-select
(including the most representative 2D slice of a 3D image) and BrainBench (including various vision-language downstream tasks). Extensive experiments on
the BrainMD dataset and its two corresponding benchmarks demonstrate that our
representative selection method significantly improves performance in zero-shot
and few-shot learning tasks. On average, Vote-MI achieves a 14.6% and 16.6% absolute gain for zero-shot and few-shot learning, respectively, compared to randomly
selecting examples. Our studies represent a significant step toward integrating AI
in medical imaging to enhance patient care and facilitate medical research. We
hope this work will serve as a foundation for data selection as vision-language
models are increasingly applied to new tasks. Code and data examples are available
at Github: https://github.com/YuliWanghust/BrainMD.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

