Continual learning with the neural tangent ensemble

Ari S. Benjamin
Christian Pehle
Kyle Daruwalla
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724
{benjami,pehle,daruwal}@cshl.edu

Abstract
A natural strategy for continual learning is to weigh a Bayesian ensemble of fixed
functions. This suggests that if a (single) neural network could be interpreted as
an ensemble, one could design effective algorithms that learn without forgetting.
To realize this possibility, we observe that a neural network classifier with N
parameters can be interpreted as a weighted ensemble of N classifiers, and that
in the lazy regime limit these classifiers are fixed throughout learning. We call
these classifiers the neural tangent experts and show they output valid probability
distributions over the labels. We then derive the likelihood and posterior probability
of each expert given past data. Surprisingly, the posterior updates for these experts
are equivalent to a scaled and projected form of stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
over the network weights. Away from the lazy regime, networks can be seen as
ensembles of adaptive experts which improve over time. These results offer a new
interpretation of neural networks as Bayesian ensembles of experts, providing a
principled framework for understanding and mitigating catastrophic forgetting in
continual learning settings.

1

Introduction

Neural networks often forget previous knowledge when trained with gradient descent. In contrast,
animals learn from sequential experiences, suggesting that true ‘lifelong learners’ use different
strategies for learning [25].
One strategy to learns without forgetting is to update the posterior distribution over a set of fixed
probabilistic models [8]. This includes any fully Bayesian model, such as Bayesian linear regression.
The fundamental reason why these algorithms do not forget information is because the posterior
over models is invariant to data sequence. Given two permutations of the data, the posterior will
be the same. This property of posteriors has inspired many strategies to reduce forgetting by
approximating the posterior distribution over neural networks [22, 24, 11, 28, 26, 41, 37]. However,
these approximations introduce many new parameters and considerable memory overhead. In general,
estimating the full posterior distribution over high-dimensional networks is prohibitive.
Here, we shift our perspective and instead interpret a single neural network as an ensemble of many
experts. This allows tracking a posterior (over experts, instead of networks) without introducing any
memory overhead besides the network itself.
This motivates our main result, which we note is generally applicable outside of continual learning.
More specifically, we show that neural network classifiers perturbed by a small vector in parameter space can be described as a weighted ensemble of valid classifiers outputting a probability
distribution over labels. We call this the Neural Tangent Ensemble (NTE). Inspired by the Neural
Tangent Kernel, this result depends on a first-order Taylor expansion around a seed point [19]. As a
consequence, it operates as an ensemble of fixed classifiers in the NTK limit of infinite width.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

