Towards Robust Multimodal Sentiment Analysis
with Incomplete Data

1

Haoyu Zhang1,2 , Wenbin Wang3 , Tianshu Yu1,∗
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
2
Department of Computer Science, University College London
3
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
{zhanghaoyu, yutianshu}@cuhk.edu.cn
haoyu.zhang.23@ucl.ac.uk
wangwenbin97@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
The field of Multimodal Sentiment Analysis (MSA) has recently witnessed an
emerging direction seeking to tackle the issue of data incompleteness. Recognizing that the language modality typically contains dense sentiment information,
we consider it as the dominant modality and present an innovative Languagedominated Noise-resistant Learning Network (LNLN) to achieve robust MSA.
The proposed LNLN features a dominant modality correction (DMC) module and
dominant modality based multimodal learning (DMML) module, which enhances
the model’s robustness across various noise scenarios by ensuring the quality of
dominant modality representations. Aside from the methodical design, we perform
comprehensive experiments under random data missing scenarios, utilizing diverse
and meaningful settings on several popular datasets (e.g., MOSI, MOSEI, and
SIMS), providing additional uniformity, transparency, and fairness compared to
existing evaluations in the literature. Empirically, LNLN consistently outperforms
existing baselines, demonstrating superior performance across these challenging
and extensive evaluation metrics.1

1

Introduction

The field of Multimodal Sentiment Analysis (MSA) is at the vanguard of human sentiment identification by assimilating heterogeneous data types, such as video, audio, and language. Its applicability
spans numerous fields, prominent among healthcare and human-computer interaction (Jiang et al.,
2020). MSA has become essential in enhancing both the precision and the robustness of sentiment
analysis by drawing sentiment cues from diverse perspectives.
Changing trends in recent research has taken a turn towards modeling data in natural scenarios from
laboratory conditions (Tsai et al., 2019; Hazarika et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023).
The shift has created a wider application space in the real-world for MSA, though concerns arise due
to problems like sensor failures and problems with Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR), leading to
inconsistencies such as incomplete data in real-world deployment.
Numerous impactful solutions have been proposed against this primary concern of incomplete
data in multimodal sentiment analysis. For instance, Yuan et al. (2021) introduced a Transformerbased feature reconstruction mechanism, TFR-Net, aiming to strengthen the robustness of the
model handling random missing in unaligned multimodal sequences via reconstructing missing data.
∗
1

the corresponding author
The code is available at: https://github.com/Haoyu-ha/LNLN

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

