S PREADSHEET B ENCH: Towards Challenging
Real World Spreadsheet Manipulation

Zeyao Ma1,∗,‡ , Bohan Zhang1,∗,‡ , Jing Zhang1,† , Jifan Yu2 , Xiaokang Zhang1 ,
Xiaohan Zhang3 , Sijia Luo1 , Xi Wang1 , Jie Tang2
1
Renmin University of China 2 Tsinghua University 3 Zhipu.AI
https://spreadsheetbench.github.io

Abstract
We introduce S PREADSHEET B ENCH, a challenging spreadsheet manipulation
benchmark exclusively derived from real-world scenarios, designed to immerse
current large language models (LLMs) in the actual workflow of spreadsheet users.
Unlike existing benchmarks that rely on synthesized queries and simplified spreadsheet files, S PREADSHEET B ENCH is built from 912 real questions gathered from
online Excel forums, which reflect the intricate needs of users. The associated
spreadsheets from the forums contain a variety of tabular data such as multiple
tables, non-standard relational tables, and abundant non-textual elements. Furthermore, we propose a more reliable evaluation metric akin to online judge platforms,
where multiple spreadsheet files are created as test cases for each instruction, ensuring the evaluation of robust solutions capable of handling spreadsheets with varying
values. Our comprehensive evaluation of various LLMs under both single-round
and multi-round inference settings reveals a substantial gap between the state-ofthe-art (SOTA) models and human performance, highlighting the benchmark’s
difficulty.

1

Introduction

Today, millions of users engage with spreadsheets across various fields, including management,
marketing, and finance [1, 2, 3]. Assisting users with spreadsheet manipulation can significantly
reduce their workload, thereby enhancing productivity and efficiency [4, 5]. Initially, program
synthesis aided spreadsheet manipulation [6, 7], followed by deep learning methods for automated
manipulation [8, 9]. More recently, leveraging the powerful capabilities of LLMs [10], spreadsheet
agents such as SheetCopilot[11] and SheetAgent [12] have been developed to assist people in
manipulating spreadsheets via natural language instructions. These agents employ LLMs to transform
instructions into solutions, typically presented as executable code for spreadsheet operations.
However, current spreadsheet-related agents [11, 12] are still far from being truly helpful assistants
for automating spreadsheet tasks. Users of Copilot and similar agents find these tools useful for
reducing the effort of searching online, but they do not necessarily improve task completion time or
success rates [13]. A critical reason for this shortcoming is that the benchmarks [11, 12, 14] used to
evaluate these agents do not truly reflect real and challenging user demands. The primary limitations
could be summarized as follows.
First, these benchmarks either use the self-instruct technique [15] to synthesize queries based on a
limited set of real-world spreadsheet manipulation demands [11, 12], or they rely on crowdworkers
∗

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding author.
‡
Work was done when interned at Zhipu AI.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

