Learning rigid-body simulators over implicit shapes
for large-scale scenes and vision

Yulia Rubanova∗ Tatiana Lopez-Guevara Kelsey R. Allen
Kimberly Stachenfeld† Tobias Pfaff†

William F. Whitney

Google Deepmind

Abstract
Simulating large scenes with many rigid objects is crucial for a variety of applications, such as robotics, engineering, film and video games. Rigid interactions
are notoriously hard to model: small changes to the initial state or the simulation parameters can lead to large changes in the final state. Recently, learned
simulators based on graph networks (GNNs) were developed as an alternative to
hand-designed simulators like MuJoCo [36] and PyBullet [13]. They are able to
accurately capture dynamics of real objects directly from real-world observations.
However, current state-of-the-art learned simulators operate on meshes and scale
poorly to scenes with many objects or detailed shapes. Here we present SDF-Sim,
the first learned rigid-body simulator designed for scale. We use learned signeddistance functions (SDFs) to represent the object shapes and to speed up distance
computation. We design the simulator to leverage SDFs and avoid the fundamental
bottleneck of the previous simulators associated with collision detection. For the
first time in literature, we demonstrate that we can scale the GNN-based simulators
to scenes with hundreds of objects and up to 1.1 million nodes, where mesh-based
approaches run out of memory. Finally, we show that SDF-Sim can be applied to
real world scenes by extracting SDFs from multi-view images.

1

Introduction

Simulating real-world environments, such as a bookshelf with books and decorations or a dinner
table with plates and glasses, presents a significant challenge for traditional physics simulators. These
simulators require precise 3D shape, location, and corresponding physical parameters of each object,
making the simulation of arbitrary scenes a difficult task.
Recently, learned simulators based on graph networks (GNNs) [4, 19, 29] have been introduced as
a powerful alternative to traditional hand-designed simulators like MuJoCo [36] or PyBullet [13].
Graph networks can capture a range of complex physical dynamics, learn physical properties directly
from real data and generalize to new scenes. However, current GNN-based methods do not scale well
to large scenes. Similarly to the traditional simulators, they rely on 3D meshes to describe object
shapes. In scenes with a large number of objects or objects with detailed meshes, these scenes might
contain thousands of nodes and mesh triangles, making collision detection between objects extremely
costly. In the context of graph networks, large meshes also lead to input graphs that might contain
hundreds of thousands of nodes and edges, crippling runtime and memory performance.
To remedy the issue with expensive collision detection, a common approach in the classic simulation
literature is to use signed-distance functions or fields (SDFs). SDFs implicitly represent the object
* Corresponding email: rubanova@google.com
†

Co-senior authorship

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

