Generate Universal Adversarial Perturbations for
Few-Shot Learning

Yiman Hu
Yixiong Zou∗ Ruixuan Li∗ Yuhua Li
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{imane, yixiongz, rxli, idcliyuhua}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep networks are known to be vulnerable to adversarial examples which are
deliberately designed to mislead the trained model by introducing imperceptible
perturbations to input samples. Compared to traditional perturbations crafted
specifically for each data point, Universal Adversarial Perturbations (UAPs) are
input-agnostic and shown to be more practical in the real world. However, UAPs are
typically generated in a close-set scenario that shares the same classification task
during the training and testing phases. This paper demonstrates the ineffectiveness
of traditional UAPs in open-set scenarios like Few-Shot Learning (FSL). Through
analysis, we identify two primary challenges that hinder the attacking process: the
task shift and the semantic shift. To enhance the transferability of UAPs in FSL, we
propose a unifying attacking framework addressing these two shifts. The task shift
is addressed by aligning proxy tasks to the downstream tasks, while the semantic
shift is handled by leveraging the generalizability of pre-trained encoders.The
proposed Few-Shot Attacking FrameWork, denoted as FSAFW, can effectively
generate UAPs across various FSL training paradigms and different downstream
tasks. Our approach not only sets a new standard for state-of-the-art works but also
significantly enhances attack performance, exceeding the baseline method by over
16%.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks[16, 12] have made significant advancements in a variety of computer vision
tasks. Nowadays, there is a growing trend of pre-training a model that achieves strong generalization
capabilities and subsequently fine-tuning it for different unseen downstream tasks. A promising
method to handle this open set problem is Few-Shot Learning (FSL), which learns a model that can
rapidly adapt to unseen tasks with only a limited number of samples.
Meanwhile, deep networks have shown to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks [41, 14, 5], which are
deliberately designed to deceive a trained model by introducing imperceptible perturbations to the
input samples. Given the widespread adoption of the pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm, it is
crucial to acknowledge and address the security concerns associated with such approaches.
For a more applicable way to attack various downstream tasks, we focus on Universal Adversarial
Perturbations (UAPs) [26]. This kind of perturbation can be applied to all images once generated,
eliminating the need for crafting image-dependent perturbations for each task.
However, current approaches for generating UAPs have primarily concentrated on close-set scenarios [26, 15, 30], where the classification tasks for both training and finetuning are essentially identical.
Despite achieving a high Attack Success Rate (ASR) in their respective settings, our research reveals
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

