Theoretical and Empirical Insights into the Origins of
Degree Bias in Graph Neural Networks

1

Arjun Subramonian1 , Jian Kang2 , Yizhou Sun1
University of California, Los Angeles, 2 University of Rochester
{arjunsub, yzsun}@cs.ucla.edu
jian.kang@rochester.edu

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) often perform better for high-degree nodes than
low-degree nodes on node classification tasks. This degree bias can reinforce
social marginalization by, e.g., privileging celebrities and other high-degree actors in social networks during social and content recommendation. While researchers have proposed numerous hypotheses for why GNN degree bias occurs,
we find via a survey of 38 degree bias papers that these hypotheses are often
not rigorously validated, and can even be contradictory. Thus, we provide an
analysis of the origins of degree bias in message-passing GNNs with different
graph filters. We prove that high-degree test nodes tend to have a lower probability of misclassification regardless of how GNNs are trained. Moreover, we
show that degree bias arises from a variety of factors that are associated with
a node’s degree (e.g., homophily of neighbors, diversity of neighbors). Furthermore, we show that during training, some GNNs may adjust their loss on
low-degree nodes more slowly than on high-degree nodes; however, with sufficiently many epochs of training, message-passing GNNs can achieve their maximum possible training accuracy, which is not significantly limited by their expressive power. Throughout our analysis, we connect our findings to previouslyproposed hypotheses for the origins of degree bias, supporting and unifying
some while drawing doubt to others. We validate our theoretical findings on
8 common real-world networks, and based on our theoretical and empirical insights, describe a roadmap to alleviate degree bias. Our code can be found at:
github.com/ArjunSubramonian/degree-bias-exploration.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been applied to node classification tasks such as document
topic prediction [4] and content moderation [41]. However, in recent years, researchers have shown
that GNNs exhibit better performance for high-degree nodes on node classification tasks. This
has significant social implications, such as the marginalization of: (1) authors of less-cited papers
when predicting the topic of papers in citation networks; (2) junior researchers when predicting the
suitability of prospective collaborators in academic collaboration networks; (3) creators of newer or
niche products when predicting the category of products in online product networks; and (4) authors
of short or standalone websites when predicting the topic of websites in hyperlink networks.
To illustrate this phenomenon, Figure 1 shows that across different message-passing GNNs (see §D
for details about architectures) applied to the CiteSeer dataset (where nodes represent documents
and the classification task is to predict their topic), high-degree nodes generally incur a lower test
loss than low-degree nodes. In practice, if such GNNs are applied to predict the topic of documents
in social scientific studies, less-cited documents will be misclassified, which can lead to the con38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

