E-Motion: Future Motion Simulation via Event
Sequence Diffusion
Song Wu 1 , Zhiyu Zhu 2 , Junhui Hou 2 , Guangming Shi 1 , Jinjian Wu 1 ∗
1
Xidian University, 2 City University of Hong Kong
swu_666@stu.xidian.edu.cn,zhiyuzhu2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk
jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk,gmshi@xidian.edu.cn,jinjian.wu@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Forecasting a typical object’s future motion is a critical task for interpreting and
interacting with dynamic environments in computer vision. Event-based sensors,
which could capture changes in the scene with exceptional temporal granularity,
may potentially offer a unique opportunity to predict future motion with a level of
detail and precision previously unachievable. Inspired by that, we propose to integrate the strong learning capacity of the video diffusion model with the rich motion
information of an event camera as a motion simulation framework. Specifically,
we initially employ pre-trained stable video diffusion models to adapt the event
sequence dataset. This process facilitates the transfer of extensive knowledge from
RGB videos to an event-centric domain. Moreover, we introduce an alignment
mechanism that utilizes reinforcement learning techniques to enhance the reverse
generation trajectory of the diffusion model, ensuring improved performance and
accuracy. Through extensive testing and validation, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in various complex scenarios, showcasing its potential to
revolutionize motion flow prediction in computer vision applications such as autonomous vehicle guidance, robotic navigation, and interactive media. Our findings
suggest a promising direction for future research in enhancing the interpretative
power and predictive accuracy of computer vision systems. The source code is
publicly available at https://github.com/p4r4mount/E-Motion.

1

Introduction

Accurately capturing and interpreting dynamic scenes under fluctuating motion and illumination
conditions remains an enduring challenge in computer vision [27, 33]. This challenge is particularly
pronounced in real-world settings, where subtle variations can dramatically affect the perception
and analysis of future motion [60, 11]. Traditional imaging modalities often struggle to capture
these nuances, leading to a gap in accurately modeling and predicting motion flow in complex visual
environments.
The rapid advancements in deep learning have catalyzed transformative developments in computer
vision, particularly in the generative models [45, 16, 18, 25, 46, 48, 49]. Video diffusion models [1,
19, 32, 10, 2], which stand at the forefront of these innovations, leverage stochastic diffusion processes
to generate, restore, and accurately manipulate video content. These models, emblematic of the stateof-the-art in temporal data processing, offer refined capabilities for complex video-based tasks [5, 39],
underscoring the significant strides made in understanding and interpreting dynamic visual scenes.
∗
This work was supported in part by National Key Research and Development Program of
China(2023YFA1008500), in part by NSFC Excellent Young Scientists Fund 62422118, and in part by Hong
Kong Innovation and Technology Fund ITS/164/23. The first two authors contributed to this paper equally.
Corresponding author: Jinjian Wu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

