ClevrSkills: Compositional Language and Visual
Reasoning in Robotics

Sanjay Haresh
Qualcomm AI Research∗
sanjayh@qti.qualcomm.com

Daniel Dijkman
Qualcomm AI Research
ddijkman@qti.qualcomm.com

Apratim Bhattacharyya
Qualcomm AI Research
aprabhat@qti.qualcomm.com

Roland Memisevic
Qualcomm AI Research
rmemisevic@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
Robotics tasks are highly compositional by nature. For example, to perform a
high-level task like cleaning the table a robot must employ low-level capabilities
of moving the effectors to the objects on the table, pick them up and then move
them off the table one-by-one, while re-evaluating the consequently dynamic
scenario in the process. Given that large vision language models (VLMs) have
shown progress on many tasks that require high level, human-like reasoning, we
ask the question: if the models are taught the requisite low-level capabilities,
can they compose them in novel ways to achieve interesting high-level tasks like
cleaning the table without having to be explicitly taught so? To this end, we present
ClevrSkills - a benchmark suite for compositional reasoning in robotics. ClevrSkills
is an environment suite developed on top of the ManiSkill2 [16] simulator and an
accompanying dataset. The dataset contains trajectories generated on a range of
robotics tasks with language and visual annotations as well as multi-modal prompts
as task specification. The suite includes a curriculum of tasks with three levels
of compositional understanding, starting with simple tasks requiring basic motor
skills. We benchmark multiple different VLM baselines on ClevrSkills and show
that even after being pre-trained on large numbers of tasks, these models fail on
compositional reasoning in robotics tasks.

1

Introduction

Compositional generalization is a hallmark feature of human intelligence. Unlike any other animals,
humans can receive instructions in natural language and successfully perform previously unseen
tasks with minimal to no task-specific learning or adaptation. Modeling this capability has been a
long-standing aspiration in AI, dating back at least to Winograd’s influential SHRDLU system [45]
developed more than half a century ago. The architectural underpinnings that enable these capabilities
in humans have remained an inspiration as well as puzzle until this day [22, 37].
A potential steppingstone towards replicating this ability in AI systems is the recent progress in
language modeling, based on large models pre-trained using next-token-prediction. These models
have shown encouraging compositional reasoning behaviors in response to language-based prompts
– an ability that was confined initially to text-based tasks, but that since has been extended to
multi-modal, and most recently also to robotics tasks.
∗

Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

