RedPajama: an Open Dataset for Training Large
Language Models
Maurice Weber1 , Daniel Y. Fu1,2 , Quentin Anthony4,8,10 , Yonatan Oren1
Shane Adams1 , Anton Alexandrov7, , Xiaozhong Lyu7 , Huu Nguyen5 , Xiaozhe Yao7 ,
Virginia Adams1 , Ben Athiwaratkun1 , Rahul Chalamala1,11 , Kezhen Chen1 , Max Ryabinin1
Tri Dao1,6 , Percy Liang1,2 , Christopher Ré1,2 , Irina Rish8,9 , Ce Zhang1,3
1
Together AI, 2 Stanford University, 3 University of Chicago
EleutherAI 5 Ontocord.ai, 6 Princeton University, 7 ETH Zurich
8
Mila, Montréal, Canada 9 Université de Montréal 10 Ohio State University 11 Caltech
4

Abstract
Large language models are increasingly becoming a cornerstone technology in
artificial intelligence, the sciences, and society as a whole, yet the optimal strategies for dataset composition and filtering remain largely elusive. Many of the
top-performing models lack transparency in their dataset curation and model development processes, posing an obstacle to the development of fully open language
models. In this paper, we identify three core data-related challenges that must
be addressed to advance open-source language models. These include (1) transparency in model development, including the data curation process, (2) access
to large quantities of high-quality data, and (3) availability of artifacts and metadata for dataset curation and analysis. To address these challenges, we release
RedPajama-V1, an open reproduction of the LLaMA training dataset. In addition,
we release RedPajama-V2, a massive web-only dataset consisting of raw, unfiltered
text data together with quality signals and metadata. Together, the RedPajama
datasets comprise over 100 trillion tokens spanning multiple domains and with
their quality signals facilitate the filtering of data, aiming to inspire the development of numerous new datasets. To date, these datasets have already been used
in the training of strong language models used in production, such as Snowflake
Arctic, Salesforce’s XGen and AI2’s OLMo. To provide insight into the quality of
RedPajama, we present a series of analyses and ablation studies with decoder-only
language models with up to 1.6B parameters. Our findings demonstrate how quality
signals for web data can be effectively leveraged to curate high-quality subsets of
the dataset, underscoring the potential of RedPajama to advance the development
of transparent and high-performing language models at scale.

1

Introduction

Pretraining data is among the most central building blocks that go into the development of modern
large language models (LLMs). However, one of the core challenges this field faces is the general
lack of transparency regarding the composition and curation strategy of pretraining data [8]. Indeed,
with a few notable exceptions [19, 4, 2, 65], the majority of reports documenting state-of-the-art
LLMs [1] provide scarce details, if any, on their pretraining datasets. Even open-weights models such
as LLaMA [57, 58] provide little to no details about their training data, let alone release their datasets.
Furthermore, the process of studying and building optimal data compositions, along with developing
filtering rules and heuristics, is time-consuming as it necessitates running numerous ablations on
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

