Large Language Models Must Be Taught
to Know What They Don’t Know

Sanyam Kapoor∗
New York University
Manley Roberts
Abacus AI
Adrian Weller
Cambridge University

Nate Gruver*
New York University

Katherine Collins
Cambridge University
Samuel Dooley
Abacus AI

Arka Pal
Abacus AI

Micah Goldblum
Columbia University

Umang Bhatt
New York University
Andrew Gordon Wilson
New York University

Abstract
When using large language models (LLMs) in high-stakes applications, we need to
know when we can trust their predictions. Some works argue that prompting highperformance LLMs is sufficient to produce calibrated uncertainties, while others
introduce sampling methods that can be prohibitively expensive. In this work, we
first argue that prompting on its own is insufficient to achieve good calibration and
then show that fine-tuning on a small dataset of correct and incorrect answers can
create an uncertainty estimate with good generalization and small computational
overhead. We show that a thousand graded examples are sufficient to outperform
baseline methods and that training through the features of a model is necessary
for good performance and tractable for large open-source models when using
LoRA. We also investigate the mechanisms that enable reliable LLM uncertainty
estimation, finding that many models can be used as general-purpose uncertainty
estimators, applicable not just to their own uncertainties but also the uncertainty
of other models. Lastly, we show that uncertainty estimates inform human use of
LLMs in human-AI collaborative settings through a user study.

1

Introduction

“I have high cortisol but low ACTH on a dexamethasone suppression
test. What should I do?” If the answer to such a question is given without associated
confidence, it is not actionable, and if the answer is presented with erroneously high confidence, then
acting on the answer is dangerous. One of the biggest open questions about whether large language
models (LLMs) can benefit society and reliably be used for decision making hinges on whether or
not they can accurately represent uncertainty over the correctness of their output.
There is anything but consensus on whether LLMs accurately represent uncertainty, or even how
we should approach uncertainty representation with language models. Claims regarding language
models’ ability to estimate uncertainty vary widely, with some works suggesting that language models
are increasingly capable of estimating their uncertainty directly through prompting, without any
fine-tuning or changes to the training data [25, 51], and others suggesting that LLMs remain far too
overconfident in their predictions [60, 61]. The task of uncertainty estimation in LLMs is further
exacerbated by linguistic variances in freeform generation, all of which cannot be exhaustively
∗

Equal contribution. Order decided by coin flip. Correspondence to: sanyam@nyu.edu & nvg7279@nyu.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

