Self-supervised Transformation Learning
for Equivariant Representations

Jaemyung Yu1

Jaehyun Choi1 Dong-Jae Lee1 HyeongGwon Hong1 Junmo Kim1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{jaemyung,chlwogus,jhtwosun,honggudrnjs,junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr
1

Abstract
Unsupervised representation learning has significantly advanced various machine
learning tasks. In the computer vision domain, state-of-the-art approaches utilize
transformations like random crop and color jitter to achieve invariant representations, embedding semantically the same inputs despite transformations. However, this can degrade performance in tasks requiring precise features, such as
localization or flower classification. To address this, recent research incorporates
equivariant representation learning, which captures transformation-sensitive information. However, current methods depend on transformation labels and thus
struggle with interdependency and complex transformations. We propose Selfsupervised Transformation Learning (STL), replacing transformation labels with
transformation representations derived from image pairs. The proposed method
ensures transformation representation is image-invariant and learns corresponding
equivariant transformations, enhancing performance without increased batch complexity. We demonstrate the approach’s effectiveness across diverse classification
and detection tasks, outperforming existing methods in 7 out of 11 benchmarks
and excelling in detection. By integrating complex transformations like AugMix,
unusable by prior equivariant methods, this approach enhances performance across
tasks, underscoring its adaptability and resilience. Additionally, its compatibility
with various base models highlights its flexibility and broad applicability. The code
is available at https://github.com/jaemyung-u/stl.

Keyword
Equivariant Learning, Transformation Representation, Self-supervised Transformation Learning

1

Introduction

Recently, unsupervised representation learning [15, 10, 34] has made remarkable strides in various
machine learning tasks and is actively employed as the ground model. In particular to the state-ofthe-art computer vision models [4, 18, 3, 5, 48, 1], invariant representation learning utilizes various
augmentations, hereinafter transformations, including but not limited to random crop, horizontal
flip, color jitter, and Gaussian blur. Their objective is to embed the semantically same inputs
obtained through transformation, based on the notion that semantic differences due to the various
transformations are inconsequential. Unfortunately, although effective most of the time, it does
not always guarantee performance gain in the target downstream tasks. For instance, in tasks such
as localization or flower classification, applying random crop or color jitter for invariant learning
degrades performance by diluting discriminative features regarding the position of the object or the
color of the flower, respectively.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

