Web2Code: A Large-scale Webpage-to-Code Dataset
and Evaluation Framework for Multimodal LLMs
Sukmin Yun∗,1,4 , Haokun Lin∗,1 , Rusiru Thushara∗,1 , Mohammad Qazim Bhat∗,1 ,
Yongxin Wang∗ ,1 , Zutao Jiang1,7 , Mingkai Deng2 , Jinhong Wang1 , Tianhua Tao1,3 ,
Junbo Li1 , Haonan Li1 , Preslav Nakov1 , Timothy Baldwin1 , Zhengzhong Liu1,5 ,
Eric P. Xing1,2,5 , Xiaodan Liang1,6 , Zhiqiang Shen1
1
2
MBZUAI, CMU, 3 UIUC, 4 HYU ERICA, 5 Petuum, 6 SYSU, 7 Pengcheng Laboratory
https://mbzuai-llm.github.io/webpage2code/

Abstract
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have shown impressive success
across modalities such as image, video, and audio in a variety of understanding and
generation tasks. However, current MLLMs are surprisingly poor at understanding
webpage screenshots and generating their corresponding HTML code. To address
this problem, we propose Web2Code, a benchmark consisting of a new large-scale
webpage-to-code dataset for instruction tuning and an evaluation framework for
the webpage understanding and HTML code translation abilities of MLLMs. For
dataset construction, we leverage pretrained LLMs to enhance existing webpageto-code datasets as well as generate a diverse pool of new webpages rendered
into images. Specifically, the inputs are webpage images and instructions, while
the responses are the webpage’s HTML code. We further include diverse natural
language QA pairs about the webpage content in the responses to enable a more
comprehensive understanding of the web content. To evaluate model performance
in these tasks, we develop an evaluation framework for testing MLLMs’ abilities in
webpage understanding and web-to-code generation. Extensive experiments show
that our proposed dataset is beneficial not only to our proposed tasks but also in the
general visual domain. We hope our work will contribute to the development of general MLLMs suitable for web-based content generation and task automation. Our
data and code are available at https://github.com/MBZUAI-LLM/web2code.

1

Introduction

Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have achieved explosive growth in the past few
years. Leveraging the rich commonsense knowledge in large language models (LLMs), MLLMs are
remarkably successful at processing and reasoning about various modalities such as image [2, 35],
video [60, 53], and audio [40] in a broad range of tasks such as recognition [52], reasoning [59], and
question-answering [39], all using language as the intermediate representation. However, existing
MLLMs are surprisingly poor at understanding webpage screenshots and generating the HTML code
to express their latent states. For instance, given the instruction “Parse the HTML code for this
webpage”, the well-known LLaVA-1.5 [33] generates generic, pale code that fails to preserve most of
the original webpage’s features (see Figure 1), which hampers its utility in applications such as UI
prototyping, automation agents, and accessibility (e.g., noting available buttons and options given
webpage screenshot).
The essential ingredients behind the progress in MLLMs are arguably large-scale instruction
datasets [9, 63] and evaluation benchmarks [16, 58] – the former for aligning multimodal inputs
∗

Equal Contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

