Stochastic Extragradient with Flip-Flop Shuffling &
Anchoring: Provable Improvements

Jiseok Chae
Department of Mathematical Sciences
KAIST
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
jsch@kaist.ac.kr

Chulhee Yun
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI
KAIST
Seoul, Republic of Korea
chulhee.yun@kaist.ac.kr

Donghwan Kim
Department of Mathematical Sciences
KAIST
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
donghwankim@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
In minimax optimization, the extragradient (EG) method has been extensively
studied because it outperforms the gradient descent-ascent method in convexconcave (C-C) problems. Yet, stochastic EG (SEG) has seen limited success in C-C
problems, especially for unconstrained cases. Motivated by the recent progress of
shuffling-based stochastic methods, we investigate the convergence of shufflingbased SEG in unconstrained finite-sum minimax problems, in search of convergent
shuffling-based SEG. Our analysis reveals that both random reshuffling and the
recently proposed flip-flop shuffling alone can suffer divergence in C-C problems.
However, with an additional simple trick called anchoring, we develop the SEG
with flip-flop anchoring (SEG-FFA) method which successfully converges in C-C
problems. We also show upper and lower bounds in the strongly-convex-stronglyconcave setting, demonstrating that SEG-FFA has a provably faster convergence
rate compared to other shuffling-based methods.

1

Introduction

Minimax problems with a finite-sum structure, which are optimization problems of the form
n
1X
min max f (x, y) :=
fi (x, y),
x
y
n i=1

(1)

can be found in many interesting applications, such as generative adversarial networks [19], refining
diffusion models [28], adversarial training [37], optimal transport based generative models [48],
multi-agent reinforcement learning [53], and so on. Deterministic methods for minimax problems,
such as gradient descent-ascent (GDA) [3] and extragradient (EG) [29], have been extensively studied
in the literature. It is though known that, unlike gradient descent (GD) for minimization problems,
GDA may diverge even when f is convex on x and concave on y. On the other hand, EG employs
a two-step update procedure, named extrapolation and update steps (see Section 2 for details), which
allows it to find an optimum under this convex-concave setting [29, 51], and moreover, attains a
convergence rate faster than GDA [4] when f is strongly convex on x and strongly concave on y.
In contrast, attempts to construct stochastic variants of these algorithms have not been so fruitful.
When f is convex-concave, stochastic gradient descent-ascent (SGDA) clearly may diverge, just as
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

