OneBit: Towards Extremely Low-bit
Large Language Models

Yuzhuang Xu1 Xu Han2 Zonghan Yang2 Shuo Wang2
Qingfu Zhu1 Zhiyuan Liu2 Weidong Liu2 Wanxiang Che1,B
1
Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval,
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
2
Department of Computer Science & Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
xyz21thu@gmail.com, car@ir.hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Model quantification uses low bit-width values to represent the weight matrices
of existing models to be quantized, which is a promising approach to reduce
both storage and computational overheads of deploying highly anticipated LLMs.
However, current quantization methods suffer severe performance degradation
when the bit-width is extremely reduced, and thus focus on utilizing 4-bit or 8-bit
values to quantize models. This paper boldly quantizes the weight matrices of
LLMs to 1-bit, paving the way for the extremely low bit-width deployment of
LLMs. For this target, we introduce a 1-bit model compressing framework named
OneBit, including a novel 1-bit parameter representation method to better quantize
LLMs as well as an effective parameter initialization method based on matrix
decomposition to improve the convergence speed of the quantization framework.
Sufficient experimental results indicate that OneBit achieves good performance
(at least 81% of the non-quantized performance on LLaMA models) with robust
training processes when only using 1-bit weight matrices. Code and checkpoints
are available at https://github.com/xuyuzhuang11/OneBit

1

Introduction

Transformer [36] has emerged as the pivotal architecture in large language models (LLMs), fundamentally reshaping the approach to natural language processing in deep learning era [6, 34, 4].
Despite their popularity, deploying transformer-based LLMs presents significant challenges due to
their computational intensity and considerable memory requirements as the parameters of LLMs
become more and more. For instance, even moderately-sized LLMs like LLaMA-13B [34] require
around 26GB of memory to load its all parameters in FP16 format. Such overheads make deploying
LLMs difficult beyond mid-to-high-end GPUs like the A100, let alone on mobile devices. The high
demand for resources not only drives up usage costs, but also restricts their wider application.
Numerous efforts [10, 14, 13] have been devoted to reducing the computational and memory overheads of LLMs, while still preserving most of their original model capabilities. Among these efforts,
quantization has gained widespread attention, particularly Post-Training Quantization (PTQ), benefitted from its lower transferring costs. Seminal studies such as GPTQ [14], SpQR [12], and AWQ [20]
successfully compress the weight matrices of LLMs to 4-bit values while maintaining the main
abilities of LLMs. Efficient quantization represents significant advances in LLM optimization, by
achieving a balance between time and space efficiency as well as model performance.
Unfortunately, the efficacy of PTQ rapidly diminishes when the quantization bit-width is extremely
low, as shown in Figure 1. Existing PTQ methods managed to compress weight matrices down
to at least 3-bit [9]. Recent researches hope to leverage Quantization-Aware Training (QAT) to
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

