On the Stability and Generalization of Meta-Learning

Raman Arora
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD, 21218
arora@cs.jhu.edu

Yunjuan Wang
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD, 21218
ywang509@jhu.edu

Abstract
We focus on developing a theoretical understanding of meta-learning. Given
multiple tasks drawn i.i.d. from some (unknown) task distribution, the goal is to
find a good pre-trained model that can be adapted to a new, previously unseen,
task with little computational and statistical overhead. We introduce a novel
notion of stability for meta-learning algorithms, namely uniform meta-stability.
We instantiate two uniformly meta-stable learning algorithms based on regularized
empirical risk minimization and gradient descent and give explicit generalization
bounds for convex learning problems with smooth losses and for weakly convex
learning problems with non-smooth losses. Finally, we extend our results to
stochastic and adversarially robust variants of our meta-learning algorithm.

1

Introduction

Traditional machine learning algorithms excel at generalizing, but they often require extensive training
data and assume that both training and test data come from the same distribution or task. In real-world
scenarios, large sets of training data from a single task are often lacking. Instead, training data may
stem from diverse tasks with shared similarities, while test data come from entirely new tasks. The
challenge is to rapidly adapt to these unseen tasks without the need to train from scratch.
To address this challenge, meta-learning, also referred to as learning-to-learn, has emerged as
an effective approach. Meta-learning has gained significant attention recently [Hospedales et al.,
2021], with applications spanning across various domains including computer vision [Nichol et al.,
2018] and robotics [Al-Shedivat et al., 2017], ranging from few-shot classification [Snell et al.,
2017], hyperparameter optimization [Franceschi et al., 2018], to personalized recommendation
systems [Wang et al., 2022].
As the name suggests, meta-learning operates on two levels of abstraction to enhance learning over
time. On an intra-task level, the learner needs to find models that perform well on individual tasks.
On a meta-level, the learner needs to figure out useful meta-information, perhaps a prior over tasks,
that relates different tasks and allows transferring and adaptation of knowledge to new unseen tasks
efficiently (both in terms of statistical as well computational overhead). It is typical to represent
such meta-information in the form of a pre-trained model, which we can represent using certain
meta-parameters. Distinct from a standard setting, meta-learning involves training on a diverse set of
tasks. At test time, we evaluate the performance of the pre-trained model on new unseen tasks while
allowing it to adapt using a small sample on the test task.
An increasing body of empirical research is dedicated to advancing meta-learning algorithms, among
which model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) [Finn et al., 2017] stands out as a prominent approach.
MAML is designed to find a good meta-parameter w which facilitates the learning of task-specific
parameters through a single step of gradient descent. In particular, given aPset of m tasks denoted
m
m
1
as {Dj }j=1 , MAML estimates the meta-parameter as w = argminw m
j=1 L(uj , Dj ), where
task-specific parameters are computed as uj = w − η∇L(w, Dj ).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

