Classic GNNs are Strong Baselines:
Reassessing GNNs for Node Classification

Yuankai Luo
Beihang University
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
luoyk@buaa.edu.cn
Lei Shi
Beihang University
leishi@buaa.edu.cn

Xiao-Ming Wu
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
xiao-ming.wu@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Graph Transformers (GTs) have recently emerged as popular alternatives to traditional message-passing Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), due to their theoretically
superior expressiveness and impressive performance reported on standard node
classification benchmarks, often significantly outperforming GNNs. In this paper,
we conduct a thorough empirical analysis to reevaluate the performance of three
classic GNN models (GCN, GAT, and GraphSAGE) against GTs. Our findings
suggest that the previously reported superiority of GTs may have been overstated
due to suboptimal hyperparameter configurations in GNNs. Remarkably, with
slight hyperparameter tuning, these classic GNN models achieve state-of-the-art
performance, matching or even exceeding that of recent GTs across 17 out of
the 18 diverse datasets examined. Additionally, we conduct detailed ablation
studies to investigate the influence of various GNN configurations—such as normalization, dropout, residual connections, and network depth—on node classification performance. Our study aims to promote a higher standard of empirical
rigor in the field of graph machine learning, encouraging more accurate comparisons and evaluations of model capabilities. Our implementation is available at
https://github.com/LUOyk1999/tunedGNN.

1

Introduction

Node classification is a fundamental task in graph machine learning [92, 79, 54, 78, 71, 77], with
high-impact applications across many fields such as social network analysis, bioinformatics, and
recommendation systems. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [20, 28, 69, 80, 52, 33, 8, 84, 18, 9, 55,
4, 81, 60, 10, 56, 57, 70, 85, 37] have emerged as a powerful class of models for tackling the node
classification task. GNNs operate by iteratively aggregating information from a node’s neighbors,
a process known as message passing [19], leveraging both the graph structure and node features to
learn useful node representations for classification. While GNNs have achieved notable success,
studies have identified several limitations, including over-smoothing [35], over-squashing [1], lack of
sensitivity to heterophily [90], and challenges in capturing long-range dependencies [11].
Recently, Graph Transformers (GTs) [53, 51, 23] have gained prominence as popular alternatives to
GNNs. Unlike GNNs, which primarily aggregate local neighborhood information, the Transformer
architecture [68] can capture interactions between any pair of nodes via a self-attention layer. GTs
have achieved significant success in graph-level tasks, e.g., graph classification involving small-scale
graphs like molecular graphs [13, 82, 30, 45, 59, 6]. This success has inspired efforts [12, 17, 76,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

