Multivariate Probabilistic Time Series Forecasting
with Correlated Errors
Vincent Zhihao Zheng
McGill University
Montréal, QC, Canada
zhihao.zheng@mail.mcgill.ca

Lijun Sun∗
McGill University
Montréal, QC, Canada
lijun.sun@mcgill.ca

Abstract
Accurately modeling the correlation structure of errors is critical for reliable uncertainty quantification in probabilistic time series forecasting. While recent deep
learning models for multivariate time series have developed efficient parameterizations for time-varying contemporaneous covariance, but they often assume
temporal independence of errors for simplicity. However, real-world data often
exhibit significant error autocorrelation and cross-lag correlation due to factors
such as missing covariates. In this paper, we introduce a plug-and-play method
that learns the covariance structure of errors over multiple steps for autoregressive models with Gaussian-distributed errors. To ensure scalable inference and
computational efficiency, we model the contemporaneous covariance using a lowrank-plus-diagonal parameterization and capture cross-covariance through a group
of independent latent temporal processes. The learned covariance matrix is then
used to calibrate predictions based on observed residuals. We evaluate our method
on probabilistic models built on RNNs and Transformer architectures, and the
results confirm the effectiveness of our approach in improving predictive accuracy
and uncertainty quantification without significantly increasing the parameter size.

1

Introduction

Uncertainty quantification is crucial in time series forecasting, especially for applications that need
more detailed insights than point forecasts. Probabilistic time series forecasting with deep learning
(DL) has attracted attention for its ability to capture complex, nonlinear dependencies and provide the
probability distribution of target variables [1, 2]. In multivariate time series, autoregressive models
are widely used for probabilistic forecasting [3–5], modeling the joint one-step-ahead predictive
distribution and generating multistep-ahead predictions in a rolling manner. To enable scalable
learning, these models often assume that errors are independent over time. Typically, time series
variables follow a Gaussian distribution zt = m(ht ) + η t , where m(·) is the mean function and
η t ∼ N (0, Σt ) is a stochastic error process with contemporaneous covariance matrix Σt . The
assumption of time-independence implies Cov(η s , η t ) = 0, ∀s ̸= t. This holds when the model
can account for all correlations between successive time steps through hidden states determined
by previous values. However, real-world data often violate this assumption, as residuals exhibit
substantial cross-correlation due to omission of important covariates and model misspecification.
Modeling error autocorrelation (or cross-correlation) is a key area of research in statistical time series
models. A common approach is to assume that the error series follows a dependent temporal process,
such as an autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) model [6]. Deep learning models
face similar challenges. Previous studies have attempted to incorporate temporally-correlated errors
into the training process by modifying the loss function [7, 8]. However, these methods, based on
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

