AlphaTablets: A Generic Plane Representation for 3D
Planar Reconstruction from Monocular Videos
Yuze He1 , Wang Zhao1 , Shaohui Liu2 , Yubin Hu1 ,
Yushi Bai1 , Yu-Hui Wen3 , Yong-Jin Liu1∗
1
Tsinghua University 2 ETH Zurich 3 Beijing Jiaotong University

Abstract
We introduce AlphaTablets, a novel and generic representation of 3D planes that
features continuous 3D surface and precise boundary delineation. By representing
3D planes as rectangles with alpha channels, AlphaTablets combine the advantages
of current 2D and 3D plane representations, enabling accurate, consistent and
flexible modeling of 3D planes. We derive differentiable rasterization on top of
AlphaTablets to efficiently render 3D planes into images, and propose a novel
bottom-up pipeline for 3D planar reconstruction from monocular videos. Starting
with 2D superpixels and geometric cues from pre-trained models, we initialize
3D planes as AlphaTablets and optimize them via differentiable rendering. An
effective merging scheme is introduced to facilitate the growth and refinement of
AlphaTablets. Through iterative optimization and merging, we reconstruct complete and accurate 3D planes with solid surfaces and clear boundaries. Extensive
experiments on the ScanNet dataset demonstrate state-of-the-art performance in
3D planar reconstruction, underscoring the great potential of AlphaTablets as a
generic 3D plane representation for various applications. Project page is available
at: https://hyzcluster.github.io/alphatablets.

1

Introduction

3D planar reconstruction from monocular videos is a crucial aspect of 3D computer vision, dedicated
to the precise detection and reconstruction of underlying 3D planes from consecutive 2D imagery. The
reconstructed 3D planes serve as a flexible representation of surfaces, facilitating various applications
such as scene modeling, mixed reality and robotics.
Traditional methods for 3D planar reconstruction rely heavily on explicit geometric inputs [36, 41],
hand-crafted features [6, 4], strong assumptions [10, 15] and solvers [37, 42, 16] to detect and
reconstruct the planes, thereby imposing limitations on scalability and robustness. Learning-based
methods [27, 26, 2, 28, 48] leverage the power of data-driven training to directly segment the
plane instances and regress the plane parameters from single or sparse-view images. Notably,
PlanarRecon [50], a pioneering monocular video-based learning method, operates within the 3D
volume space to detect and track planes, and has demonstrated promising results in recovering planar
structures. However, it often falls short in detecting complete planar reconstructions and struggles
with generalization across diverse scenes. How to build an accurate, complete and generalizable 3d
planar reconstruction system is still a challenging open problem.
We inspect this problem from the perspective of plane representation. Current methodologies employ
various representations, such as view-based 2D masks [42, 16, 3, 9, 26, 2, 48], 3D points [37, 30],
surfels [36], and voxels [50]. While 2D masks can precisely illustrate plane contours, this 2D plane
representation faces inconsistencies across different views and necessitates complex matching and
fusion processes to reconstruct 3D surfaces. In contrast, 3D representations directly depict 3D planar
surfaces. However, they suffer from discontinous geometry and texture due to discretized sampling,
and struggle to accurately model complex plane boundaries.
∗
Corresponding Author.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

