Virtual Scanning: Unsupervised Non-line-of-sight
Imaging from Irregularly Undersampled Transients

Xingyu Cui1 Huanjing Yue1 Song Li2,3 Xiangjun Yin1
Yusen Hou1 Yun Meng2,3 Kai Zou2,3 Xiaolong Hu2,3 Jingyu Yang1,∗
1
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, China
2
School of Precision Instrument and Optoelectronic Engineering, Tianjin University, China
3
Key Lab. of Optoelectronic Information Science and Technology, Ministry of Education, China

Abstract
Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging allows for seeing hidden scenes around corners
through active sensing. Most previous algorithms for NLOS reconstruction require
dense transients acquired through regular scans over a large relay surface, which
limits their applicability in realistic scenarios with irregular relay surfaces. In this
paper, we propose an unsupervised learning-based framework for NLOS imaging
from irregularly undersampled transients (IUT). Our method learns implicit priors
from noisy irregularly undersampled transients without requiring paired data, which
is difficult and expensive to acquire and align. To overcome the ambiguity of the
measurement consistency constraint in inferring the albedo volume, we design a
virtual scanning process that enables the network to learn within both range space
and null space for high-quality reconstruction. We devise a physics-guided SUREbased denoiser to enhance robustness to ubiquitous noise in low-photon imaging
conditions. Extensive experiments on both simulated and real-world data validate
the performance and generalization of our method. Compared with the state-of-theart (SOTA) method, our method achieves higher fidelity, greater robustness, and
remarkably faster inference times by orders of magnitude. The code and model are
available at https://github.com/XingyuCuii/Virtual-Scanning-NLOS.

1

Introduction

Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging aims to reconstruct hidden scenes beyond the direct line of sight
of the detector, garnering interest across various fields such as robot vision, autonomous driving,
rescue operations, remote sensing, and medical imaging [1–5]. In a typical active confocal NLOS
imaging system, as depicted in Fig. 1, a laser source and a detector are both focused on the same
point on a relay surface. Pulses emitted by the laser reflect off the surface to illuminate the hidden
scene. The detector captures photons bouncing back from the scene toward the relay surface, referred
to as transients, from which the hidden scene can be recovered using elaborately designed algorithms.
While existing works have achieved remarkable breakthroughs, they also face significant limitations
that hinder their practical applicability. These methods assume dense and regular scanning of a large
relay surface, which may not be feasible in realistic scenarios with irregular relay surfaces such as
latticed windows or fences. Transients obtained through irregular undersampling can result in severe
ill-posedness, leading to artifacts or reconstruction failure. This raises the challenging task of NLOS
imaging from irregularly undersampled transients (IUT). To address this, Liu et al. [6] proposed
introducing manually designed strong regularization terms under a functional optimization framework.
However, this approach is hindered by the need for lengthy numerical iterative computations. Recent
∗

Corresponding author: yjy@tju.edu.cn.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

