Kernel-Based Function Approximation for Average
Reward Reinforcement Learning: An Optimist
No-Regret Algorithm

Sattar Vakili
MediaTek Research
sattar.vakili@mtkresearch.com

Julia Olkhovskaya
TU Delft
julia.olkhovskaya@gmail.com

Abstract
Reinforcement learning utilizing kernel ridge regression to predict the expected
value function represents a powerful method with great representational capacity. This setting is a highly versatile framework amenable to analytical results.
We consider kernel-based function approximation for RL in the infinite horizon
average reward setting, also referred to as the undiscounted setting. We propose
an optimistic algorithm, similar to acquisition function based algorithms in the
special case of bandits. We establish novel no-regret performance guarantees for
our algorithm, under kernel-based modelling assumptions. Additionally, we derive
a novel confidence interval for the kernel-based prediction of the expected value
function, applicable across various RL problems.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has demonstrated substantial practical success across a variety of
application domains, including gaming (Silver et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2018; Vinyals et al., 2019),
autonomous driving (Kahn et al., 2017), microchip design (Mirhoseini et al., 2021), robot control
(Kalashnikov et al., 2018), and algorithmic search (Fawzi et al., 2022). This empirical success
has prompted deeper investigations into the analytical understanding of RL, especially in complex
environments. Over the past decade, significant advances have been made in establishing theoretically
grounded algorithms for various settings. In this work, we focus on the infinite horizon average
reward setting, also known as the undiscounted setting (Wei et al., 2020, 2021). This setting is
particularly well-suited for applications that involve continuing operations not divided into episodes
such as load balancing and stock market operations. In contrast to the episodic setting (Jin et al.,
2020) and the discounted setting (Zhou et al., 2021), theoretical understanding of RL algorithms is
relatively limited for the undiscounted setting. We develop a computationally efficient algorithm and
establish its theoretical performance guarantees in the undiscounted case.
There is a natural progression in the complexity of RL models corresponding to the structural
complexity of the Markov Decision Process (MDP). This progression ranges from tabular models to
linear, kernel-based, and deep learning-based models. The kernel-based structure is an extension of
linear structure to an infinite-dimensional linear model in the feature space of a positive definite kernel,
resulting in a highly versatile model with great representational capacity for nonlinear functions. In
addition, the closed-form expressions for the prediction and the uncertainty estimate in kernel-based
models allow the development of algorithms based on nonlinear function approximation that are
amenable to theoretical analysis. Kernel-based models also serve as an intermediate step towards
understanding the deep learning-based models (see, e.g., Yang et al., 2020) based on the Neural
Tangent (NT) kernel approach (Jacot et al., 2018).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

