Improving Deep Reinforcement Learning by Reducing
the Chain Effect of Value and Policy Churn

Hongyao Tang
Mila - Québec AI Institute
Université de Montréal
tang.hongyao@mila.quebec

Glen Berseth
Mila - Québec AI Institute
Université de Montréal
glen.berseth@mila.quebec

Abstract
Deep neural networks provide Reinforcement Learning (RL) powerful function
approximators to address large-scale decision-making problems. However, these
approximators introduce challenges due to the non-stationary nature of RL training.
One source of the challenges in RL is that output predictions can churn, leading
to uncontrolled changes after each batch update for states not included in the
batch. Although such a churn phenomenon exists in each step of network training,
how churn occurs and impacts RL remains under-explored. In this work, we start
by characterizing churn in a view of Generalized Policy Iteration with function
approximation, and we discover a chain effect of churn that leads to a cycle where
the churns in value estimation and policy improvement compound and bias the
learning dynamics throughout the iteration. Further, we concretize the study
and focus on the learning issues caused by the chain effect in different settings,
including greedy action deviation in value-based methods, trust region violation in
proximal policy optimization, and dual bias of policy value in actor-critic methods.
We then propose a method to reduce the chain effect across different settings, called
Churn Approximated ReductIoN (CHAIN), which can be easily plugged into most
existing DRL algorithms. Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method in both reducing churn and improving learning performance across online
and offline, value-based and policy-based RL settings, as well as a scaling setting.

1

Introduction

One fundamental recipe for the success of Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) is powerful approximation and generalization provided by deep neural networks, which augments the ability of RL with
tabular or linear approximation to large state spaces. However, on the other side of this benefit is less
control over the function dynamics. Network outputs can change indirectly to unexpected values
after any random batch update for input data not included in the batch, called churn in this paper.
This change is particularly problematic for an RL agent due to its non-stationary nature, which can
exacerbate instability, suboptimality, and even collapse. Therefore, it is important to understand and
control these undesired dynamics to address learning issues and improve performance.
Consistent efforts have been devoted by the RL community to gain a better understanding of the
learning dynamics from different perspectives [Achiam et al., 2019, Kumar et al., 2022, Liu et al.,
2023, Lyle et al., 2022b]. Recently, Schaul et al. [2022] studied a novel churn phenomenon in the
learning process of typical value-based RL algorithms like DoubleDQN [van Hasselt et al., 2016].
The phenomenon reveals that the greedy actions of about 10% of states in the replay buffer change
after a single regular batch update. Such a dramatic churn can persist throughout the learning process
of DoubleDQN, causing instabilities.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

