Amortized Active Causal Induction with Deep
Reinforcement Learning
Yashas Annadani1,2 Panagiotis Tigas3 Stefan Bauer1,2 Adam Foster
1
Helmholtz AI, Munich 2 Technical University of Munich
3
OATML, University of Oxford

Abstract
We present Causal Amortized Active Structure Learning (CAASL), an active
intervention design policy that can select interventions that are adaptive, real-time
and that does not require access to the likelihood. This policy, an amortized
network based on the transformer, is trained with reinforcement learning on
a simulator of the design environment, and a reward function that measures
how close the true causal graph is to a causal graph posterior inferred from the
gathered data. On synthetic data and a single-cell gene expression simulator, we
demonstrate empirically that the data acquired through our policy results in a better
estimate of the underlying causal graph than alternative strategies. Our design
policy successfully achieves amortized intervention design on the distribution
of the training environment while also generalizing well to distribution shifts in
test-time design environments. Further, our policy also demonstrates excellent
zero-shot generalization to design environments with dimensionality higher than
that during training, and to intervention types that it has not been trained on.

1

Introduction

world

Infer, design and experiment is a three step loop in the
empirical scientific discovery paradigm. Causal induction
(a.k.a. causal structure learning), the problem of finding causal
relationships present in data, also falls under this paradigm
history
experiments
when experiments in the form of interventions are permissipast interventional &
observational data
ble [52, 28]. Causal structure learning has gained increasing
importance in empirical sciences, for example in single-cell
biology, where perturbation experiments like gene knockouts
can be carried out with high-precision [54]. Such interventions
policy
are not only more informative to infer the underlying causal
graph than just observational data, but in certain cases essential
transformer based
history encoder
to go beyond the Markov equivalence class [43], making the
problem of design of interventions both relevant and important.
For the problem of structure learning with interventions, how- Figure 1: Causal Amortized Strucever, inference and design both involve significant challenges. ture Learning (CAASL) is an active
For instance, inference of the causal graph from data usually intervention design method that diinvolves search over the space of graphs with a likelihood (usu- rectly proposes the next intervention
ally weighted by a prior) or score function [4, 9, 27], which is to perform by just a forward-pass of
slow and not robust to violations of data generation assump- the transformer based policy.
tions [41]. The design of informative interventions, on the
other hand, utilizes the inferred causal graph from existing data to select promising designs and rank
them according to a scoring criterion. This scoring criterion is usually based on an approximation of
mutual information between the unknown causal graph and the interventional data [56, 55], which
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

