L ONG V IDEO B ENCH: A Benchmark for Long-context
Interleaved Video-Language Understanding

Haoning Wu

Dongxu Li

Bei Chen

Junnan Li∗

Rhymes AI
Question: At the beginning of the
video, a woman with a headband
tied to her head, wearing a red
top, carrying a black backpack,
when the woman comes down
from a hill with tall rocks, what
changes occur to her backpack?
Options:
A. There is a dark red jacket
hanging on her black backpack
B. Nothing changed
C. There is a white jacket hanging
on her black backpack
D. There is a dark blue jacket
hanging on her black backpack

Figure 1: (Left) L ONG V IDEO B ENCH features referring reasoning questions, with a referring query
that references particular video contexts (i.e. referred context) to answer questions about. (Right) For
top-tier models, L ONG V IDEO B ENCH requires more input frames to obtain better performance.

Abstract
Large multimodal models (LMMs) are processing increasingly longer and richer
inputs. Albeit the progress, few public benchmark is available to measure such
development. To mitigate this gap, we introduce L ONG V IDEO B ENCH, a questionanswering benchmark that features video-language interleaved inputs up to an hour
long. Our benchmark includes 3,763 varying-length web-collected videos with
their subtitles across diverse themes, designed to comprehensively evaluate LMMs
on long-term multimodal understanding. To achieve this, we interpret the primary
challenge as to accurately retrieve and reason over detailed multimodal information
from long inputs. As such, we formulate a novel video question-answering task
termed referring reasoning. Specifically, as part of the question, it contains a referring query that references related video contexts, called referred context. The model
is then required to reason over relevant video details from the referred context.
Following the paradigm of referring reasoning, we curate 6,678 human-annotated
multiple-choice questions in 17 fine-grained categories, establishing one of the most
comprehensive benchmarks for long-form video understanding. Evaluations suggest that the L ONG V IDEO B ENCH presents significant challenges even for the most
advanced proprietary models (e.g. GPT-4o, Gemini-1.5-Pro, GPT-4-Turbo), while
their open-source counterparts show an even larger performance gap. In addition,
our results indicate that model performance on the benchmark improves only when
they are capable of processing more frames, positioning L ONG V IDEO B ENCH as a
valuable benchmark for evaluating future-generation long-context LMMs.
∗

Corresponding Author. Dataset and leaderboard at: https://longvideobench.github.io

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

