Leveraging Tumor Heterogeneity: Heterogeneous
Graph Representation Learning for Cancer Survival
Prediction in Whole Slide Images

Junxian Wu1,2∗ Xinyi Ke3∗ Xiaoming Jiang4∗ Huanwen Wu3† Youyong Kong2,5†
Lizhi Shao1†
1
School of Internet, Anhui University
2
Jiangsu Provincial Joint International Research Laboratory of Medical Information Processing,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
3
Department of Pathology, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare Disease,
Molecular Pathology Research Center, Peking Union Medical College Hospital,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China
4
School of Bioinformatics, Chongqing University of Post and Telecommunications
5
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its
Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
{junxianwu, kongyouyong}@seu.edu.cn
xinyike0321@student.pumc.edu.cn
jiangxm@cqupt.edu.cn
wuhuanwen@xhyy.pumc.edu.cn
24115@ahu.edu.cn

Abstract
Survival prediction is a significant challenge in cancer management. Tumor microenvironment is a highly sophisticated ecosystem consisting of cancer cells, immune
cells, endothelial cells, fibroblasts, nerves and extracellular matrix. The intratumor
heterogeneity and the interaction across multiple tissue types profoundly impact
the prognosis. However, current methods often neglect the fact that the contribution
to prognosis differs with tissue types. In this paper, we propose ProtoSurv, a novel
heterogeneous graph model for WSI survival prediction. The learning process of
ProtoSurv is not only driven by data but also incorporates pathological domain
knowledge, including the awareness of tissue heterogeneity, the emphasis on prior
knowledge of prognostic-related tissues, and the depiction of spatial interaction
across multiple tissues. We validate ProtoSurv across five different cancer types
from TCGA (i.e., BRCA, LGG, LUAD, COAD and PAAD), and demonstrate
the superiority of our method over the state-of-the-art methods. Source code is
available at https://github.com/wjx-error/ProtoSurv.

1

Introduction

Pathological images are considered the gold standard for cancer diagnosis and provide rich prognostic
information, such as the tumor differentiation and lymphovascular infiltration. Traditional manual
evaluation by pathologists is subject to inter-observer inconsistency and lacks accuracy in the risk
stratification for patients. The advent of whole-slide imaging allows the entire slide to be digitalized
at high resolution, enabling the standardized and automated analysis of Whole Slide Images (WSIs)
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

