On Sampling Strategies for Spectral Model Sharding

Christos Louizos
Qualcomm AI Research∗
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
clouizos@qti.qualcomm.com

Denis Korzhenkov
Qualcomm AI Research∗
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
dkorzhen@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
The problem of heterogeneous clients in federated learning has recently drawn a
lot of attention. Spectral model sharding, i.e., partitioning the model parameters
into low-rank matrices based on the singular value decomposition, has been one of
the proposed solutions for more efficient on-device training in such settings. In this
work, we present two sampling strategies for such sharding, obtained as solutions
to specific optimization problems. The first produces unbiased estimators of the
original weights, while the second aims to minimize the squared approximation
error. We discuss how both of these estimators can be incorporated in the federated
learning loop and practical considerations that arise during local training. Empirically, we demonstrate that both of these methods can lead to improved performance
on various commonly used datasets.

1

Introduction

Due to increasing concerns about user data privacy, a federated approach becomes a viable alternative
for common centralized methods of machine learning [25]. Unlike centralized training on powerful
servers, the federated setting faces a variety of user devices like personal computers, mobile phones,
tablets, etc. which may have different constraints in terms of memory footprint, spare CPU resources,
battery levels, and many others [34]. Therefore, in practice, the scenario where each user trains the
same model may be impossible.
To tackle this problem, several methods which carefully create smaller sub-models from a larger
global model were proposed [6, 17, 1, 44]. The general recipe for each communication round is
composed of three steps. Initially, the server receives from each client the information about its
capabilities and sends a sub-model of the corresponding size to that client. Afterwards, each of the
clients update their respective sub-models for a specific number of steps. Finally, the server collects
the fine-tuned models from each client and aggregates them into a single global model.
In order to create sub-models, the recently proposed method called PriSM suggests to conduct
singular value decomposition (SVD) of the weight matrices of affine layers and randomly sample the
terms from this decomposition [32, 33]. The number of sampled terms is a hyperparameter which
depend on the capacity of the client. Despite the fact that PriSM has shown promising results on
several datasets, its sampling design remains heuristic.
In this work, we show that by introducing certain first principles, better strategies can be obtained
via solutions to specific optimization problems. More specifically, our aim is to obtain the inclusion
probabilities for the SVD factors in a way that minimizes the expected, under these probabilities,
squared approximation error. In isolation, this requirement leads to the deterministic top-n sampling,
as the Eckart–Young–Mirsky theorem implies [8]. However, we propose two additional principles
∗
Qualcomm AI Research, Qualcomm Technologies Netherlands B.V (Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative
of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

