Temporal Graph Neural Tangent Kernel
with Graphon-Guaranteed

Katherine Tieu∗
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
kt42@illinois.edu
Yada Zhu
IBM Research
yzhu@us.ibm.com

Hendrik Hamann
IBM Research
hendrikh@us.ibm.com

Dongqi Fu∗
Meta AI
dongqifu@meta.com
Jingrui He
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
jingrui@illinois.edu

Abstract
Graph Neural Tangent Kernel (GNTK) fuses graph neural networks and graph
kernels, simplifies the process of graph representation learning, interprets the
training dynamics of graph neural networks, and serves various applications like
protein identification, image segmentation, and social network analysis. In practice,
graph data carries complex information among entities that inevitably evolves over
time, and previous static graph neural tangent kernel methods may be stuck in
the sub-optimal solution in terms of both effectiveness and efficiency. As a result,
extending the advantage of GNTK to temporal graphs becomes a critical problem.
To this end, we propose the temporal graph neural tangent kernel, which not only
extends the simplicity and interpretation ability of GNTK to the temporal setting
but also leads to rigorous temporal graph classification error bounds. Furthermore,
we prove that when the input temporal graph grows over time in the number of
nodes, our temporal graph neural tangent kernel will converge in the limit to
the graphon NTK value, which implies the transferability and robustness of the
proposed kernel method, named Temporal Graph Neural Tangent Kernel with
Graphon-Guaranteed or Temp-G3 NTK. In addition to the theoretical analysis,
we also perform extensive experiments, not only demonstrating the superiority
of Temp-G3 NTK in the temporal graph classification task, but also showing that
Temp-G3 NTK can achieve very competitive performance in node-level tasks like
node classification compared with various SOTA graph kernel and representation
learning baselines. Our code is available at https://github.com/kthrn22/
TempGNTK

1

Introduction

Graphs, as a relational structure, model the complex relationships among entities and have attracted
much research attention nowadays. To serve various applications, graph neural networks have been
extensively studied for their representation learning ability. On the one hand, graph neural networks
usually need to build complex neural architectures with hyperparameters to achieve their powerful
expressive ability, which is typically a nonlinear process and hard to interpret [50, 13, 21]. On the
other hand, graph kernels enjoy the explicit formula and can be convex, leading to solid theoretical
results, although their specific form is often hand-crafted and may not be powerful enough to support
complicated application scenarios [23, 34, 12]. Hence, graph neural tangent kernel (GNTK) [9]
has been proposed to fuse graph neural networks and graph kernels, enjoying the benefits of both
∗

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

