Web-Scale Visual Entity Recognition:
An LLM-Driven Data Approach

Mathilde Caron

Alireza Fathi Cordelia Schmid
Google DeepMind

Ahmet Iscen

Abstract
Web-scale visual entity recognition, the task of associating images with their corresponding entities within vast knowledge bases like Wikipedia, presents significant
challenges due to the lack of clean, large-scale training data. In this paper, we propose a novel methodology to curate such a dataset, leveraging a multimodal large
language model (LLM) for label verification, metadata generation, and rationale
explanation. Instead of relying on the multimodal LLM to directly annotate data,
which we found to be suboptimal, we prompt it to reason about potential candidate
entity labels by accessing additional contextually relevant information (such as
Wikipedia), resulting in more accurate annotations. We further use the multimodal
LLM to enrich the dataset by generating question-answer pairs and a grounded finegrained textual description (referred to as “rationale”) that explains the connection
between images and their assigned entities. Experiments demonstrate that models
trained on this automatically curated data achieve state-of-the-art performance on
web-scale visual entity recognition tasks (e.g. +6.9% improvement in OVEN entity
task), underscoring the importance of high-quality training data in this domain.

1

Introduction

Entities are at the core of how we represent and organize knowledge, as seen in prominent encyclopedias like Wikipedia, where each article is dedicated to a specific entity. In the field of computer
vision, the task of visual entity recognition aims to identify entities within query images. This
capability is not only a fundamental building block for various entity-aware visual understanding
tasks, including “info-seeking” Visual Question Answering (VQA) [10, 22, 31] and News Content
Understanding [4, 14, 24, 54], but also has numerous commercial applications. Despite the progress
made in recent years, current models often struggle with web-scale visual entity recognition. These
models, typically trained on free-form image captions [9, 15, 56], tend to hallucinate entities or output
overly generic ones, leading to suboptimal performance. We hypothesize that the root of this issue
lies in the lack of clean, large-scale training data specifically designed for visual entity recognition.
Recent efforts have been made to address this problem by transforming existing captioning datasets
into entity recognition datasets [7, 25]. For example, Caron et al. [7] propose to match each
Wikipedia entity name to most similar captions in a large image-caption database [9, 46] and
use the corresponding images as visual examples for the considered entity. Although this method
has resulted in state-of-the-art performance, it still has significant limitations: the resulting datasets
are often noisy, with poor matching between the image content and the candidate entity. First, a
source of mistake is due to the ambiguity of language. For example the entity bishop of llandaff
may refer both to a person and to a flower species [18, 35]. Second, there is some noise inherent
to the used image-caption dataset that affects the results. For example in Fig. 1(a), an image of a
building is incorrectly linked to the Wikipedia entity Negative equity. This mismatch occurs because
of the caption “Worst areas for negative equity”, which is likely to have been extracted from an
investment-related website. The irrelevant association of the caption with the building image results
in the inaccurate connection to the Wikipedia entity. Third, the text embedding matching between
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

