Differentially Private Graph Diffusion with
Applications in Personalized PageRanks

Rongzhe Wei
Georgia Institute of Technology
rongzhe.wei@gatech.edu

Eli Chien
Georgia Institute of Technology
ichien6@gatech.edu

Pan Li
Georgia Institute of Technology
panli@gatech.edu

Abstract
Graph diffusion, which iteratively propagates real-valued substances among the
graph, is used in numerous graph/network-involved applications. However, releasing diffusion vectors may reveal sensitive linking information in the data such
as transaction information in financial network data. Protecting the privacy of
graph data is challenging due to its interconnected nature. This work proposes a
novel graph diffusion framework with edge-level differential privacy guarantees by
using noisy diffusion iterates. The algorithm injects Laplace noise per diffusion
iteration and adopts a degree-based thresholding function to mitigate the high
sensitivity induced by low-degree nodes. Our privacy loss analysis is based on
Privacy Amplification by Iteration (PABI), which to our best knowledge, is the first
effort that analyzes PABI with Laplace noise and provides relevant applications.
We also introduce a novel ∞-Wasserstein distance tracking method, which tightens
the analysis of privacy leakage and makes PABI practically applicable. We evaluate
this framework by applying it to Personalized Pagerank computation for ranking
tasks. Experiments on real-world network data demonstrate the superiority of our
method under stringent privacy conditions.

1

Introduction

Graph diffusion, characterized by propagating signals across networks, is used in a variety of realworld applications. Variants of graph diffusion such as PageRank [1] and heat kernel diffusion [2]
has revolutionized the domains such as web searching [3], community detection [4–7], network
analysis [8, 9] and advancements in graph neural networks [10–13]. Despite their widespread
applications, directly releasing diffusion vectors can inadvertently leak sensitive graph information
and raise privacy concerns. Hoskins et al. [14] demonstrate that the access to a small subset of
random walk-based similarities (e.g., commute times, personalized PageRank scores) could disclose
significant portions of network’s edges, a phenomenon known as link disclosure [15]. Such attacks,
for instance, may enable advertisers to deploy invasive advertising tactics [16] or reveal sensitive
transaction information within financial networks [17]. Consequently, it becomes critically important
to design graph diffusion algorithms with privacy safeguards.
Differential privacy (DP) is recognized as a gold standard used for characterizing the privacy risk of
data processing algorithms [18]. However, the inherently interconnected nature of graph-structured
data renders the adaptation of DP to graphs non-trivial [19]. Previous studies often conduct the
analysis of output sensitivity and adopt output perturbation to keep graph data private, which include
the study on differentially private personalized PageRanks (PPRs) [20], and other relevant graph
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

