Consistency Models for Scalable and Fast
Simulation-Based Inference
Marvin Schmitt∗
University of Stuttgart
Germany
mail.marvinschmitt@gmail.com
Ullrich Köthe
Heidelberg University
Germany

Paul-Christian Bürkner
TU Dortmund University
Germany

Valentin Pratz∗
Heidelberg University & ELIZA
Germany

Stefan T. Radev
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
United States

Abstract
Simulation-based inference (SBI) is constantly in search of more expressive and
efficient algorithms to accurately infer the parameters of complex simulation models. In line with this goal, we present consistency models for posterior estimation
(CMPE), a new conditional sampler for SBI that inherits the advantages of recent
unconstrained architectures and overcomes their sampling inefficiency at inference
time. CMPE essentially distills a continuous probability flow and enables rapid
few-shot inference with an unconstrained architecture that can be flexibly tailored
to the structure of the estimation problem. We provide hyperparameters and default architectures that support consistency training over a wide range of different
dimensions, including low-dimensional ones which are important in SBI workflows but were previously difficult to tackle even with unconditional consistency
models. Our empirical evaluation demonstrates that CMPE not only outperforms
current state-of-the-art algorithms on hard low-dimensional benchmarks, but also
achieves competitive performance with much faster sampling speed on two realistic
estimation problems with high data and/or parameter dimensions.

1

Introduction

Simulation-based inference (SBI) comprises a family of computational methods for modeling the
hidden properties of complex systems by means of simulation [1, 2]. In recent years, deep learning –
and generative models in particular – have proven indispensable for scaling up SBI to challenging
inverse problems [3–7]. Recently, multiple streams of neural SBI research have been capitalizing on
the rapid progress in generative modeling of unstructured data by re-purposing existing generative
architectures into general inverse problem solvers for applications in the sciences [8–11]. In line with
the above trend, we contribute a new contender to the growing suite of SBI methods for amortized
Bayesian inference.
Within the class of deep generative models, score-based diffusion models [12–15] and flow matching
algorithms [16, 17] have recently attracted significant attention due to their sublime performance as
realistic generators. Diffusion models and flow matching are strikingly flexible but require a relatively
expensive multi-step sampling phase to denoise samples [12]. To address this shortcoming, Song
et al. [18] proposed consistency models (CMs), which are trained to perform few-step generation by
design and have since emerged as a standalone generative model family. Thus, CMs appear attractive
∗

equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

