The Scandinavian Embedding Benchmarks:
Evaluating Multilingual and Monolingual Text
Embedding for Scandinavian languages

Kenneth Enevoldsen
Aarhus University
kenneth.enevoldsen@cas.au.dk
Niklas Muennighoff
n.muennighoff@gmail.com

Márton Kardos
Aarhus University
martonkardos@cas.au.dk
Kristoffer Laigaard Nielbo
Aarhus University
kln@cas.au.dk

Abstract
The evaluation of English text embeddings has transitioned from evaluating a
handful of datasets to broad coverage across many tasks through benchmarks such
as MTEB. However, this is not the case for multilingual text embeddings due
to a lack of available benchmarks. To address this problem, we introduce the
Scandinavian Embedding Benchmark (SEB). SEB is a framework that enables text
embedding evaluation for Scandinavian languages across 24 tasks, 10 subtasks, and
4 task categories. Building on SEB, we evaluate more than 26 models, uncovering
significant performance disparities between public and commercial solutions not
previously captured by MTEB. We open-source SEB1 and integrate it with MTEB,
thus bridging the text embedding evaluation gap for Scandinavian languages.

1

Introduction

Natural language embeddings are used in a diverse range of applications, including clustering (Liu
and Xiong, 2011; Angelov, 2020), text mining (Jiang et al., 2015), semantic search (Reimers and
Gurevych, 2019a; Muennighoff, 2022) and feature representation (Alayrac et al., 2022). Furthermore,
embeddings are crucial in retrieval augmented generation (RAG) systems (Borgeaud et al., 2022),
particularly for low- to mid-resource languages and domains. RAG systems enable the enrichment
of generative models with the knowledge that might be underrepresented or absent during training.
Thus, they can play a role in broadening linguistic and domain coverage.
With the breadth of applications for text embeddings, a proper evaluation of their quality is critical.
Recent work has proposed Massive Text Embedding Benchmark (MTEB) (Muennighoff et al., 2023),
a benchmark for evaluating the quality of document embeddings for a wide variety of tasks. MTEB
improves upon prior benchmarks by addressing the lack of evaluations across tasks. This has led to
the widespread adoption of the benchmark for evaluating natural language embeddings.
However, while MTEB substantially improves the evaluation of text embeddings, the benchmark has
the following shortcomings:
1. Support for non-English evaluation: MTEB contains only limited support for evaluating non-English embeddings and multiple task categories are predominantly covered by
1

https://github.com/KennethEnevoldsen/scandinavian-embedding-benchmark

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

