Decoding-Time Language Model Alignment
with Multiple Objectives

Ruizhe Shi1∗ Yifang Chen2 Yushi Hu2,3 Alisa Liu2
Hannaneh Hajishirzi2,3 Noah A. Smith2,3 Simon S. Du2
1
IIIS, Tsinghua University 2 University of Washington 3 Allen Institute for AI

Abstract
Aligning language models (LMs) to human preferences has emerged as a critical pursuit, enabling these models to better serve diverse user needs. Existing
methods primarily focus on optimizing LMs for a single reward function, limiting their adaptability to varied objectives. Here, we propose multi-objective
decoding (MOD), a decoding-time algorithm that outputs the next token from a
linear combination of predictions of all base models, for any given weighting over
different objectives. We exploit a common form among a family of f -divergence
regularized alignment approaches (such as PPO, DPO, and their variants) to identify a closed-form solution by Legendre transform, and derive an efficient decoding
strategy. Theoretically, we show why existing approaches can be sub-optimal even
in natural settings and obtain optimality guarantees for our method. Empirical
results demonstrate the effectiveness of the algorithm. For example, compared to a
parameter-merging baseline, MOD achieves 12.8% overall reward improvement
when equally optimizing towards 3 objectives. Moreover, we experiment with
MOD on combining three fully-finetuned LMs of different model sizes, each aimed
at different objectives such as safety, coding, and general user preference. Unlike
traditional methods that require careful curation of a mixture of datasets to achieve
comprehensive improvement, we can quickly experiment with preference weightings using MOD to find the best combination of models. Our best combination
reduces toxicity on Toxigen to nearly 0% and achieves 7.9–33.3% improvement
across three other metrics (i.e., Codex@1, GSM-COT, BBH-COT).

1

Introduction

Learning from human feedback [36, 35] has gained significant attention due to its potential for using
human-labeled datasets to align language models to human preferences [42, 52, 39, 8, 60]. Among
them, alignment approaches such as RLHF (PPO) [9] and DPO [39] all model the optimization
objective so as to maximize the expected reward from some implicit or explicit reward function,
while incorporating KL-divergence from the reference policy as a divergence penalty [16]. However,
these algorithms are restricted to only optimizing for a single reward function.
In reality, different use cases and users may prefer different weightings of various alignment objectives.
For instance, dialogue agents need to trade off between helpfulness and harmlessness [3, 22],
while question-answering systems can have attributes of relevance, verbosity, and completeness
[52]. Therefore, there is a growing need for methods of adapting LMs on-the-fly toward different
combinations of objectives [44, 21, 13]. Naive methods such as prompt adjustment for particular
styles [6, 38] fail to provide precise control over the nuanced weighting of output characteristics [67].
Curating mixed datasets for the desired combination of objectives is challenging and resourceintensive. Some efforts (e.g., MORLHF [52, 3] MODPO [62]) match varying personal preferences
∗

This work was done while Ruizhe Shi was visiting the University of Washington.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

