FlowLLM: Flow Matching for Material Generation
with Large Language Models as Base Distributions

Anuroop Sriram
FAIR, Meta
anuroops@meta.com

Benjamin Kurt Miller
University of Amsterdam
b.k.miller@uva.nl

Ricky T. Q. Chen
FAIR, Meta
rtqichen@meta.com

Brandon M. Wood
FAIR, Meta
bmwood@meta.com

Abstract
Material discovery is a critical area of research with the potential to revolutionize
various fields, including carbon capture, renewable energy, and electronics. However, the immense scale of the chemical space makes it challenging to explore all
possible materials experimentally. In this paper, we introduce FlowLLM, a novel
generative model that combines large language models (LLMs) and Riemannian
flow matching (RFM) to design novel crystalline materials. FlowLLM first finetunes an LLM to learn an effective base distribution of meta-stable crystals in a text
representation. After converting to a graph representation, the RFM model takes
samples from the LLM and iteratively refines the coordinates and lattice parameters.
Our approach significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods, increasing the
generation rate of stable materials by over three times and increasing the rate for
stable, unique, and novel crystals by ∼ 50% – a huge improvement on a difficult
problem. Additionally, the crystals generated by FlowLLM are much closer to their
relaxed state when compared with another leading model, significantly reducing
post-hoc computational cost.

1

Introduction

Material discovery holds transformative potential across numerous industries including carbon
capture[38], batteries[28], photovoltaics[9], and energy storage[1]. However, the vastness of the
chemical space has hindered experimental synthesis of the majority of possible materials. Generative
models offer a promising avenue for exploring this untapped potential.
Generating crystalline materials is particularly challenging as it involves simultaneously generating
both discrete (atomic types) and continuous values (atomic positions and lattice geometry). While
existing approaches, namely autoregressive large language models (LLMs)[11, 6] and denoising
models, e.g., denoising diffusion and flow matching [47, 16, 49, 48, 30, 26, 17], have demonstrated
success, they exhibit complementary strengths and weaknesses. LLMs excel at modeling discrete
values, but they can struggle with continuous values due to their reliance on finite precision
representations. Conversely, denoising models more effectively handle continuous values and can
easily ensure equivariances, but they face challenges with discrete elements.
LLMs also offer the distinct advantage of natural language prompting, enabling versatile and intuitive
conditional generation. This capability is further enhanced by training LLMs on vast corpora of
chemistry text, equipping them with valuable prior knowledge to generate chemically valid outputs.
Queries like “Generate materials with a high bandgap and thermal stability” or “Propose a novel
perovskite structure for efficient solar energy conversion” can be directly integrated into the LLM
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

