FairMedFM: Fairness Benchmarking
for Medical Imaging Foundation Models

Ruinan Jin1,4∗ , Zikang Xu2∗ , Yuan Zhong3∗ , Qingsong Yao2 ,
Qi Dou3† , S. Kevin Zhou2† , Xiaoxiao Li1,4†
1
The University of British Columbia
2
University of Science and Technology of China
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Vector Institute

Abstract
The advent of foundation models (FMs) in healthcare offers unprecedented opportunities to enhance medical diagnostics through automated classification and
segmentation tasks. However, these models also raise significant concerns about
their fairness, especially when applied to diverse and underrepresented populations
in healthcare applications. Currently, there is a lack of comprehensive benchmarks,
standardized pipelines, and easily adaptable libraries to evaluate and understand
the fairness performance of FMs in medical imaging, leading to considerable challenges in formulating and implementing solutions that ensure equitable outcomes
across diverse patient populations. To fill this gap, we introduce FairMedFM, a fairness benchmark for FM research in medical imaging. FairMedFM integrates with
17 popular medical imaging datasets, encompassing different modalities, dimensionalities, and sensitive attributes. It explores 20 widely used FMs, with various
usages such as zero-shot learning, linear probing, parameter-efficient fine-tuning,
and prompting in various downstream tasks – classification and segmentation. Our
exhaustive analysis evaluates the fairness performance over different evaluation
metrics from multiple perspectives, revealing the existence of bias, varied utilityfairness trade-offs on different FMs, consistent disparities on the same datasets
regardless FMs, and limited effectiveness of existing unfairness mitigation methods.
Checkout FairMedFM’s project page and open-sourced codebase, which supports
extendible functionalities and applications as well as inclusive for studies on FMs
in medical imaging over the long term.

1

Introduction

Foundation Model (FM) facilitated medical image analysis is playing a pivotal role in healthcare [2,
3]. These models, which leverage large-scale pretraining and fine-tuning [6], have demonstrated
remarkable capabilities in various medical imaging tasks, including classification [69, 41] and
segmentation [55, 39]. As the use of FMs proliferates in medical imaging, addressing the challenges
of evaluating and ensuring their fairness and utility becomes increasingly critical [28, 24, 77], where
biases in model performance can result in significant disparities in patient care and outcomes.
Creating benchmarks for algorithm fairness in medical imaging can lead to consistent experiment
settings and ensure standardization. There are efforts to benchmark fairness algorithms in non-FMbased traditional machine learning for medical imaging [77, 50, 23, 76, 13, 72]. However, the fairness
∗
†

Equal contribution. Authors are listed in alphabetical order.
Co-corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

