Tensor-Based Synchronization and the
Low-Rankness of the Block Trifocal Tensor
Daniel Miao ∗

Gilad Lerman∗

Joe Kileel†

Abstract
The block tensor of trifocal tensors provides crucial geometric information on the
three-view geometry of a scene. The underlying synchronization problem seeks to
recover camera poses (locations and orientations up to a global transformation) from
the block trifocal tensor. We establish an explicit Tucker factorization of this tensor,
revealing a low multilinear rank of (6,4,4) independent of the number of cameras
under appropriate scaling conditions. We prove that this rank constraint provides
sufficient information for camera recovery in the noiseless case. The constraint
motivates a synchronization algorithm based on the higher-order singular value
decomposition of the block trifocal tensor. Experimental comparisons with stateof-the-art global synchronization methods on real datasets demonstrate the potential
of this algorithm for significantly improving location estimation accuracy. Overall
this work suggests that higher-order interactions in synchronization problems can
be exploited to improve performance, beyond the usual pairwise-based approaches.

1

Introduction

Synchronization is crucial for the success of many data-intensive applications, including structure from
motion, simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM), and community detection. This problem
involves estimating global states from relative measurements between states. While many studies have
explored synchronization in different contexts using pairwise measurements, few have considered
measurements between three or more states. In real-world scenarios, relying solely on pairwise measurements often fails to capture the full complexity of the system. For instance, in networked systems,
interactions frequently occur among groups of nodes, necessitating approaches that can handle higherorder relationships. Extending synchronization to consider measurements between three or more states,
however, increases computational complexity and requires sophisticated mathematical models. Addressing these challenges is vital for advancing various technological fields. For example, higher-order
synchronization can improve the accuracy of 3D reconstructions in structure from motion by leveraging
more complex geometric relationships. In SLAM, it enhances mapping and localization precision in dynamic environments by considering multi-robot interactions. Similarly, in social networks, it could lead
to more accurate identification of tightly-knit groups. Developing efficient algorithms to handle higherorder measurements will open new research avenues and make systems more resilient and accurate.
In this work, we focus on a specific instance of the synchronization problem within the context
of structure from motion in 3D computer vision, where each state represents the orientation and
location of a camera. Traditional approaches rely on relative measurements encoded by fundamental
matrices, which describe the relative projective geometry between pairs of images. Instead, we
consider higher-order relative measurements encoded in trifocal tensors, which capture the projective
information between triplets of images. Trifocal tensors uniquely determine the geometry of three
views, even in the collinear case [1], making them more favorable than triplets of fundamental matrices
∗

School of Mathematics, University of Minnesota (miao0022@umn.edu, lerman@umn.edu)
Department of Mathematics and Oden Institute for Computational Engineering and Sciences, University
of Texas at Austin (jkileel@math.utexas.edu)
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

