Noise Contrastive Alignment of Language Models with
Explicit Rewards

Huayu Chen1,2 , Guande He1,2 , Lifan Yuan1 , Ganqu Cui1 , Hang Su1,2,3 , Jun Zhu1,2∗
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Institute for AI, BNRist Center, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University
3
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China

Abstract
User intentions are typically formalized as evaluation rewards to be maximized
when fine-tuning language models (LMs). Existing alignment methods, such as
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO), are mainly tailored for pairwise preference
data where rewards are implicitly defined rather than explicitly given. In this paper,
we introduce a general framework for LM alignment, leveraging Noise Contrastive
Estimation (NCE) to bridge the gap in handling reward datasets explicitly annotated
with scalar evaluations. Our framework comprises two parallel algorithms, NCA
and InfoNCA, both enabling the direct extraction of an LM policy from reward data
as well as preference data. Notably, we show that the DPO loss is a special case
of our proposed InfoNCA objective under pairwise preference settings, thereby
integrating and extending current alignment theories. By comparing NCA and
InfoNCA, we demonstrate that the well-observed decreasing-likelihood trend of
DPO/InfoNCA is caused by their focus on adjusting relative likelihood across
different responses. In contrast, NCA optimizes the absolute likelihood for each
response, thereby effectively preventing the chosen likelihood from decreasing. We
evaluate our methods in both reward and preference settings with Mistral-8×7B and
7B models. Experiments suggest that InfoNCA/NCA surpasses various preference
baselines when reward datasets are available. We also find NCA significantly
outperforms DPO in complex reasoning tasks like math and coding. Code: https:
//github.com/thu-ml/Noise-Contrastive-Alignment.

1

Introduction

Aligning pretrained Language Models (LMs) with scalar rewards that reflect human intentions is
crucial for enhancing their ability to follow instructions [35, 25]. These rewards can be given either
explicitly or implicitly. Explicit rewards can be scalar ratings of human annotators or advanced models
like GPT-4, while implicit rewards are usually preference labels assigned to pairwise responses.
One effective approach for aligning LMs with preference data is Direct Preference Optimization
(DPO, [33]). DPO applies a reward training loss but parameterizes the reward model as the response
likelihood ratio between two LMs, allowing for training reward models and extracting LM policies
simultaneously. This approach is more streamlined and thus more favorable compared with traditional
Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods [26], which typically require a two-stage training process:
first training reward models, then extracting LM policies.
Despite its simplicity and effectiveness, DPO is only tailored for preference data (x → {yw > yl }).
When multiple responses are available, directly assigning a scalar reward to each response is usually
more convenient and efficient than comparing them in a pairwise manner. The resulting reward
∗

The corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

