Mean-Field Analysis for Learning Subspace-Sparse
Polynomials with Gaussian Input

Ziang Chen
Department of Mathematics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
ziang@mit.edu
Rong Ge
Department of Computer Science and Department of Mathematics
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
rongge@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
In this work, we study the mean-field flow for learning subspace-sparse polynomials
using stochastic gradient descent and two-layer neural networks, where the input
distribution is standard Gaussian and the output only depends on the projection of
the input onto a low-dimensional subspace. We establish a necessary condition for
SGD-learnability, involving both the characteristics of the target function and the
expressiveness of the activation function. In addition, we prove that the condition is
almost sufficient, in the sense that a condition slightly stronger than the necessary
condition can guarantee the exponential decay of the loss functional to zero.

1

Introduction

Neural Networks (NNs) are powerful in practice to approximate mappings on certain data structures,
such as Convectional Neural Networks (CNNs) for image data, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
for graph data, and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) for sequential data, stimulating numerous
breakthroughs in application of machine learning in many branches of science, engineering, etc.
The surprising performance of neural networks is often explained by arguing that neural networks
automatically learns useful representations of the data. However, how simple training procedures
such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) extract features remains a major open problem.
Optimization of neural networks has received lots of attention. For simpler networks such as linear
neural networks, local minima are also globally optimal [14, 15, 17]. However, this is not true for
nonlinear networks even of depth 2 [23]. Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK, [4, 12, 13]) is a line of
work that establishes strong convergence results for wide neural networks. However, in the NTK
regime, neural network is equivalent to a kernel, which cannot learn useful features based on the
target function. Such limitation prevents neural networks in NTK regime from efficiently learning
even simple single index models [28].
As an alternative, the behavior of SGD can also be understood via mean-field analysis, for both
two-layer neural networks [9, 19, 20, 22, 24, 25] and multi-layer neural networks [5, 21, 22]. Neural
networks in the mean-field regime have the potential to do feature learning. Recently, [1] showed
an interesting setup where a two-layer neural network can learn representations if the target function satisfies a merged-staircase property. More precisely, [1] considers a sparse polynomial as a
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

