Unveiling and Mitigating Backdoor Vulnerabilities
based on Unlearning Weight Changes and Backdoor
Activeness
Weilin Lin1 Li Liu1∗ Shaokui Wei2 Jianze Li3,4,2 Hui Xiong1
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Shenzhen International Center for Industrial and Applied Mathematics
4
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data

Abstract
The security threat of backdoor attacks is a central concern for deep neural networks
(DNNs). Recently, without poisoned data, unlearning models with clean data and
then learning a pruning mask have contributed to backdoor defense. Additionally,
vanilla fine-tuning with those clean data can help recover the lost clean accuracy.
However, the behavior of clean unlearning is still under-explored, and vanilla
fine-tuning unintentionally induces back the backdoor effect. In this work, we
first investigate model unlearning from the perspective of weight changes and
gradient norms, and find two interesting observations in the backdoored model: 1)
the weight changes between poison and clean unlearning are positively correlated,
making it possible for us to identify the backdoored-related neurons without using
poisoned data; 2) the neurons of the backdoored model are more active (i.e., larger
gradient norm) than those in the clean model, suggesting the need to suppress
the gradient norm during fine-tuning. Then, we propose an effective two-stage
defense method. In the first stage, an efficient Neuron Weight Change (NWC)-based
Backdoor Reinitialization is proposed based on observation 1). In the second stage,
based on observation 2), we design an Activeness-Aware Fine-Tuning to replace
the vanilla fine-tuning. Extensive experiments, involving eight backdoor attacks on
three benchmark datasets, demonstrate the superior performance of our proposed
method compared to recent state-of-the-art backdoor defense approaches. The code
is available at https://github.com/linweiii/TSBD.git.

1

Introduction

Over the past few years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved surprising success in several realworld applications, such as face recognition [1–3], medical image processing [4, 5], and autonomous
driving [6, 7], etc. However, DNNs are susceptible to malicious attacks that can compromise their
security and reliability. One typical example is the backdoor attack [8–11], where the adversary
maliciously manipulates the training dataset or training process to produce a backdoored model,
which performs normally on clean data while predicting any sample with a particular trigger pattern
to a pre-defined target label. In this work, we focus on the post-training defense scenario where, given
a backdoored model and a small set of clean training samples, one aims to mitigate the backdoor
effect while maintaining the performance on clean data, thereby obtaining a benign model.
Up to now, several important methods have been developed for backdoor defense [14–18]. One
promising approach is poison unlearning, which involves updating a backdoored model by unlearning
∗

Corresponds to Li Liu (avrillliu@hkust-gz.edu.cn)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

