HippoRAG: Neurobiologically Inspired
Long-Term Memory for Large Language Models

Bernal Jiménez Gutiérrez
The Ohio State University
Yu Gu
The Ohio State University

Yiheng Shu
The Ohio State University

Michihiro Yasunaga
Stanford University

Yu Su
The Ohio State University

Abstract
In order to thrive in hostile and ever-changing natural environments, mammalian
brains evolved to store large amounts of knowledge about the world and continually
integrate new information while avoiding catastrophic forgetting. Despite their
impressive accomplishments, large language models (LLMs), even with retrievalaugmented generation (RAG), still struggle to efficiently and effectively integrate
a large amount of new experiences after pre-training. In this work, we introduce
HippoRAG, a novel retrieval framework inspired by the hippocampal indexing
theory of human long-term memory to enable deeper and more efficient knowledge
integration over new experiences. HippoRAG synergistically orchestrates LLMs,
knowledge graphs, and the Personalized PageRank algorithm to mimic the different
roles of neocortex and hippocampus in human memory. We compare HippoRAG
with existing RAG methods on multi-hop question answering (QA) and show that
our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods remarkably, by up to 20%.
Single-step retrieval with HippoRAG achieves comparable or better performance
than iterative retrieval like IRCoT while being 10-20 times cheaper and 6-13 times
faster, and integrating HippoRAG into IRCoT brings further substantial gains.
Finally, we show that our method can tackle new types of scenarios that are out of
reach of existing methods.1

1

Introduction

Millions of years of evolution have led mammalian brains to develop the crucial ability to store large
amounts of world knowledge and continuously integrate new experiences without losing previous
ones. This exceptional long-term memory system eventually allows us humans to keep vast stores of
continuously updating knowledge that forms the basis of our reasoning and decision making [19].
Despite the progress of large language models (LLMs) in recent years, such a continuously updating
long-term memory is still conspicuously absent from current AI systems. Due in part to its ease of
use and the limitations of other techniques such as model editing [46], retrieval-augmented generation
(RAG) has become the de facto solution for long-term memory in LLMs, allowing users to present
new knowledge to a static model [36, 42, 66, 87].
However, current RAG methods are still unable to help LLMs perform tasks that require integrating
new knowledge across passage boundaries since each new passage is encoded in isolation. Many
important real-world tasks, such as scientific literature review, legal case briefing, and medical
diagnosis, require knowledge integration across passages or documents. Although less complex,
1

Code and data are available at https://github.com/OSU-NLP-Group/HippoRAG.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

