Taming “data-hungry” reinforcement learning?
Stability in continuous state-action spaces

Yaqi Duan
Department of Technology, Operations, and Statistics
Stern School of Business, New York University
New York, NY 10012
yaqi.duan@stern.nyu.edu
Martin J. Wainwright
Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, Statistics and Data Science Center
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, and Department of Mathematics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge, MA 02139
wainwrigwork@gmail.com

Abstract
We introduce a novel framework for analyzing reinforcement learning (RL) in
continuous state-action spaces, and use it to prove fast rates of convergence in both
off-line and on-line settings. Our analysis highlights two key stability properties,
relating to how changes in value functions and/or policies affect the Bellman
operator and occupation measures. We argue that these properties are satisfied
in many continuous state-action Markov decision processes. Our analysis also
offers fresh perspectives on the roles of pessimism and optimism in off-line and
on-line RL.

1

Introduction

Many domains of science and engineering involve making a sequence of decisions over time, with
previous decisions influencing the future in uncertain ways [1, 13, 22, 31, 32]. For instance, clinicians
managing diabetes [36] or engineers optimizing plasma control in tokamak systems [5] must develop
policies that adapt based on evolving conditions and lead to desirable outcomes over a longer
period. Markov decision processes (MDPs) and reinforcement learning (RL) provide frameworks and
methods for estimating effective policies for such sequential problems. While RL excels in data-rich
scenarios such as competitive gaming (e.g., AlphaGo and its extensions [30]), its application in
data-scarce areas like healthcare [36] and finance [27] remains challenging due to lack of history, or
underlying non-stationarity. With limited data, characterizing and improving the sample complexity
of RL methods becomes critical.
Considerable research effort has been devoted to studying RL sample complexity in many settings.
Existing studies for either the generative or the off-line settings (e.g., [21, 37, 35]) give √
procedures
that, when applied to a dataset of size n, yield a value gap that decays at the rate 1/ n. In√
the
on-line setting, there are various procedures that yield cumulative regret that grows at the rate T
(e.g., [18, 20, 19, 6]). In contrast, the main result of this paper is to formalize conditions, suitable for
RL in continuous domains, under which much faster rates can be obtained using the same dataset,
achieving a value gap decay of 1/n and reducing regret growth to log T .
As revealed by our analysis, these accelerated rates depend on certain stability properties, ones
that—as we argue—are naturally satisfied in many control problems with continuous state-action
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

