Graph Neural Networks Do Not Always Oversmooth

Bastian Epping1 , Alexandre René1 , Moritz Helias2,3 , Michael T. Schaub1
1
RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
2
Department of Physics, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
3
Institute for Advanced Simulation (IAS-6), Computational and Systems Neuroscience,
Jülich Research Centre, Jülich, Germany
epping@cs.rwth-aachen.de, rene@cs.rwth-aachen.de,
m.helias@fz-juelich.de, schaub@cs.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged as powerful tools for processing
relational data in applications. However, GNNs suffer from the problem of oversmoothing, the property that features of all nodes exponentially converge to the
same vector over layers, prohibiting the design of deep GNNs. In this work we
study oversmoothing in graph convolutional networks (GCNs) by using their Gaussian process (GP) equivalence in the limit of infinitely many hidden features. By
generalizing methods from conventional deep neural networks (DNNs), we can
describe the distribution of features at the output layer of deep GCNs in terms
of a GP: as expected, we find that typical parameter choices from the literature
lead to oversmoothing. The theory, however, allows us to identify a new, nonoversmoothing phase: if the initial weights of the network have sufficiently large
variance, GCNs do not oversmooth, and node features remain informative even
at large depth. We demonstrate the validity of this prediction in finite-size GCNs
by training a linear classifier on their output. Moreover, using the linearization
of the GCN GP, we generalize the concept of propagation depth of information
from DNNs to GCNs. This propagation depth diverges at the transition between
the oversmoothing and non-oversmoothing phase. We test the predictions of our
approach and find good agreement with finite-size GCNs. Initializing GCNs near
the transition to the non-oversmoothing phase, we obtain networks which are both
deep and expressive.

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) reach state of the art performance in diverse application domains
with relational data that can be represented on a graph, transferring the success of machine learning
to data on graphs [47, 12, 23, 7]. Despite their good performance, GNNs come with the limitation of
oversmoothing, a phenomenon where node features converge to the same state exponentially fast for
increasing depth [35, 45, 30, 2]. Consequently, only shallow networks are used in practice [19, 1]. In
contrast, it is known that the depth (i.e. the number of layers) is key to the success of deep neural
networks (DNNs) [32, 33]. While for conventional DNNs shallow networks are proven to be highly
expressive [6], in practice deep networks are much easier to train and are thus the commonly used
architectures [36]. Furthermore, in most GNN architectures each layer only exchanges information
between neighboring nodes. Deep GNNs are therefore necessary to exchange information between
nodes that are far apart in the graph [9]. In this study, we investigate oversmoothing in graph
convolutional networks (GCNs) [19].
To study the effect of depth, we consider the propagation of features through the network: given
(0)
(l)
some input xα , each intermediate layer l produces features xα which are fed to the next layer. We
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

