Rethinking Inverse Reinforcement Learning:
from Data Alignment to Task Alignment

Weichao Zhou
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
zwc662@bu.edu

Wenchao Li
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
wenchao@bu.edu

Abstract
Many imitation learning (IL) algorithms use inverse reinforcement learning (IRL)
to infer a reward function that aligns with the demonstrations. However, the
inferred reward function often fails to capture the underlying task objective. In
this paper, we propose a novel framework for IRL-based IL that prioritizes task
alignment over conventional data alignment. Our framework is a semi-supervised
approach that leverages expert demonstrations as weak supervision signals to
derive a set of candidate reward functions that align with the task rather than
only with the data. It adopts an adversarial mechanism to train a policy with
this set of reward functions to gain a collective validation of the policy’s ability
to accomplish the task. We provide theoretical insights into this framework’s
ability to mitigate task-reward misalignment and present a practical implementation.
Our experimental results show that our framework outperforms conventional IL
baselines in complex and transfer learning scenarios. The complete code are
available at https://github.com/zwc662/PAGAR.

1

Introduction

Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) Ng and Russell [2000], Finn et al. [2017] has become a popular
method for imitation learning (IL), allowing policies to be trained by learning reward functions from
expert demonstrations Abbeel and Ng [2004], Ho and Ermon [2016]. Despite its widespread use,
IRL-based IL faces significant challenges that often stem from overemphasizing data alignment
rather than task alignment. For instance, reward ambiguity, where multiple reward functions can be
consistent with the expert demonstrations, makes it difficult to identify the correct reward function.
This problem persists even when there are infinite data Ng and Russell [2000], Cao et al. [2021],
Skalse et al. [2022a,b]. Additionally, limited availability of demonstrations can further exacerbate
this problem, as the data may not fully capture the nuances of the task. Misaligned reward functions
can lead to policies that optimize the wrong objectives, resulting in poor performance and even
reward hacking Hadfield-Menell et al. [2017], Amodei et al. [2016], Pan et al. [2022], a phenomenon
where the policy exploits loopholes in the inferred reward function. These challenges highlight the
limitation of exclusively pursuing data alignment in solving real-world tasks.
In light of these considerations, this paper advocates for a paradigm shift from a narrow focus on
data alignment to a broader emphasis on task alignment. Grounded in a general formalism of task
objectives, we propose identifying the task-aligned reward functions that more accurately reflect the
underlying task objectives in their policy utility spaces. Expanding on this concept, we explore the
intrinsic relationship between the task objective, reward, and expert demonstrations. This relationship
leads us to a novel perspective where expert demonstrations can serve as weak supervision signals for
identifying a set of candidate task-aligned reward functions. Under these reward functions, the expert
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

