IODA: Instance-Guided One-shot Domain Adaptation
for Super-Resolution

Zai-Zuo Tang, Yu-Bin Yang∗
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University
Nanjing, China
tangzz@smail.nju.edu.cn, yangyubin@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
The domain adaptation method effectively mitigates the negative impact of domain
gaps on the performance of super-resolution (SR) networks through the guidance
of numerous target domain low-resolution (LR) images. However, in real-world
scenarios, the availability of target domain LR images is often limited, sometimes
even to just one, which inevitably impairs the domain adaptation performance
of SR networks. We propose Instance-guided One-shot Domain Adaptation for
Super-Resolution (IODA) to enable efficient domain adaptation with only a single
unlabeled target domain LR image. To address the limited diversity of the target
domain distribution caused by a single target domain LR image, we propose
an instance-guided target domain distribution expansion strategy. This strategy
effectively expands the diversity of the target domain distribution by generating
instance-specific features focused on different instances within the image. For SR
tasks emphasizing texture details, we propose an image-guided domain adaptation
method. Compared to existing methods that use text representation for domain
difference, this method utilizes pixel-level representation with higher granularity,
enabling efficient domain adaptation guidance for SR networks. Finally, we validate
the effectiveness of IODA on multiple datasets and various network architectures,
achieving satisfactory one-shot domain adaptation for SR networks. Our code is
available at https://github.com/ZaizuoTang/IODA.

1

Introduction

Super-resolution (SR) has significant practical
value in various fields, including remote sensing imagery [3, 4, 5], the restoration of old
films [6, 7], and even as a preprocessing strategy to enhance downstream tasks such as object detection [8, 9, 10] and image segmentation
[11, 12, 13]. However, SR also faces domain
gap issues, where the performance of networks
significantly declines when the distribution of
test low-resolution (LR) images differs from that
of the training LR images [14]. Therefore, domain adaptation methods for SR [14, 15] have
emerged. These methods represent training LR
images as the source domain and test LR images
∗

Figure 1: Performance improvement by IODA.
The performance of the real-world pre-trained
weights (from DF2K dataset [1]) provided in the
original paper serves as the baseline on the realworld dataset RealSR_Canon [2].

corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

