Explaining Datasets in Words:
Statistical Models with Natural Language Parameters

Ruiqi Zhong∗

Heng Wang

Dan Klein

Jacob Steinhardt

Abstract
To make sense of massive data, we often first fit simplified models and then interpret the parameters; for example, we cluster the text embeddings and then interpret
the mean parameters of each cluster. However, these parameters are often highdimensional and hard to interpret. To make model parameters directly interpretable,
we introduce a family of statistical models—including clustering, time series, and
classification models—parameterized by natural language predicates. For example,
a cluster of text about COVID could be parameterized by the predicate “discusses
COVID”. To learn these statistical models effectively, we develop a model-agnostic
algorithm that optimizes continuous relaxations of predicate parameters with gradient descent and discretizes them by prompting language models (LMs). Finally,
we apply our framework to a wide range of problems: taxonomizing user chat
dialogues, characterizing how they evolve across time, finding categories where
one language model is better than the other, clustering math problems based on
subareas, and explaining visual features in memorable images. Our framework
is highly versatile, applicable to both textual and visual domains, can be easily
steered to focus on specific properties (e.g. subareas), and explains sophisticated
concepts that classical methods (e.g. n-gram analysis) struggle to produce.2

1

Introduction

To analyze massive datasets, we often fit simplified statistical models and interpret the learned
parameters. For example, to categorize a set of user queries, we might cluster their embeddings, look
at samples from each cluster, and hopefully each cluster corresponds to an explainable category, e.g.
“asks about COVID symptoms” or “discusses the U.S. Election”. Unfortunately, each cluster might
contain an uninterpretable group of queries, thus failing to explain the categories.
Such a failure is not an isolated incident: many models explain datasets by learning high dimensional
parameters, but these parameters might require significant human effort to interpret. For example,
BERTopic [18] learns uninterpretable cluster centers over high-dimensional neural embeddings. LDA
[7], Dynamic Topic Modeling [6] (time series), and Naive Bayes (classification) learn weights over
a large set of words/phrases, which do not directly explain abstract concepts [9, 52, 63]. We want
model parameters that are more interpretable, since explaining datasets is important in machine
learning [60], business [4], political discussion [47], and science [17, 34].
To make model parameters directly interpretable, we introduce a family of models where some of
their parameters are represented as natural language predicates, which are inherently interpretable.
Our core insight is that we can use a predicate to extract a 0/1 feature by checking whether it is true
on a sample. For instance, given the predicate ϕ = “discusses the U.S. Election”, its denotation JϕK is
a binary function that evaluates to 1 on texts x discussing the U.S. Election and 0 otherwise:
∗
2

Jϕ : “discusses the U.S. Election”K(x : “Is Georgia a swinging state this year?”) = 1.

ruiqi-zhong@berkeley.edu, corresponding author. All authors affiliated with UC Berkeley.
Our code and dataset are at https://github.com/ruiqi-zhong/nlparam

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

