HGDL: Heterogeneous Graph Label Distribution
Learning

†

Yufei Jin† , Heng Lian⋄ , Yi He⋄ , Xingquan Zhu†∗
Dept. of Elec. Eng. & Computer Sci., Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL 33431, USA
⋄
Dept. of Data Science, William & Mary, Williamsburg, VA 23185, USA
yjin2021@fau.edu; hlian01@wm.edu; yihe@wm.edu; xzhu3@fau.edu

Abstract
Label Distribution Learning (LDL) has been extensively studied in IID data applications such as computer vision, thanks to its more generic setting over single-label
and multi-label classification. This paper advances LDL into graph domains and
aims to tackle a novel and fundamental heterogeneous graph label distribution
learning (HGDL) problem. We argue that the graph heterogeneity reflected on node
types, node attributes, and neighborhood structures can impose significant challenges for generalizing LDL onto graphs. To address the challenges, we propose a
new learning framework with two key components: 1) proactive graph topology
homogenization, and 2) topology and content consistency-aware graph transformer.
Specifically, the former learns optimal information aggregation between meta-paths,
so that the node heterogeneity can be proactively addressed prior to the succeeding
embedding learning; the latter leverages an attention mechanism to learn consistency between meta-path and node attributes, allowing network topology and nodal
attributes to be equally emphasized during the label distribution learning. By using
KL-divergence and additional constraints, HGDL delivers an end-to-end solution for
learning and predicting label distribution for nodes. Both theoretical and empirical
studies substantiate the effectiveness of our HGDL approach. Our code and datasets
are available at https://github.com/Listener-Watcher/HGDL.

1

Introduction

Definite supervision signals are often postulated in learning settings [3, 4]; yet, data generated from
the real world tend to present inherent ambiguity, imposing challenges on assertive classifiers that
predict instances into single or multiple classes. Label Distribution Learning (LDL) [5, 6, 7, 8, 9] has
emerged to navigate label ambiguity by pursuing a mapping from instances to their class distributions.
Each distribution quantifies the descriptive degrees of various classes given a specific instance.
However, the existing LDL studies mainly [10, 6, 7, 11] focus on independent and identically
distributed (IID) data, such as images or texts, which do not generalize well on graphs. In fact, the
topological structure underlying instances may provide invaluable information for label distribution
learning. For example, in the task of urban planning, recent learning models have been employed to
predict the point of interests (POIs) of local regions [12, 13, 14, 15]. LDL can further extend this task
by providing the regional distributions over all POIs, which lends a finer-granular delineation of urban
regional functionality instead of single- or multi-class classification. To wit, for a region that mixes
four POIs (classes): housing, healthcare, education and worship, unlike other models assertively
classify it into one or multiple POI(s), LDL model can provide insights of the functional degrees of
all four POIs in this region, as shown in Figure 1. Nevertheless, existing LDL studies overlook the
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

