SciCode: A Research Coding Benchmark
Curated by Scientists

Minyang Tian1,2∗‡ , Luyu Gao3∗ , Shizhuo Dylan Zhang1 , Xinan Chen1† , Cunwei Fan1† ,
Xuefei Guo1† , Roland Haas1† , Pan Ji4† , Kittithat Krongchon1† ,Yao Li1† ,
Shengyan Liu1† , Di Luo5,6,11† ,Yutao Ma7† , Hao Tong1† , Kha Trinh7† , Chenyu Tian8† ,
Zihan Wang1† , Bohao Wu1† , Yanyu Xiong9† , Shengzhu Yin1† , Minhui Zhu1† ,
Kilian Lieret10 , Yanxin Lu1 , Genglin Liu1 , Yufeng Du1 , Tianhua Tao1 ,
Ofir Press10 , Jamie Callan3 , Eliu Huerta1,2,7‡ , Hao Peng1‡
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Argonne National Laboratory
3
Carnegie Mellon University 4 University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
5
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 6 Harvard University 7 University of Chicago
8
University of Texas at Austin 9 Stanford University 10 Princeton University
11
The NSF AI Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental Interactions
∗
Equal contribution lead authors. † Data curation, alphabetical order.
‡ Correspondence to {mtian8, haopeng}@illinois.edu, elihu@anl.gov

Abstract
Since language models (LMs) now outperform average humans on many challenging tasks,
it is becoming increasingly difficult to develop challenging, high-quality, and realistic
evaluations. We address this by examining LM capabilities to generate code for solving
real scientific research problems. Incorporating input from scientists and AI researchers in
16 diverse natural science sub-fields, including mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology,
and materials science, we create a scientist-curated coding benchmark, SciCode. The
problems naturally factorize into multiple subproblems, each involving knowledge recall,
reasoning, and code synthesis. In total, SciCode contains 338 subproblems decomposed
from 80 challenging main problems, and it offers optional descriptions specifying useful
scientific background information and scientist-annotated gold-standard solutions and test
cases for evaluation. OpenAI o1-preview, the best-performing model among those tested,
can solve only 7.7% of the problems in the most realistic setting. We believe that SciCode
demonstrates both contemporary LMs’ progress towards realizing helpful scientific assistants
and sheds light on the building and evaluation of scientific AI in the future. 1

1

Introduction

The development of evaluations in tandem with language models (LMs) has substantially contributed
to the rapid advancement of these models [30, 12, 8, 26, 83, 28, 74]. Because LMs now surpass
the performance of most humans except domain experts, evaluating them becomes increasingly
challenging. Many established benchmarks struggle to keep pace with the advancements in LM
performance and have quickly become saturated [93, 15, 72, 59], leading to discrepancies between
the models’ perceived and actual capabilities [37]. As a consequence, researchers are developing
synthetic challenging benchmarks, often involving models in the construction of evaluation instances.
For example, some subsample instances from existing benchmarks that cannot be solved by current
models [95, 84], or augment them to construct more challenging evaluations [22, 45, 50]. However, it
is unclear whether such efforts accurately reflect real-world applications and the models’ performance
in practical scenarios. Realistic, high-quality, and challenging evaluations are crucial for the continued
advancement of LMs.
1

Data, code, and leaderboard available at https://scicode-bench.github.io/

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

