On the Curses of Future and History in
Future-dependent Value Functions for OPE

Yuheng Zhang
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
yuhengz2@illinois.edu

Nan Jiang
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
nanjiang@illinois.edu

Abstract
We study off-policy evaluation (OPE) in partially observable environments with
complex observations, with the goal of developing estimators whose guarantee
avoids exponential dependence on the horizon. While such estimators exist for
MDPs and POMDPs can be converted to history-based MDPs, their estimation
errors depend on the state-density ratio for MDPs which becomes history ratios
after conversion, an exponential object. Recently, Uehara et al. [2022a] proposed
future-dependent value functions as a promising framework to address this issue,
where the guarantee for memoryless policies depends on the density ratio over
the latent state space. However, it also depends on the boundedness of the futuredependent value function and other related quantities, which we show could be
exponential-in-length and thus erasing the advantage of the method. In this paper,
we discover novel coverage assumptions tailored to the structure of POMDPs, such
as outcome coverage and belief coverage, which enable polynomial bounds on
the aforementioned quantities. As a side product, our analyses also lead to the
discovery of new algorithms with complementary properties.

1

Introduction and Related Works

Off-policy evaluation (OPE) is the problem of estimating the return of a new evaluation policy πe
based on historical data, which is typically collected using a different policy πb (the behavior policy).
OPE plays a central role in the pipeline of offline reinforcement learning (RL), but is also notoriously
difficult. Among the major approaches, importance sampling (IS) and its variants Precup et al. [2000],
Jiang and Li [2016] provide unbiased and/or asymptotically correct estimation using the cumulative
importance weights: given a trajectory of observations and actions o1 , a1 , o2 , a2 , . . . , oH , aH , the
QH
(ah |oh )
cumulative importance weight is h=1 ππeb (a
, whose variance grows exponentially with the
h |oh )
horizon, unless πb and πe are very close in their action distributions. In the language of offline RL
theory [Chen and Jiang, 2019, Xie and Jiang, 2021, Yin and Wang, 2021], the boundedness of the
cumulative importance weights is the coverage assumption required by IS, a very stringent one.
Alternatively, algorithms such as Fitted-Q Evaluation [FQE; Ernst et al., 2005, Munos and Szepesvári,
2008, Le et al., 2019] and Marginalized Importance Sampling [MIS; Liu et al., 2018, Xie et al., 2019,
Nachum et al., 2019, Uehara et al., 2020] enjoy more favorable coverage assumptions, at the cost of
function-approximation biases. Instead of requiring bounded cumulative importance weights, FQE
and MIS only require that of the state-density ratios, which can be substantially smaller [Chen and
Jiang, 2019, Xie and Jiang, 2021]. That is, when the environment satisfies the Markov assumption
(namely oh is a state), the guarantees of FQE and MIS only depend on the range of dπhe (oh )/dπhb (oh ),
where dπhe and dπhb is the marginal distribution of oh under πe and πb , respectively.
In this paper, we study the non-Markov setting, which is ubiquitous in real-world applications. Such
environments are typically modeled as Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs)
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

