Deep Bayesian Active Learning for Preference
Modeling in Large Language Models

Luckeciano C. Melo∗ 1,2
Panagiotis Tigas1
Alessandro Abate† 2
Yarin Gal† 1
1
2
OATML, University of Oxford
OXCAV, University of Oxford

Abstract
Leveraging human preferences for steering the behavior of Large Language Models
(LLMs) has demonstrated notable success in recent years. Nonetheless, data
selection and labeling are still a bottleneck for these systems, particularly at large
scale. Hence, selecting the most informative points for acquiring human feedback
may considerably reduce the cost of preference labeling and unleash the further
development of LLMs. Bayesian Active Learning provides a principled framework
for addressing this challenge and has demonstrated remarkable success in diverse
settings. However, previous attempts to employ it for Preference Modeling did not
meet such expectations. In this work, we identify that naive epistemic uncertainty
estimation leads to the acquisition of redundant samples. We address this by
proposing the Bayesian Active Learner for Preference Modeling (BAL-PM), a
novel stochastic acquisition policy that not only targets points of high epistemic
uncertainty according to the preference model but also seeks to maximize the
entropy of the acquired prompt distribution in the feature space spanned by the
employed LLM. Notably, our experiments demonstrate that BAL-PM requires
33% to 68% fewer preference labels in two popular human preference datasets and
exceeds previous stochastic Bayesian acquisition policies.

1

Introduction

Preference Modeling is a key component to
Log Likelihood
aligning unsupervised pre-trained Large Lan0.61
guage Models (LLMs) towards human preferences [1–4]. It is often performed by collecting
human feedback for a set of prompt-completion
0.62
pairs and then leveraging the data to steer the
~33% fewer samples
behavior of such models, either directly [5] or
via reward models [6]. Nevertheless, human
0.63
feedback generation is laborious [7], especially
Random Sampling
when it requires specialized knowledge [8, 9].
BALD
Furthermore, the quality of the prompts has a
BAL-PM (ours)
crucial impact on the performance of fine-tuned
2000
8000 12000 16000 20000 24000
models [10]. Hence, selecting the most inforAcquired Data
mative points to gather feedback is essential to
Figure 1: Log-Likelihood of learned preference
reduce costs and enable better LLMs.
models in the Reddit TL;DR dataset [1]. Our
Despite its substantial impact, data selection for method, BAL-PM, reduces the volume of required
Preference Modeling poses a significant chal- human feedback by 33% over random acquisition.
lenge. The prompt-completion pool is arbitrarily
∗
†

Correspondence to: luckeciano.carvalho.melo@cs.ox.ac.uk
Denotes equal supervision.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

