Plant-and-Steal: Truthful Fair Allocations via
Predictions
Ilan Reuven Cohen
Bar-Ilan University
ilan-reuven.cohen@biu.ac.il
Talya Eden
Bar-Ilan University
talyaa01@gmail.com

Alon Eden
The Hebrew University
alon.eden@mail.huji.ac.il
Arsen Vasilyan
UC Berkeley
arsen@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study truthful mechanisms for approximating the Maximin-Share (MMS) value
of agents with additive valuations for indivisible goods. Algorithmically, constant
factor approximations exist for the problem for any number of agents. When adding
incentives to the mix, a jarring result by Amanatidis, Birmpas, Christodoulou, and
Markakis [EC 2017] shows that the best possible approximation for two agents
and m items is ⌊ m
2 ⌋. We adopt a learning-augmented framework to investigate
what is possible when a prediction on the input is given. For two agents, we give
a truthful mechanism that takes agents’ ordering over items as prediction. When
the prediction is accurate, our mechanism gives a 2-approximation to the MMS
(consistency), and when the prediction is off, our mechanism still obtains an ⌈ m
2 ⌉approximation to the MMS (robustness). We further show that the mechanism’s
performance degrades gracefully in the number of “mistakes” in the prediction;
i.e., we interpolate between the two extremes: when there are no mistakes, and
when there is a maximum number of mistakes. We also show an impossibility
result on the obtainable consistency for mechanisms with finite robustness. For the
general case of n ≥ 2 agents, we give a 2-approximation mechanism for accurate
predictions, with relaxed fallback guarantees. Finally, we give experimental results
which illustrate when different components of our framework, made to ensure
consistency and robustness, come into play.

1

Introduction

Allocating items among self interested agents in a “fair" way is an age-old problem, with many
applications such as splitting inheritance and allocating courses to students. As a starting point,
consider the case of two agents. When the items are divisible, the famous cut-and-choose procedure
achieves fairness in two senses. Firstly, no agent wants to switch their allocation with the other;
i.e., there is no envy among the agents. Secondly, each agent gets a bundle of items which they
value at least as much as their value for all the items divided by 2; that is, each one gets their “fair
share". When moving to the case of indivisible goods, which is relevant to scenarios such as splitting
inheritance and allocating courses, things get trickier. For instance, if there’s a single item, the agent
that does not receive that item does not get an envy-free allocation, nor do they get their “fair share"
according to the previous definitions. Therefore, it is clear that some fairness needs to be sacrificed in
this case.
The study of fair allocations with indivisible goods has been a fruitful research direction, with many
meaningful notions of fairness studied (see survey by Amanatidis et al. [10]). In this paper, we
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

