The Impact of Geometric Complexity on Neural
Collapse in Transfer Learning

Michael Munn∗
Google Research
munn@google.com

Benoit Dherin∗
Google Research
dherin@google.com

Javier Gonzalvo
Google Research
xavigonzalvo@google.com

Abstract
Many of the recent remarkable advances in computer vision and language models
can be attributed to the success of transfer learning via the pre-training of large
foundation models. However, a theoretical framework which explains this empirical
success is incomplete and remains an active area of research. Flatness of the loss
surface and neural collapse have recently emerged as useful pre-training metrics
which shed light on the implicit biases underlying pre-training. In this paper,
we explore the geometric complexity of a model’s learned representations as
a fundamental mechanism that relates these two concepts. We show through
experiments and theory that mechanisms which affect the geometric complexity of
the pre-trained network also influence the neural collapse. Furthermore, we show
how this effect of the geometric complexity generalizes to the neural collapse of
new classes as well, thus encouraging better performance on downstream tasks,
particularly in the few-shot setting.

1

Introduction

Many of the recent remarkable advances in modern machine learning owe their success in part to
transfer learning [4, 6, 9, 15, 28, 49, 50, 66]. While there are different approaches to this technique,
the standard one involves two stages. In a first stage, called pre-training, ones trains a deep neural
network on a general, large-scale dataset in the form of a supervised or unsupervised source task; e.g.,
ImageNet or CIFAR-100 [14, 33] for image models or the Common Crawl, C4 or LM1B datasets
[8, 11, 49] for language models. In the second stage, one then leverages portions of the pre-trained
network to use as features map or embeddings that can then be adapted, or fine-tuned, on a more
specific target task. Often these target tasks are unknown at the time of pre-training and labeled
data may be very scarce, such as in the context of few-shot learning [34, 51, 60]. However, despite
these limitations, this approach often results in a fine-tuned model that achieves quite impressive
performance substantially better than training on the target task alone and requiring less computational
resources [20]. Despite this empirical success, a comprehensive theoretical understanding of the
mechanisms underlying this effectiveness of transfer learning is not fully understood and remains an
active area of research [63].
One interesting line of research suggests that the effectiveness of transfer learning is due to the implicit
biases encoded in pre-trained models [22, 36, 48]. These implicit biases effectively constrain the
hypothesis space, guiding the model towards solutions that have a preference for smoother functions
[12, 17, 38, 40, 53], simpler geometry in the loss surface [3, 13, 18, 55, 58] or reduced complexity of
the internal learned representations [23, 32]. In the same way that these implicit biases have been
used to help explain the success of deep learning, recent work has shown that the notion of neural
collapse [22, 35, 62] and flatness of the loss surface [36] can also inform the mechanisms behind
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

