Infer Induced Sentiment of Comment Response to
Video: A New Task, Dataset and Baseline

Qi Jia1

1

Baoyu Fan2,1∗ Cong Xu1

Lu Liu1

Liang Jin1

Guoguang Du1

Zhenhua Guo1

Yaqian Zhao1 Xuanjing Huang3 Rengang Li1
IEIT SYSTEMS Co., Ltd. 2 College of Computer Science, Nankai University, Tianjin, China,
3
School of Computer Science, Fudan University

{jiaqi01, fanbaoyu, xucong, liulu06, jinliang, duguoguang}@ieisystem.com,
{guozhenhua zhaoyaqian}@ieisystem.com, xjhuang@fudan.edu.cn, lirg@ieisystem.com

Abstract
Existing video multi-modal sentiment analysis mainly focuses on the sentiment
expression of people within the video, yet often neglects the induced sentiment of
viewers while watching the videos. Induced sentiment of viewers is essential for
inferring the public response to videos and has broad application in analyzing public
societal sentiment, effectiveness of advertising and other areas. The micro videos
and the related comments provide a rich application scenario for viewers’ induced
sentiment analysis. In light of this, we introduces a novel research task, Multimodal Sentiment Analysis for Comment Response of Video Induced(MSA-CRVI),
aims to infer opinions and emotions according to comments response to micro video.
Meanwhile, we manually annotate a dataset named Comment Sentiment toward to
Micro Video (CSMV) to support this research. It is the largest video multi-modal
sentiment dataset in terms of scale and video duration to our knowledge, containing
107, 267 comments and 8, 210 micro videos with a video duration of 68.83 hours.
To infer the induced sentiment of comment should leverage the video content,
we propose the Video Content-aware Comment Sentiment Analysis (VC-CSA)
method as a baseline to address the challenges inherent in this new task. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our method is showing significant improvements
over other established baselines. We make the dataset and source code publicly
available at https://github.com/IEIT-AGI/MSA-CRVI.

1

Introduction

Video multi-modal sentiment analysis, a captivating and challenging research field, has exhibited rapid
advancements with a variety of benchmarks proposed in recent years [31, 4, 21, 51, 8, 34]. These
benchmarks aim to understand the opinions or emotions of speakers in monologues or dialogues, as
depicted in Fig. 1a. They consider the combined input from visual, audio, and subtitle text at the
utterance level, which maintain the same semantic("It is absolutely wonderful, I fell in love with
it from the very first time I saw it and used it."). Current methods infer the speaker’s opinions or
emotions by examining elements such as sequential images (e.g., facial expressions, smiles, gazes),
audio cues (e.g., tones, pauses, pitch), and transcribed text from spoken words [13].
Nevertheless, current research has primarily centered on the sentiments of the people in the video,
paying less attention to viewers’ induced sentiment while watching the video. People create and
upload micro videos, and viewers contribute comments as responses to the micro video [5]. These
comments often reveal sentiments which are induced by the video. Analyzing the viewers’ induced
sentiments of the video based on comments is significant for developing comprehensive applications
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

