State Chrono Representation for Enhancing
Generalization in Reinforcement Learning

Jianda Chen1 Wen Zheng Terence Ng1,2 Zichen Chen3
Sinno Jialin Pan4 Tianwei Zhang1
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 Continental Automotive Singapore
3
University of California, Santa Barbara 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{jianda001, ngwe0099}@ntu.edu.sg zichen_chen@ucsb.edu
sinnopan@cuhk.edu.hk tianwei.zhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
In reinforcement learning with image-based inputs, it is crucial to establish a robust
and generalizable state representation. Recent advancements in metric learning,
such as deep bisimulation metric approaches, have shown promising results in
learning structured low-dimensional representation space from pixel observations,
where the distance between states is measured based on task-relevant features.
However, these approaches face challenges in demanding generalization tasks
and scenarios with non-informative rewards. This is because they fail to capture
sufficient long-term information in the learned representations. To address these
challenges, we propose a novel State Chrono Representation (SCR) approach. SCR
augments state metric-based representations by incorporating extensive temporal
information into the update step of bisimulation metric learning. It learns state
distances within a temporal framework that considers both future dynamics and
cumulative rewards over current and long-term future states. Our learning strategy
effectively incorporates future behavioral information into the representation space
without introducing a significant number of additional parameters for modeling
dynamics. Extensive experiments conducted in DeepMind Control and Meta-World
environments demonstrate that SCR achieves better performance comparing to other
recent metric-based methods in demanding generalization tasks. The codes of SCR
are available in https://github.com/jianda-chen/SCR.

1

Introduction

In deep reinforcement learning (Deep RL), one of the key challenges is to derive an optimal policy
from highly dimensional environmental observations, particularly images [5, 12, 33]. The stream
of images received by an RL agent contains temporal relationships and significant spatial redundancy. This redundancy, along with potentially distracting visual inputs, poses difficulties for the
agent in learning optimal policies. Numerous studies have highlighted the importance of building
state representations that can effectively distinguish task-relevant information from task-irrelevant
surroundings [45, 46, 8]. Such representations have the potential to facilitate the RL process and
improve the generalizability of learned policies. As a result, representation learning has emerged as a
fundamental aspect in the advancement of Deep RL algorithms, gaining increased attention within
the RL community [21].
Related Works. The main objective of representation learning in RL is to develop a mapping
function that transforms high-dimensional observations into low-dimensional embeddings. This
process helps reduce the influence of redundant signals and simplify the policy learning process.
Previous research has utilized autoencoder-like reconstruction losses [43, 18], which have shown
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

