SeTAR: Out-of-Distribution Detection with
Selective Low-Rank Approximation

Yixia Li1∗, Boya Xiong2∗, Guanhua Chen1†, Yun Chen3†
1
Southern University of Science and Technology
2
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
3
MoE Key Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Research of Computation and Economics,
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
liyixia@me.com, xiongboya@163.sufe.edu.cn
chengh3@sustech.edu.cn, yunchen@sufe.edu.cn

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is crucial for the safe deployment of neural
networks. Existing CLIP-based approaches perform OOD detection by devising
novel scoring functions or sophisticated fine-tuning methods. In this work, we propose SeTAR, a novel, training-free OOD detection method that leverages selective
low-rank approximation of weight matrices in vision-language and vision-only
models. SeTAR enhances OOD detection via post-hoc modification of the model’s
weight matrices using a simple greedy search algorithm. Based on SeTAR, we
further propose SeTAR+FT, a fine-tuning extension optimizing model performance
for OOD detection tasks. Extensive evaluations on ImageNet1K and Pascal-VOC
benchmarks show SeTAR’s superior performance, reducing the relatively false
positive rate by up to 18.95% and 36.80% compared to zero-shot and fine-tuning
baselines. Ablation studies further validate SeTAR’s effectiveness, robustness, and
generalizability across different model backbones. Our work offers a scalable,
efficient solution for OOD detection, setting a new state-of-the-art in this area.

1

Introduction

The task of out-of-distribution (OOD) detection (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017; Ming et al., 2022)
aims to identify whether input data comes from an unknown distribution. It has garnered significant
attention in the machine learning community recently (Hendrycks et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2021; Miyai
et al., 2023a). While machine learning models are trained with supervised in-distribution (ID) data,
they often struggle to generalize to OOD data encountered in real-world applications (Emmott et al.,
2016) like autonomous vehicles and healthcare. These OOD samples pose challenges as they are
not represented in the training data. Consequently, OOD detection plays a crucial role in developing
reliable and trustworthy machine-learning models suitable for real-world deployment (Bai et al.,
2023). It allows models to filter out and reject these awkward inputs effectively, and enables the use
of curated and labeled OOD samples to further train for a more robust model in the wild.
Previous research has primarily focused on detecting OOD instances in either visual (DeVries &
Taylor, 2018; Liang et al., 2018; Hendrycks et al., 2022) or textual data (Hu & Khan, 2021; Zheng
et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021). Recently, significant progress has been made in multimodal tasks like
multimodal retrieval (Li et al., 2023; Caesar et al., 2018) and image classification (Yu et al., 2022),
thanks to vision-and-language pretrained (VLP) models like CLIP (Radford et al., 2021). More recent
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

