Segment Any Change

Zhuo Zheng1 , Yanfei Zhong2∗, Liangpei Zhang2 , Stefano Ermon1∗
1
Stanford University
2
Wuhan University
zhuozheng@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Visual foundation models have achieved remarkable results in zero-shot image
classification and segmentation, but zero-shot change detection remains an open
problem. In this paper, we propose the segment any change models (AnyChange),
a new type of change detection model that supports zero-shot prediction and generalization on unseen change types and data distributions. AnyChange is built on the
segment anything model (SAM) via our training-free adaptation method, bitemporal
latent matching. By revealing and exploiting intra-image and inter-image semantic
similarities in SAM’s latent space, bitemporal latent matching endows SAM with
zero-shot change detection capabilities in a training-free way. We also propose a
point query mechanism to enable AnyChange’s zero-shot object-centric change
detection capability. We perform extensive experiments to confirm the effectiveness
of AnyChange for zero-shot change detection. AnyChange sets a new record on the
SECOND benchmark for unsupervised change detection, exceeding the previous
SOTA by up to 4.4% F1 score, and achieving comparable accuracy with negligible
manual annotations (1 pixel per image) for supervised change detection. Code is
available at https://github.com/Z-Zheng/pytorch-change-models.

1

Introduction

The Earth’s surface undergoes constant changes over time due to natural processes and human
activities. Some of the dynamic processes driving these changes (e.g., natural disasters, deforestation,
and urbanization) have huge impact on climate, environment, and human life (Zhu et al., 2022).
Capturing these global changes via remote sensing and machine learning is a crucial step in many
sustainability disciplines (Yeh et al., 2020; Burke et al., 2021).
Deep change detection models have yielded impressive results via large-scale pre-training (Manas
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022; Mall et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2023) and architecture improvements
(Chen et al., 2021b; Zheng et al., 2022). However, their capabilities depend on training data and are
limited to specific application scenarios. These models cannot generalize to new change types and
data distributions (e.g., new geographic areas) beyond those seen during training.
This desired level of generalization on unseen change types and data distributions requires change
detection models with zero-shot prediction capabilities. However, the concept of zero-shot change
detection has not been explored so far in the literature. While we are in the era of “foundation models”
(Bommasani et al., 2021) and have witnessed the emergence of large language models (LLMs) and
vision foundation models (VFMs) (e.g., CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and Segment Anything Model
(SAM) (Kirillov et al., 2023)) with strong zero-shot prediction and generalization capabilities via
prompt engineering, zero-shot change detection is still an open problem.
To close this gap, we present Segment Any Change, the first change detection model with zero-shot
generalization on unseen change types and data distributions. Our approach builds on SAM, the first
∗

Corresponding authors: Stefano Ermon, Yanfei Zhong

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

