Vidu4D: Single Generated Video to High-Fidelity 4D
Reconstruction with Dynamic Gaussian Surfels

Yikai Wang∗1 , Xinzhou Wang∗1,2,3 , Zilong Chen1,2 , Zhengyi Wang1,2 , Fuchun Sun1 , Jun Zhu†1,2
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, BNRist Center, Tsinghua University
2
ShengShu 3 College of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University
yikaiw@outlook.com, wangxinzhou@tongji.edu.cn, dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Video generative models are receiving particular attention given their ability to generate realistic and imaginative frames. Besides, these models are also observed to
exhibit strong 3D consistency, significantly enhancing their potential to act as world
simulators. In this work, we present Vidu4D, a novel reconstruction model that
excels in accurately reconstructing 4D (i.e., sequential 3D) representations from
single generated videos, addressing challenges associated with non-rigidity and
frame distortion. This capability is pivotal for creating high-fidelity virtual contents
that maintain both spatial and temporal coherence. At the core of Vidu4D is our proposed Dynamic Gaussian Surfels (DGS) technique. DGS optimizes time-varying
warping functions to transform Gaussian surfels (surface elements) from a static
state to a dynamically warped state. This transformation enables a precise depiction
of motion and deformation over time. To preserve the structural integrity of surfacealigned Gaussian surfels, we design the warped-state geometric regularization
based on continuous warping fields for estimating normals. Additionally, we learn
refinements on rotation and scaling parameters of Gaussian surfels, which greatly
alleviates texture flickering during the warping process and enhances the capture
of fine-grained appearance details. Vidu4D also contains a novel initialization
state that provides a proper start for the warping fields in DGS. Equipping Vidu4D
with an existing video generative model, the overall framework demonstrates highfidelity text-to-4D generation in both appearance and geometry. Project page:
https://vidu4d-dgs.github.io.

1

Introduction

The field of multimodal generation exhibits significant advancements and holds great promise for
various applications. Recently, video generative models have garnered attention for their remarkable
capability to craft immersive and lifelike frames [4, 8]. These models produce visually stunning
content while also exhibiting strong 3D consistency [15, 81], largely increasing their potential to
simulate realistic environments.
Parallel to these developments, high-quality 4D reconstruction has made great strides [19, 58, 63,
94, 100]. This technique involves capturing and rendering detailed spatial and temporal information.
When integrated with generative video technologies, 4D reconstruction potentially enables the
creation of models that capture static scenes and dynamic sequences over time. This synthesis
provides a more holistic representation of reality, which is crucial for applications such as virtual
reality, scientific visualization, and embodied artificial intelligence.
∗

Equal contribution.

†

The corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

