Large Language Models-guided Dynamic Adaptation
for Temporal Knowledge Graph Reasoning

Jiapu Wang1 , Kai Sun1∗, Linhao Luo2 , Wei Wei3 , Yongli Hu1† , Alan Wee-Chung Liew4 ,
Shirui Pan4†, Baocai Yin1
1
Beijing University of Technology, China, 2 Monash University, Australia
3
University of Hong Kong, China, 4 Griffith University, Australia
{jpwang, sunkai}@emails.bjut.edu.cn, linhao.luo@monash.edu, weiwei1206cs@gmail.com
{huyongli, ybc}@bjut.edu.cn, {a.liew, s.pan}@griffith.edu.au

Abstract
Temporal Knowledge Graph Reasoning (TKGR) is the process of utilizing temporal
information to capture complex relations within a Temporal Knowledge Graph
(TKG) to infer new knowledge. Conventional methods in TKGR typically depend
on deep learning algorithms or temporal logical rules. However, deep learningbased TKGRs often lack interpretability, whereas rule-based TKGRs struggle to
effectively learn temporal rules that capture temporal patterns. Recently, Large
Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated extensive knowledge and remarkable
proficiency in temporal reasoning. Consequently, the employment of LLMs for
Temporal Knowledge Graph Reasoning (TKGR) has sparked increasing interest
among researchers. Nonetheless, LLMs are known to function as black boxes,
making it challenging to comprehend their reasoning process. Additionally, due to
the resource-intensive nature of fine-tuning, promptly updating LLMs to integrate
evolving knowledge within TKGs for reasoning is impractical. To address these
challenges, in this paper, we propose a Large Language Models-guided Dynamic
Adaptation (LLM-DA) method for reasoning on TKGs. Specifically, LLM-DA
harnesses the capabilities of LLMs to analyze historical data and extract temporal
logical rules. These rules unveil temporal patterns and facilitate interpretable
reasoning. To account for the evolving nature of TKGs, a dynamic adaptation
strategy is proposed to update the LLM-generated rules with the latest events. This
ensures that the extracted rules always incorporate the most recent knowledge and
better generalize to the predictions on future events. Experimental results show that
without the need of fine-tuning, LLM-DA significantly improves the accuracy of
reasoning over several common datasets, providing a robust framework for TKGR
tasks3 .

1

Introduction

Temporal Knowledge Graphs (TKGs) [1, 2] are the structured representations of the real world,
which incorporate the temporal dimension to analyze how relations between entities evolve over time.
Temporal Knowledge Graph Reasoning (TKGR) focuses on leveraging historical information within
TKGs to forecast future events. Prior research [3, 4] on TKGR has primarily relied on temporal
logical rules [5] or deep learning algorithms, such as graph neural networks [6–8] and reinforcement
learning techniques [9]. However, the deep learning-based TKGRs often suffer from the lack of
∗

Equally Important
Corresponding authors
3
Code and data are available at: https://github.com/jiapuwang/LLM-DA.git

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

