FashionR2R: Texture-preserving Rendered-to-Real
Image Translation with Diffusion Models

Rui Hu1∗† , Qian He2† , Gaofeng He2 , Jiedong Zhuang1 ,
Huang Chen2 , Huafeng Liu1‡ , Huamin Wang2
1
2
Zhejiang University,
Style3D Research
https://rickhh.github.io/FashionR2R/

Abstract
Modeling and producing lifelike clothed human images has attracted researchers’
attention from different areas for decades, with the complexity from highly articulated and structured content. Rendering algorithms decompose and simulate the
imaging process of a camera, while are limited by the accuracy of modeled variables
and the efficiency of computation. Generative models can produce impressively
vivid human images, however still lacking in controllability and editability. This
paper studies photorealism enhancement of rendered images, leveraging generative
power from diffusion models on the controlled basis of rendering. We introduce
a novel framework to translate rendered images into their realistic counterparts,
which consists of two stages: Domain Knowledge Injection (DKI) and Realistic Image Generation (RIG). In DKI, we adopt positive (real) domain finetuning
and negative (rendered) domain embedding to inject knowledge into a pretrained
Text-to-image (T2I) diffusion model. In RIG, we generate the realistic image corresponding to the input rendered image, with a Texture-preserving Attention Control
(TAC) to preserve fine-grained clothing textures, exploiting the decoupled features
encoded in the UNet structure. Additionally, we introduce SynFashion dataset,
featuring high-quality digital clothing images with diverse textures. Extensive
experimental results demonstrate the superiority and effectiveness of our method
in rendered-to-real image translation.

1

Introduction

Modeling and simulating digital humans and clothing has achieved significant progress [1, 2, 3, 4, 5],
while leveraging these 3D assets for fashion e-commerce still remains a challenging problem. Due
to the imperfection of 3D models and the approximation in rendering algorithms, rendered images
cannot yet replace fashion photos taken by a camera, with deficiency in the realism of rendered human
faces and skin, clothing shape and fabric, etc. This paper studies transferring rendered fashion images
into their realistic counterparts, which is inherently an Image-to-Image (I2I) translation problem.
Existing works on improving the realism of rendered images mainly resort to retrieving and blending
real image patches [6], or train a GAN-based network [7, 8, 9] due to lack of paired training data.
Another line of works can tackle this problem as general I2I translation [10, 11, 12, 13]. However,
these methods may still suffer from several limitations: Firstly, their image generation pipelines have
limited power to utilize real image resources for highly-detailed enhancement and may suffer from
instability and mode collapse from adversarial training. Moreover, they either focus on indoor/outdoor
∗

Work done during an internship at Style3D Research.
These authors contributed equally to this work.
‡
Corresponding author.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

