Era3D: High-Resolution Multiview Diffusion
Using Efficient Row-wise Attention

Peng Li1∗ Yuan Liu2,3 ∗ Xiaoxiao Long1,2 † Feihu Zhang3
Xingqun Qi1

Shanghang Zhang4

Wenhan Luo1

Cheng Lin2

Ping Tan1,5

Mengfei Li1

Wenping Wang2

Qifeng Liu1 Yike Guo1 †
Equal contribution †Corresponding author

∗
1

HKUST 2 HKU 3 DreamTech 4 PKU 5 LightIllusion

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce Era3D, a novel multiview diffusion method that generates high-resolution multiview images from a single-view image. Despite significant advancements in multiview generation, existing methods still suffer from
camera prior mismatch, inefficacy, and low resolution, resulting in poor-quality
multiview images. Specifically, these methods assume that the input images should
comply with a predefined camera type, e.g. a perspective camera with a fixed focal
length, leading to distorted shapes when the assumption fails. Moreover, the fullimage or dense multiview attention they employ leads to a dramatic explosion of
computational complexity as image resolution increases, resulting in prohibitively
expensive training costs. To bridge the gap between assumption and reality, Era3D
first proposes a diffusion-based camera prediction module to estimate the focal
length and elevation of the input image, which allows our method to generate images without shape distortions. Furthermore, a simple but efficient attention layer,
named row-wise attention, is used to enforce epipolar priors in the multiview diffusion, facilitating efficient cross-view information fusion. Consequently, compared
with state-of-the-art methods, Era3D generates high-quality multiview images with
up to a 512×512 resolution while reducing computation complexity of multiview
attention by 12x times. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the superior generation power of Era3D- it can reconstruct high-quality and detailed 3D meshes from
diverse single-view input images, significantly outperforming baseline multiview
diffusion methods. Project page: https://penghtyx.github.io/Era3D/.

1

Introduction

3D reconstruction from single-view images is an essential task in computer vision and graphics due to
its potential applications in game design, virtual reality, and robotics. Early research [42, 44, 53, 78,
28] mainly relies on direct 3D regression on voxels [39, 58, 9], which often leads to oversmoothed
results and has difficulty in generalizing to real-world unseen objects due to limited 3D training
data [4]. Recently, diffusion models (DMs) [16, 50] show strong generation ability on image or video
synthesis by training on extremely large-scale datasets [47, 48]. These diffusion models are promising
tools for single-view 3D reconstruction because it is possible to generate novel-view images from the
given image to enable 3D reconstruction.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

