Kaleidoscope: Learnable Masks for Heterogeneous
Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning

Xinran Li

Ling Pan

Jun Zhang

Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
xinran.li@connect.ust.hk, lingpan@ust.hk, eejzhang@ust.hk

Abstract
In multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), parameter sharing is commonly
employed to enhance sample efficiency. However, the popular approach of full
parameter sharing often leads to homogeneous policies among agents, potentially
limiting the performance benefits that could be derived from policy diversity. To
address this critical limitation, we introduce Kaleidoscope, a novel adaptive partial
parameter sharing scheme that fosters policy heterogeneity while still maintaining
high sample efficiency. Specifically, Kaleidoscope maintains one set of common
parameters alongside multiple sets of distinct, learnable masks for different agents,
dictating the sharing of parameters. It promotes diversity among policy networks by
encouraging discrepancy among these masks, without sacrificing the efficiencies of
parameter sharing. This design allows Kaleidoscope to dynamically balance high
sample efficiency with a broad policy representational capacity, effectively bridging
the gap between full parameter sharing and non-parameter sharing across various
environments. We further extend Kaleidoscope to critic ensembles in the context of
actor-critic algorithms, which could help improve value estimations. Our empirical
evaluations across extensive environments, including multi-agent particle environment, multi-agent MuJoCo and StarCraft multi-agent challenge v2, demonstrate the
superior performance of Kaleidoscope compared with existing parameter sharing
approaches, showcasing its potential for performance enhancement in MARL. The
code is publicly available at https://github.com/LXXXXR/Kaleidoscope.

1

Introduction

Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has demonstrated remarkable effectiveness
in solving complex real-world decision-making problems across various domains, such as resource
allocation (Ying and Dayong, 2005), package delivery (Seuken and Zilberstein, 2007), autonomous
driving (Zhou et al., 2021), and robot control (Swamy et al., 2020). To mitigate the challenges posed
by the non-stationary and partially observable environments typical of MARL (Yuan et al., 2023),
the centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE) paradigm (Foerster et al., 2016) has
become prevalent, inspiring many influential MARL algorithms such as MADDPG (Lowe et al.,
2017), COMA (Foerster et al., 2018), MATD3 (Ackermann et al., 2019), QMIX (Rashid et al., 2020),
and MAPPO (Yu et al., 2022).
Under the CTDE paradigm, parameter sharing among agents is a commonly adopted practice to
improve sample efficiency. However, identical network parameters across agents often lead to
homogeneous policies, restricting diversity in behaviors and the overall joint policy representational
capacity. This limitation can result in undesired outcomes in certain situations (Christianos et al.,
2021; Fu et al., 2022; Kim and Sung, 2023), as shown in Figure 1, impeding further performance
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

