LLMs Can Evolve Continually on Modality for
X-Modal Reasoning
Jiazuo Yu1 , Haomiao Xiong1 , Lu Zhang1,∗, Haiwen Diao1 , Yunzhi Zhuge1 ,
Lanqing Hong2 , Dong Wang1 , Huchuan Lu1 , You He3 , Long Chen4
1
Dalian University of Technology, 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Tsinghua University, 4 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
yujiazuo@mail.dlut.edu.cn, zhangluu@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have gained significant attention
due to their impressive capabilities in multimodal understanding. However, existing methods rely heavily on extensive modal-specific pretraining and joint-modal
tuning, leading to significant computational burdens when expanding to new modalities. In this paper, we propose PathWeave, a flexible and scalable framework with
modal-path switching and expansion abilities that enables MLLMs to continually
evolve on modalities for X-modal reasoning. We leverage the concept of Continual
Learning and develop an incremental training strategy atop pre-trained MLLMs,
enabling their expansion to new modalities using uni-modal data, without executing
joint-modal pretraining. In detail, a novel Adapter-in-Adapter (AnA) framework is
introduced, in which uni-modal and cross-modal adapters are seamlessly integrated
to facilitate efficient modality alignment and collaboration. Additionally, an MoEbased gating module is applied between two types of adapters to further enhance
the multimodal interaction. To investigate the proposed method, we establish a
challenging benchmark called Continual Learning of Modality (MCL), which
consists of high-quality QA data from five distinct modalities: image, video, audio,
depth and point cloud. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed AnA framework on learning plasticity and memory stability during continual learning. Furthermore, PathWeave performs comparably to state-of-the-art
MLLMs while concurrently reducing parameter training burdens by 98.73%. Our
code locates at https://github.com/JiazuoYu/PathWeave.

1

Introduction

With recent advances in artificial intelligence, Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated
impressive capacities in language understanding and reasoning. The success of LLMs [1, 2, 3, 4]
has spurred researchers to develop Multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) by integrating additional input for
multimodal tasks, such as image-text understanding [5, 6, 7], audio recognition [8, 9] and 3D question
answering [10, 11]. Aided by large-scale image-text paired data from the Internet [12, 13, 6, 14, 5],
vision LLMs have become a thriving area in the research community. The typical framework
comprises a visual encoder, a frozen or trainable LLM, and a projection module for vision-language
alignment. Through stepwisely pretraining on large-scale image-text pairs and instruction tuning on
specific datasets, vision LLMs exhibit promising generalization abilities on downstream applications
such as detection [15], grounding [16, 17], and captioning [6, 14]. Subsequently, the LLM-based
framework and training pipeline of vision LLMs serve as the basis and drive the extension to other
modalities, including video [18, 19], audio [9, 8], and point cloud [11, 10]. However, these modal∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

