Online Feature Updates Improve Online (Generalized)
Label Shift Adaptation

Ruihan Wu∗ †
UC San Diego
ruw076@ucsd.edu
Dheeraj Baby
UC Santa Barbara
dheeraj@ucsb.edu

Siddhartha Datta∗ †
University of Oxford
siddhartha.datta@cs.ox.ac.uk
Yu-Xiang Wang
UC San Diego
yuxiangw@ucsd.edu

Yi Su
Google DeepMind
yisumtv@google.com
Kilian Q. Weinberger
Cornell University
kilian@cornell.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses the prevalent issue of label shift in an online setting with
missing labels, where data distributions change over time and obtaining timely
labels is challenging. While existing methods primarily focus on adjusting or
updating the final layer of a pre-trained classifier, we explore the untapped potential
of enhancing feature representations using unlabeled data at test-time. Our novel
method, Online Label Shift adaptation with Online Feature Updates (OLS-OFU),
leverages self-supervised learning to refine the feature extraction process, thereby
improving the prediction model. By carefully designing the algorithm, theoretically
OLS-OFU maintains the similar online regret convergence to the results in the
literature while taking the improved features into account. Empirically, it achieves
substantial improvements over existing methods, which is as significant as the gains
existing methods have over the baseline (i.e., without distribution shift adaptations).

1

Introduction

The effectiveness of most supervised learning models relies on a key assumption that the training
data and test data share the same distribution. However, this assumption rarely holds in real-world
scenarios, leading to the phenomenon of distribution shift [41, 2]. Previous research has primarily
focused on understanding distribution shifts in offline or batch settings, where a single shift occurs
between the training and test distributions [33, 45, 51, 52, 35]. In contrast, real-world applications
often involve test data arriving in an online fashion, and the distribution shift can continuously evolve
over time. Additionally, there is another challenging issue of missing and delayed feedback labels,
stemming from the online setup, where gathering labels for the streaming data in a timely manner
becomes a challenging task.
To tackle the distribution shift problem, prior work often relies on additional assumptions regarding
the nature of the shift, such as label shift or covariate shift [43]. In this paper, we focus on the common
(generalized) label shift problem in an online setting with missing labels [49] . Specifically, the learner
is given a fixed set of labeled training data D0 ∼ P train in advance and trains a model f0 . During testtime, only a small batch of unlabelled test data St ∼ Pttest arrives in an online fashion (t = 1, 2, · · · ).
For the online label shift, we assume the label distribution Pttest (y) may change over time t while the
conditional distribution remains the same, i.e. Pttest (x|y) = P train (x|y). For example, employing
MRI image classifiers for concussion detection becomes challenging as label shifts emerge from
∗
†

Equal contribution
Work done while at Cornell University

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

