SSDM: Scalable Speech Dysfluency Modeling
Jiachen Lian1 , Xuanru Zhou2 , Zoe Ezzes3 , Jet Vonk3 , Brittany Morin3 , David Baquirin3 , Zachary Miller3 , Maria
Luisa Gorno Tempini3 , Gopala Anumanchipalli1
1

UC Berkeley, 2 Zhejiang University, 3 UCSF
{jiachenlian, gopala}@berkeley.edu

Instruction:
What do you think of the pronunciation?

Reference Text:
You wish to know all about my grandfather

LTU-AS (13 B)

The pronunciation is clear and easy to understand, which makes it
easier for listeners to follow along with what the speaker is saying.

SALMONN (13 B)

I think the pronunciation of the speech is clear and easy to understand.
It is great effort.

ChatGPT

The pronunciation was clear again, but here are a couple of additional
tips to enhance clarity. Emphasize the "k" sound in "know" slightly
more. Overall, it's a strong effort.

SSDM

You are trying to pronounce "you wish to know all about my grandfather".
There are a few problems. For the word "you," there is a stutter of "y" at
0.60 seconds. For the word "all," there is a block at 2.92 seconds. For
the word "grandfather," there is a stutter at 5.60 seconds, and there is a
phonetic error for "d" at 5.90 seconds. Try to speak slowly or consider
using speech therapy exercises that target these errors.

Ours

Demo Audio link:
https://shorturl.at/7OtCk

Figure 1: SSDM. Comparison to other methods
.

Abstract
Speech dysfluency modeling is the core module for spoken language learning, and
speech therapy. However, there are three challenges. First, current state-of-the-art
solutions [1, 2] suffer from poor scalability. Second, there is a lack of a large-scale
dysfluency corpus. Third, there is not an effective learning framework. In this
paper, we propose SSDM: Scalable Speech Dysfluency Modeling, which (1) adopts
articulatory gestures as scalable forced alignment; (2) introduces connectionist
subsequence aligner (CSA) to achieve dysfluency alignment; (3) introduces a largescale simulated dysfluency corpus called Libri-Dys; and (4) develops an end-to-end
system by leveraging the power of large language models (LLMs). We expect
SSDM to serve as a standard in the area of dysfluency modeling. Demo is available
at https://berkeley-speech-group.github.io/SSDM/.

1

Introduction

Speech dysfluency modeling is key for diagnosing speech disorders, supporting language learning,
and enhancing therapy [1]. In the U.S., over 2 million individuals live with aphasia [3], while
globally, dyslexia affects approximately one in ten people [4]. The U.S. speech therapy market is
projected to reach USD 6.93 billion by 2030 [5]. This growth parallels developments in Automatic
Speech Recognition (ASR), valued at USD 12.62 billion in 2023 [6], and Text-to-Speech (TTS),
valued at USD 3.45 billion [7]. Moreover, the global language learning market is anticipated to be
USD 337.2 billion by 2032 [8]. Conversely, substantial investments have been made in training
speech-language pathologists (SLPs) [9, 10], and the high cost of treatment often remains out of
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

