Dissecting the Interplay of Attention Paths in a
Statistical Mechanics Theory of Transformers

Lorenzo Tiberi1,2 Francesca Mignacco3,4 Kazuki Irie1,2 Haim Sompolinsky1,2,5
1
Center for Brain Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
2
Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural and Artificial Intelligence,
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
3
Graduate Center, City University of New York, NY, USA
4
Joseph Henry Laboratories of Physics, Princeton University, NJ, USA
5
Edmond and Lily Safra Center for Brain Sciences,
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
ltiberi@fas.harvard.edu, fmignacco@princeton.edu
kirie@fas.harvard.edu, hsompolinsky@mcb.harvard.edu

Abstract
Despite the remarkable empirical performance of transformers, their theoretical
understanding remains elusive. Here, we consider a deep multi-head self-attention
network, that is closely related to transformers yet analytically tractable. We develop a statistical mechanics theory of Bayesian learning in this model, deriving
exact equations for the network’s predictor statistics under the finite-width thermodynamic limit, i.e., N, P → ∞, P/N = O(1), where N is the network width and
P is the number of training examples. Our theory shows that the predictor statistics
are expressed as a sum of independent kernels, each one pairing different attention
paths, defined as information pathways through different attention heads across
layers. The kernels are weighted according to a task-relevant kernel combination
mechanism that aligns the total kernel with the task labels. As a consequence, this
interplay between attention paths enhances generalization performance. Experiments confirm our findings on both synthetic and real-world sequence classification
tasks. Finally, our theory explicitly relates the kernel combination mechanism to
properties of the learned weights, allowing for a qualitative transfer of its insights to
models trained via gradient descent. As an illustration, we demonstrate an efficient
size reduction of the network, by pruning those attention heads that are deemed
less relevant by our theory.1

1

Introduction

In recent years, transformer models based on multi-head self-attention layers [1–6] have achieved
remarkable performance at natural language processing and vision tasks [7–9]. Yet, theoretical
characterizations accounting for the success of these architectures remain sparse. Two fundamental
questions remain to a large extent unsolved: First, interpretability—how can we discern task-relevant
structures within the learned weights? Second, generalization—what specific aspects of the transformer architecture are responsible for their effective learning? We posit that one important feature of
transformers is the combination of layer-wise multi-head organization with depth. This provides the
network with a large number of attention paths, defined as specific sequences of heads through the
attention layers. Their interplay is still poorly understood by deep learning theory.
1

Our code is public: https://github.com/tiberilor/attention-paths-interplay

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

