Implicit Optimization Bias of
Next-token Prediction in Linear Models
Christos Thrampoulidis
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada
cthrampo@ece.ubc.ca

Abstract
We initiate an investigation into the optimization properties of next-token prediction
(NTP), the dominant training paradigm for modern language models. Specifically,
we study the structural properties of the solutions selected by gradient-based
optimizers among the many possible minimizers of the NTP objective. By framing
NTP as cross-entropy minimization across distinct contexts, each tied with a
sparse conditional probability distribution across a finite vocabulary of tokens,
we introduce “NTP-separability conditions” that enable reaching the data-entropy
lower bound. With this setup, and focusing on linear models with fixed context
embeddings, we characterize the optimization bias of gradient descent (GD): Within
the data subspace defined by the sparsity patterns of distinct contexts, GD selects
parameters that equate the logits’ differences of in-support tokens to their logodds. In the orthogonal subspace, the GD parameters diverge in norm and select
the direction that maximizes a margin specific to NTP. These findings extend
previous research on implicit bias in one-hot classification to the NTP setting,
highlighting key differences and prompting further research into the optimization
and generalization properties of NTP, irrespective of the specific architecture used
to generate the context embeddings.

1

Introduction

Next-token prediction (NTP) has emerged as the go-to paradigm in training modern language models,
revolutionizing various applications such as machine translation, text-summarization, and language
generation [66]. In NTP, models are trained to predict the most probable token given a sequence
of preceding tokens, commonly referred to as the context. Concretely, the objective is to learn a
mapping from the input context to the probability distribution over the (finite) vocabulary of possible
tokens, enabling the model to generate a token that is contextually appropriate [9, 8]. Recently, the
NTP paradigm has witnessed remarkable empirical success through its utilization on large-scale
deep-learning architectures trained on vast corpora of data [66, 67, 86], leading to unprecedented
advances in the field, and the swift integration of these advanced language models into society
[62]. Concurrently, researchers have raised critical concerns about robustness, interpretability, and
fairness-bias issues arising from our limited understanding of the fundamental operational principles
of these models [10, 6]. Despite progress, a comprehensive theory that elucidates the fundamentals
of modern language models—including key components like the NTP paradigm and transformer
architecture, particularly in terms of optimization and generalization principles—is still lacking.
We initiate an investigation when implicit optimization biases in training language models under
the NTP paradigm, particularly in overparameterized regimes where the empirical-loss reaches its
lower bound and there is many possible minimizers. To formalize the NTP paradigm, consider
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

