An In-depth Investigation of Sparse Rate Reduction
in Transformer-like Models
Yunzhe Hu
School of Computing and Data Science
The University of Hong Kong
yzhu@cs.hku.hk

Difan Zou
School of Computing and Data Science
& Institute of Data Science
The University of Hong Kong
dzou@cs.hku.hk

Dong Xu
School of Computing and Data Science
The University of Hong Kong
dongxu@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
Deep neural networks have long been criticized for being black-box. To unveil
the inner workings of modern neural architectures, a recent work [45] proposed an
information-theoretic objective function called Sparse Rate Reduction (SRR) and
interpreted its unrolled optimization as a Transformer-like model called Coding
Rate Reduction Transformer (CRATE). However, the focus of the study was
primarily on the basic implementation, and whether this objective is optimized in
practice and its causal relationship to generalization remain elusive. Going beyond
this study, we derive different implementations by analyzing layer-wise behaviors
of CRATE, both theoretically and empirically. To reveal the predictive power
of SRR on generalization, we collect a set of model variants induced by varied
implementations and hyperparameters and evaluate SRR as a complexity measure
based on its correlation with generalization. Surprisingly, we find out that SRR has
a positive correlation coefficient and outperforms other baseline measures, such as
path-norm and sharpness-based ones. Furthermore, we show that generalization
can be improved using SRR as regularization on benchmark image classification
datasets. We hope this paper can shed light on leveraging SRR to design principled
models and study their generalization ability.

1

Introduction

Transformers [39, 11] have become the de facto choice of neural architecture nowadays and find great
success in applications across language, vision, speech, and other scientific fields. The self-attention
module in Transformers utilize global interactions to capture long-range dependency. However, the
mechanisms and learning process of self-attention and other components in Transformers remain
open problems, calling for more research to interpret and understand their properties.
One approach to interpreting the attention module involves experimental observation of the attention
module to gain insights into their behaviors. For instance, DINO [7] provides a means to observe and
analyze attention maps w.r.t class tokens in Vision Transformer (ViT), shedding light on their emerging
interpretability from self-supervised learning. Another line of work focuses on interpreting or building
attention module and even Transformer-like models from a mathematical perspective. Works in this
vein have attempted to establish connections between Transformers and a reverse-engineered energy
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

