Evaluating Multiview Object Consistency
in Humans and Image Models

Tyler Bonnen1 Stephanie Fu1 Yutong Bai1 Thomas O’Connell2 Yoni Friedman2
Nancy Kanwisher2 Joshua B. Tenenbaum2 Alexei A. Efros1
1

University of California, Berkeley

2

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

HUMANS

MODELS

35K trials from 500 subjects

DINOv2, MAE, CLIP, …

Figure 1: How well do computer vision models represent the 3D structure of objects? We develop a
benchmark using a shape inference task from the cognitive sciences: Multiview Object Consistency in Humans
and in Image models (MOCHI). Given three images of objects from random viewpoints, observers must identify
which image depicts the object that is different. We compare human performance (35K trials from over 500
subjects, including accuracy, reaction time, and gaze data) against a number of standard computer vision models.

Abstract
We introduce a benchmark to directly evaluate the alignment between human
observers and vision models on a 3D shape inference task. We leverage an experimental design from the cognitive sciences: given a set of images, participants
identify which contain the same/different objects, despite considerable viewpoint
variation. We draw from a diverse range of images that include common objects
(e.g., chairs) as well as abstract shapes (i.e., procedurally generated ‘nonsense’
objects). After constructing over 2000 unique image sets, we administer these
tasks to human participants, collecting 35K trials of behavioral data from over
500 participants. This includes explicit choice behaviors as well as intermediate
measures, such as reaction time and gaze data. We then evaluate the performance
of common vision models (e.g., DINOv2, MAE, CLIP). We find that humans outperform all models by a wide margin. Using a multi-scale evaluation approach, we
identify underlying similarities and differences between models and humans: while
human-model performance is correlated, humans allocate more time/processing on
challenging trials. All images, data, and code can be accessed via our project page.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

