Bayesian Online Natural Gradient (BONG)

Matt Jones
University of Colorado
mcjones@colorado.edu

Peter Chang
MIT
gyuyoung@mit.edu

Kevin Murphy
Google DeepMind
kpmurphy@google.com

Abstract
We propose a novel approach to sequential Bayesian inference based on variational
Bayes (VB). The key insight is that, in the online setting, we do not need to add the
KL term to regularize to the prior (which comes from the posterior at the previous
timestep); instead we can optimize just the expected log-likelihood, performing
a single step of natural gradient descent starting at the prior predictive. We prove
this method recovers exact Bayesian inference if the model is conjugate. We also
show how to compute an efficient deterministic approximation to the VB objective,
as well as our simplified objective, when the variational distribution is Gaussian
or a sub-family, including the case of a diagonal plus low-rank precision matrix.
We show empirically that our method outperforms other online VB methods in the
non-conjugate setting, such as online learning for neural networks, especially when
controlling for computational costs.

1

Introduction

Bayesian methods for neural network (NN) training aim to minimize the Kullback-Leibler divergence
between true and estimated posterior distributions. This is equivalent to minimizing the variational
loss (or negative ELBO)
L(ψ) = −Eθ∼qψ [log p(D|θ)] + DKL (qψ |p0 )

(1)

Here θ are the network parameters, ψ are the variational parameters of the approximate posterior
qψ (θ), D is the training dataset, and p0 (θ) is the prior. The two terms in the variational loss
correspond to data fit and regularization to the prior, the latter being analogous to a regularizer
r(θ) = − log p0 (θ) in traditional point estimation methods like SGD.
An important set of approaches learns the variational parameters by gradient descent on L(ψ)
[Blundell et al., 2015]. More recently Khan and colleagues [Khan et al., 2018b, Khan and Rue, 2023,
Shen et al., 2024] have proposed using the natural gradient F−1
ψ ∇ψ L(ψ) where Fψ is the Fisher
information matrix of the variational family evaluated at qψ . Natural gradient descent (NGD) is often
more efficient than vanilla GD because it accounts for the intrinsic geometry of the variational family
[Amari, 1998]. Khan and Rue [2023] call this approach the "Bayesian Learning Rule" or BLR. Using
various choices for the variational distribution, generalized losses replacing negative log-likelihood,
and other approximations, they reproduce many standard optimization methods such as Adam, and
derive new ones.
We study Bayesian NN optimization in online learning, where the data are observed in sequence,
Dt = {(xk , yk )tk=1 }, and the algorithm maintains an approximate posterior qψt (θt ) ≈ p(θt |Dt ),
which it updates at each step. Fast updates (in terms of both computational speed and statistical
efficiency) are critical for many online learning applications [Zhang et al., 2024]. To allow for
nonstationarity in the datastream, we include a time index on θt , to represent that the parameters
may change over time, as is standard for approaches based on state-space models and the extended
Kalman filter (see e.g., [Sarkka and Svensson, 2023]). The belief state is updated recursively using
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

