Probabilistic size-and-shape functional mixed models

Fangyi Wang
Department of Statistics
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, 43210
wang.15022@osu.edu

Karthik Bharath
School of Mathematical Sciences
University of Nottingham
Nottingham, UK, NG7 2RD
Karthik.Bharath@nottingham.ac.uk

Oksana Chkrebtii
Department of Statistics
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, 43210
oksana@stat.osu.edu

Sebastian Kurtek
Department of Statistics
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH, 43210
kurtek.1@stat.osu.edu

Abstract
The reliable recovery and uncertainty quantification of a fixed effect function µ in
a functional mixed model, for modelling population- and object-level variability
in noisily observed functional data, is a notoriously challenging task: variations
along the x and y axes are confounded with additive measurement error, and cannot
in general be disentangled. The question then as to what properties of µ may
be reliably recovered becomes important. We demonstrate that it is possible to
recover the size-and-shape of a square-integrable µ under a Bayesian functional
mixed model. The size-and-shape of µ is a geometric property invariant to a
family of space-time unitary transformations, viewed as rotations of the Hilbert
space, that jointly transform the x and y axes. A random object-level unitary
transformation then captures size-and-shape preserving deviations of µ from an
individual function, while a random linear term and measurement error capture
size-and-shape altering deviations. The model is regularized by appropriate priors
on the unitary transformations, posterior summaries of which may then be suitably
interpreted as optimal data-driven rotations of a fixed orthonormal basis for the
Hilbert space. Our numerical experiments demonstrate utility of the proposed
model, and superiority over the current state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Consider a sample of functions from the much-studied Berkeley growth data in Figure 1(a), where
growth rate curves from measurements on heights in centimeters of 54 girls and 39 boys from age 1
to 18 are plotted on a rescaled time axis. It appears that individuals experience different numbers
of small and large growth spurts that differ in magnitude and timing. Any reasonable generative
model for inference on distributional aspects of the functions will need to account for the fact that the
sample size (n = 93) is smaller than the dimension of each observation, and it is thus common to
consider tractable parametric probabilistic models. A popular choice is a functional mixed model
fi = µ + vi + ϵi ,

i = 1, . . . , n,

(1)

comprising three component real-valued functions on [0, 1]: (i) fixed population-level function that
represents an average, or representative, change in growth rate; (ii) an individual- or object-level
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

