SWT-Bench: Testing and Validating Real-World
Bug-Fixes with Code Agents

Niels Mündler1 , Mark Niklas Müller1,2 , Jingxuan He1 , Martin Vechev1
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich

2

LogicStar.ai

{niels.muendler, mark.mueller, jingxuan.he, martin.vechev}@inf.ethz.ch 1
mark@logicstar.ai 2

Abstract
Rigorous software testing is crucial for developing and maintaining high-quality
code, making automated test generation a promising avenue for both improving
software quality and boosting the effectiveness of code generation methods. However, while code generation with Large Language Models (LLMs) is an extraordinarily active research area, test generation remains relatively unexplored. We
address this gap and investigate the capability of LLM-based Code Agents to formalize user issues into test cases. To this end, we propose a novel benchmark
based on popular GitHub repositories, containing real-world issues, ground-truth
bug-fixes, and golden tests. We find that LLMs generally perform surprisingly
well at generating relevant test cases, with Code Agents designed for code repair
exceeding the performance of systems designed specifically for test generation.
Further, as test generation is a similar but more structured task than code generation, it allows for a more fine-grained analysis using issue reproduction rate
and coverage changes, providing a dual metric for analyzing systems designed for
code repair. Finally, we find that generated tests are an effective filter for proposed
code fixes, doubling the precision of SWE-AGENT. We release all data and code
at github.com/logic-star-ai/SWT-Bench.

1

Introduction

As the complexity of software systems increases, rigorous testing is becoming more important than
ever to ensure their reliability and correctness. However, while a large portion of these tests aims to
reproduce previously reported issues (Kang et al., 2023), such issue reproduction is often disliked
by professional developers (Straubinger & Fraser, 2023). Therefore, automatic generation of tests
reproducing such issues from informal natural language descriptions is a promising path toward
improving both code quality and developer productivity. Finally, generated tests can be leveraged as
formal specifications to boost the effectiveness of automatic code repair tools (Chen et al., 2023a).
However, while automatic code generation, in particular using Code Agents, is an extremely active
research area (i.e. Yang et al. (2024); Tao et al. (2024); Zhang et al. (2024); Bouzenia et al. (2024b);
OpenDevin (2024); Bouzenia et al. (2024a); Schäfer et al. (2024); Alshahwan et al. (2024a)), there
is comparatively little work investigating automatic test generation directly. Indeed, while prior
work has proposed methods based on symbolic execution (Lukasczyk & Fraser, 2022), specialized
transformers (Tufano et al., 2020), and general-purpose LLMs (Li et al., 2023; Alshahwan et al.,
2024b; Kang et al., 2023, 2024; Chen et al., 2023b), Code Agents have not been considered in this
context, and even less work is applicable to the issue reproduction setting. Finally, large-scale, diverse test-generation datasets are lacking for Python, which is one of the most popular programming
languages at the time of writing (TIOBE, 2024; PYPL, 2024) and a focus of Code Agent research.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

