DETAIL: Task DEmonsTration Attribution for
Interpretable In-context Learning

Zijian Zhou13 Xiaoqiang Lin1 Xinyi Xu12 Alok Prakash3
Daniela Rus34 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low1
1
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore
2
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
3
Singapore-MIT Alliance for Research and Technology Centre, Singapore
4
CSAIL, MIT, USA
{zhzijian,xiaoqiang.lin,xuxinyi,lowkh}@comp.nus.edu.sg
{zijian.zhou,alok.prakash}@smart.mit.edu
rus@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
In-context learning (ICL) allows transformer-based language models that are pretrained on general text to quickly learn a specific task with a few “task demonstrations” without updating their parameters, significantly boosting their flexibility and
generality. ICL possesses many distinct characteristics from conventional machine
learning, thereby requiring new approaches to interpret this learning paradigm.
Taking the viewpoint of recent works showing that transformers learn in context
by formulating an internal optimizer, we propose an influence function-based attribution technique, DETAIL, that addresses the specific characteristics of ICL. We
empirically verify the effectiveness of our approach for demonstration attribution
while being computationally efficient. Leveraging the results, we then show how
DETAIL can help improve model performance in real-world scenarios through
demonstration reordering and curation. Finally, we experimentally prove the wide
applicability of DETAIL by showing our attribution scores obtained on white-box
models are transferable to black-box models in improving model performance.

1

Introduction

The rapid development of transformer-based language models [12, 14, 17, 71] has inspired a new
in-context learning (ICL) paradigm [14], which allows a language model sufficiently pre-trained on
general text to quickly adapt to specific tasks. This lightweight approach of customizing a general
model for specific tasks is in contrast to fine-tuning [31, 68] that necessitates both access to the model
parameters and resource-intensive step of tuning these parameters for model adaptation. In ICL, a
few task demonstrations are included in the input text (i.e., prompt) together with a query to help the
language model better understand how to answer the query. It has been shown that including task
demonstrations in the prompt can enhance the capability of language models to apply common sense
and logical reasoning [65, 72] and learn patterns from the supplied demonstrations [14], significantly
enhancing the flexibility and generality of language models. In the ICL paradigm, each demonstration
can be viewed as a “training data point” for ICL. Analogous to how the performance of a conventional
supervised machine learning (ML) model depends on the quality of training data, the performance of
ICL depends on the quality of task demonstrations [41]. A research question naturally arises: How to
attribute and interpret ICL demonstrations that are helpful or harmful for model prediction?
Though there are many prior works on interpreting and attributing model prediction for conventional
ML models [25, 34, 52], these methods are not readily applicable to ICL due to its unique charac38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

