Diffusion-Reward Adversarial Imitation Learning

Chun-Mao Lai1∗ Hsiang-Chun Wang1∗ Ping-Chun Hsieh2 Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1,3
Min-Hung Chen3 Shao-Hua Sun1
1
National Taiwan University 2 National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University 3 NVIDIA

Abstract
Imitation learning aims to learn a policy from observing expert demonstrations
without access to reward signals from environments. Generative adversarial imitation learning (GAIL) formulates imitation learning as adversarial learning, employing a generator policy learning to imitate expert behaviors and discriminator
learning to distinguish the expert demonstrations from agent trajectories. Despite its encouraging results, GAIL training is often brittle and unstable. Inspired by the recent dominance of diffusion models in generative modeling, we
propose Diffusion-Reward Adversarial Imitation Learning (DRAIL), which integrates a diffusion model into GAIL, aiming to yield more robust and smoother
rewards for policy learning. Specifically, we propose a diffusion discriminative classifier to construct an enhanced discriminator, and design diffusion rewards based on the classifier’s output for policy learning. Extensive experiments are conducted in navigation, manipulation, and locomotion, verifying
DRAIL’s effectiveness compared to prior imitation learning methods. Moreover, additional experimental results demonstrate the generalizability and data
efficiency of DRAIL. Visualized learned reward functions of GAIL and DRAIL
suggest that DRAIL can produce more robust and smoother rewards. Project page:
https://nturobotlearninglab.github.io/DRAIL/

1

Introduction

Imitation learning, i.e., learning from demonstration [24, 41, 49], aims to acquire an agent policy by
observing and mimicking the behavior demonstrated in expert demonstrations. Various imitation
learning methods [53, 60] have enabled deploying reliable and robust learned policies in a variety
of tasks involving sequential decision-making, especially in the scenarios where devising a reward
function is intricate or uncertain [7, 32, 34], or when learning in a trial-and-error manner is expensive
or unsafe [14, 17].
Among various methods in imitation learning, generative adversarial imitation learning (GAIL) [21]
has been widely adopted due to its effectiveness and data efficiency. GAIL learns a generator policy to
imitate expert behaviors through reinforcement learning and a discriminator to differentiate between
the expert and the generator’s state-action pair distributions, resembling the idea of generative
adversarial networks (GANs) [16]. Despite its established theoretical guarantee, GAIL training
is notoriously brittle and unstable. To alleviate this issue, significant efforts have been put into
improving GAIL’s sample efficiency, scalability, robustness, and generalizability by modifying loss
functions [12], developing improved policy learning algorithms [30], and exploring various similarity
measures of distributions [2, 8, 12].
Inspired by the recent dominance of diffusion models in generative modeling [22], this work explores
incorporating diffusion models into GAIL to provide more robust and smoother reward functions
∗

Equal contribution.

Correspondence to: Shao-Hua Sun <shaohuas@ntu.edu.tw>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

