Asynchronous Perception Machine
for Efficient Test Time Training

Rajat Modi∗ Yogesh Singh Rawat
Centre for Research in Computer Vision
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL 32765
rajat.modi@ucf.edu,yogesh@crcv.ucf.edu
https://rajatmodi62.github.io/apm_project_page

Abstract
In this work, we propose Asynchronous Perception Machine (APM), a
computationally-efficient architecture for test-time-training (TTT). APM can process patches of an image one at a time in any order asymmetrically, and still
encode semantic-awareness in the net. We demonstrate APM’s ability to recognize
out-of-distribution images without dataset-specific pre-training, augmentation or
any-pretext task. APM offers competitive performance over existing TTT approaches. To perform TTT, APM just distills test sample’s representation once.
APM possesses a unique property: it can learn using just this single representation
and starts predicting semantically-aware features.
APM demostrates potential applications beyond test-time-training: APM can scale
up to a dataset of 2D images and yield semantic-clusterings in a single forward
pass. APM also provides first empirical evidence towards validating GLOM’s
insight, i.e. if input percept is a field. Therefore, APM helps us converge towards
an implementation which can do both interpolation and perception on a sharedconnectionist hardware. Our code is publicly available at this link.

1

Introduction

In these past centuries, computing-machines have become a lot faster [92]. This made it possible
to train higher-parameterized neural nets and led to interesting emergent abilities [80]. As was
predicted by Turing himself, and as were his suspicions of Lady Lovelace’s arguments against
learning machines[90]: neural-nets can now finally learn without human-feedback [6], paint pictures
[76] and even compose a sonnet [92]. Even with such impressive-progress, a key question still
remains: how can these nets recognize images whose distribution is far different from the ones which
were used during training? For e.g., consider a self-driving car trying to stop when it encounters a
pedestrian crossing a road. Such practical scenarios require ‘instantaneous-decisions’2 for ensuring
human-safety in autonomous-systems [64].
Test-time-training (TTT) [85] is one of the promising techniques for handling such distribution shifts:
a neural net adapts to a test sample ‘on the fly’. Since the label of the sample is not known, the net
performs some auxiliary pre-text task like data augmentation [15], rotation [15, 86] or prompt tuning
[84] on it. After several such iterations, the net recognizes the test sample. The key idea is that the net
is allowed to dynamically adjust its decision boundary even after it has been trained, thereby bringing
it much closer to how humans keep learning ‘continuously’ throughout their lifespans [86].
∗

Correspondence to rajatmodi62@gmail.com.
A flick of the eye, the fall of her hair, the passing of a second, or capturing the world at 120fps: instantaneous
can be a subjective experience. Seconds can sometimes pass slowly for other reasons also.
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

