AVATA R: Optimizing LLM Agents for Tool Usage via
Contrastive Reasoning

Shirley Wu§ , Shiyu Zhao§ , Qian Huang§ , Kexin Huang§ , Michihiro Yasunaga§ , Kaidi Cao§
Vassilis N. Ioannidis† , Karthik Subbian† , Jure Leskovec∗§ , James Zou∗§
∗
Equal senior authorship.
§
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University † Amazon

Abstract
Large language model (LLM) agents have demonstrated impressive capabilities in
utilizing external tools and knowledge to boost accuracy and reduce hallucinations.
However, developing prompting techniques that enable LLM agents to effectively
use these tools and knowledge remains a heuristic and labor-intensive task. Here,
we introduce AVATA R, a novel and automated framework that optimizes an LLM
agent to effectively leverage provided tools, improving performance on a given
task. During optimization, we design a comparator module to iteratively deliver
insightful and comprehensive prompts to the LLM agent by contrastively reasoning
between positive and negative examples sampled from training data. We demonstrate AVATA R on four complex multimodal retrieval datasets featuring textual,
visual, and relational information, and three general question-answering (QA)
datasets. We find AVATA R consistently outperforms state-of-the-art approaches
across all seven tasks, exhibiting strong generalization ability when applied to
novel cases and achieving an average relative improvement of 14% on the Hit@1
metric for the retrieval datasets and 13% for the QA datasets. Code and dataset are
available at https://github.com/zou-group/avatar.

1

Introduction

Autonomous agents powered by large language models (LLMs) offer substantial promise for complex
problem-solving [6, 39, 41, 55, 65]. These agents demonstrate remarkable capabilities in reasoning [46, 47, 54, 55] and planning [8, 13, 14, 62]. Additionally, their functionality is extended through
the use of external tools that provide access to external or private data and specialized operations,
such as APIs for interacting with knowledge bases and search engines. These tools enable agents to
perform complex tasks like multi-step problem-solving and retrieving diverse information, which is
essential for complex retrieval and question-answering (QA) [13, 21, 26, 33, 38, 40, 48].
Despite the promising capabilities of LLM agents, it remains challenging to engineer effective
prompts that guide these agents through a multi-stage process for real-world problem-solving. This
process involves (1) decomposing a complex question into an actionable plan with simpler steps,
(2) strategically using provided tools to gather relevant information, and, finally, (3) synthesizing
intermediate results to produce a coherent and accurate response. Each step requires extensive manual
effort and numerous iterations of trial and error to refine the prompts.
Current approaches have primarily focused on directly deploying agents using complex humandesigned “mega-prompts” [18, 24, 55], which require lots of manual trial and error. Nevertheless, such
hand-engineered mega-prompts may also result in brittle implementations with suboptimal accuracy
(see Figure 2 (a)), where the ReAct agent [55] easily produces trivial and misleading answers to
Correspondence: {shirwu, jure, jamesz}@cs.stanford.edu
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

