HLM-Cite: Hybrid Language Model Workflow for
Text-based Scientific Citation Prediction
Qianyue Hao, Jingyang Fan, Fengli Xu∗, Jian Yuan, Yong Li∗
Department of Electronic Engineering, BNRist, Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Abstract
Citation networks are critical infrastructures of modern science, serving as intricate webs of past literature and enabling researchers to navigate the knowledge
production system. To mine information hiding in the link space of such networks, predicting which previous papers (candidates) will a new paper (query)
cite is a critical problem that has long been studied. However, an important gap
remains unaddressed: the roles of a paper’s citations vary significantly, ranging
from foundational knowledge basis to superficial contexts. Distinguishing these
roles requires a deeper understanding of the logical relationships among papers,
beyond simple edges in citation networks. The emergence of large language models
(LLMs) with textual reasoning capabilities offers new possibilities for discerning
these relationships, but there are two major challenges. First, in practice, a new
paper may select its citations from gigantic existing papers, where the combined
texts far exceed the context length of LLMs. Second, logical relationships between
papers are often implicit, and directly prompting an LLM to predict citations may
lead to results based primarily on surface-level textual similarities, rather than the
deeper logical reasoning required. In this paper, we introduce the novel concept
of core citation, which identifies the critical references that go beyond superficial
mentions. Thereby, we elevate the citation prediction task from a simple binary
classification to a more nuanced problem: distinguishing core citations from both
superficial citations and non-citations. To address this, we propose HLM-Cite, a
Hybrid Language Model workflow for citation prediction, which combines embedding and generative LMs. We design a curriculum finetune procedure to adapt a
pretrained text embedding model to coarsely retrieve high-likelihood core citations
from vast candidate sets and then design an LLM agentic workflow to rank the
retrieved papers through one-shot reasoning, revealing the implicit relationships
among papers. With the two-stage pipeline, we can scale the candidate sets to
100K papers, vastly exceeding the size handled by existing methods. We evaluate HLM-Cite on a dataset across 19 scientific fields, demonstrating a 17.6%
performance improvement comparing SOTA methods. Our code is open-source at
https://github.com/tsinghua-fib-lab/H-LM for reproducibility.

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of modern science, the volume of research papers is increasing annually [1]. As links between papers, citations network connects vast literature and bridge newly
emerging knowledge with existing ones. Due to the critical role of citations, citation prediction is
an important problem that has long been studied [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7], where the goal is to predict which
∗
Fengli Xu and Yong Li are corresponding authors.
liyong07@tsinghua.edu.cn

Email:

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

fenglixu@tsinghua.edu.cn,

