DiffSF: Diffusion Models for Scene Flow Estimation
Yushan Zhang

Bastian Wandt Maria Magnusson
Linköping University
{firstname.lastname}@liu.se

Michael Felsberg

Abstract
Scene flow estimation is an essential ingredient for a variety of real-world applications, especially for autonomous agents, such as self-driving cars and robots.
While recent scene flow estimation approaches achieve reasonable accuracy, their
applicability to real-world systems additionally benefits from a reliability measure. Aiming at improving accuracy while additionally providing an estimate
for uncertainty, we propose DiffSF that combines transformer-based scene flow
estimation with denoising diffusion models. In the diffusion process, the ground
truth scene flow vector field is gradually perturbed by adding Gaussian noise. In
the reverse process, starting from randomly sampled Gaussian noise, the scene
flow vector field prediction is recovered by conditioning on a source and a target
point cloud. We show that the diffusion process greatly increases the robustness
of predictions compared to prior approaches resulting in state-of-the-art performance on standard scene flow estimation benchmarks. Moreover, by sampling
multiple times with different initial states, the denoising process predicts multiple hypotheses, which enables measuring the output uncertainty, allowing our
approach to detect a majority of the inaccurate predictions. The code is available at
https://github.com/ZhangYushan3/DiffSF.

1

Introduction

Scene flow estimation is an important research topic in computer vision with applications in various
fields, such as autonomous driving [25] and robotics [30]. Given a source and a target point cloud,
the objective is to estimate a scene flow vector field that maps each point in the source point cloud
to the target point cloud. Many studies on scene flow estimation aim at enhancing accuracy and
substantial progress has been made particularly on clean, synthetic datasets. However, real-world
data contains additional challenges such as severe occlusion and noisy input, thus requiring a high
level of robustness when constructing models for scene flow estimation.
Recently, Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) have not only been widely explored in
image generation [12, 28] but also in analysis tasks, e.g. detection [3], classification [11], segmentation [1, 10], optical flow [29], human pose estimation [13], point cloud registration [14], etc. Drawing
inspiration from the recent successes of diffusion models in regression tasks and recognizing their
potential compatibility with scene flow estimation, we formulate scene flow estimation as a diffusion
process following DDPMs [12] as shown in Figure 1. The forward process initiates from the ground
truth scene flow vector field and gradually introduces noise to it. Conversely, the reverse process is
conditioned on the source and the target point cloud and is tasked to reconstruct the scene flow vector
field based on the current noisy input. To learn the denoising process, a new network is proposed
inspired by state-of-the-art scene flow estimation methods FLOT [26] and GMSF [43].
Previous methods [43, 5, 36, 4] usually suffer from inaccuracies when occlusions occur or when
dealing with noisy inputs. During inference, based on the fixed parameters learned during training,
they cannot provide information about their inaccurate predictions, which might lead to problems
in safety-critical downstream tasks. Our proposed method approaches this problem in two aspects:
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

