Defensive Unlearning with Adversarial Training
for Robust Concept Erasure in Diffusion Models

Yimeng Zhang1
Jiancheng Liu1
1
3

Xin Chen2

Jinghan Jia1

Mingyi Hong3

Michigan State University
University of Minnesota, Twin City

Yihua Zhang1

Chongyu Fan1

Ke Ding2

Sijia Liu1,4
2

4

Applied ML, Intel
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research

Abstract
Diffusion models (DMs) have achieved remarkable success in text-to-image generation, but they also pose safety risks, such as the potential generation of harmful
content and copyright violations. The techniques of machine unlearning, also
known as concept erasing, have been developed to address these risks. However, these techniques remain vulnerable to adversarial prompt attacks, which can
prompt DMs post-unlearning to regenerate undesired images containing concepts
(such as nudity) meant to be erased. This work aims to enhance the robustness
of concept erasing by integrating the principle of adversarial training (AT) into
machine unlearning, resulting in the robust unlearning framework referred to as
AdvUnlearn. However, achieving this effectively and efficiently is highly nontrivial. First, we find that a straightforward implementation of AT compromises
DMs’ image generation quality post-unlearning. To address this, we develop a
utility-retaining regularization on an additional retain set, optimizing the trade-off
between concept erasure robustness and model utility in AdvUnlearn. Moreover,
we identify the text encoder as a more suitable module for robustification compared to UNet, ensuring unlearning effectiveness. And the acquired text encoder
can serve as a plug-and-play robust unlearner for various DM types. Empirically,
we perform extensive experiments to demonstrate the robustness advantage of
AdvUnlearn across various DM unlearning scenarios, including the erasure of
nudity, objects, and style concepts. In addition to robustness, AdvUnlearn also
achieves a balanced tradeoff with model utility. To our knowledge, this is the first
work to systematically explore robust DM unlearning through AT, setting it apart
from existing methods that overlook robustness in concept erasing. Codes are
available at https://github.com/OPTML-Group/AdvUnlearn.
Warning: This paper contains model outputs that may be offensive in nature.

1

Introduction

Recent rapid advancements in diffusion models (DMs) [1–8] have popularized the realm of textto-image generation. These models, trained on extensive online datasets, can generate remarkably
realistic images. However, their training heavily relies on diverse internet-sourced content and
can introduce safety concerns when prompted with inappropriate texts, such as the generation of
NSFW (Not Safe For Work) images, highlighted in several studies [9, 10]. To address this concern,
post-hoc safety checkers were initially applied to DMs [10, 11]. However, they were later found to be
inadequate in effectively preventing the generation of unsafe content. To further enhance safety, the
concept of machine unlearning (MU) has been introduced [12–18], aiming to mitigate the influence
of undesired textual concepts in DM training or fine-tuning [19–22]. As a result, DMs post-unlearning
(referred to as ‘concept-erased DMs’ or ‘unlearned DMs’) are designed to negate the generation of
undesirable content, even when faced with inappropriate prompts.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

