DALD: Improving Logits-based Detector without
Logits from Black-box LLMs
Cong Zeng1∗ Shengkun Tang1 ∗ Xianjun Yang2 Yuanzhou Chen3
Yiyou Sun4 Zhiqiang Xu1 Yao Li5 Haifeng Chen4 Wei ChengB 4 Dongkuan Xu6
MBZUAI1 University of California, Santa Barbara2
University of California, Los Angeles3 NEC Labs America4
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill5 NC State University6
{cong.zeng, shengkun.tang, zhiqiang.xu}@mbzuai.ac.ae xianjunyang@ucsb.edu
{sunyiyou, haifengchen, weicheng}@nec-labs.com dxu27@ncsu.edu
yuanzhouchen@cs.ucla.edu yaoli@ad.unc.edu

Abstract
The advent of Large Language Models (LLMs) has revolutionized text generation,
producing outputs that closely mimic human writing. This blurring of lines between
machine- and human-written text presents new challenges in distinguishing one
from the other – a task further complicated by the frequent updates and closed
nature of leading proprietary LLMs. Traditional logits-based detection methods
leverage surrogate models for identifying LLM-generated content when the exact
logits are unavailable from black-box LLMs. However, these methods grapple
with the misalignment between the distributions of the surrogate and the often
undisclosed target models, leading to performance degradation, particularly with
the introduction of new, closed-source models. Furthermore, while current methodologies are generally effective when the source model is identified, they falter in
scenarios where the model version remains unknown, or the test set comprises
outputs from various source models. To address these limitations, we present
Distribution-Aligned LLMs Detection (DALD), an innovative framework that redefines the state-of-the-art performance in black-box text detection even without
logits from source LLMs. DALD is designed to align the surrogate model’s distribution with that of unknown target LLMs, ensuring enhanced detection capability and
resilience against rapid model iterations with minimal training investment. By leveraging corpus samples from publicly accessible outputs of advanced models such
as ChatGPT, GPT-4, and Claude-3, DALD fine-tunes surrogate models to synchronize with unknown source model distributions effectively. Our approach performs
SOTA in black-box settings on different advanced closed-source and open-source
models. The versatility of our method enriches widely adopted zero-shot detection
frameworks (DetectGPT, DNA-GPT, Fast-DetectGPT) with a plug-and-play enhancement feature. Extensive experiments validate that our methodology reliably
secures high detection precision for LLM-generated text and effectively detects
text from diverse model origins through a singular detector. Our method is also
robust under the revised text attack and non-English texts.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) such as ChatGPT[1], GPT-4[2], Llama[3–5] and Claude-3[6] have
profoundly impacted both industrial and academic domains, reshaping productivity across various
∗

Equal contribution. The code and data are released at https://github.com/cong-zeng/DALD

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

