Instruction-Guided Visual Masking

Jinliang Zheng∗ 1,2 , Jianxiong Li∗ 1 , Sijie Cheng1 , Yinan Zheng1 ,
Jiaming Li1 , Jihao Liu3,2 , Yu Liu2 , Jingjing Liu† 1 , Xianyuan Zhan† 1,4
1
AIR, Tsinghua University, 2 Sensetime Research
3
MMLab, CUHK, 4 Shanghai AI Lab
{zhengjl23, li-jx21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
zhanxianyuan@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Instruction following is crucial in contemporary LLM. However, when extended
to multimodal setting, it often suffers from misalignment between specific textual
instruction and targeted local region of an image. To achieve more accurate and
nuanced multimodal instruction following, we introduce Instruction-guided Visual
Masking (IVM), a new versatile visual grounding model that is compatible with
diverse multimodal models, such as LMM and robot model. By constructing
visual masks for instruction-irrelevant regions, IVM-enhanced multimodal models
can effectively focus on task-relevant image regions to better align with complex
instructions. Specifically, we design a visual masking data generation pipeline and
create an IVM-Mix-1M dataset with 1 million image-instruction pairs. We further
introduce a new learning technique, Discriminator Weighted Supervised Learning
(DWSL) for preferential IVM training that prioritizes high-quality data samples.
Experimental results on generic multimodal tasks such as VQA and embodied
robotic control demonstrate the versatility of IVM, which as a plug-and-play tool,
significantly boosts the performance of diverse multimodal models, yielding new
state-of-the-art results across challenging multimodal benchmarks. Code, model
and data are available at https://github.com/2toinf/IVM.

1

Introduction

Multimodal instruction following is a fundamental multimodal task, powering a wide-range of
applications such as visual question answering (VQA) [18], visual captioning [1, 41], and embodied
robotic control [14]. To effectively solve this task, one critical capability required is nuanced imagelanguage grounding, which current multimodal models grow implicitly and slowly through dataintensive end-to-end training without explicit grounding supervisions. Two challenges emerge in this
indirect learning of image-instruction alignment: 1) How to accurately localize targeted image regions
that corresponds to a specific textual instruction, as illustrated in Figure 1. 2) How to generalize to
diverse visual representations (e.g., same object with different colors, compositions, or backgrounds)
that reflect similar textual instruction (e.g., Q3 in Figure 1). Lacking an effective and direct solution
to these challenges, the most advanced Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) [1, 6, 41, 14] still suffer
from hallucinations even when trained with high-quality data in the magnitude of billions [34].
We introduce Instruction-guided Visual Masking (IVM), a versatile plug-and-play model designed
to enhance multimodal instruction following via nuanced surgical visual grounding. To eliminate
the distraction of instruction-irrelevant visual regions, IVM automatically masks out these regions to
sharpen the focus of instruction following, and meticulously crops visual input to tailor for a specific
* Equal contribution
†

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

