Optimal Algorithms for Learning Partitions with
Faulty Oracles

Adela Frances DePavia
University of Chicago
adepavia@uchicago.edu

Olga Medrano Martín del Campo
University of Chicago
omedranomdelc@uchicago.edu

Erasmo Tani
University of Chicago
etani@uchicago.edu

Abstract
We consider a clustering problem where a learner seeks to partition a finite set by
querying a faulty oracle. This models applications where learners crowdsource
information from non-expert human workers or conduct noisy experiments to
determine group structure. The learner aims to exactly recover a partition by
submitting queries of the form “are u and v in the same group?” for any pair
of elements u and v in the set. Moreover, because the learner only has access
to faulty sources of information, they require an error-tolerant algorithm for this
task: i.e. they must fully recover the correct partition, even if up to ℓ answers are
incorrect, for some error-tolerance parameter ℓ. We study the question: for any
given error-tolerance ℓ, what is the minimum number of queries needed to learn a
finite set partition of n elements into k groups? We design algorithms for this task
and prove that they achieve optimal query complexity. To analyze our algorithms,
we first highlight a connection between this task and correlation clustering. We
then use this connection to build a Rényi-Ulam style analytical framework for
this problem, which yields matching lower bounds. Our analysis also reveals an
inherent asymmetry between the query complexity necessary to be robust against
false negative errors as opposed to false positive errors.

1

Introduction

Learning cluster structure from data is a fundamental task in machine learning. While the statistical
setting is typically concerned with using batch data to approximately recover cluster structure with
high probability, some applications allow for the learner to make explicit queries, and some require
exact recovery guarantees.
We highlight two key settings. In several scientific domains, particularly bioinformatics, researchers
conduct physical experiments to learn whether two objects are part of the same class [9, 11, 20, 35].
Another major application is learning cluster structure by collecting information from human workers
via crowdsourcing services [15, 30, 37]. While some traditional methods focus on querying workers
for class labels, alternative approaches use simpler same-cluster queries. For example, Vinayak and
Hassibi [37] point out that, given images of birds, it may be easier for non-experts to correctly answer
the question “Do these two birds belong to the same species?” as opposed to “What species does
this bird belong to?” In both of these application domains, the learner typically seeks to minimize
the number of queries made, as queries require carrying out potentially expensive measurements or
time-consuming experiments.
We consider a very general setting and develop algorithms that make no assumptions about the
specific type of data involved, but rather rely solely on the same-cluster queries to infer structure.
In particular, we model this task by assuming that the algorithm only interfaces with the data via a
same-cluster oracle. In this setting, the learner obtains information about a hidden partition C of a
finite set V by repeatedly choosing two elements u, v ∈ V and asking questions of the form “Are u
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

