Making Offline RL Online: Collaborative World
Models for Offline Visual Reinforcement Learning

Qi Wang1,2∗ Junming Yang3∗ Yunbo Wang1† Xin Jin2 Wenjun Zeng2 Xiaokang Yang1
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
Ningbo Institute of Digital Twin, Eastern Institute of Technology, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, China
https://qiwang067.github.io/coworld

Abstract
Training offline RL models using visual inputs poses two significant challenges, i.e.,
the overfitting problem in representation learning and the overestimation bias for
expected future rewards. Recent work has attempted to alleviate the overestimation
bias by encouraging conservative behaviors. This paper, in contrast, tries to build
more flexible constraints for value estimation without impeding the exploration
of potential advantages. The key idea is to leverage off-the-shelf RL simulators,
which can be easily interacted with in an online manner, as the “test bed” for offline
policies. To enable effective online-to-offline knowledge transfer, we introduce
CoWorld, a model-based RL approach that mitigates cross-domain discrepancies
in state and reward spaces. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of
CoWorld, outperforming existing RL approaches by large margins.

1

Introduction

Learning control policies with visual observations can be challenging due to high interaction costs
with the physical world. Offline reinforcement learning (RL) is a promising approach to address
this challenge [11, 21, 37, 3, 65]. However, the direct use of current offline RL algorithms in visual
control tasks presents two primary difficulties. Initially, offline visual RL is more prone to overfitting
issues during representation learning, as it involves extracting hidden states from the limited, highdimensional visual inputs. Moreover, like its state-space counterpart, offline visual RL is susceptible
to the challenge of value overestimation, as we observe from existing methods [22, 16].
Improving offline visual RL remains an underexplored research area. We aim to balance between overestimating and over-conservatism
of the value function to avoid excessively penalizing the estimated values beyond the offline data distribution. Intuitively, we should
not overly constrain the exploration with potential advantages. Our basic idea, as illustrated in Figure 1, is to leverage readily available online simulators for related (not necessarily identical) visual control tasks as auxiliary source domains, so that we can frame
offline visual RL as an offline-online-offline
transfer learning problem to learn mildly conservative policies.
∗
†

Rich interac1ons

Value
constraint
Online

environment

Source world model
State
alignment

Oﬄine dataset

Reward
alignment

Target world model

Source agent
State
explora8on

Target agent

Figure 1: Our approach for offline visual RL.

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author: Yunbo Wang <yunbow@sjtu.edu.cn>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

