Non-Asymptotic Uncertainty Quantification in
High-Dimensional Learning

Frederik Hoppe∗
RWTH Aachen University
hoppe@mathc.rwth-aachen.de
Hannah Laus∗
TU Munich & MCML
hannah.laus@tum.de

Claudio Mayrink Verdun∗
Harvard University
claudioverdun@seas.harvard.edu

Felix Krahmer
TU Munich & MCML
felix.krahmer@tum.de

Holger Rauhut
LMU Munich & MCML
rauhut@math.lmu.de

Abstract
Uncertainty quantification (UQ) is a crucial but challenging task in many highdimensional learning problems to increase the confidence of a given predictor.
We develop a new data-driven approach for UQ in regression that applies both to
classical optimization approaches such as the LASSO as well as to neural networks.
One of the most notable UQ techniques is the debiased LASSO, which modifies
the LASSO to allow for the construction of asymptotic confidence intervals by
decomposing the estimation error into a Gaussian and an asymptotically vanishing
bias component. However, in real-world problems with finite-dimensional data, the
bias term is often too significant to disregard, resulting in overly narrow confidence
intervals. Our work rigorously addresses this issue and derives a data-driven
adjustment that corrects the confidence intervals for a large class of predictors by
estimating the means and variances of the bias terms from training data, exploiting
high-dimensional concentration phenomena. This gives rise to non-asymptotic
confidence intervals, which can help avoid overestimating certainty in critical
applications such as MRI diagnosis. Importantly, our analysis extends beyond
sparse regression to data-driven predictors like neural networks, enhancing the
reliability of model-based deep learning. Our findings bridge the gap between
established theory and the practical applicability of such methods.

1

Introduction

The past few years have witnessed remarkable advances in high-dimensional statistical models,
inverse problems, and learning methods for solving them. In particular, we have seen a surge of new
methodologies and algorithms that have revolutionized our ability to extract insights from complex,
high-dimensional data [1–3]. Also, the theoretical underpinnings of the techniques in these fields
have achieved tremendous success. However, the development of rigorous methods for quantifying
the uncertainty associated with their estimates and underlying parameters, such as constructing
confidence intervals for a given solution, has lagged behind, with much of the underlying theory
remaining elusive.
In high-dimensional statistics, for example, even for classical regularized estimators such as the
LASSO [4–6], it was shown that a closed-form characterization of the probability distribution of
the estimator in simple terms is not possible, e.g., [7, Theorem 5.1]. This, in turn, implies that it is
very challenging to establish rigorous confidence intervals that would quantify the uncertainty of
∗: Equal contribution. Correspondence to hoppe@mathc.rwth-aachen.de.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

