On Mesa-Optimization in Autoregressively Trained
Transformers: Emergence and Capability

Chenyu Zheng1,2 , Wei Huang3 , Rongzhen Wang1,2 , Guoqiang Wu4 ,
Jun Zhu5 , Chongxuan Li1,2∗
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
3
RIKEN AIP 4 School of Software, Shandong University
5
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., BNRist Center, THU-Bosch ML Center, Tsinghua University
{cyzheng,wangrz,chongxuanli}@ruc.edu.cn; wei.huang.vr@riken.jp;
guoqiangwu@sdu.edu.cn; dcszj@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Autoregressively trained transformers have brought a profound revolution to the
world, especially with their in-context learning (ICL) ability to address downstream
tasks. Recently, several studies suggest that transformers learn a mesa-optimizer
during autoregressive (AR) pretraining to implement ICL. Namely, the forward
pass of the trained transformer is equivalent to optimizing an inner objective
function in-context. However, whether the practical non-convex training dynamics
will converge to the ideal mesa-optimizer is still unclear. Towards filling this
gap, we investigate the non-convex dynamics of a one-layer linear causal selfattention model autoregressively trained by gradient flow, where the sequences are
generated by an AR process xt+1 = W xt . First, under a certain condition of data
distribution, we prove that an autoregressively trained transformer learns W by
implementing one step of gradient descent to minimize an ordinary least squares
c for next-token prediction,
(OLS) problem in-context. It then applies the learned W
thereby verifying the mesa-optimization hypothesis. Next, under the same data
conditions, we explore the capability limitations of the obtained mesa-optimizer.
We show that a stronger assumption related to the moments of data is the sufficient
and necessary condition that the learned mesa-optimizer recovers the distribution.
Besides, we conduct exploratory analyses beyond the first data condition and prove
that generally, the trained transformer will not perform vanilla gradient descent for
the OLS problem. Finally, our simulation results verify the theoretical results, and
the code is available at https://github.com/ML-GSAI/MesaOpt-AR-Transformer.

1

Introduction

Foundation models based on transformers [1] have revolutionized the AI community in lots of
fields, such as language modeling [2; 3; 4; 5; 6], computer vision [7; 8; 9; 10] and multi-modal
learning [11; 12; 13; 14; 15]. The crux behind these large models is a very simple yet profound
strategy named autoregressive (AR) pretraining, which encourages transformers to predict the next
token when a context is given. In terms of the trained transformers, one of their most intriguing
properties is the in-context learning (ICL) ability [2], which allows them to adapt their computation
and perform downstream tasks based on the information (e.g. examples) provided in the context
without any updates to their parameters. However, the reason underlying the emergence of ICL ability
is still poorly understood.
∗

Correspondence to Chongxuan Li.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

