Warm-starting Push-Relabel

Sami Davies∗ , Sergei Vassilvitskii† , Yuyan Wang†
∗
UC Berkeley, † Google Research – New York
davies@berkeley.edu, {sergeiv,wangyy}@google.com

Abstract
Push-Relabel is one of the most celebrated network flow algorithms. Maintaining
a pre-flow that saturates a cut, it enjoys better theoretical and empirical running
time than other flow algorithms, such as Ford-Fulkerson. In practice, Push-Relabel
is even faster than what theoretical guarantees can promise, in part because of
the use of good heuristics for seeding and updating the iterative algorithm. However, it remains unclear how to run Push-Relabel on an arbitrary initialization
that is not necessarily a pre-flow or cut-saturating. We provide the first theoretical guarantees for warm-starting Push-Relabel with a predicted flow, where our
learning-augmented version benefits from fast running time when the predicted
flow is close to an optimal flow, while maintaining robust worst-case guarantees.
Interestingly, our algorithm uses the gap relabeling heuristic, which has long been
employed in practice, even though prior to our work there was no rigorous theoretical justification for why it can lead to run-time improvements. We then provide
experiments that show our warm-started Push-Relabel also works well in practice.

1

Introduction

Maximum flow is a fundamental problem in combinatorial optimization. It admits many algorithms,
from the famous Ford-Fulkerson algorithm [FF56] which employs augmenting paths, to recent
near-linear time scaling based approaches [CKL+ 22]. In practice, however, the Push-Relabel family
of algorithms remains one of the most versatile and is often the standard benchmark to which new
flow algorithms are compared [Wil19, CH09].
Designed by Goldberg and Tarjan [GT88], the core Push-Relabel algorithm (Algorithm 1) has
running time O(n2 m), where n and m are the number of vertices and edges in the network. Given
the popularity of max-flow as a subroutine in large-scale applications [BK04, KBR07, Wil19], it is
no surprise that improving running times has been a subject of a lot of study, with multiple heuristic
methods being developed [JM+ 93, CG95, AKMO97, Gol08].
To complement these heuristics, researchers studied max-flow in the algorithms with predictions
framework (or learning-augmented algorithms) [MV22]. Two groups initiated the study and proved
that the running time of the Edmonds-Karp selection rule for Ford Fulkerson can be improved from
O(m2 n) to O(m||f ∗ − fˆ||1 ), where f ∗ is an optimal flow on the network and fˆ is a predicted
flow [DMVW23, PZ22]. These algorithms start the augmenting path algorithms from a feasible
flow obtained from the predicted flow, then bound the number of augmentations by the ℓ1 -distance
between the predicted and maximum flows.
While these works have improved upon the cold-start, non learning-augmented versions, it is important
to note that they have improved upon sub-optimal algorithms for max flow. In this work, we show
how to warm-start Push-Relabel, whose cold-start version is nearly state-of-the-art for the maximum
flow problem. This directly addresses the challenge specified in [DMVW23] on bringing a rigorous
analysis for warm-starting non-augmenting path style algorithms. In the process of doing so, we
provide a theoretical explanation for the success of the popular gap relabeling heuristic in improving
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

