Do LLMs dream of elephants (when told not to)?
Latent concept association and associative memory in
transformers
Yibo Jiang1 , Goutham Rajendran2 , Pradeep Ravikumar2 , and Bryon Aragam3
2

1
Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University
3
Booth School of Business, University of Chicago

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have the capacity to store and recall facts.
Through experimentation with open-source models, we observe that this ability to retrieve facts can be easily manipulated by changing contexts, even without
altering their factual meanings. These findings highlight that LLMs might behave
like an associative memory model where certain tokens in the contexts serve as
clues to retrieving facts. We mathematically explore this property by studying how
transformers, the building blocks of LLMs, can complete such memory tasks. We
study a simple latent concept association problem with a one-layer transformer
and we show theoretically and empirically that the transformer gathers information
using self-attention and uses the value matrix for associative memory.

1

Introduction

What is the first thing that would come to mind if you were asked not to think of an elephant? Chances
are, you would be thinking about elephants. What if we ask the same thing to Large Language Models
(LLMs)? Obviously, one would expect the outputs of LLMs to be heavily influenced by tokens in the
context [Bro+20]. Could such influence potentially prime LLMs into changing outputs in a nontrivial
way? To gain a deeper understanding, we focus on one specific task called fact retrieval [Men+22;
Men+23] where expected output answers are given. LLMs, which are trained on vast amounts of
data, are known to have the capability to store and recall facts [Men+22; Men+23; DCAT21; Mit+21;
Mit+22; Dai+21]. This ability raises natural questions: How robust is fact retrieval, and to what extent
does it depend on semantic meanings within contexts? What does it reveal about memory in LLMs?
In this paper, we first demonstrate that fact retrieval is not robust and LLMs can be easily fooled
by varying contexts. For example, when asked to complete “The Eiffel Tower is in the city of”,
GPT-2 [Rad+19] answers with “Paris”. However, when prompted with “The Eiffel Tower is not
in Chicago. The Eiffel Tower is in the city of”, GPT-2 responds with “Chicago”. See Figure 1 for
more examples, including Gemma and LLaMA. On the other hand, humans do not find the two
sentences factually confusing and would answer “Paris” in both cases. We call this phenomenon
context hijacking. Importantly, these findings suggest that LLMs might behave like an associative
memory model. Specifically, we refer to an associative memory model in which LLMs rely on
certain tokens in contexts to guide the retrieval of memories, even if such associations formed are
not inherently semantically meaningful. This contrasts with the ideal behavior, where LLMs would
generalize by understanding new contexts, reasoning through them, and integrating prior knowledge.
This associative memory perspective raises further interpretability questions about how LLMs form
such associations. Answering these questions can facilitate the development of more robust LLMs.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

