Learning Distributions on Manifolds
with Free-Form Flows
Peter Sorrenson*, Felix Draxler*, Armand Rousselot*, Sander Hummerich, Ullrich Köthe
Computer Vision and Learning Lab, Heidelberg University
*equal contribution, firstname.lastname@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
We propose Manifold Free-Form Flows (M-FFF), a simple new generative model
for data on manifolds. The existing approaches to learning a distribution on
arbitrary manifolds are expensive at inference time, since sampling requires solving
a differential equation. Our method overcomes this limitation by sampling in a
single function evaluation. The key innovation is to optimize a neural network
via maximum likelihood on the manifold, possible by adapting the free-form
flow framework to Riemannian manifolds. M-FFF is straightforwardly adapted
to any manifold with a known projection. It consistently matches or outperforms
previous single-step methods specialized to specific manifolds. It is typically two
orders of magnitude faster than multi-step methods based on diffusion or flow
matching, achieving better likelihoods in several experiments. We provide our code
at https://github.com/vislearn/FFF.

1

Introduction

Generative models have achieved remarkable success in various domains such as image synthesis
[Rombach et al., 2022], natural language processing [Brown et al., 2020], scientific applications [Noé
et al., 2019] and more. However, the approaches are not directly applicable when dealing with data
inherently structured in non-Euclidean spaces, which is common in fields such as the natural sciences,
computer vision, and robotics. Examples include earth science data on a sphere, the orientation of
real-world objects given as a rotation matrix in SO(3), or data on special geometries modeled by
meshes or signed distance functions. Representing such data naively using internal coordinates, such
as angles, can lead to topological issues, causing discontinuities or artifacts.
Luckily, many generative models can be adapted to handle data on arbitrary manifolds. However, the
predominant methods compatible with arbitrary Riemannian manifolds involve solving differential
equations—stochastic (SDEs) or ordinary (ODEs)—for sampling and density estimation [Rozen et al.,
2021, Mathieu and Nickel, 2020, Huang et al., 2022, De Bortoli et al., 2022, Chen and Lipman, 2024].
These methods are computationally intensive due to the need for numerous function evaluations
during integration, slowing down inference.
To address these challenges, we introduce a novel approach for modeling distributions on arbitrary
Riemannian manifolds that circumvents the computational burden of previous methods. This is
achieved by using a single feed-forward neural network on an embedding space as a generator, with
outputs projected to the manifold (Fig. 1). We learn this network as a normalizing flow, facilitated by
generalizing the free-form flow framework [Draxler et al., 2024, Sorrenson et al., 2024] to Riemannian
manifolds. The core innovation is estimating the gradient of the negative log-likelihood within the
tangent space of the manifold.
In particular, we make the following contributions:
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

