A Systematic Review of NeurIPS Dataset Management
Practices
Yiwei Wu
University of Texas at Austin
yw25689@utexas.edu

Leah Ajmani
University of Minnesota
ajman004@umn.edu

Shayne Longpre
MIT
slongpre@media.mit.edu
Hanlin Li
University of Texas at Austin
lihanlin@utexas.edu

Abstract
As new machine learning methods demand larger training datasets, researchers
and developers face significant challenges in dataset management. Although ethics
reviews, documentation, and checklists have been established, it remains uncertain
whether consistent dataset management practices exist across the community. This
lack of a comprehensive overview hinders our ability to diagnose and address
fundamental tensions and ethical issues related to managing large datasets. We
present a systematic review of datasets published at the NeurIPS Datasets and
Benchmarks track, focusing on four key aspects: provenance, distribution, ethical
disclosure, and licensing. Our findings reveal that dataset provenance is often
unclear due to ambiguous filtering and curation processes. Additionally, a variety
of sites are used for dataset hosting, but only a few offer structured metadata and
version control. These inconsistencies underscore the urgent need for standardized
data infrastructures for the publication and management of datasets.

1

Introduction

Datasets serve as a fundamental bedrock for machine learning models. While the construction of
larger datasets has propelled advancements in the field, it has also revealed negative implications
of these practices [33]. Issues include a lack of consent and compensation [2], documentation debt
[4, 17], legal risks [31], and malign content [6, 5, 13, 12].
To incentivize responsible management of datasets, the research community proposed various procedures, e.g. ethics review[19], dataset licensing [11], and standardized dataset documentation [17].
While these toolkits have promoted individual reflections to be more conscious of ethical and legal
issues in sharing datasets, limited work examined the practices of data management at scale [42]. To
what extent do data management practices align or vary among researchers?
The lack of a comprehensive overview of data management practices hampers our ability to systematically diagnose and address key tensions in managing large datasets. To tackle this issue, we reviewed
The 38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and
Benchmarks. Do not distribute.

