Can LLMs Solve Molecule Puzzles? A Multimodal
Benchmark for Molecular Structure Elucidation
Kehan Guo1∗, Bozhao Nan2∗, Yujun Zhou1 , Taicheng Guo1 , Zhichun Guo1 , Mihir Surve2 ,
Zhenwen Liang1 , Nitesh V. Chawla1 , Olaf Wiest2 , Xiangliang Zhang1†
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame
2
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Notre Dame
{kguo2,bnan,xzhang33}@nd.edu
https://kehanguo2.github.io/Molpuzzle.io/

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown significant problem-solving capabilities across predictive and generative tasks in chemistry. However, their proficiency
in multi-step chemical reasoning remains underexplored. We introduce a new
challenge: molecular structure elucidation, which involves deducing a molecule’s
structure from various types of spectral data. Solving such a molecular puzzle,
akin to solving crossword puzzles, poses reasoning challenges that require integrating clues from diverse sources and engaging in iterative hypothesis testing. To
address this challenging problem with LLMs, we present MolPuzzle, a benchmark
comprising 217 instances of structure elucidation, which feature over 23,000 QA
samples presented in a sequential puzzle-solving process, involving three interlinked sub-tasks: molecule understanding, spectrum interpretation, and molecule
construction. Our evaluation of 12 LLMs reveals that the best-performing LLM,
GPT-4o, performs significantly worse than humans, with only a small portion
(1.4%) of its answers exactly matching the ground truth. However, it performs
nearly perfectly in the first subtask of molecule understanding, achieving accuracy
close to 100%. This discrepancy highlights the potential of developing advanced
LLMs with improved chemical reasoning capabilities in the other two sub-tasks.
Our MolPuzzle dataset and evaluation code are available at this link.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

19

20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27

1

Introduction

Artificial intelligence (AI) is revolutionizing the field of chemistry, influencing diverse sectors such as
industrial chemical engineering [1, 2], drug discovery [3], and chemistry education [4]. In particular,
recent studies have highlighted the success of large language models (LLMs) in addressing predictive
challenges in chemistry, including molecular property prediction [5], reaction prediction [6], and
experiment automation [7]. These advancements suggest significant potential for AI to enhance
efficiency and innovation across these critical areas.
We introduce a new chemical challenge to AI, molecular structure elucidation. While this critical
task has been explored in other contexts, it remains unexplored for large language models (LLMs),
∗

Both authors contributed equally to this work, supported by the NSF Center for Computer-Assisted Synthesis
(C-CAS), https://ccas.nd.edu
†
Corresponding author.
Submitted to the 38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets
and Benchmarks. Do not distribute.

