Generalizing Consistency Policy to Visual RL with
Prioritized Proximal Experience Regularization

Haoran Li
Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
lihaoran2015@ia.ac.cn

Zhennan Jiang
Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
jiangzhennan2024@ia.ac.cn

Yuhui Chen
Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
chenyuhui2022@ia.ac.cn

Dongbin Zhao∗
Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
dongbin.zhao@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
With high-dimensional state spaces, visual reinforcement learning (RL) faces
significant challenges in exploitation and exploration, resulting in low sample
efficiency and training stability. As a time-efficient diffusion model, although
consistency models have been validated in online state-based RL, it is still an open
question whether it can be extended to visual RL. In this paper, we investigate the
impact of non-stationary distribution and the actor-critic framework on consistency
policy in online RL, and find that consistency policy was unstable during the
training, especially in visual RL with the high-dimensional state space. To this end,
we suggest sample-based entropy regularization to stabilize the policy training, and
propose a consistency policy with prioritized proximal experience regularization
(CP3ER) to improve sample efficiency. CP3ER achieves new state-of-the-art
(SOTA) performance in 21 tasks across DeepMind control suite and Meta-world. To
the best of our knowledge, CP3ER is the first method to apply diffusion/consistency
models to visual RL and demonstrates the potential of consistency models in visual
RL. Our project page is hosted at https://jzndd.github.io/CP3ER-Page/.

1

Introduction

RL has achieved remarkable results in many fields, such as video games [1], Go [2], Chess [3, 4] and
robotics [5–8]. Since it is hard to parameterize the complex policy distribution over high-dimensional
state and continuous action spaces, the performance and stability of visual RL are still unsatisfactory.
As the most common policy distribution, Gaussian distribution is easy to sample, but its unimodal
nature limits the expressiveness to represent complex behaviors [9]. While complex distributions have
the rich, expressive power to improve the exploration ability [10], the difficulty of sampling makes it
hard to apply to online RL directly. Parameterizing the complex policy distribution to balance ease of
sampling and expressiveness is a bottleneck to improving the efficiency of visual RL.
As an emerging generation model, the diffusion model [11] stands out in fields such as image
generation [12–14] and video generation [15, 16] with its ability to model complex distributions and
ease of sampling characteristics. These properties have also been explored for learning a complex
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

