WorkArena++: Towards Compositional Planning
and Reasoning-based Common Knowledge Work Tasks

Léo Boisvert∗123 Megh Thakkar∗124 Maxime Gasse†123 Massimo Caccia†1
Thibault Le Sellier De Chezelles†13 Quentin Cappart23 Nicolas Chapados123
Alexandre Lacoste‡1 Alexandre Drouin‡12
1
ServiceNow Research, 2 Mila, 3 Polytechnique Montréal, 4 Chandar Research Lab
{leo.boisvert, megh.thakkar, alexandre.drouin}@servicenow.com

Abstract
The ability of large language models (LLMs) to mimic human-like intelligence
has led to a surge in LLM-based autonomous agents. Though recent LLMs seem
capable of planning and reasoning given user instructions, their effectiveness in
applying these capabilities for autonomous task solving remains underexplored.
This is especially true in enterprise settings, where automated agents hold the
promise of a high impact. To fill this gap, we propose WorkArena++, a novel
benchmark consisting of 682 tasks corresponding to realistic workflows routinely
performed by knowledge workers. WorkArena++ is designed to evaluate the
planning, problem-solving, logical/arithmetic reasoning, retrieval, and contextual
understanding abilities of web agents. Our empirical studies across state-of-the-art
LLMs and vision-language models (VLMs), as well as human workers, reveal
several challenges for such models to serve as useful assistants in the workplace.
In addition to the benchmark, we provide a mechanism to effortlessly generate
thousands of ground-truth observation/action traces, which can be used for
fine-tuning existing models. Overall, we expect this work to serve as a useful
resource to help the community progress toward capable autonomous agents. The
benchmark can be found at https://github.com/ServiceNow/WorkArena.

1

Introduction

In 2024, the average adult spends about 400 minutes every day interacting with computer software
and the internet [DataReportal, 2024]. While some of this time is devoted to productive work,
entertainment or creative endeavors, a significant portion is consumed by monotonous, low-value
tasks, particularly in enterprise settings. Employees often engage in tedious tasks such as searching for
information hidden deeply in knowledge bases, coordinating group discussions to schedule meetings,
or filling expense reports in counter-intuitive user interfaces designed for functionality rather than
user-friendliness [Bailey and Konstan, 2006, Norman, 2013]. One easily envisions a future where
autonomous assistants—AI agents—handle these tasks, allowing humans to focus on more complex,
skill-intensive work that generates greater value. Recent advances in the reasoning and planning
capacities of large language models (LLMs), with developments such as Chain-of-Thought [Wei et al.,
2022a], ReAct [Yao et al., 2023], and Tree-of-Thought [Yao et al., 2024] (see [Huang et al., 2024,
Wang et al., 2024b] for a review) suggest that this future might be within reach.
While the development of autonomous agents has long been a major research topic both in academia
and industry, the recent advances in LLM capabilities have led to a massive surge of interest for
∗

Equal contribution.
Core contributors.
‡
Equal supervision.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

