CHASE: Learning Convex Hull Adaptive Shift for
Skeleton-based Multi-Entity Action Recognition

Yuhang Wen
Sun Yat-sen University
wenyh29@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Songtao Wu
Sony R&D Center China
Songtao.Wu@sony.com

Mengyuan Liu∗
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence
Peking University, Shenzhen Graduate School
nkliuyifang@gmail.com
Beichen Ding∗
Sun Yat-sen University
dingbch@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Skeleton-based multi-entity action recognition is a challenging task aiming to
identify interactive actions or group activities involving multiple diverse entities.
Existing models for individuals often fall short in this task due to the inherent
distribution discrepancies among entity skeletons, leading to suboptimal backbone optimization. To this end, we introduce a Convex Hull Adaptive Shift based
multi-Entity action recognition method (CHASE), which mitigates inter-entity distribution gaps and unbiases subsequent backbones. Specifically, CHASE comprises
a learnable parameterized network and an auxiliary objective. The parameterized
network achieves plausible, sample-adaptive repositioning of skeleton sequences
through two key components. First, the Implicit Convex Hull Constrained Adaptive
Shift ensures that the new origin of the coordinate system is within the skeleton
convex hull. Second, the Coefficient Learning Block provides a lightweight parameterization of the mapping from skeleton sequences to their specific coefficients
in convex combinations. Moreover, to guide the optimization of this network for
discrepancy minimization, we propose the Mini-batch Pair-wise Maximum Mean
Discrepancy as the additional objective. CHASE operates as a sample-adaptive
normalization method to mitigate inter-entity distribution discrepancies, thereby
reducing data bias and improving the subsequent classifier’s multi-entity action
recognition performance. Extensive experiments on six datasets, including NTU
Mutual 11/26, H2O, Assembly101, Collective Activity and Volleyball, consistently
verify our approach by seamlessly adapting to single-entity backbones and boosting their performance in multi-entity scenarios. Our code is publicly available
at https://github.com/Necolizer/CHASE.

1

Introduction

Multi-entity action recognition, a challenging task derived from action recognition [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9], aims to find the optimal estimator of the mapping from multi-entity motions to semantic labels,
where entities involved can range from human bodies [10, 11], hands [12] to various objects [13].
Recent approaches predominantly rely on skeletal data for addressing this challenge [10, 11, 14], given
that skeletons serve as a concise representation of spatiotemporal features [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21].
This task has broad applications in human-robot interaction [22, 23], scene understanding [24, 25, 26,
27, 28], human motion analysis [29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34], etc.
∗

Corresponding Authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

