Fast Last-Iterate Convergence of Learning in Games
Requires Forgetful Algorithms

Yang Cai
Yale
yang.cai@yale.edu
Christian Kroer
Columbia
ck2945@columbia.edu

Gabriele Farina
MIT
gfarina@mit.edu

Julien Grand-Clément
HEC Paris
grand-clement@hec.fr

Chung-Wei Lee
USC
leechung@usc.edu

Haipeng Luo
USC
haipengl@usc.edu

Weiqiang Zheng
Yale
weiqiang.zheng@yale.edu

Abstract
Self-play via online learning is one of the premier ways to solve large-scale twoplayer zero-sum games, both in theory and practice. Particularly popular algorithms include optimistic multiplicative weights update (OMWU) and optimistic
gradient-descent-ascent (OGDA). While both algorithms enjoy O(1/T ) ergodic
convergence to Nash equilibrium in two-player zero-sum games, OMWU offers
several advantages including logarithmic dependence on the size of the payoff
matrix and Õ(1/T ) convergence to coarse correlated equilibria even in generalsum games. However, in terms of last-iterate convergence in two-player zero-sum
games, an increasingly popular
√ topic in this area, OGDA guarantees that the duality
gap shrinks at a rate of (1/ T ), while the best existing last-iterate convergence for
OMWU depends on some game-dependent constant that could be arbitrarily large.
This begs the question: is this potentially slow last-iterate convergence an inherent
disadvantage of OMWU, or is the current analysis too loose? Somewhat surprisingly, we show that the former is true. More generally, we prove that a broad class
of algorithms that do not forget the past quickly all suffer the same issue: for any
arbitrarily small δ > 0, there exists a 2 × 2 matrix game such that the algorithm admits a constant duality gap even after 1/δ rounds. This class of algorithms includes
OMWU and other standard optimistic follow-the-regularized-leader algorithms.

1

Introduction

Self-play via online learning is one of the premier ways to solve large-scale two-player zero-sum
games. Major examples include super-human AIs for Go, Poker [Brown and Sandholm, 2018], and
human-level AI for Stratego [Perolat et al., 2022] and alignment of large language models [Munos
et al., 2023]. In particular, Optimistic Multiplicative Weights Update (OMWU) and Optimistic
Gradient Descent-Ascent (OGDA) are two of the most well-known online learning algorithms. When
applied to learning a two-player zero-sum game via self-play for T rounds, the average iterates of
both algorithms are known to be an O(1/T )-approximate Nash equilibrium [Rakhlin and Sridharan,
2013, Syrgkanis et al., 2015], while other algorithms, such as vanilla Multiplicative Weights Update
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

