H Y S YNTH: Context-Free LLM Approximation for
Guiding Program Synthesis

Shraddha Barke
UC San Diego
San Diego, USA

Emmanuel Anaya Gonzalez
UC San Diego
San Diego, USA

Saketh Ram Kasibatla
UC San Diego
San Diego, USA

sbarke@ucsd.edu

fanayagonzalez@ucsd.edu

skasibatla@ucsd.edu

Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick
UC San Diego
San Diego, USA

Nadia Polikarpova
UC San Diego
San Diego, USA

tbergkirkpatrick@ucsd.edu

npolikarpova@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Many structured prediction and reasoning tasks can be framed as program synthesis
problems, where the goal is to generate a program in a domain-specific language
(DSL) that transforms input data into the desired output. Unfortunately, purely
neural approaches, such as large language models (LLMs), often fail to produce
fully correct programs in unfamiliar DSLs, while purely symbolic methods based
on combinatorial search scale poorly to complex problems. Motivated by these
limitations, we introduce a hybrid approach, where LLM completions for a given
task are used to learn a task-specific, context-free surrogate model, which is then
used to guide program synthesis. We evaluate this hybrid approach on three
domains, and show that it outperforms both unguided search and direct sampling
from LLMs, as well as existing program synthesizers.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) demonstrate impressive capabilities in various domains, but they
continue to struggle with tasks that require precision—e.g. structured prediction, reasoning, counting,
or data transformation—when direct task examples are not prevalent in their training data [8, 12, 23,
31, 38, 40, 45]. As one example, consider the Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (A RC) [14], which
was designed as a benchmark for human-like structured reasoning. A RC tasks are grid-based puzzles,
such as one depicted in Fig. 1a. This puzzle consists of three training examples, which are pairs of
input and output grids; the goal is to infer the transformation that maps the input to the output, and
then apply this transformation to the test grid. The A RC benchmark’s emphasis on generalization
and few-shot learning has rendered it challenging to solve with purely machine learning techniques:
state-of-the-art generative models like GPT-4 hardly solve more than 10% of the tasks in the dataset
when asked to predict the test output, even with the help of advanced prompting techniques [25].
In fact, the leading entries in the A RC Kaggle competition [1] tackle this task using Programming-byExample (PBE): instead of predicting the output directly, they search for a program that captures the
transformation occurring in the input-output examples. For example, the transformation in Fig. 1a
might be represented as the following program:
if color_of(self) = GREY ∧ is_neighbor(self, other) ∧ size_of(other) = MIN
then update_color(color_of(other))

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

(1)

