Analysing Multi-Task Regression via Random Matrix
Theory with Application to Time Series Forecasting

Romain Ilbert∗1, 2 Malik Tiomoko1 Cosme Louart3 Ambroise Odonnat1, 4
Vasilii Feofanov 1 Themis Palpanas2 Ievgen Redko1
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Paris, France 2 LIPADE, Paris Descartes University, Paris, France
3
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
4
Inria, Univ. Rennes 2, CNRS, IRISA

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a novel theoretical framework for multi-task regression,
applying random matrix theory to provide precise performance estimations, under
high-dimensional, non-Gaussian data distributions. We formulate a multi-task
optimization problem as a regularization technique to enable single-task models
to leverage multi-task learning information. We derive a closed-form solution for
multi-task optimization in the context of linear models. Our analysis provides
valuable insights by linking the multi-task learning performance to various model
statistics such as raw data covariances, signal-generating hyperplanes, noise levels, as well as the size and number of datasets. We finally propose a consistent
estimation of training and testing errors, thereby offering a robust foundation for
hyperparameter optimization in multi-task regression scenarios. Experimental validations on both synthetic and real-world datasets in regression and multivariate time
series forecasting demonstrate improvements on univariate models, incorporating
our method into the training loss and thus leveraging multivariate information.

1

Introduction

The principle of multi-task learning, which encompasses concepts such as "learning to learn" and
"knowledge transfer," offers an efficient paradigm that mirrors human intelligence. Unlike traditional
machine learning, which tackles problems on a task-specific basis with tailored algorithms, multi-task
learning leverages shared information across various tasks to enhance overall performance. This
approach not only improves accuracy but also addresses challenges related to insufficient data and
data cleaning. By analyzing diverse and multimodal data and structuring representations multi-task
learning can significantly boost general intelligence, similar to how humans integrate skills. This
concept is well-established [33] and has been successfully applied to a wide range of domains, such
as computer vision [41], natural language processing [35, 37] and biology [17, 28, 42].
Our Method. We consider the multi-task regression framework [5] with T tasks with the input space
X (t) ⊂ Rd and the output space Y (t) ⊂ Rq for t ∈ {1, . . . , T }. For each task t, we assume that we
(t)
(t)
are given nt training examples organized into the feature matrix X(t) = [x1 , . . . , xnt ] ∈ Rd×nt and
(t)
(t)
(t)
the corresponding response matrix Y(t) = [y1 , . . . , ynt ] ∈ Rq×nt , where xi ∈ X (t) represents
(t)
the i-th feature vector of the t-th task and yi ∈ Y (t) is the associated response. In order to have
a more tractable and insightful setup, we follow Romera-Paredes et al. [36] and consider the linear
multi-task regression model. In particular, we study a straightforward linear signal-plus-noise model
∗

Correspondence to: romain.ilbert@hotmail.fr.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

