Would I Lie To You? Inference Time Alignment of
Language Models using Direct Preference Heads

Avelina Asada Hadji-Kyriacou
Department of Computer Science
University of St Andrews
College Gate, St Andrews, KY16 9AJ
lhk3@st-andrews.ac.uk

Ognjen Arandjelović
Department of Computer Science
University of St Andrews
College Gate, St Andrews, KY16 9AJ
oa7@st-andrews.ac.uk

Abstract
Pre-trained Language Models (LMs) exhibit strong zero-shot and in-context learning capabilities; however, their behaviors are often difficult to control. By utilizing
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF), it is possible to fine-tune
unsupervised LMs to follow instructions and produce outputs that reflect human
preferences. Despite its benefits, RLHF has been shown to potentially harm a language model’s reasoning capabilities and introduce artifacts such as hallucinations
where the model may fabricate facts. To address this issue we introduce Direct
Preference Heads (DPH), a fine-tuning framework that enables LMs to learn human
preference signals through an auxiliary reward head without directly affecting the
output distribution of the language modeling head. We perform a theoretical analysis of our objective function and find strong ties to Conservative Direct Preference
Optimization (cDPO). Finally we evaluate our models on GLUE, RACE, and the
GPT4All evaluation suite and demonstrate that our method produces models which
achieve higher scores than those fine-tuned with Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) or
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) alone.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) is a technique that can be used to align an
agent — such as a Large Language Model (LLM) — to human preferences and lead to more truthful,
more helpful, less harmful and more preferred outputs [29]. Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO)
[36] and Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) [31] are two such alignment techniques which have
been extensively used to improve the quality of LLM outputs, leading to instruction following agents
or chat assistants which are quickly approaching human-baselines in a variety of knowledge and
reasoning tasks [4, 10, 42, 18, 24, 35, 11].
However, recent research has shown that RLHF may actually hurt an LLM’s reasoning abilities rather
than improve it. One study [5] discovered that performing alignment during the Supervised FineTuning (SFT) stage of training may lead to worse performance on reasoning benchmarks, and another
[3] that SFT alone outperforms RLHF for smaller models with the benefits of RLHF only emerging
for models with more than 1 billion parameters. Ouyang et al. [29] also report an increased tendency
for RLHF models to make up information in closed domain tasks (“hallucination”) compared to
models trained with SFT alone.
To combat the the risk of RLHF compromising the abilities of an LLM in favour of producing
preferable outputs we introduce Direct Preference Heads (DPH), a novel feature based approach
that optimises a reward score produced by the LLM rather than optimising the logits produced by
language modelling head. DPH can be used in combination with (or without) existing alignment
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

