A Benchmark Dataset for Event-Guided Human Pose
Estimation and Tracking in Extreme Conditions

Hoonhee Cho∗
KAIST
gnsgnsgml@kaist.ac.kr

Taewoo Kim∗
KAIST
intelpro@kaist.ac.kr

Yuhwan Jeong
KAIST
jeongyh98@kaist.ac.kr

Kuk-Jin Yoon
KAIST
kjyoon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Multi-person pose estimation and tracking have been actively researched by the
computer vision community due to their practical applicability. However, existing human pose estimation and tracking datasets have only been successful in
typical scenarios, such as those without motion blur or with well-lit conditions.
These RGB-based datasets are limited to learning under extreme motion blur situations or poor lighting conditions, making them inherently vulnerable to such
scenarios. As a promising solution, bio-inspired event cameras exhibit robustness
in extreme scenarios due to their high dynamic range and micro-second level
temporal resolution. Therefore, in this paper, we introduce a new hybrid dataset
encompassing both RGB and event data for human pose estimation and tracking
in two extreme scenarios: low-light and motion blur environments. The proposed
Event-guided Human Pose Estimation and Tracking in eXtreme Conditions (EHPTXC) dataset covers cases of motion blur caused by dynamic objects and low-light
conditions individually as well as both simultaneously. With EHPT-XC, we aim to
inspire researchers to tackle pose estimation and tracking in extreme conditions
by leveraging the advantageous of the event camera. Project pages are available at
https://github.com/Chohoonhee/EHPT-XC.

1

Introduction

Human pose estimation and tracking involve the identification and monitoring of human body parts
or significant joints. This task holds paramount importance in comprehending human activities and
analyzing movements across various domains, including rehabilitation, sports, augmented/virtual
reality, autonomous driving. Consequently, numerous datasets [10, 33, 11, 20, 30] have been
dedicated to studying human pose estimation and tracking for various applications. However, despite
the dynamic nature of human activity, most datasets assume that the subjects are well-groomed in
terms of motion and lighting conditions. Considering the reality of perceiving human motion, most
individuals move in a dynamic fashion. Moreover, human activity occurs across various times of the
day, exposing individuals to diverse lighting environments. This diversity is directly reflected in the
cameras acquiring the data. Ultimately, AI models should strive to predict human body movements
even in such varied environments.
To address this, we acquired human pose estimation and tracking dataset that tackle two extreme
cases that can occasionally arise when capturing images with cameras. Firstly, we obtained data
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

