WONDERBREAD: A Benchmark for Evaluating
Multimodal Foundation Models on Business Process
Management Tasks

Michael Wornow Avanika Narayan
Ben Viggiano Ishan S. Khare Tathagat Verma
Tibor Thompson Miguel Angel Fuentes Hernandez Sudharsan Sundar
Chloe Trujillo Krrish Chawla Rongfei Lu Justin Shen
Divya Nagaraj Joshua Martinez Vardhan Agrawal Althea Hudson
Nigam H. Shah Christopher Ré
Stanford University

Abstract
Existing ML benchmarks lack the depth and diversity of annotations needed for
evaluating models on business process management (BPM) tasks. BPM is the practice of documenting, measuring, improving, and automating enterprise workflows.
However, research has focused almost exclusively on one task – full end-to-end
automation using agents based on multimodal foundation models (FMs) like GPT-4.
This focus on automation ignores the reality of how most BPM tools are applied
today – simply documenting the relevant workflow takes 60% of the time of the
typical process optimization project. To address this gap we present
WONDERBREAD, the first benchmark for evaluating multimodal FMs on BPM tasks beyond
automation. Our contributions are: (1) a dataset containing 2928 documented workflow demonstrations; (2) 6 novel BPM tasks sourced from real-world applications
ranging from workflow documentation to knowledge transfer to process improvement; and (3) an automated evaluation harness. Our benchmark shows that while
state-of-the-art FMs can automatically generate documentation (e.g. recalling 88%
of the steps taken in a video demonstration of a workflow), they struggle to re-apply
that knowledge towards finer-grained validation of workflow completion (F1 <
0.3). We hope
WONDERBREAD encourages the development of more “humancentered” AI tooling for enterprise applications and furthers the exploration of
multimodal FMs for the broader universe of BPM tasks. We publish our dataset and
experiments here: § https://github.com/HazyResearch/wonderbread.

1

Introduction

Multimodal foundation models (FMs) such as GPT-4 [43] have the potential to revolutionize business process management (BPM), which is the discipline of measuring and improving enterprise
workflows – e.g. a physician submitting a medication order. Typical BPM projects progress in
four stages across the following BPM tasks: (1) Documentation – mapping the steps of an existing
workflow; (2) Knowledge Transfer – ensuring a shared understanding of the documented workflow;
(3) Improvement – identifying workflow inefficiencies and proposing fixes; and (4) Automation –
writing software to execute the workflow without human involvement [53, 57]. Please see Appendix
Section A.7 for a concrete example. FMs could be well-suited for these tasks due to their robust
reasoning [69, 61, 2] and visual [9, 58, 71] understanding skills.
However, existing ML benchmarks [73, 65, 18, 64] focus almost exclusively on one BPM task:
end-to-end workflow automation using agents based on multimodal FMs (see Table 1). This is
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

