Emergence of heavy tails in homogenized stochastic
gradient descent

Zhe Jiao
School of Mathematics and Statistics
Northwestern Polytechnical University
Xi’an 710129, China
zjiao@nwpu.edu.cn

Martin Keller-Ressel∗
Institute of Mathematical Stochastics
Technische Universität Dresden
01217 Dresden, Germany
martin.keller-ressel@tu-dresden.de

Abstract
It has repeatedly been observed that loss minimization by stochastic gradient descent (SGD) leads to heavy-tailed distributions of neural network parameters. Here,
we analyze a continuous diffusion approximation of SGD, called homogenized
stochastic gradient descent, and show in a regularized linear regression framework
that it leads to an asymptotically heavy-tailed parameter distribution, even though
local gradient noise is Gaussian. We give explicit upper and lower bounds on
the tail-index of the resulting parameter distribution and validate these bounds in
numerical experiments. Moreover, the explicit form of these bounds enables us to
quantify the interplay between optimization hyperparameters and the tail-index.
Doing so, we contribute to the ongoing discussion on links between heavy tails and
the generalization performance of neural networks as well as the ability of SGD to
avoid suboptimal local minima.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is the cornerstone of optimization in modern deep learning
(cf. [Bottou et al., 2018]). In contrast to deterministic methods, it introduces stochasticity to the
optimization procedure and therefore has to be analyzed from a probabilistic viewpoint. For instance,
it has been observed by Martin and Mahoney [2019], Simsekli et al. [2019], Hodgkinson and Mahoney
[2021], Gurbuzbalaban et al. [2021] and others, that the distributions of neural network parameters
under loss minimization by SGD are typically heavy-tailed. This heavy-tailed behavior has been
linked to the generalization performance of neural networks: Simsekli et al. [2019] give evidence
that the extreme realizations of heavy-tailed random variables allows SGD to escape local minima of
the loss landscape, and Hodgkinson and Mahoney [2021] argue for a negative correlation between
the parameter distributions’s tail-index and the network’s generalization performance.2 For these
reasons, it is important to understand the origin and effects of heavy-tailed behavior of neural network
parameters in SGD. An important step in this direction has been taken in [Gurbuzbalaban et al., 2021],
where the tail behavior of SGD iterates is characterized in dependence on optimization parameters,
dimension and Hessian curvature at the loss minimum. One limitation of [Gurbuzbalaban et al., 2021]
is that this link is described only qualitatively, but not quantitatively. Here, we provide an alternative
approach through analyzing homogenized stochastic gradient descent, a diffusion approximation of
SGD introduced in [Paquette et al., 2022b, Mori et al., 2022]. Leveraging Itô calculus for diffusion
processes, we are able to provide more precise bounds and estimates of the tail behavior of SGD
iterates, which we subsequently validate in numerical experiments.
∗

Center for scalable data analytics and artificial intelligence (ScaDS.ai), Leipzig/Dresden, Germany.
The tail-index is a quantitative measure of heavy-tailedness, with a smaller tail index indicating increased
heaviness of tails; see Section 2.4. See also [Raj et al., 2023, Benjamin and Simsekli, 2024] for further results on
the connection between generalization and heavy tails.
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

