Conditional Controllable Image Fusion

Bing Cao1,2

Xingxin Xu3

Pengfei Zhu1∗ Qilong Wang1

Qinghua Hu1

1

2

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
3
School of New Media and Communication, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{caobing, xuxingxin, zhupengfei, qlwang, huqinghua}@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Image fusion aims to integrate complementary information from multiple input
images acquired through various sources to synthesize a new fused image. Existing
methods usually employ distinct constraint designs tailored to specific scenes,
forming fixed fusion paradigms. However, this data-driven fusion approach is
challenging to deploy in varying scenarios, especially in rapidly changing environments. To address this issue, we propose a conditional controllable fusion (CCF)
framework for general image fusion tasks without specific training. Due to the
dynamic differences of different samples, our CCF employs specific fusion constraints for each individual in practice. Given the powerful generative capabilities
of the denoising diffusion model, we first inject the specific constraints into the
pre-trained DDPM as adaptive fusion conditions. The appropriate conditions are
dynamically selected to ensure the fusion process remains responsive to the specific
requirements in each reverse diffusion stage. Thus, CCF enables conditionally
calibrating the fused images step by step. Extensive experiments validate our
effectiveness in general fusion tasks across diverse scenarios against the competing
methods without additional training. The code is publicly available.†

1

Introduction

Image fusion aims at integrating complementary information from multi-source images, fusing a
new composite image containing richer details [1]. It has been applied in various scenarios that
single image contains incomplete information, such as multi-modal fusion (MMF) [2, 3], multiexposure fusion (MEF) [4, 5], multi-focus fusion (MFF) [6], and remote sensing fusion [2]. The
fused image inherits the strengths of both modalities, resulting in a composite with enhanced visual
effects [7]. These fusion tasks have diverse downstream applications in computer vision, including
object detection [8–10], semantic segmentation [11, 12], and medical diagnosis [13] because the
comprehensive representation of images with multi-scene information contributes to the improved
performance of applications.
Recently, numerous image fusion methods [14–17] have been proposed, such as traditional fusion
methods [18], CNN-based fusion methods [19, 20] and GAN-based methods [21]. While these
methods produce acceptable fused images in certain scenarios, they are also accompanied by significant drawbacks and limitations: (i) They are often tailored for specific scenarios or individual
tasks, limiting their adaptability across diverse applications; (ii) These methods necessitate training
and consume substantial computational resources, posing limitations in terms of time and resource
requirements. Lately, denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPM) have emerged as an iterative
∗
†

Corresponding author.
https://github.com/jehovahxu/CCF

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

