Multi-Agent Imitation Learning:
Value is Easy, Regret is Hard

Jingwu Tang
Carnegie Mellon University
jingwutang@cmu.edu

Gokul Swamy
Carnegie Mellon University
gswamy@cmu.edu

Fei Fang
Carnegie Mellon University
feifang@cmu.edu

Zhiwei Steven Wu
Carnegie Mellon University
zstevenwu@cmu.edu

Abstract
We study a multi-agent imitation learning (MAIL) problem where we take the
perspective of a learner attempting to coordinate a group of agents based on demonstrations of an expert doing so. Most prior work in MAIL essentially reduces the
problem to matching the behavior of the expert within the support of the demonstrations. While doing so is sufficient to drive the value gap between the learner and
the expert to zero under the assumption that agents are non-strategic, it does not
guarantee robustness to deviations by strategic agents. Intuitively, this is because
strategic deviations can depend on a counterfactual quantity: the coordinator’s
recommendations outside of the state distribution their recommendations induce.
In response, we initiate the study of an alternative objective for MAIL in Markov
Games we term the regret gap that explicitly accounts for potential deviations by
agents in the group. We first perform an in-depth exploration of the relationship
between the value and regret gaps. First, we show that while the value gap can be
efficiently minimized via a direct extension of single-agent IL algorithms, even
value equivalence can lead to an arbitrarily large regret gap. This implies that
achieving regret equivalence is harder than achieving value equivalence in MAIL.
We then provide a pair of efficient reductions to no-regret online convex optimization that are capable of minimizing the regret gap (a) under a coverage assumption
on the expert (MALICE) or (b) with access to a queryable expert (BLADES).

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of a mediator learning to coordinate a group of strategic agents via
recommendations of actions to take without knowledge of their underlying utility functions (e.g.
routing a group of drivers through a road network). Given the difficulty of manually specifying
the quality of a recommendation in such situations, it is natural to provide the mediator with data
of desired coordination behavior, turning our problem into one of multi-agent imitation learning
(MAIL, [27, 6, 19, 26, 11]). In our work, we explore the nuances of a fundamental MAIL question:
What is the right objective for the learner in a multi-agent imitation learning problem?
We can begin to answer this question by exploring the following scenario: consider developing a
routing application to provide personalized route recommendations (σ) to a group of users with joint
policy π (e.g. the routing policy that underlies the recommendations provided in Google Maps [3]).
As usual in imitation learning (IL), we assume we are given access to demonstrations from an expert
σE (e.g. a past iteration of the application). We can imagine two kinds of users of our application (i.e.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

