Structured Matrix Basis for Multivariate Time Series
Forecasting with Interpretable Dynamics

Xiaodan Chen1 , Xiucheng Li2 ( ), Xinyang Chen2 , Zhijun Li1 ( )
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
{21B303004@stu., lixiucheng@, chenxinyang@, lizhijun_os@}hit.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Multivariate time series forecasting is of central importance in modern intelligent
decision systems. The dynamics of multivariate time series are jointly characterized
by temporal dependencies and spatial correlations. Hence, it is equally important
to build the forecasting models from both perspectives. The real-world multivariate
time series data often presents spatial correlations that show structures and evolve
dynamically. To capture such dynamic spatial structures, the existing forecasting
approaches often rely on a two-stage learning process (learning dynamic series
representations and then generating spatial structures), which is sensitive to the
small time-window input data and has high variance. To address this, we propose a
novel forecasting model with a structured matrix basis. At its core is a dynamic
spatial structure generation function whose output space is well-constrained and
the generated structures have lower variance, meanwhile, it is more expressive
and can offer interpretable dynamics. This is achieved via a novel structured
parameterization and imposing structure regularization on the matrix basis. The
resulting forecasting model can achieve up to 8.5% improvements over the existing
methods on six benchmark datasets, and meanwhile, it enables us to gain insights
into the dynamics of underlying systems.

1

Introduction

Multivariate time series forecasting plays a pivotal role in a wide range of fields, such as traffic flow
management, electricity consumption, and weather prediction. Multivariate time series data records
quantities of interest from N series spanning over T time steps, and its underlying dynamics are
jointly characterized by the temporal correlations (intra-series dependencies) and spatial structures
(inter-series dependencies). Inspired by the advancements in Natural Language Processing, substantial
research has been proposed to apply RNNs and Transformers to capture the underlying temporal
dependencies [41, 32, 44, 45, 30]. Besides, the convolution paradigm also exhibits promising
temporal correlation modeling capability and excels in long-term forecasting [33, 36, 29].
As the underlying dynamics are jointly described by the intra- and inter-correlations, it is equally
important to explore the spatial structures for an ideal forecasting model design. Many proposals
employ dense connection to capture the spatial correlations implicitly [31, 24]. However, the dense
connection lacks clear structures and is prone to introduce noise from uncorrelated spatial dimensions.
The development of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [18, 17, 7] offers an effective solution to model
non-Euclidean structure data. DCRNN [22] builds graphs based on spatial proximity and conducts
graph convolution to capture spatial correlations for traffic forecasting. To apply GNNs to more
general scenarios where graph structures are unavailable, the forecasting methods propose to learn
the graph adaptively through learnable node embeddings [37, 1, 38, 15], which significantly enhances
the forecasting performance.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

