User-item fairness tradeoffs in recommendations
Sophie Greenwood
Computer Science
Cornell Tech

Sudalakshmee Chiniah
Operations Research and Information Engineering
Cornell Tech

Nikhil Garg
Operations Research and Information Engineering
Cornell Tech

Abstract
In the basic recommendation paradigm, the most (predicted) relevant item is recommended to each user. This may result in some items receiving lower exposure than
they “should”; to counter this, several algorithmic approaches have been developed
to ensure item fairness. These approaches necessarily degrade recommendations
for some users to improve outcomes for items, leading to user fairness concerns.
In turn, a recent line of work has focused on developing algorithms for multi-sided
fairness, to jointly optimize user fairness, item fairness, and overall recommendation quality. This induces the question: what is the tradeoff between these
objectives, and what are the characteristics of (multi-objective) optimal solutions?
Theoretically, we develop a model of recommendations with user and item fairness
objectives and characterize the solutions of fairness-constrained optimization. We
identify two phenomena: (a) when user preferences are diverse, there is “free”
item and user fairness; and (b) users whose preferences are misestimated can be
especially disadvantaged by item fairness constraints. Empirically, we prototype
a recommendation system for preprints on arXiv and implement our framework,
measuring the phenomena in practice and showing how these phenomena inform
the design of markets with recommendation systems-intermediated matching.

1

Introduction

Recommendation systems are employed throughout modern online platforms to suggest items (media,
songs, books, products, or jobs) to users (viewers, listeners, readers, consumers, or job seekers).
The platform learns user preferences and shows each user personalized recommendations. One
recommendation paradigm is to simply show the user the items they most prefer. However, this
approach may result in disparately poor outcomes for some items, which may not be most preferred
by any user [44]. For example, in our empirical application in prototyping a recommender system
for arXiv prepints, we find that on average more than 47% of papers have less than a 0.0001%
probability of being recommended to any user, even when the number of users and items are the same.
Thus, many algorithmic techniques have been proposed to improve item fairness in recommendation
[3, 35, 48, 50]. However, by not solely optimizing for user engagement, these techniques impose a
cost both to overall recommendation quality [3] and especially for some individual users more than
others.
Accordingly, algorithms have recently been introduced to address the problem of two-sided fairness
(or multi-sided fairness), in which the platform aims to balance user fairness, item fairness, and overall
recommendation quality [11, 12, 47]. These algorithms formalize the desired balance in terms of an
optimization problem – for example, maximizing the difference between overall recommendation
quality and unfairness penalties [11], or the overall recommendation quality subject to fairness
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

