Reversing the Forget-Retain Objectives: An Efficient
LLM Unlearning Framework from Logit Difference

Jiabao Ji1∗ Yujian Liu1 Yang Zhang2
Gaowen Liu Ramana Rao Kompella3 Sijia Liu4 Shiyu Chang1
1
UC Santa Barbara 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab 3 Cisco Research 4 Michigan State University
3

Abstract
As Large Language Models (LLMs) demonstrate extensive capability in learning
from documents, LLM unlearning becomes an increasingly important research area
to address concerns of LLMs in terms of privacy, copyright, etc. A conventional
LLM unlearning task typically involves two goals: (1) The target LLM should
forget the knowledge in the specified forget documents, and (2) it should retain the
other knowledge that the LLM possesses, for which we assume access to a small
number of retain documents. To achieve both goals, a mainstream class of LLM
unlearning methods introduces an optimization framework with a combination of
two objectives – maximizing the prediction loss on the forget documents while
minimizing that on the retain documents, which suffers from two challenges,
degenerated output and catastrophic forgetting. In this paper, we propose a novel
unlearning framework called Unlearning from Logit Difference (ULD), which
introduces an assistant LLM that aims to achieve the opposite of the unlearning
goals: remembering the forget documents and forgetting the retain knowledge.
ULD then derives the unlearned LLM by computing the logit difference between
the target and the assistant LLMs. We show that such reversed objectives would
naturally resolve both aforementioned challenges while significantly improving the
training efficiency. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method efficiently
achieves the intended forgetting while preserving the LLM’s overall capabilities,
reducing training time by more than threefold. Notably, our method loses 0% of
model utility on the ToFU benchmark, whereas baseline methods may sacrifice
17% of utility on average to achieve comparable forget quality. Our code is publicly
available at https://github.com/UCSB-NLP-Chang/ULD.

1

Introduction

As Large Language Models (LLMs) continue to impress with their ability to learn from pre-training
documents and apply this knowledge to real-world tasks like programming and question-answering,
attention has increasingly focused on addressing the accompanying privacy issues [1, 2]. Machine
unlearning [2–8], aiming to remove the influence of specific data, has become an important research
area and is being used to remove sensitive information such as copyright contents from LLMs.
Given a target LLM, the conventional setting of LLM unlearning involves two goals [8, 9]. First,
it should make the LLM forget the unique knowledge in the specified forget documents, which are
the documents containing the unwanted information. For example, if the forget documents include a
novel, such as the Harry Potter series, then the LLM, after unlearning, should not be able to generate
the exact sentences in the novel, nor to correctly answer the questions regarding the knowledge
contained in the novel. Second, the unlearning should not affect the other knowledge in the target
∗

Correspondance to <jiabaoji@ucsb.edu>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

