MVSDet: Multi-View Indoor 3D Object Detection via
Efficient Plane Sweeps

Yating Xu1
Chen Li2,3∗
Gim Hee Lee1
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore1
Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR2
Centre for Frontier AI Research, A*STAR3
xu.yating@u.nus.edu lichen@u.nus.edu gimhee.lee@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
The key challenge of multi-view indoor 3D object detection is to infer accurate
geometry information from images for precise 3D detection. Previous method
relies on NeRF for geometry reasoning. However, the geometry extracted from
NeRF is generally inaccurate, which leads to sub-optimal detection performance.
In this paper, we propose MVSDet which utilizes plane sweep for geometry-aware
3D object detection. To circumvent the requirement for a large number of depth
planes for accurate depth prediction, we design a probabilistic sampling and soft
weighting mechanism to decide the placement of pixel features on the 3D volume.
We select multiple locations that score top in the probability volume for each
pixel and use their probability score to indicate the confidence. We further apply
recent pixel-aligned Gaussian Splatting to regularize depth prediction and improve
detection performance with little computation overhead. Extensive experiments on
ScanNet and ARKitScenes datasets are conducted to show the superiority of our
model. Our code is available at https://github.com/Pixie8888/MVSDet.

1

Introduction

Indoor 3D object detection is a fundamental task in scene understanding and has wide applications
in robotics, AR/VR equipment, etc. Although point cloud based 3D objection methods [13, 14, 15]
have achieved impressive performance, depth sensors are required to capture the data, which may
not be available due to budget limitation, form factor constraints, etc. Recently, the more economic
pipeline of 3D object detection from only posed multi-view images is gaining increasing attention.
However, it is much more sophisticated to estimate geometry information from 2D images alone.
A straightforward solution to this problem is using ground truth geometry information, e.g. point
cloud [19] or TSDF [17], to supervise the model. Built on the 3D volume representation [16],
ImGeoNet [19] predicts the emptiness of each voxel by converting the ground truth point clouds to
surface voxels as supervision. CN-RMA [17] first reconstructs 3D scenes using ground truth TSDF
as supervision and then runs an existing point cloud based object detector to predict bounding boxes.
Although they achieve promising performance, the precise ground truth scene geometry is hard to
obtain and may not be available [1].
An alternative way is to learn geometry via self-supervision. The pioneer work ImVoxelNet [16]
unprojectes 2D image features to a 3D volume representation. However, 2D features can propagate
to irrelevant 3D locations since depth information is not known. NeRF-Det [22] relies on a Neural
Radiance Field (NeRF) [12] to learn a density field and queries an opacity score for each voxel. The
∗

Chen Li was at the National University of Singapore when this work was done.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

