Stochastic Amortization: A Unified Approach to
Accelerate Feature and Data Attribution
Ian Covert∗
Stanford University
icovert@stanford.edu

Chanwoo Kim∗
University of Washington
chanwkim@uw.edu

James Zou†
Stanford University
jamesz@stanford.edu

Su-In Lee†
University of Washington
suinlee@uw.edu

Tatsunori Hashimoto†
Stanford University
thashim@stanford.edu

Abstract
Many tasks in explainable machine learning, such as data valuation and feature
attribution, perform expensive computation for each data point and are intractable
for large datasets. These methods require efficient approximations, and although
amortizing the process by learning a network to directly predict the desired output
is a promising solution, training such models with exact labels is often infeasible.
We therefore explore training amortized models with noisy labels, and we find
that this is inexpensive and surprisingly effective. Through theoretical analysis
of the label noise and experiments with various models and datasets, we show
that this approach tolerates high noise levels and significantly accelerates several
feature attribution and data valuation methods, often yielding an order of magnitude
speedup over existing approaches.

1

Introduction

Many tasks in explainable machine learning (XML) perform some form of costly computation for
every data point in a dataset. For example, common tasks include assessing individual data points’
impact on a model’s accuracy [33], or quantifying each input feature’s influence on individual model
predictions [68]. Many of these techniques are prohibitively expensive: in particular, those with
game-theoretic formulations have exponential complexity in the number of features or data points,
making their exact calculation intractable [89, 4].
Accelerating these methods is therefore a topic of great practical importance. This has been addressed
primarily with Monte Carlo approximations [96, 16, 74], which are faster than brute-force calculations
but can be slow to converge and impractical for large datasets. Alternatively, a promising idea is to
amortize the computation, or to approximate each data point’s output with a learned model, typically
a deep neural network [2]. For example, in the feature attribution context, we can train an explainer
model to predict Shapley values that describe how each feature affects a classifier’s prediction [50].
There are several reasons why amortization is appealing, particularly with neural networks: similar
data points often have similar outputs, pretrained networks extract relevant features and can be
efficiently fine-tuned, and if the combined training and inference time is low then amortization can
be faster than computing the object of interest (e.g., data valuation scores) for the entire dataset.
However, it is not obvious how to train such amortized models, because standard supervised learning
requires a dataset of ground truth labels that can be intractable to generate. Our goal here is therefore
to explore efficiently training amortized models when exact labels are costly. Our main insight is that
∗

Equal contribution. † Equal advising.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

