GIC: Gaussian-Informed Continuum for Physical
Property Identification and Simulation

Junhao Cai1∗ Yuji Yang2∗ Weihao Yuan3† Yisheng He3
Zilong Dong3 Liefeng Bo3 Hui Cheng2 Qifeng Chen1
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 2 Sun Yat-sen University, 3 Alibaba Group
∗
Equal contribution, order determined by coin toss. † Corresponding author.

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of estimating physical properties (system identification) through visual observations. To facilitate geometry-aware guidance in
physical property estimation, we introduce a novel hybrid framework that leverages
3D Gaussian representation to not only capture explicit shapes but also enable
the simulated continuum to render object masks as 2D shape surrogates during
training. We propose a new dynamic 3D Gaussian framework based on motion
factorization to recover the object as 3D Gaussian point sets across different time
states. Furthermore, we develop a coarse-to-fine filling strategy to generate the
density fields of the object from the Gaussian reconstruction, allowing for the
extraction of object continuums along with their surfaces and the integration of
Gaussian attributes into these continuums. In addition to the extracted object
surfaces, the Gaussian-informed continuum also enables the rendering of object
masks during simulations, serving as 2D-shape guidance for physical property
estimation. Extensive experimental evaluations demonstrate that our pipeline
achieves state-of-the-art performance across multiple benchmarks and metrics.
Additionally, we illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed method through realworld demonstrations, showcasing its practical utility. Our project page is at
https://jukgei.github.io/project/gic.

1

Introduction

Identifying the physical properties of objects (i.e., system identification) is essential for numerous
applications such as games, digital twins, and robotic manipulation [1–3]. Although humans can
intuitively deduce the underlying physical properties with a single glance when the object undergoes deformation, estimating the properties with only visual observations remains challenging for
computational perceptual algorithms.
To tackle this challenge, many established methods [4–6] adopt the assumption of elastic material [7]
and perform physics-based modeling based on mass-spring systems (MSS) or finite element method
(FEM) to model and simulate the dynamics of the objects. Such an assumption inevitably restricts
the ability to simulate more general types beyond elastic materials, such as fluids or granular media.
Another problem of previous methods lies in that many methods [8–10] require the ground-truth
full knowledge of object geometry for the identification, which limits their practicality. Some
subsequent methods [5, 4] turn to recover the geometries and physical properties from observations
in a decoupled manner. Specifically, these methods first extract object geometries by making use
of stereo observations or dynamic neural reconstruction [11] from RGB video sequences, and then
perform simulation directly on the point clouds or after the tetrahedral mesh conversion. While
these methods introduce explicit geometries to guide the estimation of physical properties, the noisy
reconstruction results usually lead to degraded system identification performance.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

