Vision Foundation Model Enables
Generalizable Object Pose Estimation

Kai Chen1 , Yiyao Ma1 , Xingyu Lin2 , Stephen James3 , Jianshu Zhou1
Yun-Hui Liu1 , Pieter Abbeel2 , Qi Dou1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 UC Berkeley, 3 Dyson Robot Learning Lab

Abstract
Object pose estimation plays a crucial role in robotic manipulation, however, its
practical applicability still suffers from limited generalizability. This paper addresses the challenge of generalizable object pose estimation, particularly focusing
on category-level object pose estimation for unseen object categories. Current methods either require impractical instance-level training or are confined to predefined
categories, limiting their applicability. We propose VFM-6D, a novel framework
that explores harnessing existing vision and language models, to elaborate object
pose estimation into two stages: category-level object viewpoint estimation and
object coordinate map estimation. Based on the two-stage framework, we introduce
a 2D-to-3D feature lifting module and a shape-matching module, both of which
leverage pre-trained vision foundation models to improve object representation
and matching accuracy. VFM-6D is trained on cost-effective synthetic data and
exhibits superior generalization capabilities. It can be applied to both instancelevel unseen object pose estimation and category-level object pose estimation for
novel categories. Evaluations on benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and versatility of VFM-6D in various real-world scenarios. Project website:
vfm-6d.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Object pose estimation refers to the procedure of identifying the position and orientation of target
objects. This essential operation is highly valued in various scenarios such as robotic manipulation [1,
2], augmented reality [3, 4], and embodied intelligence [5, 6], etc. Predominantly, most existing
approaches [7, 8] largely rely on instance-level training to associate object frame and camera frame
for object pose estimation. These methods struggle to accurately predict the poses of objects that
were not present during the training phase. In order to enhance the manipulation and interaction with
a broad range of objects, there is a considerable demand for generalizable object pose estimation.
Towards generalizable object pose estimation, two main streams of effort have been made in recent
literature: instance-level unseen object pose estimation [9, 10, 11, 12] and category-level object pose
estimation [13, 14, 15]. Instance-level unseen object pose estimation methods work by comparing
the observed object to instance-level reference images and then estimating a relative pose from the
reference to the observation. These methods typically necessitate either textured CAD models or the
collection and labeling of reference images for each object instance. However, these requirements are
often impractical for many real-world scenarios [16, 17, 18], such as open-world mobile manipulation,
where the objects that the agent encounters are unpredictable. This greatly hampers the practical
applicability of instance-level unseen object pose estimation methods. On the other hand, recent
category-level approaches learn to recover object pose from category-level object semantic and shape
features. By learning category-level characteristics from data, these methods can be readily applied
to novel objects that belong to a certain category, provided the model is trained on that category.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

