EAGLE : Efficient Adaptive Geometry-based
Learning in Cross-view Understanding
Thanh-Dat Truong1 , Utsav Prabhu2 , Dongyi Wang3
Bhiksha Raj4,5 , Susan Gauch6 , Jeyamkondan Subbiah7 , Khoa Luu1
1
CVIU Lab, University of Arkansas, USA 2 Google DeepMind, USA
3
Dep. of BAEG, University of Arkansas, USA 4 Carnegie Mellon University, USA
5
Mohammed bin Zayed University of AI, UAE
6
Dep. of EECS, University of Arkansas, USA 7 Dep. of FDSC, University of Arkansas, USA
{tt032, dongyiw, sgauch, jsubbiah, khoaluu}@uark.edu
bhiksha@cs.cmu.edu, utsavprabhu@google.com

https://uark-cviu.github.io/projects/EAGLE

Abstract
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation has been an efficient approach to transferring
the semantic segmentation model across data distributions. Meanwhile, the recent
Open-vocabulary Semantic Scene understanding based on large-scale vision language models is effective in open-set settings because it can learn diverse concepts
and categories. However, these prior methods fail to generalize across different
camera views due to the lack of cross-view geometric modeling. At present, there
are limited studies analyzing cross-view learning. To address this problem, we introduce a novel Unsupervised Cross-view Adaptation Learning approach to modeling
the geometric structural change across views in Semantic Scene Understanding.
First, we introduce a novel Cross-view Geometric Constraint on Unpaired Data
to model structural changes in images and segmentation masks across cameras.
Second, we present a new Geodesic Flow-based Correlation Metric to efficiently
measure the geometric structural changes across camera views. Third, we introduce
a novel view-condition prompting mechanism to enhance the view-information
modeling of the open-vocabulary segmentation network in cross-view adaptation
learning. The experiments on different cross-view adaptation benchmarks have
shown the effectiveness of our approach in cross-view modeling, demonstrating that
we achieve State-of-the-Art (SOTA) performance compared to prior unsupervised
domain adaptation and open-vocabulary semantic segmentation methods.

1

Introduction

Modern segmentation models [3, 4, 63] have
achieved remarkable results on the close-set
training with a set of pre-defined categories
and concepts. To work towards human-level
perception where the scenes are interpreted
with diverse categories and concepts, the openvocabulary (open-vocab) perception model [38,
40] based on the power of large vision-language
models [30, 39] has been introduced to address
the limitations of close-set training. By using
the power of language as supervision, the largescale vision language model is able to learn the
more powerful representations where languages
offer better reasoning mechanisms and openword concept representations compared to traditional close-set training methods [3, 63, 9].

Figure 1: Our Proposed Cross-view Adaptation
Learning Approach. Prior models, e.g., FreeSeg
[38], DenseCLIP [40], trained on the car view do
not perform well on the drone-view images. Meanwhile, our cross-view adaptation approach is able
to generalize well from the car to drone view.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

