Maximizing utility in multi-agent environments by
anticipating the behavior of other learners

Angelos Assos
MIT CSAIL
Cambridge, MA
assos@mit.edu

Yuval Dagan
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA
yuvaldag@berkeley.edu
Constantinos Daskalakis
MIT CSAIL
Cambridge, MA
costis@mit.edu

Abstract
Learning algorithms are often used to make decisions in sequential decision-making
environments. In multi-agent settings, the decisions of each agent can affect the
utilities/losses of the other agents. Therefore, if an agent is good at anticipating the
behavior of the other agents, in particular how they will make decisions in each
round as a function of their experience that far, it could try to judiciously make
its own decisions over the rounds of the interaction so as to influence the other
agents to behave in a way that ultimately benefits its own utility. In this paper, we
study repeated two-player games involving two types of agents: a learner, which
employs an online learning algorithm to choose its strategy in each round; and
an optimizer, which knows the learner’s utility function and the learner’s online
learning algorithm. The optimizer wants to plan ahead to maximize its own utility,
while taking into account the learner’s behavior. We provide two results: a positive
result for repeated zero-sum games and a negative result for repeated generalsum games. Our positive result is an algorithm for the optimizer, which exactly
maximizes its utility against a learner that plays the Replicator Dynamics — the
continuous-time analogue of Multiplicative Weights Update (MWU). Additionally,
we use this result to provide an algorithm for the optimizer against MWU, i.e. for
the discrete-time setting, which guarantees an average utility for the optimizer
that is higher than the value of the one-shot game. Our negative result shows that,
unless P=NP, there is no Fully Polynomial Time Approximation Scheme (FPTAS)
for maximizing the utility of an optimizer against a learner that best-responds to
the history in each round. Yet, this still leaves open the question of whether there
exists a polynomial-time algorithm that optimizes the utility up to o(T ).

1

Introduction

With the increased use of learning algorithms as a means to optimize agents’ objectives in unknown
or complex environments, it is inevitable that they will be used in multi-agent settings as well. This
encompasses scenarios where multiple agents are repeatedly taking actions in the same environment,
and their actions influence the payoffs of the other players. For example, participants in repeated
online auctions use learning algorithms to bid, and the outcome, who gets to win and how much they
pay, depends on all the bids (see e.g. [39, 40]). Other examples arise in contract design (see e.g. [30]),
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

