Typicalness-Aware Learning for Failure Detection

Yijun Liu1 Jiequan Cui2 Zhuotao Tian1
Senqiao Yang3
4
1
Qingdong He
Xiaoling Wang
Jingyong Su1
{liuyijun}@stu.hit.edu.cn
1
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen) 2 Nanyang Technological University
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Tencent Youtu Lab

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) often suffer from the overconfidence issue, where
incorrect predictions are made with high confidence scores, hindering the applications in critical systems. In this paper, we propose a novel approach called
Typicalness-Aware Learning (TAL) to address this issue and improve failure detection performance. We observe that, with the cross-entropy loss, model predictions
are optimized to align with the corresponding labels via increasing logit magnitude
or refining logit direction. However, regarding atypical samples, the image content
and their labels may exhibit disparities. This discrepancy can lead to overfitting
on atypical samples, ultimately resulting in the overconfidence issue that we aim
to address. To tackle the problem, we have devised a metric that quantifies the
typicalness of each sample, enabling the dynamic adjustment of the logit magnitude
during the training process. By allowing atypical samples to be adequately fitted
while preserving reliable logit direction, the problem of overconfidence can be mitigated. TAL has been extensively evaluated on benchmark datasets, and the results
demonstrate its superiority over existing failure detection methods. Specifically,
TAL achieves a more than 5% improvement on CIFAR100 in terms of the Area
Under the Risk-Coverage Curve (AURC) compared to the state-of-the-art. Code is
available at https://github.com/liuyijungoon/TAL.

1

Introduction

Failure detection plays a vital role in machine learning applications, particularly in high-risk domains
where the reliability and trustworthiness of predictions are crucial. Applications such as medical
diagnosis [8], autonomous driving [19, 42, 43], and other visual perception tasks [22, 38, 32, 25, 35,
30, 37, 29, 36] require accurate assessments of prediction confidence before making critical decisions.
The goal of failure detection is to enhance the reliability and trustworthiness of predictions, ensuring
that high-confidence predictions are relied upon while low-confidence predictions are appropriately
rejected [26, 47]. This is essential for maintaining the safety and effectiveness of these applications.
Indeed, deep neural networks (DNNs) trained using the cross-entropy loss often suffer from the issue
of overconfidence. This leads to unreliable confidence scores, which in turn hinder the effectiveness
of failure detection methods. It is common for models to make incorrect predictions with high
confidence scores, sometimes even close to 1.0. A recent study called LogitNorm [40] has shed
light on this problem. It reveals that the softmax cross-entropy loss can cause the magnitude of the
logit vector to continue increasing, even when most training examples are correctly classified. This
phenomenon contributes to the model’s overconfidence.
To alleviate the overconfidence problem, LogitNorm [40] proposes assigning a constant magnitude
to decouple the influence of the magnitude during optimization. The cross-entropy loss with the
: Corresponding Authors. Email: tianzhuotao@hit.edu.cn, sujingyong@hit.edu.cn
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

