Lumina-Next : Making Lumina-T2X
Stronger and Faster with Next-DiT

Le Zhuo1,2∗ Ruoyi Du1,5∗ Han Xiao1,2∗ Yangguang Li1,2∗ Dongyang Liu1,2∗
Rongjie Huang1∗ Wenze Liu1,2∗ Xiangyang Zhu1 Fu-Yun Wang2 Zhanyu Ma5
Xu Luo1 Zehan Wang1 Kaipeng Zhang1 Lirui Zhao1 Si Liu4
Xiangyu Yue1,2 Wanli Ouyang1,2 Yu Qiao1† Hongsheng Li2,3† Peng Gao1†‡∗
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
HKGAI under InnoHK 4 Beihang University
5
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications

Abstract
Lumina-T2X is a nascent family of Flow-based Large Diffusion Transformers
(Flag-DiT) that establishes a uniﬁed framework for transforming noise into various modalities, such as images and videos, conditioned on text instructions. Despite its promising capabilities, Lumina-T2X still encounters challenges including
training instability, slow inference, and extrapolation artifacts. In this paper, we
present Lumina-Next, an improved version of Lumina-T2X, showcasing stronger
generation performance with increased training and inference efﬁciency. We begin
with a comprehensive analysis of the Flag-DiT architecture and identify several
suboptimal components, which we address by introducing the Next-DiT architecture with 3D RoPE and sandwich normalizations. To enable better resolution
extrapolation, we thoroughly compare different context extrapolation methods applied to text-to-image generation with 3D RoPE, and propose Frequency- and
Time-Aware Scaled RoPE tailored for diffusion transformers. Additionally, we introduce a sigmoid time discretization schedule to reduce sampling steps in solving
the Flow ODE and the Context Drop method to merge redundant visual tokens for
faster network evaluation, effectively boosting the overall sampling speed. Thanks
to these improvements, Lumina-Next not only improves the quality and efﬁciency
of basic text-to-image generation but also demonstrates superior resolution extrapolation capabilities and multilingual generation using decoder-based LLMs as the
text encoder, all in a zero-shot manner. To further validate Lumina-Next as a versatile generative framework, we instantiate it on diverse tasks including visual recognition, multi-view, audio, music, and point cloud generation, showcasing strong
performance across these domains. By releasing all codes and model weights at
https://github.com/Alpha-VLLM/Lumina-T2X, we aim to advance the development of next-generation generative AI capable of universal modeling.

1

Introduction

Scaling diffusion transformers has unveiled signiﬁcant improvements in text-conditional image and
video generation [15, 14, 31, 35, 62]. Notably, Lumina-T2X [35] introduces ﬂow-based large diffusion transformer (Flag-DiT), which has proven to be a stable, scalable, ﬂexible, and trainingefﬁcient architecture for generative modeling across various data domains. For instance, the use
∗

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Authors
‡
Project Lead
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

