Energy-based Hopfield Boosting for
Out-of-Distribution Detection
Claus Hofmann 1

Simon Schmid 2

Daniel Klotz 4

Bernhard Lehner 3

Sepp Hochreiter 1

1

Institute for Machine Learning, JKU LIT SAL IWS Lab,
Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria
2
Software Competence Center Hagenberg GmbH, Austria
3
Silicon Austria Labs, JKU LIT SAL IWS Lab, Linz, Austria
4
Department of Computational Hydrosystems,
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research–UFZ, Leipzig, Germany
hofmann@ml.jku.at

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is critical when deploying machine learning
models in the real world. Outlier exposure methods, which incorporate auxiliary
outlier data in the training process, can drastically improve OOD detection performance compared to approaches without advanced training strategies. We introduce
Hopfield Boosting, a boosting approach, which leverages modern Hopfield energy to sharpen the decision boundary between the in-distribution and OOD data.
Hopfield Boosting encourages the model to focus on hard-to-distinguish auxiliary
outlier examples that lie close to the decision boundary between in-distribution and
auxiliary outlier data. Our method achieves a new state-of-the-art in OOD detection
with outlier exposure, improving the FPR95 from 2.28 to 0.92 on CIFAR-10, from
11.76 to 7.94 on CIFAR-100, and from 50.74 to 36.60 on ImageNet-1K.

1

Introduction

Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is crucial when using machine learning systems in the real
world (Ruff et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021). Deployed models will — sooner or
later — encounter inputs that deviate from the training distribution. For example, a system trained
to recognize music genres might also hear a sound clip of construction site noise. In the best case,
a naive deployment can then result in overly confident predictions. In the worst case, we will get
erratic model behavior and completely wrong predictions (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017). The purpose
of OOD detection is to classify these inputs as OOD, such that the system can then, for instance,
notify users that no prediction is possible. In this paper we propose Hopfield Boosting, a novel
OOD detection method that leverages the energy component of modern Hopfield networks (MHNs;
Ramsauer et al., 2021) and advances the state-of-the-art of OOD detection. This energy represents a
measure of dissimilarity between a set of data instances X and a query instance ξ. It is therefore a
natural fit for doing OOD detection (as shown in Zhang et al., 2023a).
Hopfield Boosting uses an auxiliary outlier data set (AUX) to boost the model’s OOD detection
capacity. This allows the training process to learn a boundary around the in-distribution (ID) data,
improving the performance at the OOD detection task. In summary, our contributions are as follows:
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

