Multi-modal Situated Reasoning in 3D Scenes

Xiongkun Linghu1,˚ , Jiangyong Huang1,2,˚ , Xuesong Niu1,˚ , Xiaojian Ma1 ,
Baoxiong Jia1,† , Siyuan Huang1,†
1
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI
2
Peking University
https://msr3d.github.io

Abstract
Situation awareness is essential for understanding and reasoning about 3D scenes
in embodied AI agents. However, existing datasets and benchmarks for situated understanding are limited in data modality, diversity, scale, and task scope. To address
these limitations, we propose Multi-modal Situated Question Answering (MSQA),
a large-scale multi-modal situated reasoning dataset, scalably collected leveraging
3D scene graphs and vision-language models (VLMs) across a diverse range of
real-world 3D scenes. MSQA includes 251K situated question-answering pairs
across 9 distinct question categories, covering complex scenarios within 3D scenes.
We introduce a novel interleaved multi-modal input setting in our benchmark to
provide text, image, and point cloud for situation and question description, resolving ambiguity in previous single-modality convention (e.g., text). Additionally,
we devise the Multi-modal Situated Next-step Navigation (MSNN) benchmark to
evaluate models’ situated reasoning for navigation. Comprehensive evaluations on
MSQA and MSNN highlight the limitations of existing vision-language models
and underscore the importance of handling multi-modal interleaved inputs and
situation modeling. Experiments on data scaling and cross-domain transfer further demonstrate the efficacy of leveraging MSQA as a pre-training dataset for
developing more powerful situated reasoning models.

1

Introduction

Understanding and interacting with the 3D physical world is fundamental to the development of
embodied AI. A central challenge in equipping agents with these capabilities is the integration of
situational awareness into models. This is particularly critical given the pivotal role of situation
awareness in bridging agents’ multi-modal local context (e.g., text descriptions, images, point clouds,
etc.) with the global environment status, thereby facilitating reasoning and planning in 3D scenes.
However, compared to recent advancement in 3D vision-language learning [9, 1, 72, 24, 30], the
study of situation modeling in 3D scenes remained largely underexplored. This is primarily due to
the absence of a scalable method to collect diverse multi-modal situational data. Previous studies
have mainly relied on simulated environments [63, 55, 47] to generate egocentric observations of
virtual agents. These approaches severely limit the quality of situational data due to the constrained
diversity and complexity of available synthetic scenes. Recent efforts such as SQA3D [41] have
aimed to extend situated understanding to real-world scenes like ScanNet [17] by collecting situated
question-answer pairs under imaginative situations represented by locations and orientations in 3D
scenes. Nonetheless, this data collection process is prohibitively expensive, thereby restricting the
scale of situational data available for model learning and evaluation.
˚

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

