Learning an Actionable Discrete Diffusion Policy via
Large-Scale Actionless Video Pre-Training

Haoran He 1

Chenjia Bai2,4† Ling Pan1

Weinan Zhang3

Bin Zhao4

Xuelong Li2,4

1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
2

Abstract
Learning a generalist embodied agent capable of completing multiple tasks poses
challenges, primarily stemming from the scarcity of action-labeled robotic datasets.
In contrast, a vast amount of human videos exist, capturing intricate tasks and interactions with the physical world. Promising prospects arise for utilizing actionless
human videos for pre-training and transferring the knowledge to facilitate robot
policy learning through limited robot demonstrations. However, it remains a challenge due to the domain gap between humans and robots. Moreover, it is difficult
to extract useful information representing the dynamic world from human videos,
because of its noisy and multimodal data structure. In this paper, we introduce a
novel framework to tackle these challenges, which leverages a unified discrete diffusion to combine generative pre-training on human videos and policy fine-tuning
on a small number of action-labeled robot videos. We start by compressing both
human and robot videos into unified video tokens. In the pre-training stage, we
employ a discrete diffusion model with a mask-and-replace diffusion strategy to
predict future video tokens in the latent space. In the fine-tuning stage, we harness
the imagined future videos to guide low-level action learning with a limited set of
robot data. Experiments demonstrate that our method generates high-fidelity future
videos for planning and enhances the fine-tuned policies compared to previous
state-of-the-art approaches with superior performance. Our project webpage is
available at https://video-diff.github.io/.

1

Introduction

How do we derive a general-purpose robot agent that can complete a wide variety of tasks? We
believe that recent advances in vision and language give us a clue, which delves into pre-training
foundation models on extremely large and diverse datasets, followed by fine-tuning on specific
domains. For instance, through pre-training on internet-scale datasets [65], large language models
[81, 82, 63] and vision models [9, 69, 72] showcase impressive performance on various downstream
tasks such as question answering, coding, and image generation. However, unlike general visual
language tasks that can exploit copious amounts of data available on the Internet, embodied tasks
necessitate high-quality egocentric data in robotics domains for precise control. Collecting such data
can be expensive or time-consuming due to the reliance on robot interactions through teleoperation
or kinematic solvers [31], and significant gaps in embodiments and dynamics persist when applying
them to different robots.
In contrast to the limited availability of robot data, there is a wealth of human interaction videos
capturing intricate tasks and varied interactions with the physical world [27]. These videos inherently
†

Correspondence to: Chenjia Bai (baicj@chinatelecom.cn).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

