Tackling Uncertain Correspondences for
Multi-Modal Entity Alignment

Liyi Chen1 , Ying Sun2 , Shengzhe Zhang1 , Yuyang Ye3 , Wei Wu1 , Hui Xiong2,4∗
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Thrust of Artificial Intelligence,
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou),
3
Rutgers University, 4 Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
liyichencly@gmail.com, {owen_zsz, urara}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
yings@hkust-gz.edu.cn, yuyang.ye@rutgers.edu, xionghui@ust.hk

1

Abstract
Recently, multi-modal entity alignment has emerged as a pivotal endeavor for
the integration of Multi-Modal Knowledge Graphs (MMKGs) originating from
diverse data sources. Existing works primarily focus on fully depicting entity
features by designing various modality encoders or fusion approaches. However,
uncertain correspondences between inter-modal or intra-modal cues, such as weak
inter-modal associations, description diversity, and modality absence, still severely
hinder the effective exploration of aligned entity similarities. To this end, in
this paper, we propose a novel Tackling uncertain correspondences method for
Multi-modal Entity Alignment (TMEA). Specifically, to handle diverse attribute
knowledge descriptions, we design alignment-augmented abstract representation
that incorporates the large language model and in-context learning into attribute
alignment and filtering for generating and embedding the attribute abstract. In
order to mitigate the influence of the modality absence, we propose to unify all
modality features into a shared latent subspace and generate pseudo features via
variational autoencoders according to existing modal features. Then, we develop an
inter-modal commonality enhancement mechanism based on cross-attention with
orthogonal constraints, to address weak semantic associations between modalities.
Extensive experiments on two real-world datasets validate the effectiveness of
TMEA with a clear improvement over competitive baselines.

1

Introduction

Multi-Modal Knowledge Graphs (MMKGs) effectively store a substantial volume of knowledge
encompassing diverse modalities including visual, relational, and attribute information in a structured
and organized manner [23, 43, 44]. They greatly facilitate the advancement of various downstream
tasks such as recommender systems [41, 47, 12, 34], video understanding [40, 51, 39], and domainspecific applications [7, 30, 35, 49]. In order to construct a more comprehensive multi-modal
knowledge base for supporting external knowledge comprehension and reasoning, the demand for
integrating MMKGs from heterogeneous data sources has become extremely urgent. As a result,
multi-modal entity alignment to match entities referring to identical real-world concepts from distinct
MMKGs has emerged as an increasingly critical task for their integration [23, 5, 6].
In the literature, early investigations into entity alignment primarily rely on translational models [9,
53, 31] or graph neural networks [36, 3] to capture semantic relatedness of aligned entities through the
geometrical structures in an embedding space. However, these methods were originally devised for
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

