Suppress Content Shift: Better Diffusion Features
via Off-the-Shelf Generation Techniques
Benyuan Meng1,2 Qianqian Xu3,4∗ Zitai Wang3
Zhiyong Yang5 Xiaochun Cao6 Qingming Huang5,3,7∗
1

Institute of Information Engineering, CAS
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Key Lab. of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory
5
School of Computer Science and Tech., University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
6
School of Cyber Science and Tech., Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
7
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, CAS
mengbenyuan@iie.ac.cn {xuqianqian,wangzitai}@ict.ac.cn
{yangzhiyong21,qmhuang}@ucas.ac.cn caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Diffusion models are powerful generative models, and this capability can also be
applied to discrimination. The inner activations of a pre-trained diffusion model can
serve as features for discriminative tasks, namely, diffusion feature. We discover
that diffusion feature has been hindered by a hidden yet universal phenomenon
that we call content shift. To be specific, there are content differences between
features and the input image, such as the exact shape of a certain object. We locate
the cause of content shift as one inherent characteristic of diffusion models, which
suggests the broad existence of this phenomenon in diffusion feature. Further
empirical study also indicates that its negative impact is not negligible even when
content shift is not visually perceivable. Hence, we propose to suppress content
shift to enhance the overall quality of diffusion features. Specifically, content shift
is related to the information drift during the process of recovering an image from
the noisy input, pointing out the possibility of turning off-the-shelf generation
techniques into tools for content shift suppression. We further propose a practical
guideline named GATE to efficiently evaluate the potential benefit of a technique
and provide an implementation of our methodology. Despite the simplicity, the
proposed approach has achieved superior results on various tasks and datasets,
validating its potential as a generic booster for diffusion features. Our code is
available at this url.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models (DMs) [15, 34] are a prevalent family of generative models for various tasks [36, 35,
25]. This strong generative capability can be applied to discrimination [21]. Diffusion Feature (DF),
a popular approach, extracts inner activations from a pre-trained diffusion model as vision features [1,
50, 60, 57, 37, 62], similarly to how ResNet [14] serves as a feature extractor. Extracting features
with a vastly pre-trained diffusion model grants this approach strong robustness and generalizability.
Furthermore, it enjoys the philosophy of hitchhiking, a solid research paradigm in the age of large
base models [44]: advancements in diffusion models can all be transformed into better feature quality.
It promises this research direction a bright future.
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

