Rejection via Learning Density Ratios

Alexander Soen†
Amazon
The Australian National University
alexander.soen@anu.edu.au

Hisham Husain⋆
hisham.husain@protonmail.com

Philip Schulz
Amazon
phschulz@amazon.com

Vu Nguyen
Amazon
vutngn@amazon.com

Abstract
Classification with rejection emerges as a learning paradigm which allows models
to abstain from making predictions. The predominant approach is to alter the
supervised learning pipeline by augmenting typical loss functions, letting model
rejection incur a lower loss than an incorrect prediction. Instead, we propose
a different distributional perspective, where we seek to find an idealized data
distribution which maximizes a pretrained model’s performance. This can be
formalized via the optimization of a loss’s risk with a φ-divergence regularization
term. Through this idealized distribution, a rejection decision can be made by
utilizing the density ratio between this distribution and the data distribution. We
focus on the setting where our φ-divergences are specified by the family of αdivergence. Our framework is tested empirically over clean and noisy datasets.

1

Introduction

Forcing Machine Learning (ML) models to always make a prediction can lead to costly consequences.
Indeed, in real-world domains such as automated driving, product inspection, and medical diagnosis,
inaccurate prediction can cause significant real-world harm [16, 29, 53, 50]. To deal with such a
dilemma, selective prediction and classification with rejection were proposed to modify the standard
supervised learning setting [15, 17, 72]. The idea is to allow for a model to explicitly reject making a
prediction whenever the underlying prediction would be either inaccurate and / or uncertain.
In classification, a confidence-based approach can be utilized, where a classifier is trained to output a “margin” which is used as a confidence score for rejection [7, 31, 71, 59, 53]. The model
rejects whenever this confidence score is lower than an assigned threshold value. A key aspect of
these approaches is that they rely on good probability estimates Pr(Y | X = x) [60], i.e., being
calibrated [71, 53]. While some approaches avoid explicit probability estimation, these are typically
restricted to binary classification [7, 31, 47]. Empirically, approaches utilizing confidence scores have
shown to outperform other methods, even with simple plugin estimates for probabilities [26, 39, 58].
Another classifier-rejection approach aims to simultaneously train a prediction and rejection model in
tandem [16, 17, 53]. These approaches are theoretically driven by the construction of surrogate loss
functions, but in the multiclass classification case many of these loss functions have been shown to not
be suitable [53]. For the multiclass classification setting, one approach connects classification with
rejection to cost-sensitive classification [14]. In practice, these classification-rejection approaches
require models to be trained from scratch using their specific loss function and architecture — if there
(†) Work done while interning at Amazon.
(*) Work done while employed at Amazon.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

