Causal Dependence Plots

Joshua R. Loftus
Department of Statistics
London School of Economics
London, England, UK
j.r.loftus@lse.ac.uk

Lucius E. J. Bynum
Center for Data Science
New York University
New York, NY, USA
lucius@nyu.edu

Sakina Hansen
Department of Statistics
London School of Economics
London, England, UK
s.a.hansen1@lse.ac.uk

Abstract
To use artificial intelligence and machine learning models wisely we must understand how they interact with the world, including how they depend causally on
data inputs. In this work we develop Causal Dependence Plots (CDPs) to visualize how a model’s predicted outcome depends on changes in a given predictor
along with consequent causal changes in other predictor variables. Crucially, this
differs from standard methods based on independence or holding other predictors
constant, such as regression coefficients or Partial Dependence Plots (PDPs). Our
explanatory framework generalizes PDPs, including them as a special case, as well
as a variety of other interpretive plots that show, for example, the total, direct, and
indirect effects of causal mediation. We demonstrate with simulations and real
data experiments how CDPs can be combined in a modular way with methods for
causal learning or sensitivity analysis. Since people often think causally about
input-output dependence, CDPs can be powerful tools in the xAI or interpretable
machine learning toolkit and contribute to applications like scientific machine
learning and algorithmic fairness.

1

Introduction

This paper develops Causal Dependence Plots (CDPs) to visualize relationships between input
variables and a predicted outcome. Motivated by explaining or interpreting AI or machine learning
models [8, 16, 17, 36], for simplicity we consider supervised learning, i.e. regression or classification.
We also focus on the model-agnostic or "black-box" setting, where the interpreter can query the
model but not access its internal structure. Model-agnostic interpretation methods are functionally
limited to observing how the model responds to variation in the inputs. While this initial application
forms our practical motivation, we emphasize that CDPs are more general.
Simple explanations that focus on one input variable at a time can be powerful tools for human
understanding. However, just as with the interpretation of linear regression model coefficients, these
simple relationships can be misleading. When varying one input variable, we must make some choice
about what values to use for the other inputs. CDPs make this choice using an explicit causal model,
and to our knowledge this is the first work that does so. We compare CDPs to other state-of-the-art,
non-causal explanation methods like the Partial Dependence Plot (PDP) [12], Individual Conditional
Expectation (ICE) [14], Accumulated Local Effect (ALE) [3], and Shapley Additive Explanation
(SHAP) feature plot [33]. Explanation methods may respect existing causal dependencies between
predictors or break them.
Problem statement. If there are causal relationships between predictors but our visualization,
interpretation, or explanation method does not respect them the resulting model explanation may be
irrelevant or misleading [37, 54]. Such explanations could lead to incorrect decisions for regulating
or aligning algorithmic systems, sub-optimal allocations of resources based on model predictions, a
breakdown between human feedback and reinforcement learning systems, or other forms of error and
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

