Opponent Modeling based on Subgoal Inference
Xiaopeng Yu

Jiechuan Jiang

Zongqing Lu†

School of Computer Science, Peking University

Abstract
When an agent is in a multi-agent environment, it may face previously unseen
opponents, and it is a challenge to cooperate with other agents to accomplish
the task together or to maximize its own rewards. Most opponent modeling
methods deal with the non-stationarity caused by unknown opponent policies
via predicting the opponent’s actions. However, focusing on the opponent’s action
is shortsighted, which also constrains the adaptability to unknown opponents in
complex tasks. In this paper, we propose opponent modeling based on subgoal
inference, which infers the opponent’s subgoals through historical trajectories. As
subgoals are likely to be shared by different opponent policies, predicting subgoals
can yield better generalization to unknown opponents. Additionally, we design two
subgoal selection modes for cooperative games and general-sum games respectively.
Empirically, we show that our method achieves more effective adaptation than
existing methods in a variety of tasks.

1

Introduction

Autonomous agents are systems capable of making decisions and acting independently in their environment, often
operating without direct human intervention [3]. These
agents can either cooperate with or compete against each
other, depending on the context. In cooperative scenarios, many multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
methods [20, 41, 33, 38] aim to bridge the information
gap between agents [44] by training agents in a centralized manner, called centralized training with decentralized
execution, enabling agents to work together seamlessly
to accomplish cooperative tasks. Alternatively, fully decentralized methods[17, 40] seek to break free from the
constraints of centralized training, allowing agents to reach
collaboration in a simpler and decentralized manner. In
Figure 1: Infer the goal of others
competitive scenarios, NFSP [15], PSRO [19], and DeepNash [29] employ self-play to train agents for equilibrium strategies, allowing agents to adapt and
improve their policy. By considering how the agent affects the expected learning progress of other
agents, LOLA [10] and COLA [49] apply opponent shaping to this setting. Overall, these methods
focus on training agents in a way that accounts for their interactions, resulting in a set of policies that
enable effective collaboration or competition within a group of agents.
While the above methods emphasizes the collective behavior of agents, it is also crucial to consider
the role of individual agents, particularly self-interested agents, in these multi-agent environments.
A self-interested agent [37, 12] operates with the primary goal of maximizing its own benefits,
†

Correspondence to B zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

