Rethinking Model-based, Policy-based, and
Value-based Reinforcement Learning via the Lens of
Representation Complexity

Guhao Feng∗†

Han Zhong∗‡

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning (RL) encompasses diverse paradigms, including modelbased RL, policy-based RL, and value-based RL, each tailored to approximate
the model, optimal policy, and optimal value function, respectively. This work
investigates the potential hierarchy of representation complexity among these
RL paradigms. By utilizing computational complexity measures, including time
complexity and circuit complexity, we theoretically unveil a potential representation
complexity hierarchy within RL. We find that representing the model emerges as
the easiest task, followed by the optimal policy, while representing the optimal
value function presents the most intricate challenge. Additionally, we reaffirm this
hierarchy from the perspective of the expressiveness of Multi-Layer Perceptrons
(MLPs), which align more closely with practical deep RL and contribute to a
completely new perspective in theoretical studying representation complexity in
RL. Finally, we conduct deep RL experiments to validate our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

The past few years have witnessed the tremendous success of Reinforcement Learning (RL) [43] in
solving intricate real-world decision-making problems, such as Go [41] and robotics [27]. These
successes can be largely attributed to powerful function approximators, particularly Neural Networks
(NN) [30], and the evolution of modern RL algorithms. These algorithms can be categorized into
model-based RL, policy-based RL, and value-based RL based on their respective objectives of
approximating the underlying model, optimal policy, or optimal value function.
Despite the extensive theoretical analysis of RL algorithms in terms of statistical error [e.g., 5, 21, 42,
24, 23, 14, 17, 58, 51] and optimization error [e.g., 2, 49, 9, 29] lenses, a pivotal perspective often left
in the shadows is approximation error. Specifically, the existing literature predominantly relies on the
(approximate) realizability assumption, assuming that the given function class can sufficiently capture
the underlying model, optimal value function, or optimal policy. However, limited works examine
the representation complexity in different RL paradigms — the complexity of the function class
needed to represent the underlying model, optimal policy, or optimal value function. In particular, the
following problem remains elusive:
Is there a representation complexity hierarchy among model-based RL, policy-based RL, and
value-based RL?
To our best knowledge, the theoretical exploration of this question is limited, with only two exceptions
[13, 62]. [13] employs piecewise linear functions to represent both the model and value functions,
∗

Alphabetical order.
School of EECS, Peking University. Email: fenguhao@stu.pku.edu.cn
‡
Center for Data Science, Peking University. Email: hanzhong@stu.pku.edu.cn
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

