Sim2Real-Fire: A Multi-modal Simulation Dataset for
Forecast and Backtracking of Real-world Forest Fire

Yanzhi Li1,2
Lubo Wang1

Keqiu Li1
Die Zuo1

Guohui Li2
Qing Guo4

Zumin Wang3

Feng Zhang5

Changqing Ji3

Manyu Wang1∗

Di Lin1∗

1
Tianjin University, China
Tianjin Fire Science and Technology Research Institute of MEM, China
3
Dalian University, China
4
CFAR and IHPC, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
5
Hebei University, China
wmy22@tju.edu.cn di.lin@tju.edu.cn
2

Abstract
The latest research on wildfire forecast and backtracking has adopted AI models,
which require a large amount of data from wildfire scenarios to capture fire spread
patterns. This paper explores using cost-effective simulated wildfire scenarios to
train AI models and apply them to the analysis of real-world wildfire. This solution
requires AI models to minimize the Sim2Real gap, a brand-new topic in the fire
spread analysis research community. To investigate the possibility of minimizing
the Sim2Real gap, we collect the Sim2Real-Fire dataset that contains 1M simulated
scenarios with multi-modal environmental information for training AI models.
We prepare 1K real-world wildfire scenarios for testing the AI models. We also
propose a deep transformer, S2R-FireTr, which excels in considering the multimodal environmental information for forecasting and backtracking the wildfire.
S2R-FireTr surpasses state-of-the-art methods in real-world wildfire scenarios.

1

Introduction

The frequency and intensity of extreme weather events, such as high temperatures and droughts,
have escalated. This escalation has increased the frequency and scale of forest fires, rendering
fire extinguishing a formidable challenge. An accurate and real-time forest fire spread forecast is
imperative for organizing evacuations and commanding rescue operations. On the other hand, forest
fire backtracking helps identify high-risk ignition areas, assisting people in preventing potential fires.
Extensive studies have been conducted on forest fire spread forecast and backtracking. These studies
have given rise to three categories of methods based on the empirical, physical, or artificial intelligence
(AI) models. The empirical models [1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6; 7] only capture the statistical correlation between
observed fire data in real-world or the energy conservation, without considering the impact of physical
rules like the conductive, convective, and radiative modes of heat transfer on the fire spread. The
physical models [8; 9; 10; 11; 12] rely on the approximate physical rules, including the fluid dynamics,
combustion, and heat transfer, to forecast the forest fire spread. Furthermore, they also consider the
impact of environmental information about vegetation, atmosphere, and topography on fire spread.
The research on the empirical and physical models leads to the emergence of an array of simulators
of forest fire spread like BehavePlus [13], FARSITE [1], FIRETEC [14], WRF-SFIRE [12], and
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

