Identifying Equivalent Training Dynamics

William T. Redman∗
AIMdyn Inc.
UC Santa Barbara

Juan Bello-Rivas
Johns Hopkins University

Maria Fonoberova
AIMdyn Inc.

Ryan Mohr
AIMdyn Inc.

Igor Mezić†
AIMdyn Inc.
UC Santa Barbara

Yannis G. Kevrekidis
Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
Study of the nonlinear evolution deep neural network (DNN) parameters undergo
during training has uncovered regimes of distinct dynamical behavior. While a
detailed understanding of these phenomena has the potential to advance improvements in training efficiency and robustness, the lack of methods for identifying
when DNN models have equivalent dynamics limits the insight that can be gained
from prior work. Topological conjugacy, a notion from dynamical systems theory,
provides a precise definition of dynamical equivalence, offering a possible route
to address this need. However, topological conjugacies have historically been
challenging to compute. By leveraging advances in Koopman operator theory,
we develop a framework for identifying conjugate and non-conjugate training
dynamics. To validate our approach, we demonstrate that comparing Koopman
eigenvalues can correctly identify a known equivalence between online mirror
descent and online gradient descent. We then utilize our approach to: (a) identify
non-conjugate training dynamics between shallow and wide fully connected neural
networks; (b) characterize the early phase of training dynamics in convolutional
neural networks; (c) uncover non-conjugate training dynamics in Transformers that
do and do not undergo grokking. Our results, across a range of DNN architectures,
illustrate the flexibility of our framework and highlight its potential for shedding
new light on training dynamics.

1

Introduction

The analysis and experimentation of deep neural network (DNN) training continues to uncover
new – and in some cases, surprising – phenomena. By changing the architecture, optimization
hyper-parameters, and/or initialization, it is possible to identify regimes in which DNN parameters
evolve along trajectories (in parameter space) with linear dynamics [1, 2], low-dimensional dynamics
[3], correlated dynamics [4], lazy/rich dynamics [5, 6], and oscillatory dynamics [7, 8]. In some
cases, the training dynamics have been linked with the performance of the trained model [7, 9, 10],
providing new insight in DNN generalization. Additionally, detailed understanding of the dynamics
has led to improvements in training efficiency [4, 11], demonstrating the practical implications such
work can provide.
To obtain a more complete picture of DNN training, it is necessary to have a method by which
equivalent dynamics can be identified and distinguished from other, non-equivalent dynamics. The
construction of equivalence classes, which has fundamentally shaped the study of complex systems
∗
†

redmanw@aimdyn.com
mezici@aimdyn.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

