Constructing Semantics-Aware Adversarial Examples
with a Probabilistic Perspective

Andi Zhang∗
Computer Laboratory
University of Cambridge
az381@cantab.ac.uk

Mingtian Zhang
Centre for Artificial Intelligence
University College London
m.zhang@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Damon Wischik
Computer Laboratory
University of Cambridge
djw1005@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a probabilistic perspective on adversarial examples, allowing us to
embed subjective understanding of semantics as a distribution into the process
of generating adversarial examples, in a principled manner. Despite significant
pixel-level modifications compared to traditional adversarial attacks, our method
preserves the overall semantics of the image, making the changes difficult for
humans to detect. This extensive pixel-level modification enhances our method’s
ability to deceive classifiers designed to defend against adversarial attacks. Our
empirical findings indicate that the proposed methods achieve higher success rates
in circumventing adversarial defense mechanisms, while remaining difficult for
human observers to detect. Code can be found at https://github.com/andiac/
AdvPP.

1

Introduction

The purpose of generating adversarial examples is to deceive a classifier (which we refer to as
victim classifier) by making minimal changes to the original data’s semantic meaning. In image
classification, most existing adversarial techniques ensure the preservation of adversarial example
semantics by limiting their geometric distance (Lp distance) from the original image [39, 14, 4, 26].
While these methods can deceive classifiers using minimal geometric perturbations, they are not
as successful in black-box attack scenarios. Furthermore, the recent surge in adversarial defense
methods [26, 33] primarily targets geometric-based attacks, gradually reducing their effectiveness.
In response to these challenges, unrestricted adversarial attacks are gaining traction as a potential
solution. These methods employ more natural alterations, moving away from the small Lp norm
perturbations typical of traditional approaches. This shift towards unrestricted modifications offers a
more practical approach to adversarial attacks.
In this paper, we introduce a probabilistic perspective for adversarial examples. Through this innovative lens, both the victim classifier and geometric constraints are regarded as distinct distributions:
the victim distribution and the distance distribution. Adversarial examples naturally arise as samples
from the product of these distributions.
This probabilistic perspective offers an opportunity to transform traditional geometric-based constraints into semantic constraints. Traditional geometric constraints, when viewed through this
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

