Equivariant spatio-hemispherical networks for
diffusion MRI deconvolution
Axel Elaldi
New York University
axel.elaldi@nyu.edu

Guido Gerig
New York University
gerig@nyu.edu

Neel Dey
MIT CSAIL
dey@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Each voxel in a diffusion MRI (dMRI) image contains a spherical signal corresponding to the direction and strength of water diffusion in the brain. This paper
advances the analysis of such spatio-spherical data by developing convolutional
network layers that are equivariant to the E(3) × SO(3) group and account for
the physical symmetries of dMRI including rotations, translations, and reflections
of space alongside voxel-wise rotations. Further, neuronal fibers are typically
antipodally symmetric, a fact we leverage to construct highly efficient spatiohemispherical graph convolutions to accelerate the analysis of high-dimensional
dMRI data. In the context of sparse spherical fiber deconvolution to recover white
matter microstructure, our proposed equivariant network layers yield substantial
performance and efficiency gains, leading to better and more practical resolution
of crossing neuronal fibers and fiber tractography. These gains are experimentally
consistent across both simulation and in vivo human datasets.

1

Introduction

Instead of scalar intensities, each voxel of a diffusion MR image (dMRI) contains spatio-angular
measurements of local water diffusion [64]. As in Fig. 1, this yields spatio-spherical images living on
R3 × S 2 that are used to map neuronal organization in vivo [7, 44] alongside several other biomedical
use cases [35, 37, 56, 65, 71]. Despite its potential, deriving neuronal fiber pathways using dMRI is
hampered by significant partial voluming in both spatial and spherical domains due to limited clinical
scanner resolutions and low SNR [1]. This paper presents a state-of-the-art dMRI deconvolution
method to recover neuronal pathways in practical timeframes by developing highly efficient equivariant neural networks that account for dMRI’s spatio-spherical data geometry and the voxel-level antipodal symmetry of neuronal fibers, all while demonstrating robustness to clinical dMRI resolutions.
Need for deconvolution. The diffusivity at a voxel reflects the underlying local tissue microstructure [7, 8, 44]. As multiple neuronal fibers can cross within a given resolution-limited voxel,
recovering these fibers necessitates solving a blind fiber deconvolution problem at each voxel.
Several voxel-level fiber models have been proposed [5, 45, 67, 69, 73, 79] and this work focuses
on the widely used fiber Orientation Distribution Function (fODF) model, which represents the fiber
configuration at a voxel as a sparse non-negative spherical function [66]. fODFs are the first step of
common dMRI applications such as fiber tractography [37]. However, due to noise, subject motion,
and clinically viable sampling resolutions (e.g., ≤ 30 spherical samples per voxel), fODF recovery
is highly ill-posed and requires significant regularization.
Iterative solutions. Constrained spherical deconvolution (CSD) [66] is the workhorse algorithm
for dMRI deconvolution, solving the per-voxel fODF deconvolution problem iteratively, subject
to non-negativity constraints. Several extensions of CSD further regularize fODFs to be sparse
and/or spatially smooth [11, 12, 29, 57, 59, 74]. Further, as fODFs can be assumed to be antipodally
symmetric [40, 67], many iterative algorithms optimize only over the hemisphere to accelerate
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

