VQ-Map: Bird’s-Eye-View Map Layout Estimation in
Tokenized Discrete Space via Vector Quantization

Yiwei Zhang1,2 , Jin Gao1,2∗, Fudong Ge1,2 , Guan Luo1,2 , Bing Li1,2,5 ,
Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,4 , Haibin Ling6 , Weiming Hu1,2,3
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS), CASIA
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
4
Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI, CAS,
5
People AI, Inc, 6 Stony Brook University
{zhangyiwei2023,gefudong2022,zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn,
{jin.gao,guanl,bli,wmhu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, hling@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Bird’s-eye-view (BEV) map layout estimation requires an accurate and full understanding of the semantics for the environmental elements around the ego car to
make the results coherent and realistic. Due to the challenges posed by occlusion,
unfavourable imaging conditions and low resolution, generating the BEV semantic
maps corresponding to corrupted or invalid areas in the perspective view (PV) is
appealing very recently. The question is how to align the PV features with the
generative models to facilitate the map estimation. In this paper, we propose to
utilize a generative model similar to the Vector Quantized-Variational AutoEncoder
(VQ-VAE) to acquire prior knowledge for the high-level BEV semantics in the
tokenized discrete space. Thanks to the obtained BEV tokens accompanied with
a codebook embedding encapsulating the semantics for different BEV elements
in the groundtruth maps, we are able to directly align the sparse backbone image
features with the obtained BEV tokens from the discrete representation learning
based on a specialized token decoder module, and finally generate high-quality
BEV maps with the BEV codebook embedding serving as a bridge between PV
and BEV. We evaluate the BEV map layout estimation performance of our model,
termed VQ-Map, on both the nuScenes and Argoverse benchmarks, achieving
62.2/47.6 mean IoU for surround-view/monocular evaluation on nuScenes, as
well as 73.4 IoU for monocular evaluation on Argoverse, which all set a new
record for this map layout estimation task. The code and models are available on
https://github.com/Z1zyw/VQ-Map.

1

Introduction

BEV layouts represent high-dimensional structured data that encompasses significant prior knowledge,
particularly regarding road structures. While current methods for BEV map layout estimation mainly
focus on constructing dense BEV features [2, 1, 3] for semantic segmentation as map prediction,
they often overlook the incorporation of map prior knowledge. Additionally, occlusion and inherent
challenges in depth estimation often lead to inaccuracies in dense features, especially in the areas
that are corrupted or invalid in the PV. These factors contribute to incoherent and unrealistic BEV
layout results, often with numerous artifacts (see Fig. 1). Yet, humans can rely solely on partial
observations of a scene in the PV to imagine the entire coherent BEV layout elements. A natural
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

