Practical Bayesian Algorithm Execution via
Posterior Sampling

Chu Xin Cheng∗
California Institute of Technology
ccheng2@caltech.edu

Raul Astudillo∗
California Institute of Technology
rastudil@caltech.edu

Thomas Desautels
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
desautels2@llnl.gov

Yisong Yue
California Institute of Technology
yyue@caltech.edu

Abstract
We consider Bayesian algorithm execution (BAX), a framework for efficiently
selecting evaluation points of an expensive function to infer a property of interest
encoded as the output of a base algorithm. Since the base algorithm typically
requires more evaluations than are feasible, it cannot be directly applied. Instead,
BAX methods sequentially select evaluation points using a probabilistic numerical approach. Current BAX methods use expected information gain to guide
this selection. However, this approach is computationally intensive. Observing
that, in many tasks, the property of interest corresponds to a target set of points
defined by the function, we introduce PS-BAX, a simple, effective, and scalable
BAX method based on posterior sampling. PS-BAX is applicable to a wide range
of problems, including many optimization variants and level set estimation. Experiments across diverse tasks demonstrate that PS-BAX performs competitively
with existing baselines while being significantly faster, simpler to implement, and
easily parallelizable, setting a strong baseline for future research. Additionally, we
establish conditions under which PS-BAX is asymptotically convergent, offering
new insights into posterior sampling as an algorithm design paradigm.

1

Introduction

Many real-world problems can be cast as estimating a property of a black-box function with expensive
evaluations. Bayesian optimization (BO) [1] has focused on the case where the property of interest is
the function’s global optimum. Similarly, level set estimation [2] deals with the problem of estimating
the subset of points above (or below) a user-specified threshold.
In many cases, an algorithm to compute the property of interest is available, which we refer to as
the base algorithm. However, this algorithm typically requires more evaluations than are feasible in
practice and cannot be used directly. Instead, evaluation points must be carefully selected through
other means. Similar to BO and level set estimation, the Bayesian algorithm execution (BAX)
framework selects evaluation points using two key components: (1) a Bayesian probabilistic model
of the function and (2) a sequential sampling criterion that leverages this model to choose new points
for evaluation [3].
Existing approaches to BAX rely on expected information gain (EIG) as the criterion for selecting
which points to evaluate [3]. However, maximizing the EIG presents a significant computational
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

