R2-Gaussian: Rectifying Radiative Gaussian Splatting
for Tomographic Reconstruction

Ruyi Zha1

Tao Jun Lin1 Yuanhao Cai2,∗ Jiwen Cao1
Yanhao Zhang3 Hongdong Li1

1

The Australian National University 2 Johns Hopkins University
3
Robotics Institute, University of Technology Sydney
{ruyi.zha, taojun.lin, jiwen.cao, hongdong.li}@anu.edu.au
caiyuanhao1998@gmail.com yanhao.zhang@uts.edu.au

Abstract
3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS) has shown promising results in image rendering and
surface reconstruction. However, its potential in volumetric reconstruction tasks,
such as X-ray computed tomography, remains under-explored. This paper introduces R2 -Gaussian, the first 3DGS-based framework for sparse-view tomographic
reconstruction. By carefully deriving X-ray rasterization functions, we discover
a previously unknown integration bias in the standard 3DGS formulation, which
hampers accurate volume retrieval. To address this issue, we propose a novel rectification technique via refactoring the projection from 3D to 2D Gaussians. Our new
method presents three key innovations: (1) introducing tailored Gaussian kernels,
(2) extending rasterization to X-ray imaging, and (3) developing a CUDA-based differentiable voxelizer. Experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate
that our method outperforms state-of-the-art approaches in accuracy and efficiency.
Crucially, it delivers high-quality results in 4 minutes, which is 12× faster than
NeRF-based methods and on par with traditional algorithms. Code and models are
available on the project page https://github.com/Ruyi-Zha/r2_gaussian.

1

Introduction

Computed tomography (CT) is an essential imaging technique for noninvasively examining the
internal structure of objects. Most CT systems use X-rays as the imaging source thanks to their
ability to penetrate solid substances [20]. During a CT scan, an X-ray machine captures multi-angle
2D projections that measure ray attenuation through the material. As the core of CT, tomographic
reconstruction aims to recover the 3D density field of the object from its projections. This task is
challenging in two aspects. Firstly, the harmful X-ray radiation limits the acquisition of sufficient
and noise-free projections, making reconstruction a complex and ill-posed problem. Secondly,
time-sensitive applications like medical diagnosis require algorithms to deliver results promptly.
Existing tomography methods suffer from either suboptimal reconstruction quality or slow processing
speed. Traditional CT algorithms [13, 2, 55] deliver results in minutes but induce serious artifacts. Supervised learning-based approaches [32, 33, 10, 35] achieve promising outcomes by learning semantic
priors but struggle with out-of-distribution objects. Recently, neural radiance fields (NeRF) [43] have
been applied to tomography and perform well in per-case reconstruction [67, 66, 48, 6, 54]. However,
they are very time-consuming (> 30 minutes) because a huge amount of points have to be sampled
for volume rendering.
∗

Yuanhao Cai is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

