Compositional Generalization Across Distributional
Shifts with Sparse Tree Operations

Paul Soulos∗
Johns Hopkins University
psoulos1@jh.edu
Paul Smolensky
Johns Hopkins University and
Microsoft Research

Henry Conklin∗
University of Edinburgh

Jianfeng Gao
Microsoft Research

Mattia Opper∗
University of Edinburgh

Roland Fernandez
Microsoft Research

Abstract
Neural networks continue to struggle with compositional generalization, and this
issue is exacerbated by a lack of massive pre-training. One successful approach for
developing neural systems which exhibit human-like compositional generalization
is hybrid neurosymbolic techniques. However, these techniques run into the core
issues that plague symbolic approaches to AI: scalability and flexibility. The
reason for this failure is that at their core, hybrid neurosymbolic models perform
symbolic computation and relegate the scalable and flexible neural computation to
parameterizing a symbolic system. We investigate a unified neurosymbolic system
where transformations in the network can be interpreted simultaneously as both
symbolic and neural computation. We extend a unified neurosymbolic architecture
called the Differentiable Tree Machine in two central ways. First, we significantly
increase the model’s efficiency through the use of sparse vector representations of
symbolic structures. Second, we enable its application beyond the restricted set of
tree2tree problems to the more general class of seq2seq problems. The improved
model retains its prior generalization capabilities and, since there is a fully neural
path through the network, avoids the pitfalls of other neurosymbolic techniques
that elevate symbolic computation over neural computation.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models achieve remarkable performance
across a broad range of natural language tasks [71],
despite having difficulty generalizing outside of their
training data, struggling with new words [36], known
words in new contexts [29], and novel syntactic structures, like longer sequences with greater recursive depth
[30, 39]. Increasingly this problem is addressed through
data augmentation, which tries to make it less likely
a model will encounter something unlike what it sees
during training — reducing the degree by which it has
to generalize [1, 15, 26]. However, even models trained
on vast quantities of data struggle when evaluated on Figure 1: Generalization ability of our approach (sDTM) compared with baselines
examples unlike those seen during training [32].
across various out-of-distribution shifts, av∗
eraged over different datasets. See §5.
Work partially completed while at Microsoft Research.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

