Con4m: Context-aware Consistency Learning
Framework for Segmented Time Series Classification

Junru Chen
Zhejiang University
jrchen_cali@zju.edu.cn
Jing Xu
State Grid Power Supply Co. Ltd.
ltxu1111@gmail.com

Tianyu Cao
Zhejiang University
ty.cao@zju.edu.cn

Jiahe Li
Zhejiang University
jiaheli@zju.edu.cn

Tao Xiao
State Grid Power Supply Co. Ltd.
xtxjtu@163.com

Zhilong Chen
Zhejiang University
zhilongchen@zju.edu.cn

Yang Yang†
Zhejiang University
yangya@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Time Series Classification (TSC) encompasses two settings: classifying entire sequences or classifying segmented subsequences. The raw time series for segmented
TSC usually contain Multiple classes with Varying Duration of each class (MVD).
Therefore, the characteristics of MVD pose unique challenges for segmented TSC,
yet have been largely overlooked by existing works. Specifically, there exists a
natural temporal dependency between consecutive instances (segments) to be classified within MVD. However, mainstream TSC models rely on the assumption of
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.), focusing on independently modeling
each segment. Additionally, annotators with varying expertise may provide inconsistent boundary labels, leading to unstable performance of noise-free TSC models.
To address these challenges, we first formally demonstrate that valuable contextual information enhances the discriminative power of classification instances.
Leveraging the contextual priors of MVD at both the data and label levels, we
propose a novel consistency learning framework Con4m, which effectively utilizes
contextual information more conducive to discriminating consecutive segments in
segmented TSC tasks, while harmonizing inconsistent boundary labels for training. Extensive experiments across multiple datasets validate the effectiveness of
Con4m in handling segmented TSC tasks on MVD. The source code is available at
https://github.com/MrNobodyCali/Con4m.

1

Introduction

Time Series Classification (TSC) is one of the most challenging problems in the field of machine
learning. TSC aims to assign labels to a series of temporally ordered data points. These points either
form a complete sequence or are subsequences (segments) resulting from the segmentation of a long
time series. Existing works [50, 20] largely focus on the assumption of independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.), in which case each sequence or segment is regarded as an independent instance to
be classified, not differentiating between these two settings. In fact, for many practical applications,
the raw time series before segmentation for segmented TSC tasks contain Multiple classes with
†

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

