Taming Heavy-Tailed Losses in Adversarial Bandits
and the Best-of-Both-Worlds Setting

Duo Cheng
Virginia Tech
duocheng@vt.edu

Xingyu Zhou
Wayne State University
xingyu.zhou@wayne.edu

Bo Ji
Virginia Tech
boji@vt.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the multi-armed bandits problem in the best-of-both-worlds
(BOBW) setting with heavy-tailed losses, where the losses can be negative and
unbounded but have (1 + v)-th raw moments bounded by u1+v for some known
u > 0 and v ∈ (0, 1]. Specifically, we consider the BOBW setting where the
underlying environment can be either (oblivious) adversarial (i.e., the loss distribution can change arbitrarily over time) or stochastic (i.e., the loss distribution is
fixed over time), which is unknown to the decision-maker a prior. We propose
1
an algorithm and prove that it achieves a T 1+v -type worst-case (pseudo-)regret
in the adversarial regime and a log T -type gap-dependent regret in the stochastic
regime, where T is the time horizon. Compared to the state-of-the-art results, our
algorithm offers stronger high-probability regret guarantees (vs. expected regret
guarantees), and more importantly, relaxes a strong technical assumption on the
loss distribution, which is generally hard to verify in practice. As a byproduct,
relaxing this assumption leads to the first near-optimal regret result for heavy-tailed
bandits with Huber contamination in the adversarial regime (vs. the easier stochastic regime studied in all previous works). Our result also implies a high-probability
BOBW regret guarantee when the bounded true losses are protected with pure
Local Differential Privacy (LDP), while the existing work ensures the (weaker)
approximate LDP with the regret bounds in expectation only.

1

Introduction

Consider the multi-armed bandits (MAB) problem (Auer et al., 2002a,b), which is a useful framework
for sequential decision-making under uncertainty and can be formulated as repeated interactions
between the environment and a (learning) algorithm. In each of the total T rounds indexed by t, the
algorithm plays an action at from a fixed set of K actions (assuming K ⩽ T ). Simultaneously, the
environment determines the losses of all actions ℓt ∈ RK . The algorithm observes and suffers the
loss associated with at (denoted by ℓt,at ). The goal of the algorithm is to minimize the cumulative
loss over T rounds, or equivalently, to minimize the regret, defined as the difference between its
cumulative loss and that incurred by playing the best-fixed action (in hindsight) all the time. Without
observing the losses of the other actions, the algorithm must “infer” the optimal action through
interactions on the fly, facing the well-known trade-off between exploration and exploitation.
Depending on how the losses are determined, MAB problem is typically studied in two regimes: 1)
the stochastic regime, where the loss of each action is drawn from a fixed (but unknown) distribution
over time; 2) the adversarial regime, where the losses can be arbitrary (within some known class).
Typically, the losses are assumed to have a support on a bounded interval (e.g., [0, 1]), and the
fundamental limits have been well understood: 1) in the stochastic regime, a number of optimism-

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

