Parameterized Approximation Schemes for
Fair-Range Clustering

Zhen Zhang1,2 , Xiaohong Chen1,2,∗ , Limei Liu1,2 , Jie Chen1,2 ,
Junyu Huang3 , Qilong Feng3,2∗
1
National Key Laboratory Cultivation Base for Data Intelligence and Smart Society,
Hunan University of Technology and Business, Changsha 410205, China
2
Xiangjiang Laboratory, Changsha 410205, China
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University,
Changsha 410083, China
zz@hutb.edu.cn, csu_cxh@163.com, seagullm@163.com,
chemjay@hnu.edu.cn, junyuhuang@csu.edu.cn, csufeng@mail.csu.edu.cn

Abstract
Fair-range clustering extends classical clustering formulations by associating each
data point with one or more demographic labels. It imposes lower and upper
bound constraints on the number of facilities opened for each label, ensuring
fair representation of all demographic groups by the selected facilities. In this
paper we focus on the fair-range k-median and k-means problems in Euclidean
spaces. We give (1 + ε)-approximation algorithms with fixed-parameter tractable
running times for both problems, parameterized by the numbers of opened facilities
and demographic labels. For Euclidean metrics, these are the first parameterized
approximation schemes for the problems, improving upon the previously known
O(1)-approximation ratios given by Thejaswi et al. (KDD 2022).

1

Introduction

Clustering seeks to partition a given set of clients into disjoint, cohesive clusters. Among the many
formalizations of clustering, the k-median and k-means problems are perhaps the most prevalent ones,
owing to the concise nature of their descriptions. Given a set of clients and facilities in a metric space
along with a positive integer k, the k-median and k-means problems aim to open at most k facilities
and connect each client to the nearest opened facility, such that the sum of the client-connection
costs is minimized. In the k-median problem, the connection cost of each client is its distance to
the corresponding facility, while in the k-means problem, it is the squared distance. Despite their
seemingly simple definitions, the k-median and k-means problems are computationally challenging,
and the development of their approximation algorithms continues to be a vibrant area of research. The
current best approximation guarantees are the ratios of 2.613 [Gowda et al., 2023] for the k-median
problem and 9 [Ahmadian et al., 2020] for the k-means problem.
The k-median and k-means problems are designed to maximize the similarity between clients and
their corresponding facilities, allowing the opened facilities to be considered representative points for
the client set. This understanding underscores the important roles that the k-median and k-means
problems play in data summarization [Moens et al., 1999, Girdhar and Dudek, 2012]. However,
algorithms developed for these problems can often yield unfair summarization of socioeconomic data,
as they prioritize minimizing the clustering costs over considering the distribution of demographic
labels (e.g., gender, age, race) associated with the opened facilities [Kay et al., 2015]. Driven by this
∗

Corresponding Authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

