LISA: Layerwise Importance Sampling for
Memory-Efficient Large Language Model Fine-Tuning

Rui Pan♠∗ , Xiang Liu♣∗ , Shizhe Diao♦ , Renjie Pi♡ , Jipeng Zhang♡ ,
Chi Han♠ , Tong Zhang♠
♠
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
♣
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology(Guangzhou)
♦
NVIDIA ♡ The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{ruip4, chihan3, tozhang}@illinois.edu
xliu886@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn {sdiaoaa, rpi, jzhanggr}@ust.hk

Abstract
The machine learning community has witnessed impressive advancements since
large language models (LLMs) first appeared. Yet, their massive memory consumption has become a significant roadblock to large-scale training. For instance,
a 7B model typically requires at least 60 GB of GPU memory with full parameter
training, which presents challenges for researchers without access to high-resource
environments. Parameter efficient fine-tuning techniques such as Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) have been proposed to alleviate this problem. However, in most
large-scale fine-tuning settings, their performance does not reach the level of full
parameter training because they confine the parameter search to a low-rank subspace. Attempting to complement this deficiency, we investigate the layerwise
properties of LoRA on fine-tuning tasks and observe an unexpected but consistent
skewness of weight norms across different layers. Utilizing this key observation, a
surprisingly simple training strategy is discovered, which outperforms both LoRA
and full parameter training in a wide range of settings with memory costs as low as
LoRA. We name it Layerwise Importance Sampled AdamW (LISA), a promising
alternative for LoRA, which applies the idea of importance sampling to different layers in LLMs and randomly freeze most middle layers during optimization.
Experimental results show that with similar or less GPU memory consumption,
LISA surpasses LoRA or even full parameter tuning in downstream fine-tuning
tasks, where LISA consistently outperforms LoRA by over 10%-35% in terms of
MT-Bench score while achieving on-par or better performance in MMLU, AGIEval
and WinoGrande. On large models, specifically LLaMA-2-70B, LISA surpasses
LoRA on MT-Bench, GSM8K, and PubMedQA, demonstrating its effectiveness
across different domains.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) like ChatGPT excel in tasks such as writing documents, generating
complex code, answering questions, and conducting human-like conversations [1]. With LLMs
being increasingly applied in diverse task domains, domain-specific fine-tuning has emerged as a
critical strategy to enhance their downstream capabilities [2, 3, 4, 5]. Nevertheless, these methods
are typically time-intensive and consume substantial computational resources, posing significant
challenges to the development of large-scale models [6]. For example, continual pre-training typically
*

Equal Contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

