Dimension-free Private Mean Estimation for
Anisotropic Distributions

Yuval Dagan
School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University
ydagan@tauex.tau.ac.il

Michael I. Jordan
Department of EECS and Statistics
University of California Berkeley
michael_jordan@berkeley.edu

Xuelin Yang
Department of Statistics
University of California Berkeley
xuelin@berkeley.edu

Lydia Zakynthinou
Department of EECS
University of California Berkeley
lydiazak@berkeley.edu

Nikita Zhivotovskiy
Department of Statistics
University of California Berkeley
zhivotovskiy@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We present differentially private algorithms for high-dimensional mean estimation. Previous private estimators on distributions over Rd suffer from a curse of
dimensionality, as they require Ω(d1/2 ) samples to achieve non-trivial error, even
in cases where O(1) samples suffice without privacy. This rate is unavoidable
when the distribution is isotropic, namely, when the covariance is a multiple of the
identity matrix. Yet, real-world data is often highly anisotropic, with signals concentrated on a small number of principal components. We develop estimators that
are appropriate for such signals—our estimators are (ε, δ)-differentially private and
have sample complexity that is dimension-independent for anisotropic subgaussian
distributions. Given n samples from a distribution with known covariance-proxy Σ
and unknown mean µ, we present an estimator µ̂ that achieves error , ∥µ̂−µ∥2 ≤ α,
as long as n ≳ tr(Σ)/α2 + tr(Σ1/2 )/(αε). We show that this is the optimal sample complexity for this task up to logarithmic factors. Moreover, for the case
of unknown covariance, we present an algorithm whose sample complexity has
improved dependence on the dimension, from d1/2 to d1/4 .

1

Introduction

Machine learning is increasingly deployed in real-world settings to learn about properties of populations, both large and small. When the data comes from human populations, it is essential that
algorithm design allows inferring properties of populations without revealing potentially sensitive
information about specific individuals in the population. That sensitive information can be revealed,
inadvertently or adversarially, has been demonstrated in numerous ways, including via reconstruction
attacks [21, 24], as well as membership-inference attacks [56], often targeting sensitive genomic
data [34, 55, 64]. To mitigate the risk of privacy violations in general database theory, Dwork, McSherry, Nissim, and Smith [25] proposed the rigorous guarantee of differential privacy (DP), which has
∗

Authors ordered alphabetically.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

