Low Degree Hardness for Broadcasting on Trees

Elchanan Mossel
Department of Mathematics
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
elmos@mit.edu

Han Huang
Department of Mathematics
University of Missouri
Columbia, MO 65203
hhuang@missouri.edu

Abstract
We study the low-degree hardness of broadcasting on trees. Broadcasting on trees
has been extensively studied in statistical physics, in computational biology in
relation to phylogenetic reconstruction and in statistics and computer science in
the context of block model inference, and as a simple data model for algorithms
that may require depth for inference.
The inference of the root can be carried by celebrated Belief Propagation (BP)
algorithm which achieves Bayes-optimal performance. Recent works indicated that
this algorithm in fact requires high level of complexity. Moitra, Mossel and Sandon
constructed a chain for which estimating the root better than random (for a typical
input) is N C1 complete. Kohler and Mossel constructed chains such that for trees
with N leaves, recovering the root better than random requires a polynomial of
degree N Ω(1) . Both works above asked if such complexity bounds hold in general
below the celebrated Kesten-Stigum bound.
In this work, we prove that this is indeed the case for low degree polynomials.
We show that for the broadcast problem using any Markov chain on trees with
N leaves, below the Kesten Stigum bound, any O(log N ) degree polynomial has
vanishing correlation with the root.
Our result is one of the first low-degree lower bound that is proved in a setting that
is not based or easily reduced to a product measure.

1

Introduction

Understanding the computational complexity inference problems of random instances has been
extensively studies in different research areas including statistics, cryptography, computational
complexity, computational learning theory and statistical physics. The emerging field of research is
mainly devoted to the study of computational-to-statistical gaps. ([3, 41, 24])
Recently, low-degree polynomials have emerged as a popular tool for predicting computationalto-statistical gaps, especially in the context of the Bayesian framework. Our work follows [23] in
studying the polynomial hardness of broadcasting on trees.
A very exciting line of work, including [19, 18, 25, 4, 15, 26, 17, 9, 40] recently showed that the
“low-degree heuristic” can be used to predict computational-statistical gaps for a variety of problems
such as recovery in general stochastic block models, sparse PCA, tensor PCA, the planted clique
problem, certification in the zero-temperature Sherrington-Kirkpatrick model, the planted sparse
vector problem, and for finding solutions in random k-SAT problems.
Interestingly, it was observed that the predictions from this method often agree with predictions from
statistical physics heuristics based on the replica and cavity methods which are closely related to the
analysis of BP/AMP fixed points, see e.g. [12, 13, 28]).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

