Near-Optimal Dynamic Regret for Adversarial
Linear Mixture MDPs
Long-Fei Li, Peng Zhao, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{lilf, zhaop, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
We study episodic linear mixture MDPs with the unknown transition and adversarial rewards under full-information feedback, employing dynamic regret as the
performance measure. We start with in-depth analyses of the strengths and limitations of the two most popular methods: occupancy-measure-based and policy-based
methods. We observe that while the occupancy-measure-based method is effective
in addressing non-stationary environments, it encounters difficulties with the unknown transition. In contrast, the policy-based method can deal with the unknown
transition effectively but faces challenges in handling non-stationary environments.
Building on this, we propose a novel algorithm that combines the benefits of both
methods. Specifically, it employs (i) an occupancy-measure-based global optimization with a two-layer structure to handle non-stationary environments; and (ii) a
policy-based variance-aware value-targeted regression to tackle the unknown transition.
p these two parts by a novel conversion. Our algorithm enjoys an
√ We bridge
e
O(d H 3 K + HK(H + P̄K )) dynamic regret, where d is the feature dimension,
H is the episode length, K is the number of episodes, P̄K is the non-stationarity
measure. We show it is minimax optimal up to logarithmic factors by establishing
a matching lower bound. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that
achieves near-optimal dynamic regret for adversarial linear mixture MDPs with
the unknown transition without prior knowledge of the non-stationarity measure.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) studies the problem where a learner interacts with the environments
and aims to maximize the cumulative reward [Sutton and Barto, 2018], which has achieved significant
success in games [Silver et al., 2016], robotics [Kober et al., 2013], large language model [Ouyang
et al., 2022] and so on. The interaction is usually modeled as Markov Decision Processes (MDPs).
Research on MDPs can be broadly divided into two lines based on the reward generation mechanism.
The first line of work [Jaksch et al., 2010, Azar et al., 2013, 2017, He et al., 2021] considers the
stochastic MDPs where the reward is sampled from a fixed distribution. In many real-world scenarios,
however, the assumption of fixed reward distributions may not hold, as rewards can vary over time.
This motivates the study on adversarial MDPs [Even-Dar et al., 2009, Yu et al., 2009, Zimin and
Neu, 2013, Jin et al., 2020a], where rewards might change in an adversarial manner. To address the
challenges of large-scale MDPs, recent studies have extended these two frameworks to incorporate
function approximation, allowing RL algorithms to handle large state and action spaces. Two popular
models are linear mixture MDPs [Ayoub et al., 2020] and linear MDPs [Jin et al., 2020b].
In this work, we focus on linear mixture MDPs with adversarial rewards, unknown transition and
full-information feedback. Though significant advances have been achieved for this setting [Cai et al.,
2020, He et al., 2022], they choose static regret as the performance measure, which benchmarks the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

