DG-SLAM: Robust Dynamic Gaussian Splatting
SLAM with Hybrid Pose Optimization

Yueming Xu1∗

Haochen Jiang1∗ Zhongyang Xiao2
1

Fudan University

2

Jianfeng Feng1

Li Zhang1†

Autonomous Driving Division, NIO

https://github.com/fudan-zvg/DG-SLAM

Abstract
Achieving robust and precise pose estimation in dynamic scenes is a significant
research challenge in Visual Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM).
Recent advancements integrating Gaussian Splatting into SLAM systems have
proven effective in creating high-quality renderings using explicit 3D Gaussian
models, significantly improving environmental reconstruction fidelity. However,
these approaches depend on a static environment assumption and face challenges
in dynamic environments due to inconsistent observations of geometry and photometry. To address this problem, we propose DG-SLAM, the first robust dynamic
visual SLAM system grounded in 3D Gaussians, which provides precise camera
pose estimation alongside high-fidelity reconstructions. Specifically, we propose
effective strategies, including motion mask generation, adaptive Gaussian point
management, and a hybrid camera tracking algorithm to improve the accuracy and
robustness of pose estimation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that DG-SLAM
delivers state-of-the-art performance in camera pose estimation, map reconstruction, and novel-view synthesis in dynamic scenes, outperforming existing methods
meanwhile preserving real-time rendering ability.

1

Introduction

Visual simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM), the task of reconstructing a 3D map within
an unknown environment while simultaneously estimating the camera pose, is recognized as a critical
component to achieving autonomous navigation in novel 3D environments for mobile robots [1].
It has been widely used in various forms in fields such as robotics, autonomous driving, and augmented/virtual reality (AR/VR). However, the majority of previous research [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
typically relies on the assumption of static environments, limiting the practical applicability of this
technology in daily life. Consequently, how to achieve accurate and robust pose estimation in dynamic
scenes remains an urgent problem to be addressed for mobile robots.
Recently, many researchers [6, 7, 8, 9, 10] have endeavored to replace the conventional explicit
representations used in visual SLAM, such as Signed Distance Function (SDF), voxel grids [11],
meshes [12], and surfel clouds [13], with the neural radiance field (NeRF) [14] approach for reconstructing the neural implicit map. This novel map representation is more continuous, efficient, and
able to be optimized with differentiable rendering, which has the potential to benefit applications
like navigation and reconstruction. However, these methods exhibit two primary issues: the scene’s
bounds are required to be predefined to initialize the neural voxel grid; and the implicit representation
proves challenging for information fusion and editing. To address these problems, recent works
∗

Yueming Xu and Haochen Jiang contribute equally to this work.
Li Zhang (lizhangfd@fudan.edu.cn) is the corresponding author with School of Data Science, Fudan
University.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

