OptEx: Expediting First-Order Optimization with
Approximately Parallelized Iterations
Yao Shu#† , Jiongfeng Fang‡ , Ying Tiffany He‡ , Fei Richard Yu‡§
†
Guangdong Lab of AI and Digital Economy (SZ), China
‡
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
§
School of Information Technology, Carleton University, Canada

Abstract
First-order optimization (FOO) algorithms are pivotal in numerous computational
domains, such as reinforcement learning and deep learning. However, their application to complex tasks often entails signiﬁcant optimization inefﬁciency due to
their need of many sequential iterations for convergence. In response, we introduce ﬁrst-order optimization expedited with approximately parallelized iterations
(OptEx), the ﬁrst general framework that enhances the optimization efﬁciency of
FOO by leveraging parallel computing to directly mitigate its requirement of many
sequential iterations for convergence. To achieve this, OptEx utilizes a kernelized
gradient estimation that is based on the history of evaluated gradients to predict
the gradients required by the next few sequential iterations in FOO, which helps to
break the inherent iterative dependency and hence enables the approximate parallelization of iterations in FOO. We further establish theoretical guarantees for the
estimation error of our kernelized gradient estimation and the iteration complexity
of SGD-based OptEx, conﬁrming that the estimation error diminishes to zero as
the history of gradients accumulates
and that our SGD-based OptEx enjoys an
√
effective acceleration rate of Θ( N ) over standard SGD given parallelism of N ,
in terms of the sequential iterations required for convergence. Finally, we provide
extensive empirical studies, including synthetic functions, reinforcement learning
tasks, and neural network training on various datasets, to underscore the substantial efﬁciency improvements achieved by OptEx in practice. Our implementation
is available at https://github.com/youyve/OptEx.

1

Introduction

First-order optimization (FOO) algorithms, such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [1], Nesterov
Accelerated Gradient (NGA) [2], AdaGrad [3], Adam [4] etc., have already been the cornerstone of
many computational disciplines, driving advancements in areas ranging from reinforcement learning [5] to machine learning [6]. These algorithms, which are widely known for their straightforward form of iterative gradient-based updates, are fundamental in solving both simple and intricate
optimization problems. However, their applications usually encounter substantial optimization inefﬁciency, especially when addressing complex functions that not only are expensive in evaluating
their function values and gradients but also necessitate a large number of sequential iterations to
converge in practice, e.g., deep reinforcement learning [7] and neural network training [8].
To this end, parallel computing has been widely used in the literature to considerably enhance the optimization (e.g., time) efﬁciency of FOO by reducing the evaluation cost of function and gradient per
iteration in FOO [9]. For instance, in the ﬁeld of neural network training, techniques that are based
# Correspondence to: Yao Shu <shuyao@gml.ac.cn>
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

