Testably Learning Polynomial Threshold Functions

Stefan Tiegel
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
stefan.tiegel@inf.ethz.ch

Lucas Slot
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
lucas.slot@inf.ethz.ch

Manuel Wiedmer
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
manuel.wiedmer@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Rubinfeld & Vasilyan recently introduced the framework of testable learning as
an extension of the classical agnostic model. It relaxes distributional assumptions
which are difficult to verify by conditions that can be checked efficiently by a tester.
The tester has to accept whenever the data truly satisfies the original assumptions,
and the learner has to succeed whenever the tester accepts. We focus on the setting
where the tester has to accept standard Gaussian data. There, it is known that
basic concept classes such as halfspaces can be learned testably with the same time
complexity as in the (distribution-specific) agnostic model. In this work, we ask
whether there is a price to pay for testably learning more complex concept classes.
In particular, we consider polynomial threshold functions (PTFs), which naturally
generalize halfspaces. We show that PTFs of arbitrary constant degree can be
testably learned up to excess error ε > 0 in time npoly(1/ε) . This qualitatively
matches the best known guarantees in the agnostic model. Our results build on
a connection between testable learning and fooling. In particular, we show that
distributions that approximately match at least poly(1/ε) moments of the standard
Gaussian fool constant-degree PTFs (up to error ε). As a secondary result, we
prove that a direct approach to show testable learning (without fooling), which was
successfully used for halfspaces, cannot work for PTFs.

1

Introduction

The PAC learning model of Valiant [30] has long served as a test-bed to study which learning tasks can
be performed efficiently and which might be computationally difficult. One drawback of this model is
that it is inherently noiseless. In order to capture noisy learning tasks, the following extension, called
the agnostic model, has been introduced [19, 24]: Let F be a class of boolean functions and let Djoint
be an (unknown) distribution over example-label-pairs in X × {±1}. Typically, X = {0, 1}n or Rn .
As input, we receive iid samples from Djoint . For a small ε > 0, our task is to output a classifier fˆ
(not necessarily in F) whose loss L(fˆ, Djoint ) := P(x,z)∼Djoint (fˆ(x) ̸= z) is at most opt + ε, where
opt := inf f ∈F L(f, Djoint ). The parameter opt thus indicates how "noisy" the instance is. We say
that an algorithm agnostically learns F up to error ε if it outputs such an fˆ. This model is appealing
since it makes assumptions neither on the distribution of the input, nor on the type and amount of
noise. After running an agnostic learning algorithm, we can therefore be certain that the output fˆ
achieves error close to that of the best function in F even without knowing what distribution the data
came from.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

