Terra: A Multimodal Spatio-Temporal
Dataset Spanning the Earth

1

Wei Chen1 Xixuan Hao1 Yuankai Wu2 Yuxuan Liang1∗
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 2 Sichuan University
onedeanxxx@gmail.com, yuxliang@outlook.com

Abstract
Since the inception of our planet, the meteorological environment, as reflected
through spatio-temporal data, has always been a fundamental factor influencing
human life, socio-economic progress, and ecological conservation. A comprehensive exploration of this data is thus imperative to gain a deeper understanding
and more accurate forecasting of these environmental shifts. Despite the success
of deep learning techniques within the realm of spatio-temporal data and earth
science, existing public datasets are beset with limitations in terms of spatial scale,
temporal coverage, and reliance on limited time series data. These constraints
hinder their optimal utilization in practical applications. To address these issues,
we introduce Terra, a multimodal spatio-temporal dataset spanning the earth. This
dataset encompasses hourly time series data from 6,480,000 grid areas worldwide
over the past 45 years, while also incorporating multimodal spatial supplementary
information including geo-images and explanatory text. Through a detailed data
analysis and evaluation of existing deep learning models within earth sciences,
utilizing our constructed dataset. we aim to provide valuable opportunities for
enhancing future research in spatio-temporal data mining, thereby advancing towards more spatio-temporal general intelligence. Our source code and data can be
accessed at https://github.com/CityMind-Lab/NeurIPS24-Terra.

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of remote sensing satellite systems [32, 27], radar monitoring devices [77,
65], and various advanced geographical observation technologies, spatio-temporal data [16, 79],
particularly those pertaining to the Earth’s environment and climate, are becoming increasingly
available. Analyzing and mining valuable knowledge from such spatio-temporal data is crucial for
many real-world applications, including environmental monitoring [37], disaster management [75],
urban planning [40], and climate change assessment [76]. In the era of sensory artificial intelligence,
an array of methods has been devised, ranging from conventional time series and spatial statistical
analysis tools [80] to cutting-edge spatio-temporal deep learning models [30], for the analysis and
utilization of domain-specific data. Despite remarkable achievements, there remains a huge gap
between mainstream spatio-temporal data mining research [94] and the recent shift towards artificial
general intelligence research [21], where the latter aims to address various challenges in a unified
manner, while the generalizability and scalability challenge still lies in the former.
What causes this gap, or in other words, what measures can be taken to further advance research
in spatio-temporal general intelligence? From historical experience, comprehensive, large-scale,
high-quality datasets are crucial for the progress of any research community in any field. For
instance, the ImageNet dataset [26], which has historically driven the development of the Computer
Vision community, and the Common Crawl dataset [64], which is currently fostering growth in the
∗

Y. Liang is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

