(FL)2: Overcoming Few Labels in Federated
Semi-Supervised Learning

Seungjoo Lee

Thanh-Long V. Le
Jaemin Shin
Sung-Ju Lee
KAIST
Republic of Korea
{seungjoo.lee,thanhlong0780,jaemin.shin,profsj}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is a distributed machine learning framework that trains
accurate global models while preserving clients’ privacy-sensitive data. However,
most FL approaches assume that clients possess labeled data, which is often not the
case in practice. Federated Semi-Supervised Learning (FSSL) addresses this label
deficiency problem, targeting situations where only the server has a small amount
of labeled data while clients do not. However, a significant performance gap exists
between Centralized Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) and FSSL. This gap arises
from confirmation bias, which is more pronounced in FSSL due to multiple local
training epochs and the separation of labeled and unlabeled data. We propose (FL)2 ,
a robust training method for unlabeled clients using sharpness-aware consistency
regularization. We show that regularizing the original pseudo-labeling loss is
suboptimal, and hence we carefully select unlabeled samples for regularization.
We further introduce client-specific adaptive thresholding and learning statusaware aggregation to adjust the training process based on the learning progress
of each client. Our experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate that
our approach significantly improves performance and bridges the gap with SSL,
particularly in scenarios with scarce labeled data. The source code is available at
https://github.com/seungjoo-ai/FLFL-NeurIPS24

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) [1] is a distributed machine learning system that trains accurate global models
while preserving clients’ privacy-sensitive data. Each FL client trains its local model on their device
using only their data, and the server aggregates these local models into a global model. As a result,
clients’ private data is protected as only the local models’ weights are shared with the server.
Because of its privacy-preserving nature, FL has garnered recent attention, with efforts to make it
reliable and efficient [2, 3, 4]. However, most previous FL studies assumed that clients have labeled
data, which is unrealistic in practical settings for two reasons. First, clients are often reluctant or lack
the motivation to label data. Second, certain data types require domain expertise during the labeling
process [5, 6]. For example, labeling medical data demands specialized knowledge and expertise.
Similarly, sensory data, which can have multiple dimensions, is difficult for most clients to interpret
accurately. Therefore, we envision a labels-at-server [7] scenario as more realistic for FL, where a
small amount of labeled data is available only at the server while the clients’ data remains unlabeled.
Various Federated Semi-Supervised Learning (FSSL) approaches [8, 7, 9, 10, 11] have been developed
for the labels-at-server scenario. However, there is a substantial performance gap between FSSL
and centralized Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL), particularly when labeled data is limited. Fig. 1
illustrates this issue across varying amounts of labeled data on the CIFAR10 dataset [12]. When a
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

