Dataset Decomposition: Faster LLM Training with
Variable Sequence Length Curriculum

Hadi Pouransari1,◦ Chun-Liang Li1 Jen-Hao Rick Chang1
Pavan Kumar Anasosalu Vasu1 Cem Koc1 Vaishaal Shankar2,† Oncel Tuzel1
1
Apple 2 Anthropic

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) are commonly trained on datasets consisting of
fixed-length token sequences. These datasets are created by randomly concatenating documents of various lengths and then chunking them into sequences of a
predetermined target length (concat-and-chunk). Recent attention implementations
mask cross-document attention, reducing the effective length of a chunk of tokens.
Additionally, training on long sequences becomes computationally prohibitive due
to the quadratic cost of attention. In this study, we introduce dataset decomposition,
a novel variable sequence length training technique, to tackle these challenges. We
decompose a dataset into a union of buckets, each containing sequences of the same
size extracted from a unique document. During training, we use variable sequence
length and batch-size, sampling simultaneously from all buckets with a curriculum.
In contrast to the concat-and-chunk baseline, which incurs a fixed attention cost at
every step of training, our proposed method incurs a computational cost proportional to the actual document lengths at each step, resulting in significant savings
in training time. We train an 8k context-length 1B model at the same cost as a 2k
context-length model trained with the baseline approach. Experiments on a webscale corpus demonstrate that our approach significantly enhances performance
on standard language evaluations and long-context benchmarks, reaching target
accuracy with up to 6× faster training compared to the baseline. Our method not
only enables efficient pretraining on long sequences but also scales effectively with
dataset size. Lastly, we shed light on a critical yet less studied aspect of training
large language models: the distribution and curriculum of sequence lengths, which
results in a non-negligible difference in performance.*

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are often pretrained autoregressively (i.e., predicting the next token
given a context) on large text corpora sourced from the web. Examples include The Pile [19],
RefinedWeb [46], RedPajama [14], and DOLMA [57]. Each of these datasets comprises multiple
documents, ranging from Wikipedia articles to books and code repositories. While the individual
lengths of the documents vary from a few words (e.g., a message) to hundreds of thousands of words
(e.g., a book), the training infrastructure often supports only a limited sequence length in a batch.
To facilitate efficient training, document chunking is necessary. In this paper, we investigate the
influence of document chunking, propose alternative strategies, and evaluate the proposed strategies
with careful experiments.
◦Corresponding author: mpouransari@apple.com, † Work is done when at Apple.
* Code to be available at https://github.com/apple/ml-dataset-decomposition.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

