Beyond Primal-Dual Methods in Bandits with
Stochastic and Adversarial Constraints
Martino Bernasconi†

Matteo Castiglioni‡

Andrea Celli†

Federico Fusco∗

†

Bocconi university
Politecnico di Milano
∗
Sapienza University of Rome
‡

{martino.bernasconi,andrea.celli2}@unibocconi.it,
matteo.castiglioni@polimi.it, federico.fusco@uniroma1.it

Abstract
We address a generalization of the bandit with knapsacks problem, where a learner
aims to maximize rewards while satisfying an arbitrary set of long-term constraints.
Our goal is to design best-of-both-worlds algorithms that perform optimally under
both stochastic and adversarial constraints. Previous works address this problem
via primal-dual methods, and require some stringent assumptions, namely the
Slater’s condition, and in adversarial settings, they either assume knowledge of
a lower bound on the Slater’s parameter, or impose strong requirements on the
primal and dual regret minimizers such as requiring weak adaptivity. We propose
an alternative and more natural approach based on optimistic estimations of the
constraints. Surprisingly, we show that estimating the constraints with an UCBlike approach guarantees optimal performances. Our algorithm consists of two
main components: (i) a regret minimizer working on moving strategy sets and
(ii) an estimate of the feasible set as an optimistic weighted empirical mean of
previous samples. The key challenge in this approach is designing adaptive weights
that meet the different requirements for stochastic and adversarial constraints.
Our algorithm is significantly simpler than previous approaches, and has a cleaner
analysis. Moreover, ours is the first best-of-both-worlds algorithm providing bounds
logarithmic √
in the number of constraints. Additionally, in stochastic settings, it
provides e
O( T ) regret without Slater’s condition.

1

Introduction

We address the problem faced by a decision maker who aims to maximize its cumulative reward over
a time horizon T , while satisfying an arbitrary set of m long-term constraints. At each round t, the
learner selects an action at from a finite set of K actions, and then observes a reward ft (at ) and
some costs gt (at ) ∈ [−1, 1]m . The goal is to design best-of-both-worlds algorithms for this problem
that perform optimally under both stochastic and adversarial constraints. We always assume rewards
are generated adversarially. This is because the real complexity of the problem is captured by the
nature of the constraints, so that transitioning from adversarial to stochastic rewards under the same
type of constraints does not affect our results.
The first works on bandits with constraints focus on budget constraints, a.k.a bandit with knapsack
(BwK) [7] study the settings in which both rewards and constraints are i.i.d. and propose an UCBbased approach, combined with primal-dual method. Agrawal and Devanur [2] provide an UCB-like
approach for more general rewards and costs. Immorlica et al. [21], Kesselheim and Singla [22]
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

