Learning to Predict Structural Vibrations
Jan van Delden1,* , Julius Schultz2 , Christopher Blech2 , Sabine C. Langer2 , and Timo Lüddecke1
2

1
Institute of Computer Science, University of Göttingen
Institute for Acoustics and Dynamics, Technische Universität Braunschweig
*
Correspondence: jan.vandelden@uni-goettingen.de

Abstract
In mechanical structures like airplanes, cars and houses, noise is generated and
transmitted through vibrations. To take measures to reduce this noise, vibrations need to be simulated with expensive numerical computations. Deep learning surrogate models present a promising alternative to classical numerical simulations as they can be evaluated magnitudes faster, while trading-off accuracy.
To quantify such trade-offs systematically and foster the development of methods, we present a benchmark on the task of predicting the vibration of harmonically excited plates. The benchmark features a total of 12,000 plate geometries with varying forms of beadings, material, boundary conditions, load position and sizes with associated numerical solutions. To address the benchmark
task, we propose a new network architecture, named Frequency-Query Operator, which predicts vibration patterns of plate geometries given a specific excitation frequency. Applying principles from operator learning and implicit models
for shape encoding, our approach effectively addresses the prediction of highly
variable frequency response functions occurring in dynamic systems. To quantify the prediction quality, we introduce a set of evaluation metrics and evaluate
the method on our vibrating-plates benchmark. Our method outperforms DeepONets, Fourier Neural Operators and more traditional neural network architectures and can be used for design optimization. Code, dataset and visualizations:
https://github.com/ecker-lab/Learning_Vibrating_Plates

1

Introduction

Humans are exposed to noise in everyday life, which is unpleasant and unhealthy in the long term
[1]. Therefore, designers and engineers work on reducing noise that occurs, for example, in cars,
airplanes, and houses. In this work, we specifically consider vibrations in mechanical structures as
a source of sound. Vibrating structures radiate sound into the surrounding air. For example in a car,
the engine causes the chassis to vibrate, which then radiates sound into the interior of the car. By
reducing the vibration energy of the chassis, the noise can be reduced.
Vibrations of mechanical structures depend on the frequency of the excitation force (e.g. by the
engine). A special case occurs when the excitation frequency matches an eigenfrequency of a given
structure. In this case, the external force adds energy in phase with the structure’s natural vibration
and amplifies the motion with each cycle. This continues until the energy added equals the energy
lost due to damping, resulting in large vibration amplitudes. This effect is called resonance and leads
to characteristic resonance peaks in the dynamic response of the system. At resonance frequencies,
due to the higher vibration amplitudes, more noise is emitted. A second distinctive feature of structural vibrations is the vibration pattern, i.e. the spatial field of vibration velocity amplitudes. With
increasing frequency, these vibration patterns become more complex and exhibit more local maxima
and minima (Figure 1, left) [2].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

