Predicting Future Actions of Reinforcement Learning
Agents

Stephen Chung∗
University of Cambridge

Scott Niekum
University of Massachusetts Amherst

David Krueger
Mila

Abstract
As reinforcement learning agents become increasingly deployed in real-world
scenarios, predicting future agent actions and events during deployment is important for facilitating better human-agent interaction and preventing catastrophic
outcomes. This paper experimentally evaluates and compares the effectiveness of
future action and event prediction for three types of RL agents: explicitly planning,
implicitly planning, and non-planning. We employ two approaches: the inner
state approach, which involves predicting based on the inner computations of the
agents (e.g., plans or neuron activations), and a simulation-based approach, which
involves unrolling the agent in a learned world model. Our results show that the
plans of explicitly planning agents are significantly more informative for prediction
than the neuron activations of the other types. Furthermore, using internal plans
proves more robust to model quality compared to simulation-based approaches
when predicting actions, while the results for event prediction are more mixed.
These findings highlight the benefits of leveraging inner states and simulations to
predict future agent actions and events, thereby improving interaction and safety in
real-world deployments.

1

Introduction

As reinforcement learning (RL) becomes increasingly applied in the real world, ensuring the safety
and reliability of RL agents is paramount. Recent advancements have shown that agents can exhibit
complex behaviors, making it crucial to understand and anticipate their actions. This is especially
important in scenarios where misaligned objectives [1] or unintended consequences could result in
suboptimal or even harmful outcomes. For instance, consider an autonomous vehicle controlled by
an RL agent that might unpredictably decide to run a red light to optimize travel time. Predicting this
behavior in advance would enable timely intervention to prevent a potentially dangerous situation.
This capability is also beneficial in scenarios that require effective collaboration and information
exchange among multiple agents [2–4]. For example, if passengers and other drivers know whether a
self-driving car will turn left or right, it becomes much easier and safer to navigate the roads. Thus,
the ability to accurately predict an agent’s future behavior can help reduce risks and ensure smooth
interaction between agents and humans in real-world situations.
In this paper, we explore the task of predicting future actions and events when deploying a trained
agent, such as whether an agent will turn left in five seconds. The distribution of future actions and
events cannot be computed directly, even with access to the policy, because the future states are
unknown. We consider two methods for predicting future actions and events: the inner state approach
and the simulation-based approach. We apply these approaches to agents trained with various RL
algorithms to assess their predictability1 .
∗
1

Correspondence to: mhc48@cam.ac.uk
Full code is available at https://github.com/stephen-chung-mh/predict_action

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

