Average gradient outer product as a mechanism for
deep neural collapse

Daniel Beaglehole˚,1
1

Peter Súkeník˚,2

UC San Diego

2

Marco Mondelli2

Mikhail Belkin1

Institute of Science and Technology Austria

Abstract
Deep Neural Collapse (DNC) refers to the surprisingly rigid structure of the data
representations in the final layers of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). Though the
phenomenon has been measured in a variety of settings, its emergence is typically
explained via data-agnostic approaches, such as the unconstrained features model.
In this work, we introduce a data-dependent setting where DNC forms due to
feature learning through the average gradient outer product (AGOP). The AGOP is
defined with respect to a learned predictor and is equal to the uncentered covariance
matrix of its input-output gradients averaged over the training dataset. The Deep
Recursive Feature Machine (Deep RFM) is a method that constructs a neural
network by iteratively mapping the data with the AGOP and applying an untrained
random feature map. We demonstrate empirically that DNC occurs in Deep RFM
across standard settings as a consequence of the projection with the AGOP matrix
computed at each layer. Further, we theoretically explain DNC in Deep RFM in
an asymptotic setting and as a result of kernel learning. We then provide evidence
that this mechanism holds for neural networks more generally. In particular, we
show that the right singular vectors and values of the weights can be responsible
for the majority of within-class variability collapse for DNNs trained in the feature
learning regime. As observed in recent work, this singular structure is highly
correlated with that of the AGOP.

1

Introduction

How Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) learn a transformation of the data to form a prediction and
what are the properties of this transformation constitute fundamental questions in the theory of deep
learning. A promising avenue to understand the hidden mechanisms of DNNs is Neural Collapse
(NC) [Papyan et al., 2020]. NC is a widely observed structural property of overparametrized DNNs,
occurring in the terminal phase of gradient descent training on classification tasks. This property is
linked with the performance of DNNs, such as generalization and robustness [Papyan et al., 2020, Su
et al., 2023]. NC is defined by four properties that describe the geometry of feature representations of
the training data in the last layer. Of these, in this paper we focus on the following two, because they
are relevant in the context of deeper layers. The within-class variability collapse (NC1) states that
feature vectors of the training samples within a single class collapse to the common class-mean. The
orthogonality or simplex equiangular tight frame property (NC2) states that these class-means form
an orthogonal or simplex equiangular tight frame. While initially observed in just the final hidden
layer, these properties were measured for the intermediate layers of DNNs as well [Rangamani et al.,
2023, He and Su, 2022], indicating that NC progresses depth-wise. This has lead to the study of Deep
Neural Collapse (DNC), a direct depth-wise extension of standard NC [Súkeník et al., 2023].
*
Equal contribution. Correspondence to: Daniel Beaglehole (dbeaglehole@ucsd.edu), Peter Súkeník
(peter.sukenik@ista.ac.at).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

