Gradient-free Decoder Inversion
in Latent Diffusion Models
Seongmin Hong1

Suh Yoon Jeon1

Ernest K. Ryu2,∗

Kyeonghyun Lee1

Se Young Chun1,3,∗

1

Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 3 INMC & IPAI, Seoul National University
2
Dept. of Mathematics, University of California, Los Angeles
{smhongok, euniejeon, litiphysics, sychun}@snu.ac.kr, eryu@math.ucla.edu
Project page: https://smhongok.github.io/dec-inv.html

Abstract
In latent diffusion models (LDMs), denoising diffusion process efficiently takes
place on latent space whose dimension is lower than that of pixel space. Decoder
is typically used to transform the representation in latent space to that in pixel
space. While a decoder is assumed to have an encoder as an accurate inverse, exact
encoder-decoder pair rarely exists in practice even though applications often require
precise inversion of decoder. In other words, encoder is not the left-inverse but the
right-inverse of the decoder; decoder inversion seeks the left-inverse. Prior works
for decoder inversion in LDMs employed gradient descent inspired by inversions of
generative adversarial networks. However, gradient-based methods require larger
GPU memory and longer computation time for larger latent space. For example,
recent video LDMs can generate more than 16 frames, but GPUs with 24 GB
memory can only perform gradient-based decoder inversion for 4 frames. Here,
we propose an efficient gradient-free decoder inversion for LDMs, which can be
applied to diverse latent models. Theoretical convergence property of our proposed
inversion has been investigated not only for the forward step method, but also for the
inertial Krasnoselskii-Mann (KM) iterations under mild assumption on cocoercivity
that is satisfied by recent LDMs. Our proposed gradient-free method with Adam
optimizer and learning rate scheduling significantly reduced computation time and
memory usage over prior gradient-based methods and enabled efficient computation
in applications such as noise-space watermarking and background-preserving image
editing while achieving comparable error levels.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models have been actively investigated over the past decade across numerous
modalities such as image [12, 41, 42, 37, 11, 35, 38], video [5, 4, 47, 52, 45, 46], audio [18, 21, 22]
and molecular structure [17, 13]. They can sample new data points from the distribution of the
training set, can model priors to solve regression problems, and can be used for applications like
editing, retrieval, and density estimation. Representative classes of deep generative models include
generative adversarial networks (GANs), variational autoencoders (VAEs), normalizing flows (NFs),
and diffusion models (DMs). They used to be known not to simultaneously satisfy the three key
requirements: (i) high-quality samples, (ii) diversity, and (iii) fast sampling, also referred to as the
generative learning trilemma [50]. However, recent DMs such as Rectified Flow [23], Adversarial
Diffusion Distillation [40] and Consistency models [43] require just one step for sampling. Thus,
∗

Co-corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

