Flipped Classroom: Aligning Teacher Attention with
Student in Generalized Category Discovery

Haonan Lin1†

Wenbin An2†

Mengmeng Wang3,4

Jiahao Wang1

Guang Dai4

Yan Chen1∗ Feng Tian1∗

Qianying Wang5

Jingdong Wang6

1 School of Comp. Science & Technology, MOEKLINNS Lab, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2 School of Auto. Science & Engineering, MOEKLINNS Lab, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3 College of Comp. Science & Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology
4 SGIT AI Lab, State Grid Corporation of China
5 Lenovo Research

6 Baidu Inc

Abstract
Recent advancements have shown promise in applying traditional Semi-Supervised
Learning strategies to the task of Generalized Category Discovery (GCD). Typically,
this involves a teacher-student framework in which the teacher imparts knowledge
to the student to classify categories, even in the absence of explicit labels. Nevertheless, GCD presents unique challenges, particularly the absence of priors for
new classes, which can lead to the teacher’s misguidance and unsynchronized
learning with the student, culminating in suboptimal outcomes. In our work, we
delve into why traditional teacher-student designs falter in open-world generalized
category discovery as compared to their success in closed-world semi-supervised
learning. We identify inconsistent pattern learning across attention layers as the
crux of this issue and introduce FlipClass—a method that dynamically updates the
teacher to align with the student’s attention, instead of maintaining a static teacher
reference. Our teacher-student attention alignment strategy refines the teacher’s
focus based on student feedback from an energy perspective, promoting consistent
pattern recognition and synchronized learning across old and new classes. Extensive experiments on a spectrum of benchmarks affirm that FlipClass significantly
surpasses contemporary GCD methods, establishing new standards for the field.

1

Introduction

Teacher-Student architecture has proved its effectiveness in Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) [66,
32, 53], which aims to take advantage of a large collection of unlabeled data, reducing the expensive
costs of annotation [57, 90, 89] . Previous approaches tend to model 𝑝(student|teacher), where the
teacher typically acts as a fixed point of reference, providing a form of “supervision prior" to guide
the student [25, 42, 60]. This supervision comes from labeled data and is asymmetrical: while the
teacher has robust prior knowledge and provides a stable learning signal, the student’s knowledge is
incomplete and evolving. The student learns from both the teacher’s supervision and the data it is
exposed to, trying to emulate the teacher by aligning its predictions with those of the teacher.
∗ Corresponding Authors.
† Equal contribution.

This work was partly completed during the internship at SGIT AI Lab, State Grid Corporation of China.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

