Gradient-Variation Online Learning under
Generalized Smoothness
Yan-Feng Xie, Peng Zhao, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{xieyf, zhaop, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Gradient-variation online learning aims to achieve regret guarantees that scale
with variations in the gradients of online functions, which is crucial for attaining fast convergence in games and robustness in stochastic optimization, hence
receiving increased attention. Existing results often require the smoothness condition by imposing a fixed bound on gradient Lipschitzness, which may be unrealistic in practice. Recent efforts in neural network optimization suggest a generalized smoothness condition, allowing smoothness to correlate with gradient
norms. In this paper, we systematically study gradient-variation online learning
under generalized smoothness. We extend the classic optimistic mirror descent
algorithm to derive gradient-variation regret by analyzing stability over the optimization trajectory and exploiting smoothness locally. Then, we explore universal
online learning, designing a single algorithm with the optimal gradient-variation
regrets for convex and strongly convex functions simultaneously, without requiring prior knowledge of curvature. This algorithm adopts a two-layer structure
with a meta-algorithm running over a group of base-learners. To ensure favorable guarantees, we design a new Lipschitz-adaptive meta-algorithm, capable of
handling potentially unbounded gradients while ensuring a second-order bound to
effectively ensemble the base-learners. Finally, we provide the applications for
fast-rate convergence in games and stochastic extended adversarial optimization.

1

Introduction

We consider online convex optimization (OCO) [Hazan, 2016; Orabona, 2019], a flexible framework
that models the decision-making problem in an online fashion. At each round t ∈ [T ], an online
learner is required to submit a decision xt from a convex compact set X ⊆ Rd and the environments
reveal a convex function ft : X 7→ R. Then the learner suffers a loss ft (xt ) and updates her decision.
The standard performance measure is the regret [Zinkevich, 2003] that benchmarks the cumulative
loss of the learner against the best decision in hindsight, formally defined as
R EGT =

T
X
t=1

ft (xt ) − min
x∈X

T
X

ft (x).

(1)

t=1

√
Regret bounds of O( T ) and O( λ1 log T ) are established for convex and λ-strongly convex functions respectively [Zinkevich, 2003; Hazan et al., 2007]. While these results are known to be minimax optimal [Abernethy et al., 2008], in this paper we are more interested in obtaining gradientvariation regret guarantees, which replace the dependence of T in the regret bounds by variations in
Correspondence: Peng Zhao <zhaop@lamda.nju.edu.cn>
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

