ManiPose: Manifold-Constrained Multi-Hypothesis
3D Human Pose Estimation
Cédric Rommel1

Victor Letzelter1,3

Matthieu Cord1,2

Nermin Samet1

Patrick Pérez1

Renaud Marlet1,5

Eduardo Valle1,4

1

Valeo.ai, Paris, France 2 Sorbonne Université, Paris, France
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
4
Recod.ai Lab, School of Electrical and Computing Engineering, University of Campinas, Brazil
5
LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Marne-la-Vallee, France
3

Abstract
We propose ManiPose, a manifold-constrained multi-hypothesis model for humanpose 2D-to-3D lifting. We provide theoretical and empirical evidence that, due to
the depth ambiguity inherent to monocular 3D human pose estimation, traditional
regression models suffer from pose-topology consistency issues, which standard
evaluation metrics (MPJPE, P-MPJPE and PCK) fail to assess. ManiPose addresses
depth ambiguity by proposing multiple candidate 3D poses for each 2D input,
each with its estimated plausibility. Unlike previous multi-hypothesis approaches,
ManiPose forgoes generative models, greatly facilitating its training and usage. By
constraining the outputs to lie on the human pose manifold, ManiPose guarantees
the consistency of all hypothetical poses, in contrast to previous works. We showcase the performance of ManiPose on real-world datasets, where it outperforms
state-of-the-art models in pose consistency by a large margin while being very
competitive on the MPJPE metric.

1

Introduction

We propose ManiPose, a novel approach for human-pose 2D-to-3D lifting. ManiPose directly
addresses the depth ambiguity inherent to monocular 3D human pose estimation by being both multihypothesis and manifold-constrained, thus avoiding pose consistency issues, which plague traditional
regression-based methods. Unlike previous multi-hypothesis approaches, ManiPose forgoes the use
of costly generative models, while still estimating the plausibility of each hypothesis.
Monocular 3D human pose estimation (HPE) is a challenging learning problem that aims to predict
3D human poses given an image or a video from a single camera. Often, the problem is split into
two successive steps: first 2D human pose estimation, then 2D-to-3D lifting. Such separation is
favorable because 2D-HPE is much more mature, leading to better overall results. Due to depth
ambiguity and occlusions, 2D-to-3D lifting is intrinsically ill-posed: multiple 3D poses correspond to
the same projection observed in 2D. Despite that, the field has experienced fast developments, with
substantial improvements in terms of mean-per-joint-prediction error (MPJPE) and derived metrics
(e.g., P-MPJPE, PCK) [52, 53, 42, 47].
However, recent studies [49, 12, 40] noted that poses predicted by state-of-the-art models fail to
respect basic invariances of human morphology, such as bilateral sagittal symmetry, or constant length
across time of rigid body segments connecting the joints. Not only do we address those concerns with
ManiPose (see Fig. 1), but we also provide theoretical elements clarifying the cause of those issues.
We show in particular that pose consistency and traditional performance metrics (such as MPJPE)
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

