LM-HT SNN: Enhancing the Performance of SNN to
ANN Counterpart through Learnable
Multi-hierarchical Threshold Model
Zecheng Hao1 , Xinyu Shi1,2 , Yujia Liu1 , Zhaofei Yu1,2∗ & Tiejun Huang1,2
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University

Abstract
Compared to traditional Artificial Neural Network (ANN), Spiking Neural Network (SNN) has garnered widespread academic interest for its intrinsic ability to
transmit information in a more energy-efficient manner. However, despite previous
efforts to optimize the learning algorithm of SNNs through various methods, SNNs
still lag behind ANNs in terms of performance. The recently proposed multithreshold model provides more possibilities for further enhancing the learning
capability of SNNs. In this paper, we rigorously analyze the relationship among the
multi-threshold model, vanilla spiking model and quantized ANNs from a mathematical perspective, then propose a novel LM-HT model, which is an equidistant
multi-threshold model that can dynamically regulate the global input current and
membrane potential leakage on the time dimension. The LM-HT model can also
be transformed into a vanilla single threshold model through reparameterization,
thereby achieving more flexible hardware deployment. In addition, we note that the
LM-HT model can seamlessly integrate with ANN-SNN Conversion framework
under special initialization. This novel hybrid learning framework can effectively
improve the relatively poor performance of converted SNNs under low time latency.
Extensive experimental results have demonstrated that our model can outperform
previous state-of-the-art works on various types of datasets, which promote SNNs
to achieve a brand-new level of performance comparable to quantized ANNs. Code
is available at https://github.com/hzc1208/LMHT_SNN.

1

Introduction

Recognized as the third generation of artificial neural networks [33], Spiking Neural Network (SNN)
is increasingly receiving significant academic attention due to its enormous potential in biological
plausibility and high energy efficiency. As the information transmission between the pre-synaptic
and post-synaptic layers relies on the discrete spike signal, which will be only emitted when the
membrane potential of the corresponding neuron exceeds the firing threshold, SNNs have a unique
event-driven property compared to conventional Artificial Neural Network (ANN). By utilizing this
property, researchers have pointed out that SNNs can achieve significant advantages in terms of
energy consumption on neuromorphic hardware [35, 5, 37]. Currently, SNNs have further fulfilled a
role in multiple application scenarios including object detection [22], natural language processing
[32], and 3D recognition [24].
Spatial-Temporal back-propagation (STBP) with surrogate gradients is currently the most mainstream
supervised learning algorithm suitable for SNNs. Although previous works have attempted to further
enhance the learning ability of SNNs by delving into various optimization strategies, including
* Corresponding author: yuzf12@pku.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

