The Fragility of Fairness:
Causal Sensitivity Analysis for Fair Machine Learning

Jake Fawkes∗
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
jake.fawkes@st-hughs.ox.ac.uk
Mel Andrews
Philosophy Department
University of Cincinnati

Nic Fishman∗
Department of Statistics
Harvard University
njwfish@gmail.com
Zachary C. Lipton
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Fairness metrics are a core tool in the fair machine learning literature (FairML),
used to determine that ML models are, in some sense, “fair.” Real-world data,
however, are typically plagued by various measurement biases and other violated
assumptions, which can render fairness assessments meaningless. We adapt tools
from causal sensitivity analysis to the FairML context, providing a general framework which (1) accommodates effectively any combination of fairness metric and
bias that can be posed in the “oblivious setting”; (2) allows researchers to investigate combinations of biases, resulting in non-linear sensitivity; and (3) enables
flexible encoding of domain-specific constraints and assumptions. Employing this
framework, we analyze the sensitivity of the most common parity metrics under 3
varieties of classifier across 14 canonical fairness datasets. Our analysis reveals the
striking fragility of fairness assessments to even minor dataset biases. We show that
causal sensitivity analysis provides a powerful and necessary toolkit for gauging
the informativeness of parity metric evaluations. Our repository is available here.

1

Introduction

Fair machine learning (FairML) is a theoretical approach to studying and remediating disparities in
prediction and allocation systems based on machine learning algorithms. A core focus of the field has
been to develop, evaluate, and train models to satisfy a number of “fairness metrics”. These metrics
operationalize the social ideal of fairness as a statistical quantification of some performance measure
compared across demographic groups. Such evaluations often play an important role in auditing ML
systems [11, 51, 48] to certify whether models satisfy some tolerable level of statistical disparity.
Real-world data, however, is frequently plagued by a variety of measurement biases and other violated
assumptions which can undermine the validity of fairness metrics[5, 34]. While such biases come
in many forms, in this work we focus on the following: noisy or poorly-defined outcome measures
(proxy bias) [27], the observation of samples or outcomes from only a subset of the population
(selection bias) [6, 35], or causal impacts on outcomes through background policies within a firm’s
control [16], which we term extra-classificatory policies, or ECPs. We focus on these varieties of
bias due to their ubiquity in FairML applications, which we demonstrate through an analysis of their
prevalence and magnitude in a range of benchmark datasets (see Table 1 and App. D).
Motivated by the problems posed by such measurement biases, we offer a framework based on
graphical causal inference to operationalize assumptions about data quality issues, alongside methods
adapted from causal sensitivity analysis for statistical quantification of their impacts on fairness
evaluations. This framework enables both ML practitioners and auditors to empirically gauge the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

