Cost-aware Bayesian Optimization
via the Pandora’s Box Gittins Index
Qian Xie1

Raul Astudillo2
Peter I. Frazier1
Ziv Scully1
1
2
Cornell University
Caltech

Alexander Terenin1

Abstract
Bayesian optimization is a technique for efficiently optimizing unknown functions
in a black-box manner. To handle practical settings where gathering data requires
use of finite resources, it is desirable to explicitly incorporate function evaluation
costs into Bayesian optimization policies. To understand how to do so, we develop
a previously-unexplored connection between cost-aware Bayesian optimization and
the Pandora’s Box problem, a decision problem from economics. The Pandora’s
Box problem admits a Bayesian-optimal solution based on an expression called the
Gittins index, which can be reinterpreted as an acquisition function. We study the
use of this acquisition function for cost-aware Bayesian optimization, and demonstrate empirically that it performs well, particularly in medium-high dimensions.
We further show that this performance carries over to classical Bayesian optimization without explicit evaluation costs. Our work constitutes a first step towards
integrating techniques from Gittins index theory into Bayesian optimization.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization is a framework for optimizing functions whose evaluation is time-consuming
or expensive. It is widely used for hyperparameter tuning of machine learning algorithms [38],
robot control [29], material design [47], and other areas. Bayesian optimization works by forming a
probabilistic model for the objective function, and then chooses where to sample via an acquisition
function that balances the explore-exploit trade-offs arising from uncertainty in this model.
We study cost-aware Bayesian optimization, where one must pay a cost to acquire another sample
and this cost may vary with where the function is evaluated. Costs are an important factor in
practical scenarios. For instance, in hyperparameter tuning using GPUs rented from a cloud provider,
training a neural network for twice as many epochs may carry twice the financial cost.
Despite its practical relevance, cost-aware Bayesian optimization is less-studied than standard
Bayesian optimization, where budgets are framed in terms of the number of function evaluations and
costs are not explicitly considered. Many existing theoretically-principled cost-aware approaches
[46, 24, 26, 4, 7] rely on multi-step lookahead computations that are computationally expensive
and can be numerically brittle, limiting their applicability. Other approaches lack a theoretical
foundation and risk having poor performance on certain problems. For example, one of the most
popular cost-aware acquisition functions used in practice, expected improvement per unit cost [38],
has recently been theoretically shown by Astudillo et al. [4] to perform arbitrarily worse than the
optimal policy. Thus, in the cost-aware setting, there is a need for theoretically-principled and
computationally-straightforward acquisition functions with good empirical performance.
In this work, we develop such an approach. To do so, we introduce a novel link between cost-aware
Bayesian optimization and a discrete-space decision problem from economics called the Pandora’s
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).
Code available at: HTTPS :// GITHUB . COM /Q IAN J ANE X IE /P ANDORA BAYES O PT.

