LACIE: Listener-Aware Finetuning for Confidence
Calibration in Large Language Models

Elias Stengel-Eskin

Peter Hase

Mohit Bansal

UNC Chapel Hill

Abstract
When answering questions, large language models (LLMs) can convey not only an
answer to the question, but a level of confidence about the answer being correct.
This includes explicit markers of confidence (e.g. giving a numeric confidence
score) as well as implicit markers, like using an authoritative tone or elaborating
with additional knowledge of a subject. For LLMs to be trustworthy sources of
knowledge, the confidence they convey should match their actual expertise on a
topic; however, this is currently not the case, with most models tending towards
overconfidence. To calibrate both implicit and explicit confidence markers, we
introduce a pragmatic, listener-aware finetuning method (LACIE) that directly
models the listener, considering not only whether an answer is right, but whether
it will be accepted by a listener. Specifically, we cast calibration as a preference
optimization problem, creating data via a two-agent speaker-listener game, where a
speaker model’s outputs are judged by a simulated listener. We then finetune three
different LLMs (Mistral-7B, Llama3-8B, Llama3-70B) with LACIE, and show
that the models resulting from this multi-agent optimization are better calibrated
on TriviaQA with respect to a simulated listener. Crucially, these trends transfer
to human listeners, helping them correctly predict model correctness: we conduct
a human evaluation where annotators accept or reject an LLM’s answers to trivia
questions, finding that training with LACIE results in 47% fewer incorrect answers
being accepted while maintaining the same level of acceptance for correct answers.
Furthermore, LACIE generalizes to another dataset, resulting in a large increase in
truthfulness on TruthfulQA when trained on TriviaQA. Our analysis indicates that
LACIE leads to a better separation in confidence between correct and incorrect
examples. Qualitatively, we find that a LACIE-trained model hedges more when
uncertain and adopts implicit cues to signal certainty when it is correct, such as
using an authoritative tone or including details. Finally, finetuning with our listeneraware method leads to an emergent increase in model abstention (e.g. saying “I
don’t know”) for answers that are likely to be wrong, trading recall for precision.1

1

Introduction

In interacting linguistically with each other, people tend to follow conventions – or maxims – that allow
for successful communication. For example, good conversational partners try to make their utterances
truthful, relevant, clear, and concise [Grice, 1975]. When people violate these conventions, they can
mislead listeners, which may ultimately lead to them being seen as incompetent, untrustworthy, or as
poor conversational partners. While large language models (LLMs) generally follow many of these
conventions, they often fail to respect Grice [1975]’s maxim of truthfulness, generating outputs that
are not truthful [Rawte et al., 2023]. More troublingly, untruthful outputs generated by LLMs are
1

Code: https://github.com/esteng/pragmatic_calibration

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

