SuperDeepFool: a new fast and accurate minimal
adversarial attack
Alireza Abdollahpoorrostam
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
alireza.abdollahpoorrostam@epfl.ch

Mahed Abroshan
Imperial College, London, UK
m.abroshan23@imperial.ac.uk

Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli
Apple
Zürich, Switzerland
smoosavi@apple.com

Abstract

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved breakthrough improvement in numerous tasks and has developed
as a powerful tool in various applications, including computer vision [32] and speech processing [35]. Despite their success, deep neural networks are known to be vulnerable to adversarial examples, carefully perturbed examples perceptually indistinguishable from original samples [54]. This can lead to a significant
disruption of the inference result of deep neural networks. It has important implications for
safety and security-critical applications of machine learning models.

Number of Gradient Computations (Log Scale)

Deep neural networks have been known to be vulnerable to adversarial examples,
which are inputs that are modified slightly to fool the network into making incorrect
predictions. This has led to a significant amount of research on evaluating the
robustness of these networks against such perturbations. One particularly important
robustness metric is the robustness to minimal ℓ2 adversarial perturbations.
However, existing methods for evaluating this robustness metric are either computationally expensive or not very accurate. In this paper, we introduce a new family
of adversarial attacks that strike a balance between effectiveness and computational
efficiency. Our proposed attacks are generalizations of the well-known DeepFool
(DF) attack, while they remain simple to understand and implement. We demonstrate that our attacks outperform existing methods in terms of both effectiveness
and computational efficiency. Our proposed attacks are also suitable for evaluating
the robustness of large models and can be used to perform adversarial training
(AT) to achieve state-of-the-art robustness to minimal ℓ2 adversarial perturbations.
10 3

FMN

DDN

FAB

10 2

ALMA
SDF

0.50

0.75

DF
1.00
1.25
Norm of Perturbations

1.50

Figure 1: The average number of gradient computations vs the mean ℓ2 -norm of perturbations.
It shows that our novel fast and accurate method,
SDF, outperforms other minimum-norm attacks.
SDF finds significantly smaller perturbations comOur goal in this paper is to introduce a pared to DF, with only a small increase in computaparameter-free and simple method for accu- tional cost. SDF also outperforms other algorithms
rately and reliably evaluating the adversarial in optimality and speed. The numbers are taken
robustness of deep networks in a fast and from Table 5.
geometrically-based fashion. Most of the current attack methods rely on general-purpose optimization
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

