When Your AIs Deceive You:
Challenges of Partial Observability in
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback

Leon Lang∗
University of Amsterdam

Davis Foote*
UC Berkeley

Stuart Russell
UC Berkeley

Anca Dragan
UC Berkeley

Erik Jenner
UC Berkeley

Scott Emmons*
UC Berkeley

Abstract
Past analyses of reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) assume that
the human evaluators fully observe the environment. What happens when human
feedback is based only on partial observations? We formally define two failure
cases: deceptive inflation and overjustification. Modeling the human as Boltzmannrational w.r.t. a belief over trajectories, we prove conditions under which RLHF is
guaranteed to result in policies that deceptively inflate their performance, overjustify
their behavior to make an impression, or both. Under the new assumption that the
human’s partial observability is known and accounted for, we then analyze how
much information the feedback process provides about the return function. We
show that sometimes, the human’s feedback determines the return function uniquely
up to an additive constant, but in other realistic cases, there is irreducible ambiguity.
We propose exploratory research directions to help tackle these challenges and
experimentally validate both the theoretical concerns and potential mitigations, and
caution against blindly applying RLHF in partially observable settings.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) and its variants are widely used for finetuning
foundation models, including ChatGPT [OpenAI, 2022], Bard [Manyika, 2023], Gemini [Gemini Team, 2023], Llama 2 [Touvron et al., 2023], and Claude [Bai et al., 2022, Anthropic, 2023a,b].
Prior theoretical analysis of RLHF assumes that the human fully observes the state of the world
[Skalse et al., 2023]. Under this assumption, it is possible to recover the ground-truth return function
from Boltzmann-rational human feedback (see Proposition 3.1).
In reality, however, this assumption is false. Models like ChatGPT are interacting with the internet
and software tools via plugins [OpenAI, 2023]. Software assistants like Devin are interacting with
complex IDEs to produce their results [Wu, 2024]. By default, some of the models’ work then
happens in the background, not observed by the users; see Figure 1. With the tasks performed by
language model assistants becoming more complex, it is also increasingly time consuming for humans
to evaluate the entire model behavior and input. Therefore, we are anticipating a future where by
default, the human evaluators do not fully observe the environment state that the language assistant is
embedded in. Our work analyzes the consequences and risks of such partial observability.
We begin our investigation with a simple example, illustrated in Figure 2, meant to isolate the key
factor leading to deception (in practice, we imagine that this effect would be embedded in a larger,
∗

Core research contributor. Correspondence to l.lang@uva.nl, emmons@berkeley.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

