AutoTimes: Autoregressive Time Series Forecasters via
Large Language Models

Yong Liu∗, Guo Qin∗, Xiangdong Huang, Jianmin Wang, Mingsheng LongB
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China
{liuyong21,qinguo24}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
{huangxdong,jimwang,mingsheng}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Foundation models of time series have not been fully developed due to the limited
availability of time series corpora and the underexploration of scalable pre-training.
Based on the similar sequential formulation of time series and natural language,
increasing research demonstrates the feasibility of leveraging large language models (LLM) for time series. Nevertheless, the inherent autoregressive property and
decoder-only architecture of LLMs have not been fully considered, resulting in
insufficient utilization of LLM abilities. To fully revitalize the general-purpose
token transition and multi-step generation capability of large language models, we
propose AutoTimes to repurpose LLMs as Autoregressive Time series forecasters,
which projects time series into the embedding space of language tokens and autoregressively generates future predictions with arbitrary lengths. Compatible with any
decoder-only LLMs, the consequent forecaster exhibits the flexibility of the lookback length and scalability with larger LLMs. Further, we formulate time series as
prompts, extending the context for prediction beyond the lookback window, termed
in-context forecasting. By introducing LLM-embedded textual timestamps, AutoTimes can utilize chronological information to align multivariate time series. Empirically, AutoTimes achieves state-of-the-art with 0.1% trainable parameters and
over 5× training/inference speedup compared to advanced LLM-based forecasters.
Code is available at this repository: https://github.com/thuml/AutoTimes.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting is of crucial demand in real-world applications, covering various domains
including climate, economics, energy, operations, etc. [22, 43]. The growing challenges of generalpurpose forecasting, where one model is versatile to handle variable-length scenarios [24, 41] and the
prediction is necessarily instructed by auxiliary information in other modalities [40, 44], underscore
the demand for foundation models [3] of time series, which are aimed to exhibit enhanced capabilities,
including multi-step generation, zero-shot generalization [49, 13], in-context learning and multimodal
utilization [15], thereby expanding the scope of time series forecasting to a wider range of situations.
Nevertheless, the development of time series foundation models has been hampered by the limited
availability of large-scale pre-training datasets and the technical uncertainty of scalable backbones.
In contrast, rapid progress is witnessed in large language models (LLM), facilitated by extensive
text corpora [50], available pre-trained models [36], and well-established adaptation techniques [14].
Notably, language and time series share basic commonalities in sequence modeling and generation
by learned token transitions, presenting opportunities to adopt off-the-shelf LLMs for time series.
∗

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

