CRONOS: Enhancing Deep Learning with Scalable
GPU Accelerated Convex Neural Networks
Miria Feng
Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
miria0@stanford.edu

Zachary Frangella
Management Science & Engineering
Stanford University
zfran@stanford.edu

Mert Pilanci
Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
pilanci@stanford.edu

Abstract
We introduce the CRONOS algorithm for convex optimization of two-layer neural
networks. CRONOS is the first algorithm capable of scaling to high-dimensional
datasets such as ImageNet, which are ubiquitous in modern deep learning. This
significantly improves upon prior work, which has been restricted to downsampled versions of MNIST and CIFAR-10. Taking CRONOS as a primitive, we
then develop a new algorithm called CRONOS-AM, which combines CRONOS
with alternating minimization, to obtain an algorithm capable of training multilayer networks with arbitrary architectures. Our theoretical analysis proves that
CRONOS converges to the global minimum of the convex reformulation under mild
assumptions. In addition, we validate the efficacy of CRONOS and CRONOS-AM
through extensive large-scale numerical experiments with GPU acceleration in JAX.
Our results show that CRONOS-AM can obtain comparable or better validation
accuracy than predominant tuned deep learning optimizers on vision and language
tasks with benchmark datasets such as ImageNet and IMDb. To the best of our
knowledge, CRONOS is the first algorithm which utilizes the convex reformulation
to enhance performance on large-scale learning tasks.

1

Introduction

The non-convex landscape of deep neural networks (DNN) poses significant challenges for modern
deep learning, especially since non-convexity implies it is NP-hard to train a neural network to
optimality Blum and Rivest [1988]. Common stochastic first-order optimizers, such as stochastic
gradient descent (SGD), offer no guarantees of producing more than an approximate stationary point
Arjevani et al. [2023], which may be considerably suboptimal Ge et al. [2015]. The effectiveness of
methods such as SGD and Adam are therefore reliant on heavily conditioned training environments.
As a result, most models require extensive hyperparameter tuning of the optimizer to train successfully.
This leads to expensive iterations in high compute settings with variable performance depending on
optimizer selection and problem domain Yao et al. [2021]. Scaling laws Rosenfeld [2021] also indicate
this regime will yield an increasingly larger number of hyperparameters, with a disproportionate
dependence on computational resources and data cost.
Our objective is to achieve more efficient targeted optimization of deep learning tasks by leveraging
the connection between neural networks and convex optimization. This approach provides clearer
insight to the underlying optimization problem deep learning is trying to solve, despite the complexity
of its non-convex landscape. The authors of Pilanci and Ergen [2020] have recently proven that
the training of shallow neural networks can be equivalently formulated as a convex optimization
program. The strategy leverages semi-infinite duality theory to develop algorithms which converge to
the global minimum in polynomial time. However, the resulting convex program is a constrained
high-dimensional linear model that is intensely difficult to solve at scale. Other more recent works
of Mishkin et al. [2022] and Bai et al. [2023] have made progress in solving this problem with
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

