A Simple yet Universal Framework for Depth Completion

Jin-Hwi Park
AI Graduate School
GIST
jinhwipark@gm.gist.ac.kr

Hae-Gon Jeon
AI Graduate School
GIST
haegonj@gist.ac.kr

Abstract
Consistent depth estimation across diverse scenes and sensors is a crucial challenge
in computer vision, especially when deploying machine learning models in the
real world. Traditional methods depend heavily on extensive pixel-wise labeled
data, which is costly and labor-intensive to acquire, and frequently have difficulty
in scale issues on various depth sensors. In response, we define Universal Depth
Completion (UniDC) problem. We also present a baseline architecture, a simple
yet effective approach tailored to estimate scene depth across a wide range of
sensors and environments using minimal labeled data. Our approach addresses
two primary challenges: generalizable knowledge of unseen scene configurations
and strong adaptation to arbitrary depth sensors with various specifications. To
enhance versatility in the wild, we utilize a foundation model for monocular depth
estimation that provides a comprehensive understanding of 3D structures in scenes.
Additionally, for fast adaptation to off-the-shelf sensors, we generate a pixel-wise
affinity map based on the knowledge from the foundation model. We then adjust
depth information from arbitrary sensors to the monocular depth along with the
constructed affinity. Furthermore, to boost up both the adaptability and generality, we embed the learned features into hyperbolic space, which builds implicit
hierarchical structures of 3D data from fewer examples. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the proposed method’s superior generalization capabilities for UniDC
problem over state-of-the-art depth completion. Source code is publicly available
at https://github.com/JinhwiPark/UniDC.

1

Introduction

Acquiring accurate and dense depth maps is crucial for various computer vision tasks such as
scene understanding [1, 2, 3, 4], 3D reconstruction [5, 6, 7, 8], and autonomous driving [9, 10, 11].
Traditional methods like dense stereo matching [12, 13, 14] often face challenges of handling
occlusion and varying lighting conditions between viewpoints. Additionally, depth maps obtained
from active depth sensors [15, 16] like LiDAR and Time-of-Flight cameras typically exhibit low
resolutions. As a solution to the above problems, depth completion has been widely studied. The goal
of depth completion is to obtain a depth map from a pair of an image and a low-resolution depth
map (often sparse depth map) taken by active sensors. The depth completion aims to convert a sparse
depth map into a dense depth prediction by propagating it with an image-based affinity map.
Recent advances in learning-based depth perceptions have markedly improved the performance in
this domain; however, most approaches are still tailored to specific settings and struggle to generalize
to new environments or sensor types. While generalizable knowledge can be achieved by training
huge models with large-scale and diverse datasets, acquiring accurate and dense depth information as
ground-truth data is prohibitively expensive and time-consuming, which makes such a generalization
model for metric scale 3D depth prediction infeasible in practice. Moreover, there exist numerous
types of active depth sensors and complex scenarios in the real world. Unfortunately, only two
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

