Towards Safe Concept Transfer of Multi-Modal
Diffusion via Causal Representation Editing

Peiran Dong1∗

Bingjie Wang1∗ Song Guo2 Junxiao Wang3,4
Jie Zhang2 Zicong Hong1
1
Hong Kong Polytechnic University 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Guangzhou University 4 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
{peiran.dong,bingjie.wang,zicong.hong}@connect.polyu.hk
songguo@cse.ust.hk, wangjunxiao@live.com, csejzhang@ust.hk

Abstract
Recent advancements in vision-language-to-image (VL2I) diffusion generation
have made significant progress. While generating images from broad visionlanguage inputs holds promise, it also raises concerns about potential misuse,
such as copying artistic styles without permission, which could have legal and
social consequences. Therefore, it’s crucial to establish governance frameworks to
ensure ethical and copyright integrity, especially with widely used diffusion models.
To address these issues, researchers have explored various approaches, such as
dataset filtering, adversarial perturbations, machine unlearning, and inference-time
refusals. However, these methods often lack either scalability or effectiveness.
In response, we propose a new framework called causal representation editing
(CRE), which extends representation editing from large language models (LLMs) to
diffusion-based models. CRE enhances the efficiency and flexibility of safe content
generation by intervening at diffusion timesteps causally linked to unsafe concepts.
This allows for precise removal of harmful content while preserving acceptable
content quality, demonstrating superior effectiveness, precision and scalability
compared to existing methods. CRE can handle complex scenarios, including
incomplete or blurred representations of unsafe concepts, offering a promising
solution to challenges in managing harmful content generation in diffusion-based
models.

1

Introduction

Expanding on recent progress in text-to-image (T2I) diffusion generation, which is great at making
realistic and varied images from written descriptions, researchers are now delving into more advanced
vision-language-to-image (VL2I) generation techniques. In these VL2I methods, especially with
diffusion models, some use both images of a subject and written descriptions to render the subject
in a new context, which is called subject-driven generation [1, 2]. Others take original images and
instructions for changes to create altered images, known as image editing [3]. Early approaches
either fine-tune models on new images [4, 2, 5, 6, 7] or directly inject image features into the U-Net
of diffusion models [8, 9, 1, 10]. However, these methods struggle to jointly model multi-modal
inputs and fully leverage the generalization ability of the diffusion model. BLIP-Diffusion [11] is
a notable advancement because it creates object representations by blending images with random
backgrounds, allowing for the generation of single objects without prior examples. Building on this,
Kosmos-G [12] expands to generate multiple objects without examples, using multi-modal large
∗

Equal Contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

