Performative Control for Linear Dynamical Systems
Songfu Cai∗, Fei Han∗, Xuanyu Cao†
Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
eesfcai@ust.hk, fhanac@connect.ust.hk, eexcao@ust.hk

Abstract
We introduce the framework of performative control, where the policy chosen by
the controller affects the underlying dynamics of the control system. This results
in a sequence of policy-dependent system state data with policy-dependent temporal correlations. Following the recent literature on performative prediction [21],
we introduce the concept of a performatively stable control (PSC) solution. We
ﬁrst propose a sufﬁcient condition for the performative control problem to admit a
unique PSC solution with a problem-speciﬁc structure of distributional sensitivity
propagation and aggregation. We further analyze the impacts of system stability on the existence of the PSC solution. Speciﬁcally, for almost surely strongly
stable policy-dependent dynamics, the PSC solution exists if the sum of the distributional sensitivities is small enough. However, for almost surely unstable policydependent dynamics, the existence of the PSC solution will necessitate a temporally backward decaying of the distributional sensitivities. We ﬁnally provide a
repeated stochastic gradient descent scheme that converges to the PSC solution
and analyze its non-asymptotic convergence rate. Numerical results validate our
theoretical analysis.

1

Introduction

Control theory is a fundamental ﬁeld of study in engineering and mathematics that centers on coordinating the behaviors of dynamical systems. It has extensive applications in aerospace, robotics,
manufacturing, economics, natural sciences, etc. It provides a framework for designing control
policies that regulate the system states, enabling them to evolve in a desired manner over time dynamically. The linear state space model is a powerful tool for representing dynamical systems,
which employs a set of difference equations to describe the Markovian system state process with
a linear state transition model. Many of the existing works on control of linear dynamical systems
(LDSs) [26, 9, 31, 7, 17, 28, 31, 32] are developed based on the key assumption that the system state
transition model is static. However, in many real world applications, such a static dynamics assumption usually does not hold because system state transition model can be changed by control policies.
For instance, in the stock market, the investment policy of well-known investors can impact the actions of the general public investors, resulting in famed investment strategy-dependent changes to
the dynamics of stock prices. Another example is autonomous vehicle (AV). A deployed AV might
change how the pedestrians and other neighboring cars behave, and the resulting trafﬁc environment
might be quite different from what the designers of the AV had in mind [20]. Such interplay between decision-making and decision-dependent system dynamics is a pervasive phenomenon in a
multitude of domains, including ﬁnance, transportation, and public policy, among others.
Most of the existing works on the control of linear systems with non-static state transition model
are primarily focused on the additive random perturbations to the system state transition matrix,
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

