D-MiSo: Editing Dynamic 3D Scenes using
Multi-Gaussians Soup
Joanna Waczyńska∗ †
Piotr Borycki*
Doctoral School of Exact and Natural Sciences Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science
Jagiellonian University
Jagiellonian University
Joanna Kaleta
Sławomir Tadeja
Przemysław Spurek
Warsaw University of Technology
Department of Engineering Jagiellonian University
Sano Centre for Computational Medicine University of Cambridge
IDEAS NCBR

Abstract
Over the past years, we have observed an abundance of approaches for modeling
dynamic 3D scenes using Gaussian Splatting (GS). These solutions use GS to
represent the scene’s structure and the neural network to model dynamics. Such approaches allow fast rendering and extracting each element of such a dynamic scene.
However, modifying such objects over time is challenging. SC-GS (Sparse Controlled Gaussian Splatting) enhanced with Deformed Control Points partially solves
this issue. However, this approach necessitates selecting elements that need to be
kept fixed, as well as centroids that should be adjusted throughout editing. Moreover, this task poses additional difficulties regarding the re-productivity of such
editing. To address this, we propose Dynamic Multi-Gaussian Soup (D-MiSo),
which allows us to model the mesh-inspired representation of dynamic GS. Additionally, we propose a strategy of linking parameterized Gaussian splats, forming a
Triangle Soup with the estimated mesh. Consequently, we can separately construct
new trajectories for the 3D objects composing the scene. Thus, we can make the
scene’s dynamic editable over time or while maintaining partial dynamics.

1

Introduction

Recently introduced Gaussian Splatting (GS) [1]
represents the 3D scene structure through Gaussian components. We can combine GS with the
neural network (i.e., deform network) to model
dynamic scenes [2]. This approach involves
the joint training of both the GS components
and the neural network. GS characterizes the
3D object’s shape and color, while the neural
network utilizes time embedding and Gaussian
parameters to generate updated initial positions
to model dynamic scenes. Such an approach
allows for fast rendering and extracting each
element of a dynamic scene.
Most existing methods can effectively model
dynamic scenes, but generating new 3D objects’
positions remain challenging. Consequently, we
cannot edit objects over time when using such Figure 1: D-MiSo model parameterized dynamic
scenes by Triangle Soup (disjoint triangles cloud),
∗
Equal contribution
which allows modification of objects during time.
†

joanna.waczynska@doctoral.uj.edu.pl

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

