Towards Harmless Rawlsian Fairness Regardless of
Demographic Prior

Xuanqian Wang1∗
Jing Li2,3†
Ivor W. Tsang2,3,4
Yew-Soon Ong2,3,4
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, China
2
Institute of High-Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
3
Centre for Frontier AI Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
4
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
wwxxqq@buaa.edu.cn {kyle.jingli, ivor.tsang}@gmail.com asysong@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Due to privacy and security concerns, recent advancements in group fairness
advocate for model training regardless of demographic information. However,
most methods still require prior knowledge of demographics. In this study, we
explore the potential for achieving fairness without compromising its utility when
no prior demographics are provided to the training set, namely harmless Rawlsian
fairness. We ascertain that such a fairness requirement with no prior demographic
information essential promotes training losses to exhibit a Dirac delta distribution.
To this end, we propose a simple but effective method named VFair to minimize the
variance of training losses inside the optimal set of empirical losses. This problem is
then optimized by a tailored dynamic update approach that operates in both loss and
gradient dimensions, directing the model towards relatively fairer solutions while
preserving its intact utility. Our experimental findings indicate that regression tasks,
which are relatively unexplored from literature, can achieve significant fairness
improvement through VFair regardless of any prior, whereas classification tasks
usually do not because of their quantized utility measurements. The implementation
of our method is publicly available at https://github.com/wxqpxw/VFair.

1

Introduction

Fairness in machine learning has gained significant attention owing to its multifaceted ethical
implications and its far-reaching potential to shape and influence various aspects of society [1, 2, 3].
In high-stakes decision-making domains, algorithms that merely prioritize model utility may yield
biased models, resulting in unintentional discriminatory outcomes concerning factors such as gender
and race. Group fairness, a.k.a. statistical fairness [4], addresses this issue by explicitly encouraging
the model behavior to be independent of group indicators, such as disparate impact [5], or equalized
odds [6]. However, with increasing privacy concerns applied in practical situations, sensitive attributes
are not accessible which raises a new challenge for fairness learning.
According to literature, numerous efforts have been directed towards achieving fairness regardless
of demographic information, which can be mainly categorized into two branches. One branch is
to employ proxy-sensitive attributes [7, 8, 9, 10]. These works assume that estimated or selected
attributes are correlated with the actual sensitive attributes and thus can serve as a proxy of potential
biases. The other branch follows Rawlsian fairness [11], which focuses on reducing the disparity in
group utility. Unlike the former branch, the group utility here is predefined and centered, and thus it is
∗
†

Work done during an internship at A*STAR.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

