Penalty-based Methods for Simple Bilevel
Optimization under Hölderian Error Bounds
Pengyu Chen∗
School of Data Science
Fudan University
pychen22@m.fudan.edu.cn

Xu Shi∗
School of Data Science
Fudan University
xshi22@m.fudan.edu.cn

Rujun Jiang†
School of Data Science
Fudan University
rjjiang@fudan.edu.cn

Jiulin Wang
School of Data Science
Fudan University
wangjiulin@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper investigates simple bilevel optimization problems where we minimize
an upper-level objective over the optimal solution set of a convex lower-level objective. Existing methods for such problems either only guarantee asymptotic
convergence, have slow sublinear rates, or require strong assumptions. To address
these challenges, we propose a penalization framework that delineates the relationship between approximate solutions of the original problem and its reformulated counterparts. This framework accommodates varying assumptions regarding smoothness and convexity, enabling the application of speciﬁc methods with
different complexity results. Speciﬁcally, when both upper- and lower-level objectives are composite convex functions, under an α-Hölderian error bound condition
β
and certain mild assumptions, our algorithm attains
solution of
(√ an (ϵ, ϵ )-optimal
)
max{α,β}
the original problem for any β > 0 within O
1/ϵ
iterations. The
result can be improved further if the smooth part of the upper-level objective is
strongly convex. We also establish complexity results when the upper- and lowerlevel objectives are general nonsmooth functions. Numerical experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithms.

1

Introduction

Bilevel optimization involves embedding one optimization problem within another, creating a hierarchical structure where the upper-level problem’s feasible set is inﬂuenced by the lower-level
problem. This framework frequently occurs in various real-world scenarios, such as meta-learning
[Bertinetto et al., 2018, Rajeswaran et al., 2019], hyper-parameter optimization [Chen et al., 2024,
Franceschi et al., 2018, Shaban et al., 2019], reinforcement learning [Mingyi et al., 2020] and adversarial learning [Bishop et al., 2020, Wang et al., 2021, 2022]. In this paper, we concentrate on
a subset of bilevel optimization known as simple bilevel optimization (SBO), which has garnered
signiﬁcant interest in the machine learning community due to its relevance in dictionary learning
[Beck and Sabach, 2014, Jiang et al., 2023], lexicographic optimization [Kissel et al., 2020, Gong
et al., 2021], lifelong learning [Malitsky, 2017, Jiang et al., 2023]; see more details in Appendix A.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

