Improved Analysis for Bandit Learning in Matching
Markets
Fang Kong
Southern University of Science and Technology
kongf@sustech.edu.cn

Zilong Wang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
wangzilong@sjtu.edu.cn

Shuai Li∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
shuaili8@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
A rich line of works study the bandit learning problem in two-sided matching
markets, where one side of market participants (players) are uncertain about their
preferences and hope to find a stable matching during iterative matchings with
the other side (arms). The state-of-the-art analysis shows that the player-optimal
stable regret is of order O(K log T /∆2 ) where K is the number of arms, T is the
horizon and ∆ is the players’ minimum preference gap. However, this result may
be far from the lower bound Ω(max{N log T /∆2 , K log T /∆}) since the number
K of arms (workers, publisher slots) may be much larger than that N of players
(employers in labor markets, advertisers in online advertising, respectively). In
this paper, we propose a new algorithm and show that the regret can be upper
bounded by O(N 2 log T /∆2 + K log T /∆). This result removes the dependence
on K in the main order term and improves the state-of-the-art guarantee in common cases where N is much smaller than K. Such an advantage is also verified
in experiments. In addition, we provide a refined analysis for the existing centralized UCB algorithm and show that, under α-condition, it achieves an improved
O(N log T /∆2 + K log T /∆) regret.

1

Introduction

The two-sided matching market problem has been extensively studied in the literature due to its wide
range of applications like labor market, school admission, house allocation, and online advertising
[26, 9, 1]. There are two sides of participants in the market, such as the employers and workers in the
labor market, advertisers and publishers in online advertising. Each participant on the one side has a
preference ranking over the other side. The concept of stability, which characterizes the equilibrium
state of the market where no participant wants to break up the current matching relationship and find
another partner, has attracted great interest from researchers [26]. Achieving stability is critical for
ensuring the long-term viability of the market.
A rich line of works [9, 15, 25] study how to find a stable matching in the market. Most of them
assume the preference ranking of each market participant is known beforehand, which we refer
to as the offline setting. However, in real applications, the knowledge of the preferences may be
uncertain. For example, in the labor market, employers usually do not know the working abilities
of workers before being matched, and advertisers also do not know the exact conversion rate of
placing the advertisement in a publisher slot. This makes the traditional algorithms unavailable to
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

