DFA-GNN: Forward Learning of Graph Neural
Networks by Direct Feedback Alignment

1

Gongpei Zhao1,2 , Tao Wang1,2∗, Congyan Lang1,2 , Yi Jin1,2 , Yidong Li1,2 , Haibin Ling3
Key Laboratory of Big Data & Artificial Intelligence in Transportation, Ministry of Education, China
2
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
3
Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University, USA
{csgpzhao, twang, cylang, yjin, ydli}@bjtu.edu.cn
hling@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) are recognized for their strong performance across
various applications, with the backpropagation (BP) algorithm playing a central
role in the development of most GNN models. However, despite its effectiveness,
BP has limitations that challenge its biological plausibility and affect the efficiency,
scalability and parallelism of training neural networks for graph-based tasks. While
several non-backpropagation (non-BP) training algorithms, such as the direct
feedback alignment (DFA), have been successfully applied to fully-connected and
convolutional network components for handling Euclidean data, directly adapting
these non-BP frameworks to manage non-Euclidean graph data in GNN models
presents significant challenges. These challenges primarily arise from the violation
of the independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) assumption in graph data
and the difficulty in accessing prediction errors for all samples (nodes) within the
graph. To overcome these obstacles, in this paper we propose DFA-GNN, a novel
forward learning framework tailored for GNNs with a case study of semi-supervised
learning. The proposed method breaks the limitations of BP by using a dedicated
forward training mechanism. Specifically, DFA-GNN extends the principles of
DFA to adapt to graph data and unique architecture of GNNs, which incorporates
the information of graph topology into the feedback links to accommodate the
non-Euclidean characteristics of graph data. Additionally, for semi-supervised
graph learning tasks, we developed a pseudo error generator that spreads residual
errors from training data to create a pseudo error for each unlabeled node. These
pseudo errors are then utilized to train GNNs using DFA. Extensive experiments
on 10 public benchmarks reveal that our learning framework outperforms not
only previous non-BP methods but also the standard BP methods, and it exhibits
excellent robustness against various types of noise and attacks.

1

Introduction

As a class of neural networks (NNs) specifically designed to process and learn from graph data,
graph neural networks (GNNs) [Zhou et al., 2020, Wu et al., 2020] have gained significant popularity
in addressing graph analytical challenges. They have demonstrated outstanding success in various
applications, including recommendation systems [Wu et al., 2022], drug discovery [Xiong et al., 2021]
and question answering [Yasunaga et al., 2021]. The impressive accomplishments of GNNs, as well
as other neural network models, are largely attributed to the backpropagation (BP) algorithm [HechtNielsen, 1992], which has emerged as the standard technique for training deep neural networks.
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

