Near-Optimal Streaming Heavy-Tailed Statistical
Estimation with Clipped SGD

Aniket Das∗
Stanford University
aniketd@cs.stanford.edu
Soumyabrata Pal∗
Adobe Research
soumyabratap@adobe.com

Dheeraj Nagaraj
Google DeepMind
dheerajnagaraj@google.com

Arun Sai Suggala
Google DeepMind
arunss@google.com

Prateek Varshney∗
Stanford University
vprateek@stanford.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of high-dimensional heavy-tailed statistical estimation in
the streaming setting, which is much harder than the traditional batch setting due
to memory constraints. We cast this problem as stochastic convex optimization
with heavy tailed stochastic gradients, and prove that the widely used ClippedSGD algorithm attains near-optimal sub-Gaussian statistical rates whenever the
second moment of the stochastic gradient noise is finite. More precisely, with T
samples, we show that
for smooth and strongly convex objectives,
qClipped-SGD,
√
Tr(Σ)+ Tr(Σ)∥Σ∥2 ln(ln(T )/δ)
achieves an error of
with probability 1 − δ, where
T
Σ is the covariance of the clipped gradient. Note that the fluctuations (depending
on 1/δ) are of
qlower order than the term Tr(Σ). This improves upon the current

best rate of Tr(Σ)Tln( /δ) for Clipped-SGD, known only for smooth and strongly
convex objectives. Our results also extend to smooth convex and lipschitz convex
objectives. Key to our result is a novel iterative refinement strategy for martingale
concentration, improving upon the PAC-Bayes approach of Catoni and Giulini [8].
1

1

Introduction

A fundamental problem in machine learning and statistics is the estimation of an unknown parameter
of a probability distribution, given samples from that distribution. This can be expressed as the
minimization of the expected loss: minx F (x) := Eξ∼P [f (x; ξ)], where x represents the parameter
to be estimated, P is the underlying probability distribution which can only be accessed through
samples, and f (x; ξ) is a function which quantifies the loss incurred at a point ξ by parameter x.
In this paper, we focus on the setting where P is a heavy-tailed distribution for which the extreme
values are more likely than in distributions like the Gaussian, f (·; ·) is convex and the learner only
has access to O(d) memory.
The heavy-tailed statistical estimation problem has received increased attention of late because of
the prevalence of heavy-tailed distributions in many statistical applications dealing with real world
data [19, 49, 57, 23]. The presence of such heavy-tailed distributions can significantly degrade the performance of statistical estimation and testing procedures designed under Gaussian (or sub-Gaussian)
tail assumptions [30, 24, 53, 24]. This has spurred recent research efforts towards developing estimators specifically tailored for heavy-tailed settings (e.g., [10, 44, 16, 36]; see Section 1.2 for a more
detailed literature review). Despite substantial progress on this problem in recent years, much of the
∗

Work done while at Google

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

