MassSpecGym: A benchmark for the discovery and
identification of molecules
Roman Bushuiev1,2 , Anton Bushuiev2 , Niek F. de Jonge3 , Adamo Young4 ,
Fleming Kretschmer5 , Raman Samusevich1,2 , Janne Heirman6 , Fei Wang7,8 ,
Luke Zhang9 , Kai Dührkop5 , Marcus Ludwig10 , Nils A. Haupt5 , Apurva Kalia11 ,
Corinna Brungs1 , Robin Schmid1 , Russell Greiner7,8 , Bo Wang4 , David S. Wishart7,12 ,
Li-Ping Liu11 , Juho Rousu13 , Wout Bittremieux6 , Hannes Rost9 , Tytus D. Mak14 ,
Soha Hassoun11,15 , Florian Huber16 , Justin J.J. van der Hooft3,17 , Michael A. Stravs18 ,
Sebastian Böcker5 , Josef Sivic2 , Tomáš Pluskal1
1

Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry of the Czech Academy of Sciences,
Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics, Czech Technical University,
3
Bioinformatics Group, Wageningen University & Research, 4 Department of Computer
Science, University of Toronto, 5 Chair for Bioinformatics, Institute for Computer Science,
Friedrich Schiller University Jena, 6 Department of Computer Science, University of Antwerp,
7
Department of computing science, University of Alberta, 8 Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute,
9
Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, 10 Bright Giant GmbH, 11 Department of
Computer Science, Tufts University, 12 Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta,
13
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, 14 Mass Spectrometry Data Center,
National Institute of Standards and Technology, 15 Department of Chemical and Biological
Engineering, Tufts University, 16 Centre for Digitalisation and Digitality, University of Applied
Sciences Düsseldorf, 17 Department of Biochemistry, University of Johannesburg,
18
Eawag: Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology
2

Abstract
The discovery and identification of molecules in biological and environmental
samples is crucial for advancing biomedical and chemical sciences. Tandem mass
spectrometry (MS/MS) is the leading technique for high-throughput elucidation
of molecular structures. However, decoding a molecular structure from its mass
spectrum is exceptionally challenging, even when performed by human experts. As
a result, the vast majority of acquired MS/MS spectra remain uninterpreted, thereby
limiting our understanding of the underlying (bio)chemical processes. Despite
decades of progress in machine learning applications for predicting molecular
structures from MS/MS spectra, the development of new methods is severely
hindered by the lack of standard datasets and evaluation protocols. To address
this problem, we propose MassSpecGym – the first comprehensive benchmark
for the discovery and identification of molecules from MS/MS data. Our benchmark comprises the largest publicly available collection of high-quality labeled
MS/MS spectra and defines three MS/MS annotation challenges: de novo molecular structure generation, molecule retrieval, and spectrum simulation. It includes
new evaluation metrics and a generalization-demanding data split, therefore standardizing the MS/MS annotation tasks and rendering the problem accessible to
the broad machine learning community. MassSpecGym is publicly available at
https://github.com/pluskal-lab/MassSpecGym.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

