Information Re-Organization Improves Reasoning in
Large Language Models

Xiaoxia Cheng, Zeqi Tan, Wei Xue, Weiming Lu∗
College of Computer Science and Technology
Zhejiang University
{zjucxx, zqtan, lokilanka, luwm}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Improving the reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs) has attracted considerable interest. Recent approaches primarily focus on improving
the reasoning process to yield a more precise final answer. However, in scenarios
involving contextually aware reasoning, these methods neglect the importance of
first identifying logical relationships from the context before proceeding with the
reasoning. This oversight could lead to a superficial understanding and interaction with the context, potentially undermining the quality and reliability of the
reasoning outcomes. In this paper, we propose an information re-organization
(InfoRE) method before proceeding with the reasoning to enhance the reasoning
ability of LLMs. Our re-organization method involves initially extracting logical
relationships from the contextual content, such as documents or paragraphs, and
subsequently pruning redundant content to minimize noise. Then, we utilize the
re-organized information in the reasoning process. This enables LLMs to deeply
understand the contextual content by clearly perceiving these logical relationships,
while also ensuring high-quality responses by eliminating potential noise. To
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in improving the reasoning ability,
we conduct experiments using Llama2-70B, GPT-3.5, and GPT-4 on various contextually aware multi-hop reasoning tasks. Using only a zero-shot setting, our method
achieves an average absolute improvement of 4% across all tasks, highlighting
its potential to improve the reasoning performance of LLMs. Our source code is
available at https://github.com/hustcxx/InfoRE.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) demonstrate powerful generative capabilities and achieve remarkable
performance across a range of linguistic tasks [1–3]. However, their capabilities in performing
complex reasoning tasks — an essential aspect of advanced language understanding and intelligent
decision-making — still present substantial challenges [4, 5]. This has spurred researchers to explore
innovative strategies [6–8] to improve the reasoning capabilities of these models.
Recently, diverse methods have been developed to enhance the reasoning ability of LLMs. For
example, a notable method Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [6], incorporates a series of intermediate
reasoning steps into the reasoning. CoT [6] allows for a more transparent and understandable path
to the final answer, making it easier to follow the logic behind the conclusion. Building upon this
foundation, subsequent approaches such as Tree of Thoughts (ToT) [7] and Graph of Thoughts
(GoT) [8] are proposed to further refine the reasoning steps and enhance the accuracy and reliability
of LLMs. Different from the sequential intermediate steps of CoT [6], ToT [7] and GoT [8] model the
problem solving process into structured tools of tree and graph, respectively. A critical observation
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

