Learning to Merge Tokens via Decoupled Embedding
for Efficient Vision Transformers
Dong Hoon Lee
KAIST
donghoonlee@kaist.ac.kr

Seunghoon Hong
KAIST
seunghoon.hong@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent token reduction methods for Vision Transformers (ViTs) incorporate token
merging, which measures the similarities between token embeddings and combines
the most similar pairs. However, their merging policies are directly dependent on intermediate features in ViTs, which prevents exploiting features tailored for merging
and requires end-to-end training to improve token merging. This paper proposes
Decoupled Token Embedding for Merging (DTEM) that enhances token merging
through a decoupled embedding learned via a continuously relaxed token merging
process. Our method introduces a lightweight embedding module decoupled from
the ViT forward pass to extract dedicated features for token merging, addressing
the restriction from using intermediate features. The continuously relaxed token
merging, applied during training, enables us to learn the decoupled embeddings
in a differentiable manner. Thanks to the decoupled structure, our method can be
seamlessly integrated into existing ViT backbones and trained either modularly
by learning only the decoupled embeddings or end-to-end by fine-tuning. We
demonstrate the applicability of DTEM on various tasks, including classification,
captioning, and segmentation, with consistent improvement in token merging. Especially in the ImageNet-1k classification, DTEM achieves a 37.2% reduction in
FLOPs while maintaining a top-1 accuracy of 79.85% with DeiT-small. Code is
available at https://github.com/movinghoon/dtem.

1

Introduction

Transformers [31] have become the dominant and most popular architecture in machine learning,
excelling in various modalities and tasks. In computer vision, Vision Transformers (ViTs) [9, 30] have
achieved state-of-the-art performance, outperforming conventional backbones in tasks such as image
classification [30], object detection [4], and segmentation [15], as well as multimodal applications
such as image captioning [33] and visual question answering [17]. A key factor in the success of
ViTs is their ability to capture long-range dependencies between patches or tokens, regardless of their
spatial positions, using self-attention. However, due to self-attention, ViTs have high computational
and memory costs that increase quadratically with the number of tokens. Consequently, there has
been significant interest in developing methods to improve the computational efficiency of ViTs.
In this pursuit, token reduction [26, 23, 39, 22] aims to progressively reduce the number of tokens
in Transformer layers, often adhering to predefined reduction rates. Early approaches [26, 23,
39] propose to prune unimportant tokens based on their contribution to the task, as measured
by scoring functions. Yet, simply pruning tokens leads to information loss, often resulting in
significant performance degradation in high reduction rates. Alternatively, approaches based on
token merging [21, 27, 40, 2, 20, 34, 12] aim to combine redundant tokens instead of removing them.
Such redundancy is measured by the similarity between the tokens based on intermediate features in
ViT, such as token- or key-embeddings. Token merging has several advantages over pruning; it can
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

