Accelerating Greedy Coordinate Gradient and
General Prompt Optimization via Probe Sampling

Yiran Zhao1† Wenyue Zheng1 Tianle Cai2 Xuan Long Do1
Kenji Kawaguchi1 Anirudh Goyal3 Michael Qizhe Shieh1†
1
National University of Singapore 2 Princeton University 3 Google DeepMind

Abstract
Safety of Large Language Models (LLMs) has become a critical issue given their
rapid progresses. Greedy Coordinate Gradient (GCG) is shown to be effective
in constructing adversarial prompts to break the aligned LLMs, but optimization
of GCG is time-consuming. To reduce the time cost of GCG and enable more
comprehensive studies of LLM safety, in this work, we study a new algorithm
called Probe sampling. At the core of the algorithm is a mechanism that
dynamically determines how similar a smaller draft model’s predictions are to the
target model’s predictions for prompt candidates. When the target model is similar
to the draft model, we rely heavily on the draft model to filter out a large number
of potential prompt candidates. Probe sampling achieves up to 5.6 times speedup
using Llama2-7b-chat and leads to equal or improved attack success rate (ASR)
on the AdvBench. Furthermore, probe sampling is also able to accelerate other
prompt optimization techniques and adversarial methods, leading to acceleration
of 1.8× for AutoPrompt, 2.4× for APE and 2.4× for AutoDAN.1

1

Introduction

Ensuring the safety of Large Language Models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2023;
Touvron et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2023) has become a central theme of research. Despite continuous
efforts, LLMs are prone to generate objectionable contents in various scenarios including using an
adversarial suffix (Zou et al., 2023), further finetuning (Qi et al., 2024; Lermen and Rogers-Smith,
2024), ciphering (Yuan et al., 2024b) and multilingual settings (Deng et al., 2024). Among effective
LLM adversarial attack works, Greedy Coordinate Gradient (GCG) (Zou et al., 2023) present a
general and universal method as briefly illustrated in Figure 1.
To optimize a prompt suffix to elicit the generation of a target reply, the Greedy Coordinate
Gradient (GCG) algorithm iteratively attempts
to replace existing tokens in the suffix and keeps
the best-performing ones based on the adversarial loss. The GCG algorithm is empirically
effective but searching the combinatorial space
of the adversarial suffixes is time-consuming Figure 1: A brief illustration of the Greedy Coordisince each token replacement attempt requires nate Gradient (GCG) algorithm (Zou et al., 2023).
a full forward computation using an LLM. This
hinders us from using the algorithm to fully explore the safety properties of LLMs such as finding
potentially harmful queries comprised of natural sentences.
†
1

Correspondence to: Yiran Zhao (zhaoyiran@u.nus.edu), Michael Shieh (michaelshieh@comp.nus.edu.sg).
Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/zhaoyiran924/Probe-Sampling.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

