Understanding Information Storage and Transfer in
Multi-modal Large Language Models

Samyadeep Basu
University of Maryland
Cecily Morrison
Microsoft Research

Martin Grayson
Microsoft Research

Besmira Nushi
Microsoft Research

Soheil Feizi
University of Maryland

Daniela Massiceti
Microsoft Research

Abstract
Understanding the mechanisms of information storage and transfer in Transformerbased models is important for driving model understanding progress. Recent work
has studied these mechanisms for Large Language Models (LLMs), revealing
insights on how information is stored in a model’s parameters and how information
flows to and from these parameters in response to specific prompts. However,
these studies have not yet been extended to Multi-modal Large Language Models
(MLLMs). Given their expanding capabilities and real-world use, we start by
studying one aspect of these models – how MLLMs process information in a
factual visual question answering task. We use a constraint-based formulation
which views a visual question as having a set of visual or textual constraints that
the model’s generated answer must satisfy to be correct (e.g. What movie directed
by the director in this photo has won a Golden Globe?). Under this setting, we
contribute i) a method that extends causal information tracing from pure language
to the multi-modal setting, and ii) VQA-Constraints, a test-bed of 9.7K visual
questions annotated with constraints. We use these tools to study two open-source
MLLMs, LLaVa and multi-modal Phi-2. Our key findings show that these MLLMs
rely on MLP and self-attention blocks in much earlier layers for information storage,
compared to LLMs whose mid-layer MLPs are more important. We also show
that a consistent small subset of visual tokens output by the vision encoder are
responsible for transferring information from the image to these causal blocks. We
validate these mechanisms by introducing M ULT E DIT, a model-editing algorithm
that can correct errors and insert new long-tailed information into MLLMs by
targeting these causal blocks.

1

Introduction

Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) trained on both text and images are rapidly moving
from research into deployment and are being used by millions of people. Yet, while there have been
some advances in understanding how Large Language Models (LLMs) work, much less has been
done to understand MLLMs. This paper begins to close this gap by studying how information is
stored and transferred in MLLMs. To do this through the lens of a factual Visual Question Answering
(VQA) task – a very common use case of MLLMs today [26, 35, 27].
MLLMs process factual information in two steps: information storage and information transfer.
Information storage refers to how facts from a pre-training dataset are stored in a model’s parameters
– its so-called ‘parametric’ memory. Information transfer describes how information from input
prompts are propagated through these storage locations to the model’s final output. Understanding
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024)., Vancouver.

