DiffAug: A Diffuse-and-Denoise Augmentation for
Training Robust Classifiers

Chandramouli S. Sastry, Sri Harsha Dumpala, Sageev Oore
Dalhousie University, Canada.

Abstract
We introduce DiffAug, a simple and efficient diffusion-based augmentation technique to train image classifiers for the crucial yet challenging goal of improved
classifier robustness. Applying DiffAug to a given example consists of one forwarddiffusion step followed by one reverse-diffusion step. Using both ResNet-50 and
Vision Transformer architectures, we comprehensively evaluate classifiers trained
with DiffAug and demonstrate the surprising effectiveness of single-step reverse
diffusion in improving robustness to covariate shifts, certified adversarial accuracy
and out of distribution detection. When we combine DiffAug with other augmentations such as AugMix and DeepAugment we demonstrate further improved
robustness. Finally, building on this approach, we also improve classifier-guided
diffusion wherein we observe improvements in: (i) classifier-generalization, (ii)
gradient quality (i.e., improved perceptual alignment) and (iii) image generation
performance. We thus introduce a computationally efficient technique for training
with improved robustness that does not require any additional data, and effectively
complements existing augmentation approaches.

1

Introduction

Motivated by the success of diffusion models in high-fidelity and photorealistic image generation,
generative data augmentation is an emerging application of diffusion models. While attempts to
train improved classifiers with synthetic data have proved challenging, Azizi et al. [2] impressively
demonstrated that extending the training dataset with synthetic images generated using Imagen [42] —
with appropriate sampling parameters (e.g. prompt and guidance strength) — could indeed improve
Imagenet classification. In a similar experiment with Stable Diffusion (SD) [41], Sariyildiz et al.
[45] studied classifiers trained exclusively on synthetic images (i.e. no real images) and discovered
improvements when training on a subset of 100 Imagenet classes. The success of generative data
augmentation depends crucially on sample quality [40], so these findings irrefutably highlight the
superior generative abilities of diffusion models.
Despite these impressive findings, widespread adoption of diffusion models for synthetic data
augmentation is constrained by high computational cost of diffusion sampling, which requires
multiple steps of reverse diffusion to ensure sufficient sample quality. Furthermore, both SD and
Imagen are trained on upstream datasets much larger than Imagenet and some of these improvements
could also be attributed to the quality and scale of the upstream dataset [19]. For example, Bansal and
Grover [4] find limited advantages in synthetic examples generated from a diffusion model trained
solely on Imagenet.
Together, these limitations motivate us to explore a diffusion-based augmentation technique that is
not only computationally efficient but can also enhance classifier training without relying on extra
data. To that end, we consider the following questions:
1. Can we leverage a diffusion model trained with no extra data?
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

