Scalable Neural Network Verification with
Branch-and-bound Inferred Cutting Planes

Duo Zhou1 Christopher Brix2 Grani A Hanasusanto1 Huan Zhang1
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 RWTH Aachen University
{duozhou2,gah}@illinois.edu brix@cs.rwth-aachen.de huan@huan-zhang.com

Abstract
Recently, cutting-plane methods such as GCP-CROWN have been explored to
enhance neural network verifiers and made significant advances. However, GCPCROWN currently relies on generic cutting planes (“cuts”) generated from external
mixed integer programming (MIP) solvers. Due to the poor scalability of MIP
solvers, large neural networks cannot benefit from these cutting planes. In this paper,
we exploit the structure of the neural network verification problem to generate
efficient and scalable cutting planes specific for this problem setting. We propose a
novel approach, Branch-and-bound Inferred Cuts with COnstraint Strengthening
(BICCOS), which leverages the logical relationships of neurons within verified
subproblems in the branch-and-bound search tree, and we introduce cuts that
preclude these relationships in other subproblems. We develop a mechanism that
assigns influence scores to neurons in each path to allow the strengthening of these
cuts. Furthermore, we design a multi-tree search technique to identify more cuts,
effectively narrowing the search space and accelerating the BaB algorithm. Our
results demonstrate that BICCOS can generate hundreds of useful cuts during
the branch-and-bound process and consistently increase the number of verifiable
instances compared to other state-of-the-art neural network verifiers on a wide range
of benchmarks, including large networks that previous cutting plane methods could
not scale to. BICCOS is part of the α,β-CROWN verifier, the VNN-COMP 2024
winner. The code is available at https://github.com/Lemutisme/BICCOS.

1

Introduction

Formal verification of neural networks (NNs) has emerged as a critical challenge in the field of
artificial intelligence. In canonical settings, the verification procedure aims to prove certified bounds
on the outputs of a neural network given a specification, such as robustness against adversarial
perturbations or adherence to safety constraints. As these networks become increasingly complex
and are deployed in sensitive domains, rigorously ensuring their safety and reliability is paramount.
Recent research progress on neural network verification has enabled safety or performance guarantees
in several mission-critical applications [55, 53, 51, 13, 60, 57].
The branch and bound (BaB) procedure has shown great promise as a verification approach [12,
59, 21]. In particular, the commonly used ReLU activation function exhibits a piecewise linear
behavior, and this property makes ReLU networks especially suitable for branch and bound techniques.
During the branching process, one ReLU neuron is selected and two subproblems are created. Each
subproblem refers to one of the two ReLU states (inactive or active) and the bounds of the neurons’
activation value are tightened correspondingly. BaB systematically branches ReLU neurons, creates
a search tree of subproblems, and prunes away subproblems whose bounds are tight enough to
guarantee the verification specifications. Although our work focuses on studying the canonical ReLU
settings, branch-and-bound has also demonstrated its power in non-ReLU cases [48]. Despite its
success in many tasks, the efficiency and effectiveness of the branch-and-bound procedure heavily
depend on the number of subproblems that can be pruned.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

