Direct Preference-Based Evolutionary Multi-Objective
Optimization with Dueling Bandits

Tian Huang1† , Shengbo Wang1† , Ke Li2∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering ,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Exeter
tianhuang.uestc@gmail.com shnbo.wang@foxmail.com k.li@exeter.ac.uk
1

Abstract
The ultimate goal of multi-objective optimization (MO) is to assist human decisionmakers (DMs) in identifying solutions of interest (SOI) that optimally reconcile
multiple objectives according to their preferences. Preference-based evolutionary
MO (PBEMO) has emerged as a promising framework that progressively approximates SOI by involving human in the optimization-cum-decision-making process.
Yet, current PBEMO approaches are prone to be inefficient and misaligned with
the DM’s true aspirations, especially when inadvertently exploiting mis-calibrated
reward models. This is further exacerbated when considering the stochastic nature
of human feedback. This paper proposes a novel framework that navigates MO to
SOI by directly leveraging human feedback without being restricted by a predefined reward model nor cumbersome model selection. Specifically, we developed a
clustering-based stochastic dueling bandits algorithm that strategically scales well
to high-dimensional dueling bandits. The learned preferences are then transformed
into a unified probabilistic format that can be readily adapted to prevalent EMO
algorithms. This also leads to a principled termination criterion that strategically
manages human cognitive loads and computational budget. Experiments on 48
benchmark test problems, including the RNA inverse design and protein structure
prediction, fully demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed approach.

1

Introduction

Multi-objective optimization (MO) represents a fundamental challenge in artificial intelligence [49],
with profound implications that span virtually every sector—from scientific discovery [67] to engineering design [22], and societal governance [23]. In MO, there is no single utopian solution
that optimizes all objectives; instead, the Pareto front (PF) comprises non-dominated solutions,
each representing an efficient yet incomparable trade-off between objectives. The goal of MO is
to assist human decision-makers (DMs) in identifying solutions of interest (SOI) that optimally
reconcile these conflicting objectives according to their preferences. This field has been a subject
of rigorous study within the multi-criterion decision-making (MCDM) community [43] for more
than half a century. Over the past two decades, we have witnessed a seamless transition from purely
analytical methodologies to a burgeoning interest in interactive evolutionary meta-heuristics, known
as preference-based evolutionary MO (PBEMO) [39].
As in Figure 1(a), a PBEMO method involves three building blocks. The optimization module
uses a population-based meta-heuristics to explore the search space. The preference information is
progressively learned by periodically involving human DM in the consultation module to provide
∗

Correspondence: k.li@exeter.ac.uk; † Equal contributions.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

