End-to-end Learnable Clustering
for Intent Learning in Recommendation

Yue Liu∗
Ant Group
National University of Singapore
yueliu19990731@163.com
Jun Xia
Westlake University
Hangzhou, China

Shihao Zhu∗
Ant Group
Hangzhou, China

Yingwei Ma
Alibaba Group
Hangzhou, China

Xinwang Liu†
National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, China

Jian Ma
Ant Group
Hangzhou, China

Shengju Yu
National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, China
Wenliang Zhong†
Ant Group
Hangzhou, China

Kejun Zhang
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, China

Abstract
Intent learning, which aims to learn users’ intents for user understanding and
item recommendation, has become a hot research spot in recent years. However,
existing methods suffer from complex and cumbersome alternating optimization,
limiting performance and scalability. To this end, we propose a novel intent
learning method termed ELCRec, by unifying behavior representation learning
into an End-to-end Learnable Clustering framework, for effective and efficient
Recommendation. Concretely, we encode user behavior sequences and initialize
the cluster centers (latent intents) as learnable neurons. Then, we design a novel
learnable clustering module to separate different cluster centers, thus decoupling
users’ complex intents. Meanwhile, it guides the network to learn intents from
behaviors by forcing behavior embeddings close to cluster centers. This allows
simultaneous optimization of recommendation and clustering via mini-batch data.
Moreover, we propose intent-assisted contrastive learning by using cluster centers
as self-supervision signals, further enhancing mutual promotion. Both experimental
results and theoretical analyses demonstrate the superiority of ELCRec from six
perspectives. Compared to the runner-up, ELCRec improves NDCG@5 by 8.9%
and reduces computational costs by 22.5% on the Beauty dataset. Furthermore, due
to the scalability and universal applicability, we deploy this method on the industrial
recommendation system with 130 million page views and achieve promising results.
The codes are available on GitHub3 . A collection (papers, codes, datasets) of deep
group recommendation/intent learning methods is available on GitHub4 .
∗

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author
3
https://github.com/yueliu1999/ELCRec
4
https://github.com/yueliu1999/Awesome-Deep-Group-Recommendation

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

