SlowFocus: Enhancing Fine-grained Temporal
Understanding in Video LLM

Ming Nie1

Dan Ding1 Chunwei Wang2 Yuanfan Guo2 Jianhua Han2 Hang Xu2
1
School of Data Science, Fudan University 2 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei

Li Zhang1∗

https://github.com/fudan-zvg/SlowFocus

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated exceptional capabilities in text
understanding, which has paved the way for their expansion into video LLMs
(Vid-LLMs) to analyze video data. However, current Vid-LLMs struggle to simultaneously retain high-quality frame-level semantic information (i.e., a sufficient
number of tokens per frame) and comprehensive video-level temporal information
(i.e., an adequate number of sampled frames per video). This limitation hinders the
advancement of Vid-LLMs towards fine-grained video understanding. To address
this issue, we introduce the SlowFocus mechanism, which significantly enhances
the equivalent sampling frequency without compromising the quality of frame-level
visual tokens. SlowFocus begins by identifying the query-related temporal segment
based on the posed question, then performs dense sampling on this segment to
extract local high-frequency features. A multi-frequency mixing attention module
is further leveraged to aggregate these local high-frequency details with global
low-frequency contexts for enhanced temporal comprehension. Additionally, to
tailor Vid-LLMs to this innovative mechanism, we introduce a set of training strategies aimed at bolstering both temporal grounding and detailed temporal reasoning
capabilities. Furthermore, we establish FineAction-CGR, a benchmark specifically
devised to assess the ability of Vid-LLMs to process fine-grained temporal understanding tasks. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our
mechanism across both existing public video understanding benchmarks and our
proposed FineAction-CGR.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have garnered significant attention due to their exceptional text
understanding capabilities. Building on the strengths of LLMs, video large language models (VidLLMs) [15, 18, 42] adapt them to the video modality, extending their reasoning and interactive skills
to video data. By training on video-level tasks like captioning and question answering, they establish
coarse-grained video-language correspondence and acquire the capabilities of video understanding.
While Vid-LLMs have demonstrated the promising performance in video understanding, they still face
a significant challenge. To embed video features into LLMs under computing resource constraints,
Vid-LLMs typically need to sparsely sample the original video (e.g., retaining one frame every
second) into a collection of low-frequency frames. Subsequently, the token number of each frame are
also compressed through a visual adapter like average pooling [16] or Q-former [14]. This leads to
a dilemma: Vid-LLMs have to choose between compromised frame-level features and video-level
features, each resulting in a reduction of video information. As illustrated in Figure 1 (a), under
the premise of a constant total token number, we investigate the performance of Vid-LLMs by
∗

Li Zhang (lizhangfd@fudan.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

