Transformers are Minimax Optimal
Nonparametric In-Context Learners

1

Juno Kim1,2∗ Tai Nakamaki1 Taiji Suzuki1,2
University of Tokyo 2 Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN
∗
junokim@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
In-context learning (ICL) of large language models has proven to be a surprisingly
effective method of learning a new task from only a few demonstrative examples. In this paper, we study the efficacy of ICL from the viewpoint of statistical
learning theory. We develop approximation and generalization error bounds for
a transformer composed of a deep neural network and one linear attention layer,
pretrained on nonparametric regression tasks sampled from general function spaces
including the Besov space and piecewise γ-smooth class. We show that sufficiently
trained transformers can achieve – and even improve upon – the minimax optimal
estimation risk in context by encoding the most relevant basis representations
during pretraining. Our analysis extends to high-dimensional or sequential data
and distinguishes the pretraining and in-context generalization gaps. Furthermore,
we establish information-theoretic lower bounds for meta-learners w.r.t. both the
number of tasks and in-context examples. These findings shed light on the roles of
task diversity and representation learning for ICL.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in understanding and
generating natural language data. In particular, the phenomenon of in-context learning (ICL) has
recently garnered widespread attention. ICL refers to the ability of pretrained LLMs to perform a new
task by being provided with a few examples within the context of a prompt, without any parameter
updates or fine-tuning. It has been empirically observed that few-shot prompting is especially effective
in large-scale models (Brown et al., 2020) and requires only a couple of examples to consistently
achieve high performance (García et al., 2023). In contrast, Raventos et al. (2023) demonstrate that
sufficient pretraining task diversity is required for the emergence of ICL. However, we still lack a
comprehensive understanding of the statistical foundations of ICL and few-shot prompting.
A vigorous line of research has been directed towards understanding ICL of single-layer linear
attention models pretrained on the query prediction loss of linear regression tasks (Garg et al., 2022;
Akyürek et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Ahn et al., 2023; Mahankali et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024).
It has been shown that the global minimizer of the L2 pretraining loss implements one step of GD
on a least-squares linear regression objective (Mahankali et al., 2023) and is nearly Bayes optimal
(Wu et al., 2024). Moreover, risk bounds with respect to the context length (Zhang et al., 2023) and
number of tasks (Wu et al., 2024) have been obtained.
Other works have examined ICL of more complex multi-layer transformers. Bai et al. (2023); von
Oswald et al. (2023) give specific transformer constructions which simulate GD in context, however
it is unclear how such meta-algorithms may be learned. Another approach is to study learning with
representations, where tasks consist of a fixed nonlinear feature map composed with a varying linear
function. Guo et al. (2023) empirically found that trained transformers exhibit a separation where
lower layers transform the input and upper layers perform linear ICL. Recently, Kim and Suzuki
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

