Discrete Flow Matching

Itai Gat1

Tal Remez1

Gabriel Synnaeve1
1
Meta FAIR

Neta Shaul2

2

Felix Kreuk1

Ricky T. Q. Chen1

Yossi Adi1
Yaron Lipman1
Weizmann Institute of Science

Abstract
Despite Flow Matching and diffusion models having emerged as powerful generative paradigms for continuous variables such as images and videos, their application
to high-dimensional discrete data, such as language, is still limited. In this work,
we present Discrete Flow Matching, a novel discrete flow paradigm designed
specifically for generating discrete data. Discrete Flow Matching offers several key
contributions: (i) it works with a general family of probability paths interpolating
between source and target distributions; (ii) it allows for a generic formula for
sampling from these probability paths using learned posteriors such as the probability denoiser (x-prediction) and noise-prediction (ϵ-prediction); (iii) practically,
focusing on specific probability paths defined with different schedulers improves
generative perplexity compared to previous discrete diffusion and flow models;
and (iv) by scaling Discrete Flow Matching models up to 1.7B parameters, we
reach 6.7% Pass@1 and 13.4% Pass@10 on HumanEval and 6.7% Pass@1 and
20.6% Pass@10 on 1-shot MBPP coding benchmarks. Our approach is capable of
generating high-quality discrete data in a non-autoregressive fashion, significantly
closing the gap between autoregressive models and discrete flow models.

1

Introduction

Despite the remarkable success of diffusion and flow models in generating continuous spatial signals
such as images (Ho et al., 2020; Rombach et al., 2022; Esser et al., 2024) and videos (Singer et al.,
2022; Blattmann et al., 2023), their performance still falters when applied to discrete sequential data
compared to autoregressive models. Recent progress in adapting diffusion and flow models to the
discrete setting has been made via mostly two approaches: embedding the discrete data in continuous
space and applying continuous diffusion (Dieleman et al., 2022; Stark et al., 2024) or designing
diffusion or flow processes over discrete state spaces (Austin et al., 2021a; Campbell et al., 2022).
In this paper, we pursue the discrete flow approach of Campbell et al. (2024) and introduce Discrete
Flow Matching, a theoretical framework and algorithmic methodology for discrete flow models that
yields a state-of-the-art discrete non-autoregressive generative approach. Surprisingly, Discrete Flow
Matching exhibits similarities with the continuous Flow Matching (Lipman et al., 2022) approach
proposed for continuous signals. Notably, its generating probability velocity, employed in the
sampling algorithm, is identical in form to its continuous counterpart. Additionally, Discrete Flow
Matching offers the following advancements and simplifications over prior methods: It encompasses
a more comprehensive family of probability paths transforming source (noise) distributions into
target (data) distributions, accommodating arbitrary source-target couplings and time-dependent
schedulers. Furthermore, it provides a unified formulation for the generating probability velocity
directly expressed in terms of the learned posteriors and schedulers, along with a unified and
general theory and algorithm for corrector sampling and iterations. In practice, we observe that path
and corrector schedulers are pivotal, and their proper tuning leads to substantial improvements in
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

