FactorizePhys: Matrix Factorization for
Multidimensional Attention in Remote Physiological
Sensing
Jitesh Joshi1 , Sos S. Agaian2 , and Youngjun Cho1
2

1
Department of Computer Science, University College London, UK
Department of Computer Science, College of Staten Island, City University of New York, USA
{jitesh.joshi.20, youngjun.cho}@ucl.ac.uk, sos.agaian@csi.cuny.edu

Abstract
Remote photoplethysmography (rPPG) enables non-invasive extraction of blood
volume pulse signals through imaging, transforming spatial-temporal data into time
series signals. Advances in end-to-end rPPG approaches have focused on this transformation where attention mechanisms are crucial for feature extraction. However,
existing methods compute attention disjointly across spatial, temporal, and channel
dimensions. Here, we propose the Factorized Self-Attention Module (FSAM),
which jointly computes multidimensional attention from voxel embeddings using
nonnegative matrix factorization. To demonstrate FSAM’s effectiveness, we developed FactorizePhys, an end-to-end 3D-CNN architecture for estimating blood
volume pulse signals from raw video frames. Our approach adeptly factorizes
voxel embeddings to achieve comprehensive spatial, temporal, and channel attention, enhancing performance of generic signal extraction tasks. Furthermore, we
deploy FSAM within an existing 2D-CNN-based rPPG architecture to illustrate its
versatility. FSAM and FactorizePhys are thoroughly evaluated against state-of-theart rPPG methods, each representing different types of architecture and attention
mechanism. We perform ablation studies to investigate the architectural decisions
and hyperparameters of FSAM. Experiments on four publicly available datasets
and intuitive visualization of learned spatial-temporal features substantiate the effectiveness of FSAM and enhanced cross-dataset generalization in estimating rPPG
signals, suggesting its broader potential as a multidimensional attention mechanism.
The code is accessible at https://github.com/PhysiologicAILab/FactorizePhys.

1

Introduction

Attention mechanisms in computer vision are inspired by the human ability to identify salient
regions in complex scenes. Such mechanisms can be interpreted as a dynamic weight adjustment
process that selects useful features and disregards irrelevant ones in a multidimensional feature space.
Recent surveys [20, 23] provide a comprehensive overview of attention mechanisms and distinctly
categorize existing attention mechanisms. Amidst a spectrum of research from convolution block
attention [66] to computationally intensive multi-head attention [58], an effective, yet computation
and memory efficient, attention mechanism has remained desirable for real-world applications.
Matrix decomposition [12, 19, 31], a dimensionality reduction technique, has captured the interest of
researchers and has been explored in deep learning research for different objectives [57, 60, 17, 18].
This work investigates nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF), a matrix decomposition technique,
for its potential to efficiently perform multidimensional attention and evaluates its effectiveness in the
spatial-temporal context of estimating rPPG signal from video frames.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

