The Fine-Grained Complexity of Gradient
Computation for Training Large Language Models

Josh Alman
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
josh@cs.columbia.edu

Zhao Song
Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing
University of California, Berkeley
magic.linuxkde@gmail.com

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have made fundamental contributions over the last
a few years. To train an LLM, one needs to alternatingly run ‘forward’ computations
and ‘backward’ computations. The forward computation can be viewed as attention
function evaluation, and the backward computation can be viewed as a gradient
computation. In previous work by [Alman and Song, NeurIPS 2023], it was proved
that the forward step can be performed in almost-linear time in certain parameter
regimes, but that there is no truly sub-quadratic time algorithm in the remaining
parameter regimes unless the popular hypothesis SETH is false. In this work, we
show nearly identical results for the harder-seeming problem of computing the
gradient of loss function of one layer attention network, and thus for the entire
process of LLM training. This completely characterizes the fine-grained complexity
of every step of LLM training.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have emerged as popular technologies, driving breakthroughs across
many applications in natural language processing, computer vision, translation, and many other
areas [VSP+ 17, DCLT18, LOG+ 19, YDY+ 19, BMR+ 20, JZLD21, ZRG+ 22, CND+ 22, TLI+ 23,
TMS+ 23, Man23, TDFH+ 22, YCRI22, WTB+ 22, WSD+ 23, WCZ+ 23, ZJL+ 23, ZWH+ 24,
LLS+ 24a, XSL24, CLL+ 24, WMS+ 24]. The training of these models is a computationally intensive process, characterized by alternating between two primary operations: forward computation
and backward computation. Forward computation, or function evaluation, involves the propagation
of input data through the network to generate predictions. Conversely, backward computation, or
gradient computation, is the process of calculating the gradient of the loss function with respect to
the model’s parameters, facilitating the optimization of these parameters during training.
The efficiency of these computations directly impacts the feasibility and scalability of training LLMs,
particularly as models grow in size and complexity. Recent work by [AS23, AS24c, AS24a] has
carefully studied the forward computation step. They demonstrated a sharp computational boundary,
showing that how quickly the forward steps can be performed depends critically on how large the
entries are of the matrices which define the model parameters. They showed a near-linear time
algorithm when these entries are small, and also proved that when the entries are large, there is no
algorithm much faster than the trivial algorithm, assuming the Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis
(SETH) [IP01] holds.
The Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis (SETH) was introduced by Impagliazzo and Paturi [IP01]
over 20 years ago. It is a strengthening of the P ̸= NP conjecture, and asserts that our current best
SAT algorithms are roughly optimal (for detailed statement, see Hypothesis 3.1 below). SETH is a
popular conjecture from fine-grained complexity theory which has been used to prove lower bounds
for a wide variety of algorithmic problems. See, for instance, the survey [Wil18].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

