EAI: Emotional Decision-Making of LLMs in Strategic
Games and Ethical Dilemmas
Mikhail Mozikov∗1,2 , Nikita Severin∗3,4 , Valeria Bodishtianu5 , Maria Glushanina6 ,
Ivan Nasonov7 , Daniil Orekhov3 , Vladislav Pekhotin2 , Ivan Makovetskiy2 ,
Mikhail Baklashkin7 , Vasily Lavrentyev8 , Akim Tsvigun9 , Denis Turdakov4 ,
Tatiana Shavrina10 , Andrey Savchenko3,4,11 , Ilya Makarov 1,2,3,4,8,12
1

5

AIRI, 2 NUST MISiS, 3 HSE University, 4 ISP RAS,
Cornell University, École normale supérieure, 7 Independent Researcher, 8 ITMO University,
9
KU Leuven, 10 Institute of Linguistics RAS, 11 Sber AI Lab, 12 MIPT
6

“AI models can have feelings too”
Geoffrey Hinton, 2024

Abstract
One of the urgent tasks of artificial intelligence is to assess the safety and alignment
of large language models (LLMs) with human behavior. Conventional verification
only in pure natural language processing benchmarks can be insufficient. Since
emotions often influence human decisions, this paper examines LLM alignment
in complex strategic and ethical environments, providing an in-depth analysis of
the drawbacks of our psychology and the emotional impact on decision-making
in humans and LLMs. We introduce the novel EAI framework for integrating
emotion modeling into LLMs to examine the emotional impact on ethics and
LLM-based decision-making in various strategic games, including bargaining
and repeated games. Our experimental study with various LLMs demonstrated
that emotions can significantly alter the ethical decision-making landscape of
LLMs, highlighting the need for robust mechanisms to ensure consistent ethical
standards. Our game-theoretic analysis revealed that LLMs are susceptible to
emotional biases influenced by model size, alignment strategies, and primary
pretraining language. Notably, these biases often diverge from typical human
emotional responses, occasionally leading to unexpected drops in cooperation
rates, even under positive emotional influence. Such behavior complicates the
alignment of multiagent systems, emphasizing the need for benchmarks that can
rigorously evaluate the degree of emotional alignment. Our framework provides a
foundational basis for developing such benchmarks.

1

Introduction

As LLMs become increasingly prevalent across various sectors – including healthcare, customer
service, and digital therapy – their ability to make autonomous decisions accurately is questionable
and appears to be on the edge of regulatory, ethical, and technological debates. The LLMs are trained
on human data impacted by many socio-economical biases. Hence, many studies have been done
to align LLMs with human behavior. LLMs’ alignment with human values is essential not only for
improving user satisfaction and trust but also for ensuring the safety and predictability of LLMs
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

