AutoManual: Constructing Instruction Manuals by
LLM Agents via Interactive Environmental Learning
Minghao Chen1 ,

Yihang Li2 , Yanting Yang3 , Shiyu Yu5 , Binbin Lin3,4⇤ , Xiaofei He2
School of Computer Science, Hangzhou Dianzi University
2
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
3
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University 4 Fullong Inc. 5 NingBo Port Group
minghaochen01@gmail.com
1

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLM) based agents have shown promise in autonomously
completing tasks across various domains, e.g., robotics, games, and web navigation.
However, these agents typically require elaborate design and expert prompts to
solve tasks in specific domains, which limits their adaptability. We introduce
AutoManual, a framework enabling LLM agents to autonomously build their understanding through interaction and adapt to new environments. AutoManual
categorizes environmental knowledge into diverse rules and optimizes them in an
online fashion by two agents: 1) The Planner codes actionable plans based on
current rules for interacting with the environment. 2) The Builder updates the rules
through a well-structured rule system that facilitates online rule management and essential detail retention. To mitigate hallucinations in managing rules, we introduce
a case-conditioned prompting strategy for the Builder. Finally, the Formulator agent
compiles these rules into a comprehensive manual. The self-generated manual can
not only improve the adaptability but also guide the planning of smaller LLMs
while being human-readable. Given only one simple demonstration, AutoManual
significantly improves task success rates, achieving 97.4% with GPT-4-turbo and
86.2% with GPT-3.5-turbo on ALFWorld benchmark tasks. The code is available
at https://github.com/minghchen/automanual.

1

Introduction

Recently, autonomous agents based on Large Language Models (LLM), e.g., ReAct [33], Reflexion [16], SayCan [1], WebGPT [10], and Voyager [24], have demonstrated their potential to
complete long-horizon tasks in grounded environments. These LLM agents operate by generating
thoughts and actions that are executable in the environment. For customized environments, such
as robotics [1, 7, 18, 23] and games [14, 24, 39], prior methods provide detailed instructions and
in-context examples to familiarize LLM with action functions (API) and the target environment.
However, unlike these agents, humans can autonomously build and update their understanding of an
unfamiliar environment through dynamic interaction.
Several existing methods enable LLM agents to reflect on feedback [16, 21] or save successful
experiences as skills [21, 24, 35] to enhance the performance and reduce the reliance on humanprovided examples. However, these reflections and skills have not been well exploited to foster
a deeper understanding of the environment. As a result, directly using saved skills as in-context
examples can lead to the Path Dependence problem, i.e., the agent blindly replicates the paths of
previous successes, failing to adapt appropriately to new scenarios. Such problems are more severe in
real-world situations characterized by high variability.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

