ClashEval: Quantifying the tug-of-war between an
LLM’s internal prior and external evidence

Kevin Wu*
Department of Biomedical Data Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
kevinywu@stanford.edu

Eric Wu*
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
wue@stanford.edu

James Zou
Department of Biomedical Data Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
jamesz@stanford.edu

Abstract
Retrieval augmented generation (RAG) is frequently used to mitigate hallucinations
and provide up-to-date knowledge for large language models (LLMs). However,
given that document retrieval is an imprecise task and sometimes results in erroneous or even harmful content being presented in context, this raises the question of
how LLMs handle retrieved information: If the provided content is incorrect, does
the model know to ignore it, or does it recapitulate the error? Conversely, when the
model’s initial response is incorrect, does it always know to use the retrieved information to correct itself, or does it insist on its wrong prior response? To answer this,
we curate a dataset of over 1200 questions across six domains (e.g., drug dosages,
Olympic records, locations) along with content relevant to answering each question.
We further apply precise perturbations to the answers in the content that range
from subtle to blatant errors. We benchmark six top-performing LLMs, including
GPT-4o, on this dataset and find that LLMs are susceptible to adopting incorrect retrieved content, overriding their own correct prior knowledge over 60% of the time.
However, the more unrealistic the retrieved content is (i.e. more deviated from
truth), the less likely the model is to adopt it. Also, the less confident a model is in
its initial response (via measuring token probabilities), the more likely it is to adopt
the information in the retrieved content. We exploit this finding and demonstrate
simple methods for improving model accuracy where there is conflicting retrieved
content. Our results highlight a difficult task and benchmark for LLMs – namely,
their ability to correctly discern when it is wrong in light of correct retrieved content
and to reject cases when the provided content is incorrect. Our dataset, called
ClashEval, and evaluations are open-sourced to allow for future benchmarking on
top-performing models at https://github.com/kevinwu23/StanfordClashEval.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are prone to hallucinations and incorrect answers [Pal et al., 2023,
Sun et al., 2024, Ahmad et al., 2023]. Additionally, they are constrained to knowledge contained
in their training corpus and are unable to answer queries about recent events or publicly restricted
information. Retrieval augmented generation (RAG) is a commonly used framework that provides
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

