Geometric Exploitation for Indoor Panoramic
Semantic Segmentation

Duc Cao Dinh

Seok Joon Kim
Kyusung Cho
Laboratory Department
MAXST
Seoul, Korea
{caodinhduc, seokjoon, kscho}@maxst.com

Abstract
PAnoramic Semantic Segmentation (PASS) is an important task in computer vision, as it enables semantic understanding of a 360° environment. Currently,
most of existing works have focused on addressing the distortion issues in 2D
panoramic images without considering spatial properties of indoor scene. This
restricts PASS methods in perceiving contextual attributes to deal with the ambiguity when working with monocular images. In this paper, we propose a novel
approach for indoor panoramic semantic segmentation. Unlike previous works,
we consider the panoramic image as a composition of segment groups: oversampled segments, representing planar structures such as floors and ceilings, and
under-sampled segments, representing other scene elements. To optimize each
group, we first enhance over-sampled segments by jointly optimizing with a dense
depth estimation task. Then, we introduce a transformer-based context module that aggregates different geometric representations of the scene, combined
with a simple high-resolution branch, it serves as a robust hybrid decoder for
estimating under-sampled segments, effectively preserving the resolution of predicted masks while leveraging various indoor geometric properties. Experimental
results on both real-world (Stanford2D3DS, Matterport3D) and synthetic (Structured3D) datasets demonstrate the robustness of our framework, by setting new
state-of-the-arts in almost evaluations, The code and updated results are available
at: https://github.com/caodinhduc/vertical_relative_distance.

1

Introduction

In recent years, 360° camera images have garnered significant attention from learning systems and
practical applications, including holistic sensing in automated vehicles [6, 8, 11, 14, 17, 20] and
immersive experiences in augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR) devices [1, 29]. Unlike
traditional pinhole cameras with their limited Fields of View (FoV), panoramic images offer an
expansive 360° × 180° FoV, providing a more comprehensive perception of both indoor and outdoor
environments. This wide FoV enhances numerous fundamental computer vision tasks by enabling a
richer understanding of scenes, thus benefiting many fundamental computer vision tasks. One such
task, Panoramic Semantic Segmentation (PASS) is a pivotal task that generates dense, pixel-wise class
maps, significantly improving high-level understanding of complex environments. By harnessing the
wide field of view and unique properties of panoramic images, PASS enables more comprehensive
scene analysis, delivering valuable insights across a range of applications.
Most current Panoramic Semantic Segmentation (PASS) approaches rely on 2D panoramas transformed through equirectangular projection [24, 33]. However, these methods face two major challenges: limited annotated data and significant image distortions. In terms of data scarcity, existing
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

