The Reliability of OKRidge Method in Solving Sparse
Ridge Regression Problems

Xiyuan Li Youjun Wang Weiwei Liu∗
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Wuhan University
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University
Lee_xiyuan@outlook.com, youjunw1208@gmail.com, liuweiwei863@gmail.com

Abstract
Sparse ridge regression problems play a significant role across various domains.
To solve sparse ridge regression, [1] recently proposes an advanced algorithm,
Scalable Optimal K-Sparse Ridge Regression (OKRidge), which is both faster
and more accurate than existing approaches. However, the absence of theoretical
analysis on the error of OKRidge impedes its large-scale applications. In this
paper, we reframe the estimation error of OKRidge as a Primary Optimization (PO)
problem and employ the Convex Gaussian min-max theorem (CGMT) to simplify
the PO problem into an Auxiliary Optimization (AO) problem. Subsequently, we
provide a theoretical error analysis for OKRidge based on the AO problem. This
error analysis improves the theoretical reliability of OKRidge. We also conduct
experiments to verify our theorems and the results are in excellent agreement with
our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Sparse Ridge Regression (SRR) has achieved notable success across various machine learning
applications, including statistics [2], signal processing [3], dynamical systems [4, 5], and others. In
this paper, we are interested in addressing the following k-sparse linear regression problem with
additive noise:
y = X β ∗ + ϵ with ∥β ∗ ∥0 ≤ k,

(1)

where β ∗ ∈ Rd represents the “true" weight parameter, X = (x 1 , x 2 , · · · , x n )⊤ ∈ Rn×d
is the input measurement matrix, y = (y1 , y2 , · · · , yn )⊤ ∈ Rn is the real output responses,
ϵ = (ϵ1 , ϵ2 , · · · , ϵn )⊤ ∈ Rn is the noise vector, k ∈ Z+ specifies the maximum number of nonzero
elements for the model, ∥ · ∥0 denotes the number of nonzero elements of the given vector. Moreover,
the entries of X are drawn i.i.d. from N (0, 1); the entries of ϵ are drawn i.i.d. from N (0, σ 2 ); and
we assume kd is a constant and limd→∞ n(d)
d = δ ∈ (0, 1).
The formulation (1) represents a black box model where β ∗ is fixed. Given X and y , to determine
the target vector β ∗ , the most basic method is solving the following k-Sparse Ridge Regression
Optimization (k-SRO), as outlined by [1, 6, 7]:
min ∥y − X β ∥22 + λ∥β ∥22
β

s.t.

∥β ∥0 ≤ k,

(2)

where λ > 0 is a regularizer parameter, and ∥ · ∥2 denotes the Euclidean norm. Our paper focuses
on the worst-case scenario ∥β ∗ ∥0 = k. This k-SRO is different from the traditional ridge regression
∗

Corresponding author: Weiwei Liu (liuweiwei863@gmail.com).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

