SpeechAlign: Aligning Speech Generation to
Human Preferences
Dong Zhang∗, Zhaowei Li∗ , Shimin Li, Xin Zhang, Pengyu Wang,
Yaqian Zhou†, Xipeng Qiu†
Fudan University
dongzhang22@m.fudan.edu.cn, lizhaowei126@gmail.com
{zhouyaqian,xpqiu}@fudan.edu.cn

https://0nutation.github.io/SpeechAlign.github.io/

Abstract
Speech language models have significantly advanced in generating realistic speech,
with neural codec language models standing out. However, the integration of
preference optimization to align speech outputs to human preferences is often
neglected. This paper addresses this gap by first analyzing the distribution gap
in codec language models, highlighting how it leads to discrepancies between
the training and inference phases, which negatively affects performance. Then
we explore leveraging preference optimization to bridge the distribution gap. We
introduce SpeechAlign, an iterative self-improvement strategy that aligns speech
language models to human preferences. SpeechAlign involves constructing a
preference codec dataset contrasting golden codec tokens against synthetic tokens, followed by preference optimization to improve the codec language model.
This cycle of improvement is carried out iteratively to steadily convert weak models to strong ones. Through both subjective and objective evaluations, we show
that SpeechAlign can bridge the distribution gap and facilitating continuous selfimprovement of the speech language model. Moreover, SpeechAlign exhibits robust generalization capabilities and works for smaller models. Demos are available
at https://0nutation.github.io/SpeechAlign.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have showcased their potent abilities through techniques such as
pretraining, supervised fine-tuning (SFT), and Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) (OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023). The field of speech language modeling has seen
significant progress (Wang et al., 2023; Borsos et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023a), particularly with
the adoption of discrete speech representations (Hsu et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023b) like audio
codecs (Défossez et al., 2022; Zeghidour et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2023d). However, current speech
language models primarily focus on the SFT stage associated with empowering the LLM’s instructionfollowing capabilities, neglecting the integration of human feedback to align speech outputs to
human preferences regarding quality, naturalness, and expressiveness. Fortunately, preference
optimization has emerged as a powerful solution for aligning LLM output distribution with human
expectation (Stiennon et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; Ouyang et al., 2022). The most successful
approach, RLHF, achieves this by integrating rewarding modeling and a reinforcement learning phase.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

