Entropy testing and its application to testing Bayesian
networks
Clément L. Canonne
University of Sydney
clement.canonne@sydney.edu.au

Joy Qiping Yang
University of Sydney
qyan6238@uni.sydney.edu.au

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of entropy identity testing: given sample access
to a distribution p and a fully described distribution q (both discrete distributions
over a domain of size k), and the promise that either p = q or |H(p) − H(q)| ⩾ ε,
where H(·) denotes the Shannon entropy, a tester needs to distinguish between
the two cases with high
We establish a near-optimal sample com√ probability.
2
plexity bound of Θ̃( k/ε + 1/ε ) for this problem, and show how to apply it to
the problem of identity testing for in-degree-d n-dimensional Bayesian networks,
obtaining an upper bound of Õ(2d/2 n3/2 /ε2 + n2 /ε4 ). This improves on the
sample complexity bound of Õ(2d/2 n2 /ε4 ) from [CDKS20], which required an
additional assumption on the structure of the (unknown) Bayesian network.

1

Introduction

Entropy is a fundamental information theory notion, which quantifies the amount of “uncertainty”
a given random variable carries. Since its introduction by Shannon, this notion has found myriads
of applications, and is central – among others – to compression and coding, probability, electrical
engineering, and learning theory.
As a result, the task of estimating the Shannon entropy of a discrete random variable (or, equivalently, its probability distribution) from samples has naturally emerged, starting (in Computer Science) with the work of [BDKR02] which considered multiplicative approximations. Additive approximation of the entropy (within ±ε) was then considered in a series of papers [VV11a, VV11b,
VV13, HJW15a, ADOS17], culminating with the work of [WY16], which establishes the optimal

log2 k
k
sample complexity, Θ ε log
, where k ≫ 1 is the domain size.
k + ε2
While the resulting sample complexity is sublinear in the domain size k, it is only so by a mere
logarithmic factor. In some settings, paying this near-linear dependence in the amount of data necessary is impractical, typically in the large-domain regime (e.g., for high-dimensional data, where
k is exponential in the dimension); moreover, it may even be unnecessary. Specifically, one may
not be concerned so much about the (approximate) value of the entropy of a distribution, but rather
about whether it is above a threshold, or differs from that of a given purported model.
It is this latter task we introduce and consider in our work, which can be seen as a variant of the
standard identity testing question from distribution testing: given a reference known hypothesis
distribution q over a domain of size k, and i.i.d. samples from an unknown distribution p, what is
the sample complexity of testing whether p is equal to q, or their entropies differ significantly? And,
crucially, is this testing task more sample-efficient than that of estimating H(p)?

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

