Revisiting Motion Information for RGB-Event
Tracking with MOT Philosophy

Tianlu Zhang
EMIM
Xidian University
tlzhang96@outlook.com

Kurt Debattista
Warwick Manufacturing Group
University of Warwick
K.Debattista@warwick.ac.uk

Guiguang Ding
School of Software
Tsinghua University
dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn

Qiang Zhang*
EMIM
Xidian University
qzhang@@xidian.edu.cn

Jungong Han*
Department of Automation
Tsinghua University
jungonghan77@gmail.com

Abstract
RGB-Event single object tracking (SOT) aims to leverage the merits of RGB and
event data to achieve higher performance. However, existing frameworks focus on
exploring complementary appearance information within multi-modal data, and
struggle to address the association problem of targets and distractors in the temporal
domain using motion information from the event stream. In this paper, we introduce
the Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) philosophy into RGB-E SOT to keep track of
targets as well as distractors by using both RGB and event data, thereby improving
the robustness of the tracker. Specifically, an appearance model is employed to
predict the initial candidates. Subsequently, the initially predicted tracking results,
in combination with the RGB-E features, are encoded into appearance and motion
embeddings, respectively. Furthermore, a Spatial-Temporal Transformer Encoder
is proposed to model the spatial-temporal relationships and learn discriminative
features for each candidate through guidance of the appearance-motion embeddings.
Simultaneously, a Dual-Branch Transformer Decoder is designed to adopt such
motion and appearance information for candidate matching, thus distinguishing
between targets and distractors. The proposed method is evaluated on multiple
benchmark datasets and achieves state-of-the-art performance on all the datasets
tested.

1

Introduction

Single object tracking (SOT) aims to predict the position of a target in videos, by being given only the
position of the target in the initial frame. While traditional RGB-based trackers [1, 8] can effectively
capture comprehensive scene representations, including color and semantic information, they face
significant performance degradation in challenging conditions like fast motion, low illumination and
distractions from similar objects.
To address such challenges associated with frame-based cameras, some researchers have taken
advantage of event cameras [39], which are characterized by high temporal resolution and high
dynamic range, to augment the RGB data for reliable object tracking. In the past few years, various
methods have been proposed for RGB-Event (RGB-E) object tracking. Existing RGB-E trackers
primarily concentrate on exploring complementary appearance information within RGB and event
* Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

