Online Relational Inference for Evolving Multi-agent
Interacting Systems

Beomseok Kang, Priyabrata Saha, Sudarshan Sharma, Biswadeep Chakraborty,
Saibal Mukhopadhyay
Georgia Institute of Technology
{beomseok,smukhopadhyay6}@gatech.edu

Abstract
We introduce a novel framework, Online Relational Inference (ORI), designed to
efficiently identify hidden interaction graphs in evolving multi-agent interacting
systems using streaming data. Unlike traditional offline methods that rely on a
fixed training set, ORI employs online backpropagation, updating the model with
each new data point, thereby allowing it to adapt to changing environments in realtime. A key innovation is the use of an adjacency matrix as a trainable parameter,
optimized through a new adaptive learning rate technique called AdaRelation,
which adjusts based on the historical sensitivity of the decoder to changes in the
interaction graph. Additionally, a data augmentation method named Trajectory
Mirror (TM) is introduced to improve generalization by exposing the model to
varied trajectory patterns. Experimental results on both synthetic datasets and realworld data (CMU MoCap for human motion) demonstrate that ORI significantly
improves the accuracy and adaptability of relational inference in dynamic settings
compared to existing methods. This approach is model-agnostic, enabling seamless
integration with various neural relational inference (NRI) architectures, and offers
a robust solution for real-time applications in complex, evolving systems. Code is
available at https://github.com/beomseokg/ORI.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent interacting systems have been studied in various fields, including particle-based physical
simulations [1–3], traffic systems [4, 5], and social networks [6–8]. Interaction among agents is
crucial information to accurately model such systems and also provides interpretability in agent
behaviors [9]. However, external observers can only access the trajectory of agents without knowing
interaction graphs. Consequently, identifying unknown interaction graphs from observable trajectories
of agents has been emerged as a specific problem referred to as relational inference [10].
In recent years, neural relational inference (NRI) and its variants have shown promising performance
in synthetic and real-world environments [11–16]. Prior studies mostly aimed to present better
network for NRI based on variational autoencoder (VAE) built with graph neural networks (GNN)
[14, 15, 12, 17]. These methods involve an encoder to infer an interaction graph as an adjacency matrix
from observed trajectories and a decoder to predict the future trajectories employing the inferred
interaction graph. They generally perform training offline assuming the well-aligned distribution in
training and testing data. Unfortunately, such assumption is frequently violated in practice due to the
shifts in test condition, including sudden changes in the interaction, evolving system parameters and
even dynamics itself. Building a relational inference model generalizable to all the different scenarios
is challenging [18–20]. In this case, online learning is an attractive approach to continuously adapt
the model to newly observed environments [5]. However, online learning for relational inference has
been rarely explored.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

