Can LLMs Implicitly Learn Numeric Parameter
Constraints in Data Science APIs?
Yinlin Deng

Chunqiu Steven Xia

Zhezhen Cao

Meiziniu Li

Lingming Zhang

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Southern University of Science and Technology
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{yinlind2,chunqiu2,lingming}@illinois.edu, 12110529@mail.sustech.edu.cn, mlick@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Data science (DS) programs, typically built on popular DS libraries (such as PyTorch and NumPy) with thousands of APIs, serve as the cornerstone for various
mission-critical domains such as financial systems, autonomous driving software,
and coding assistants. Recently, large language models (LLMs) have been widely
applied to generate DS programs across diverse scenarios, such as assisting users for
DS programming or detecting critical vulnerabilities in DS frameworks. Such applications have all operated under the assumption, that LLMs can implicitly model the
numerical parameter constraints in DS library APIs and produce valid code. However, this assumption has not been rigorously studied in the literature. In this paper,
we empirically investigate the proficiency of LLMs to handle these implicit numerical constraints when generating DS programs. We studied 28 widely used APIs
from PyTorch and NumPy, and scrutinized the LLMs’ generation performance
in different levels of granularity: full programs, all parameters, and individual
parameters of a single API. We evaluated both state-of-the-art open-source and
closed-source models. The results show that LLMs are great at generating simple
DS programs, particularly those that follow common patterns seen in training data.
However, as we increase the difficulty by providing more complex/unusual inputs,
the performance of LLMs drops significantly. We also observe that GPT-4-Turbo
can sustain much higher performance overall, but still cannot handle arithmetic
API constraints well. In summary, while LLMs exhibit the ability to memorize
common patterns of popular DS API usage through massive training, they overall
lack genuine comprehension of the underlying numerical constraints.

1

Introduction

Data science (DS) is an emerging and important area that combines classic fields like statistics,
databases, data mining, and machine learning (ML) to gain insights via complex operations on the
abundance of available data [49]. DS libraries (such as PyTorch [41] and NumPy [38]) contain
thousands of APIs used by developers and data scientists to process/analyse data. These DS APIs serve
as the fundamental building blocks for almost all important ML/DS pipelines, and have penetrated
into almost every corner of modern society, including financial systems [18, 4], autonomous driving
software [9, 27, 46], coding assistants [45, 37], etc. Due to their high importance and wide usage,
automatically synthesizing valid DS programs has been a critical research area [29, 21, 47].
One key challenge of DS code generation is to satisfy the complex constraints within each DS library
API. DS library APIs perform transformations (e.g., matrix multiplication) on inputs (i.e., arrays or
array-like objects) with numeric constraints on API parameters and inputs. Figure 1 shows an example
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

