MiSO: Optimizing brain stimulation
to create neural population activity states

Yuki Minai1,2,5 , Joana Soldado-Magraner1,4,5 , Matthew A. Smith1,3,5∗ , Byron M. Yu1,3,4,5∗
1
Neuroscience Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University
3
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University
4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University
5
Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition
{yminai,jsoldado,msmith,byronyu}@andrew.cmu.edu
*Denotes equal contribution.

Abstract
Brain stimulation has the potential to create desired neural population activity states.
However, it is challenging to search the large space of stimulation parameters, for
example, selecting which subset of electrodes to be used for stimulation. In this
scenario, creating a model that maps the configuration of stimulation parameters to
the brain’s response can be beneficial. Training such an expansive model usually
requires more stimulation-response samples than can be collected in a given experimental session. Furthermore, changes in the properties of the recorded activity over
time can make it challenging to merge stimulation-response samples across sessions.
To address these challenges, we propose MiSO (MicroStimulation Optimization),
a closed-loop stimulation framework to drive neural population activity toward
specified states by optimizing over a large stimulation parameter space. MiSO
consists of three key components: 1) a neural activity alignment method to merge
stimulation-response samples across sessions, 2) a statistical model trained on the
merged samples to predict the brain’s response to untested stimulation parameter
configurations, and 3) an online optimization algorithm to adaptively update the
stimulation parameter configuration based on the model’s predictions. In this study,
we implemented MiSO with a factor analysis (FA) based alignment method, a
convolutional neural network (CNN), and an epsilon greedy optimization algorithm.
We tested MiSO in closed-loop experiments using electrical microstimulation in the
prefrontal cortex of a non-human primate. Guided by the CNN predictions, MiSO
successfully searched amongst thousands of stimulation parameter configurations
to drive the neural population activity toward specified states. More broadly, MiSO
increases the clinical viability of neuromodulation technologies by enabling the
use of many-fold larger stimulation parameter spaces.

1

Introduction

Brain stimulation is an important tool for treating brain disorders [1–3] and for causally perturbing
neural activity states to understand brain function [4]. Because complex brain functions are realized
through the coordinated activity of populations of neurons, brain stimulation techniques to control
neural population activity have the potential to manipulate complex brain function. Most brain
stimulation studies to date have used electrical microstimulation to produce a motor response [5]
or perceptual experience [6, 7], disrupt neural activity [8, 9], or shift cognitive state [10]. It has
been less common to consider the response of a population of neurons to microstimulation [11–14].
In principle, different combinations of stimulation parameters make it possible to create diverse
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

