Diff-eRank: A Novel Rank-Based Metric for
Evaluating Large Language Models

Lai Wei1,∗ Zhiquan Tan2,∗ Chenghai Li4
1

Jindong Wang3

Weiran Huang1,†

MIFA Lab, Qing Yuan Research Institute, SEIEE, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Tsinghua University
3
William & Mary 4 Independent

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have transformed natural language processing and
extended their powerful capabilities to multi-modal domains. As LLMs continue to
advance, it is crucial to develop diverse and appropriate metrics for their evaluation.
In this paper, we introduce a novel rank-based metric, Diff-eRank, grounded
in information theory and geometry principles. Diff-eRank assesses LLMs by
analyzing their hidden representations, providing a quantitative measure of how
efficiently they eliminate redundant information during training. We demonstrate
the applicability of Diff-eRank in both single-modal (e.g., language) and multimodal settings. For language models, our results show that Diff-eRank increases
with model size and correlates well with conventional metrics such as loss and
accuracy. In the multi-modal context, we propose an alignment evaluation method
based on the eRank, and verify that contemporary multi-modal LLMs exhibit
strong alignment performance based on our method. Our code is publicly available
at https://github.com/waltonfuture/Diff-eRank.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) such as GPT [4, 23], Chinchilla [17], and PaLM [7], have gained
considerable attention for their outstanding performance in various natural language processing tasks.
LLMs have expanded from single-modal models to multi-modal models, including MiniGPT-4 [49]
and LLaVA [20], which have achieved remarkable results in various application scenarios. Pre-trained
LLMs rely on large networks, computational power, and massive amounts of data, aiming for greater
generalization capabilities.
LLMs understand the world knowledge through training on huge amounts of data. One famous
belief [34] of how LLMs work is that larger models can find more shared hidden structures in data
samples by eliminating redundant information through training. In particular, in the early phase of
training, following random initialization, the representations derived from the training data tend to be
somewhat chaotic. As training progresses, these representations become increasingly structured, and
the model discards extraneous information from the training data, which resembles a process similar
to “noise reduction”. This perspective motivates us that LLM could be evaluated by characterizing
the “noise reduction” process.
However, defining and quantifying the degree of “noise reduction” remains a significant challenge.
To address this, we hypothesize that a reasonable metric should 1) reflect the geometric characteristics
of the data such as the dimensionality of its representations, and 2) be rooted in information theory.
∗
†

Lai Wei (waltonfuture@sjtu.edu.cn) and Zhiquan Tan (tanzq21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn) contributed equally.
Correspondence to Weiran Huang (weiran.huang@outlook.com).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

