Neural Signed Distance Function Inference through
Splatting 3D Gaussians Pulled on Zero-Level Set

Wenyuan Zhang1 , Yu-Shen Liu1∗ , Zhizhong Han2
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China1
zhangwen21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA2
h312h@wayne.edu

Abstract
It is vital to infer a signed distance function (SDF) in multi-view based surface
reconstruction. 3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS) provides a novel perspective for
volume rendering, and shows advantages in rendering efficiency and quality. Although 3DGS provides a promising neural rendering option, it is still hard to infer
SDFs for surface reconstruction with 3DGS due to the discreteness, the sparseness,
and the off-surface drift of 3D Gaussians. To resolve these issues, we propose
a method that seamlessly merge 3DGS with the learning of neural SDFs. Our
key idea is to more effectively constrain the SDF inference with the multi-view
consistency. To this end, we dynamically align 3D Gaussians on the zero-level set
of the neural SDF using neural pulling, and then render the aligned 3D Gaussians
through the differentiable rasterization. Meanwhile, we update the neural SDF by
pulling neighboring space to the pulled 3D Gaussians, which progressively refine
the signed distance field near the surface. With both differentiable pulling and
splatting, we jointly optimize 3D Gaussians and the neural SDF with both RGB
and geometry constraints, which recovers more accurate, smooth, and complete
surfaces with more geometry details. Our numerical and visual comparisons show
our superiority over the state-of-the-art results on the widely used benchmarks.
Project page: https://wen-yuan-zhang.github.io/GS-Pull.

1

Introduction

3D scene representations are important to various computer vision applications, such as single or
multi-view 3D reconstruction [39, 42, 67, 72], novel view synthesis [1, 71], and neural SLAM [22,
32, 78, 24] etc.. Mesh and point clouds are the most common 3D scene representations, and can be
rendered by fast rasterization on GPUs. Instead, more recent neural radiance fields (NeRFs) [49] are
continuous scene representations, but it is slow to render NeRFs due to the need of costly stochastic
sampling along rays in volume rendering. More recently, 3D Gaussians with different attributes like
color and opacity are used as a versatile differentiable volumetric representation [30, 77, 23] for
neural rendering through splatting, dubbed 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS). It prompts the pros of
both NeRFs and point based representations, which achieves both better quality and faster speed in
rendering. Although 3D Gaussians can render plausible images, it is still a challenge to reconstruct
surfaces based on the 3D Gaussians.
The key challenge comes from the gap between the discrete 3D Gaussians and the continuous
geometry representations, such as implicit functions. Besides the discreteness, the sparseness
caused by uneven distribution and the off-surface drift make 3D Gaussians even harder to use than
∗

The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

