Rethinking Fourier Transform from A Basis Functions
Perspective for Long-term Time Series Forecasting

Runze Yang1,2 , Longbing Cao2∗ , Jianxun Li1 , Jie Yang1∗
Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
School of Computing, Macquarie University
{runze.y, jieyang, lijx}@sjtu.edu.cn
{runze.yang}@hdr.mq.edu.au, {longbing.cao}@mq.edu.au
1

Abstract
The interaction between Fourier transform and deep learning opens new avenues
for long-term time series forecasting (LTSF). We propose a new perspective to
reconsider the Fourier transform from a basis functions perspective. Specifically,
the real and imaginary parts of the frequency components can be viewed as the
coefficients of cosine and sine basis functions at tiered frequency levels, respectively. We argue existing Fourier-based methods do not involve basis functions thus
fail to interpret frequency coefficients precisely and consider the time-frequency
relationship sufficiently, leading to inconsistent starting cycles and inconsistent
series length issues. Accordingly, a novel Fourier basis mapping (FBM) method
addresses these issues by mixing time and frequency domain features through
Fourier basis expansion. Differing from existing approaches, FBM (i) embeds the
discrete Fourier transform with basis functions, and then (ii) can enable plug-andplay in various types of neural networks for better performance. FBM extracts
explicit frequency features while preserving temporal characteristics, enabling
the mapping network to capture the time-frequency relationships. By incorporating our unique time-frequency features, the FBM variants can enhance any
type of networks like linear, multilayer-perceptron-based, transformer-based, and
Fourier-based networks, achieving state-of-the-art LTSF results on diverse realworld datasets with just one or three fully connected layers. The code is available
at: https://github.com/runze1223/Fourier-Basis-Mapping.

1

Introduction

Long-term time series forecasting (LTSF) is essential for applications with long-range sequences,
which presents significant challenges including long-range temporal dependencies, and frequencyoriented global dynamics. Recently, deep neural networks (DNNs) have thrived to tackle LTSF
challenges for the presence of hierarchical effects, varied outliers, and nonlinear dynamics. They
use various DNN architectures including recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8],
convolution neural networks (CNNs) [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14], multi-layer perceptron (MLP) based
networks [15, 16, 17, 18], Transformer-based networks [19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30,
31, 32, 33]. However, a recent study NLinear [34] shows that an embarrassingly simple normalized
linear model can outperform most of the DNN-based methods. This raises the question: Would a
complex Transformer-like architecture necessarily lead to better LTSF performance? According to
CrossGNN [35], DNN-based methods like Transformers suffer from the influence of noise signals
and produce high attention scores for unexpected noises.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

