An exactly solvable model for emergence and scaling
laws in the multitask sparse parity problem
Yoonsoo Nam*a , Nayara Fonseca*a , Seok Hyeong Leeb , Chris Mingarda c , and Ard A. Louisa
b

a
Rudolf Peierls Centre for Theoretical Physics, University of Oxford
Center for Quantum Structures in Modules and Spaces, Seoul National University
c
Physical and Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory, University of Oxford

Abstract
Deep learning models can exhibit what appears to be a sudden ability to solve a
new problem as training time, training data, or model size increases, a phenomenon
known as emergence. In this paper, we present a framework where each new ability
(a skill) is represented as a basis function. We solve a simple multi-linear model
in this skill-basis, finding analytic expressions for the emergence of new skills, as
well as for scaling laws of the loss with training time, data size, model size, and
optimal compute. We compare our detailed calculations to direct simulations of a
two-layer neural network trained on multitask sparse parity, where the tasks in the
dataset are distributed according to a power-law. Our simple model captures, using
a single fit parameter, the sigmoidal emergence of multiple new skills as training
time, data size or model size increases in the neural network.

1

Introduction

Emergence in large language models (LLMs) has attracted a lot of recent attention [1–4]. It motivates
the costly drive to train ever larger models on ever larger datasets, in the hope that new skills will
emerge. While the concept of emergence has been critiqued on the grounds that the sharpness of the
transition to acquiring a new skill may be sensitive to the measure being used [5], the observation
that important new skills are learned for larger models raises many challenging questions: when
the skills emerge and what drives the emergence. These questions are complicated by difficulties in
formally defining skills or capabilities [6], and by our general limited understanding of the internal
representations of deep neural networks [7].
Another widely observed property of deep learning models is that the loss improves predictably as a
power-law in the number of data points or the number of model parameters or simply in the amount
of compute thrown at a problem. These neural scaling laws [8, 9] have been widely observed across
different architectures and datasets [10–16]. While the scaling exponents can depend on these factors,
the general phenomena of scaling appear to be remarkably robust. This raises many interesting
questions such as: What causes the near-universal scaling behavior? How does the continuous scaling
of the loss relate to the discontinuous emergence of new skills?
A challenge in answering the questions raised by the phenomena of emergence and scaling laws arises
from the enormous scale and expense of training cutting-edge modern LLMs, which are optimized
for commercial applications, and not for answering scientific questions about how they work. One
way that progress can be made is to study simpler dataset/architecture combinations that are more
tractable. The current paper is inspired in part by recent work in this direction that proposed studying
emergence in learning the sparse parity problem [17, 18], which is easy to define, but known to be
*

These authors contributed equally; {yoonsoo.nam,nayara.fonsecadesa}@physics.ox.ac.uk.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

