Dynamic Tuning Towards Parameter and Inference
Efficiency for ViT Adaptation

Wangbo Zhao1,2∗

Jiasheng Tang2,3†
Yizeng Han2,4
Yibing Song2,3
Kai Wang1
4
2
1†
Gao Huang
Fan Wang
Yang You
1
National University of Singapore 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
3
4
Hupan Laboratory
Tsinghua University
Code: https://github.com/NUS-HPC-AI-Lab/Dynamic-Tuning

Abstract
Existing parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods have achieved significant
success on vision transformers (ViTs) adaptation by improving parameter efficiency.
However, the exploration of enhancing inference efficiency during adaptation
remains underexplored. This limits the broader application of pre-trained ViT
models, especially when the model is computationally extensive. In this paper, we
propose Dynamic Tuning (DyT), a novel approach to improve both parameter and
inference efficiency for ViT adaptation. Specifically, besides using the lightweight
adapter modules, we propose a token dispatcher to distinguish informative tokens
from less important ones, allowing the latter to dynamically skip the original block,
thereby reducing the redundant computation during inference. Additionally, we
explore multiple design variants to find the best practice of DyT. Finally, inspired
by the mixture-of-experts (MoE) mechanism, we introduce an enhanced adapter to
further boost the adaptation performance. We validate DyT across various tasks,
including image/video recognition and semantic segmentation. For instance, DyT
achieves superior performance compared to existing PEFT methods while evoking
only 71% of their FLOPs on the VTAB-1K benchmark.

1

Introduction

With the remarkable success of Vision Transformers (ViTs) [20, 53, 26], fine-tuing pre-trained ViT
on other data domains [90] or task applications [89, 36, 60, 79, 31] is becoming a common practice.
However, as model sizes increase [88, 16, 52], the associated adaptation costs become prohibitive
due to the burden of fine-tuning and inference on the target task. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT) methods (e.g. AdaptFormer [12], LoRA [34], and VPT [36]), are proposed to tackle the
tuning problem by reducing tunable model parameters. They usually update a small amount of
parameters while keeping the original model fixed, which reduces learnable parameters effectively
while maintaining fine-tuning accuracy.
Despite the extensive research in parameter efficiency, the inference efficiency on target tasks is less
explored. We numerically demonstrate the inference efficiency of three representative PEFT methods
in Figure. 1(a), revealing that none of them reduces the computation during inference compared
to full tuning. This limitation poses challenges for adapting pre-trained ViT to downstream tasks,
particularly when the model is computationally extensive. To this end, we aim to unify both parameter
and inference perspectives for efficient ViT adaptations.
* Work done during an internship at DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, wangbo.zhao96@gmail.com
†

Corresponding authors, jiasheng.tjs@alibaba-inc.com, youy@comp.nus.edu.sg

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

