RedCode: Risky Code Execution and Generation
Benchmark for Code Agents
Chengquan Guo1∗ , Xun Liu2∗ , Chulin Xie2∗ , Andy Zhou2,3 , Yi Zeng4 , Zinan Lin5 , Dawn Song6 , Bo Li1,2
1

3

University of Chicago 2 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Lapis Labs 4 Virginia Tech 5 Microsoft Research 6 University of California Berkeley

Abstract
With the rapidly increasing capabilities and adoption of code agents for AI-assisted
coding and software development, safety and security concerns, such as generating
or executing malicious code, have become significant barriers to the real-world
deployment of these agents. To provide comprehensive and practical evaluations
on the safety of code agents, we propose RedCode, an evaluation platform with
benchmarks grounded in four key principles: real interaction with systems, holistic
evaluation of unsafe code generation and execution, diverse input formats, and highquality safety scenarios and tests. RedCode consists of two parts to evaluate agents’
safety in unsafe code execution and generation: (1) RedCode-Exec provides
challenging code prompts in Python as inputs, aiming to evaluate code agents’
ability to recognize and handle unsafe code. We then map the Python code to other
programming languages (e.g., Bash) and natural text summaries or descriptions for
evaluation, leading to a total of over 4,000 testing instances. We provide 25 types
of critical vulnerabilities spanning various domains, such as websites, file systems,
and operating systems. We provide a Docker sandbox environment to evaluate the
execution capabilities of code agents and design corresponding evaluation metrics
to assess their execution results. (2) RedCode-Gen provides 160 prompts with
function signatures and docstrings as input to assess whether code agents will follow
instructions to generate harmful code or software. Our empirical findings, derived
from evaluating three agent frameworks based on 19 LLMs, provide insights into
code agents’ vulnerabilities. For instance, evaluations on RedCode-Exec show that
agents are more likely to reject executing unsafe operations on the operating system,
but are less likely to reject executing technically buggy code, indicating high risks.
Unsafe operations described in natural text lead to a lower rejection rate than
those in code format. Additionally, evaluations on RedCode-Gen reveal that more
capable base models and agents with stronger overall coding abilities, such as GPT4, tend to produce more sophisticated and effective harmful software. Our findings
highlight the need for stringent safety evaluations for diverse code agents. Our
dataset and code are publicly available at https://github.com/AI-secure/RedCode.

1

Introduction

LLM-based code agents [23, 31, 24, 30, 8, 25] have significantly advanced AI-assisted coding
and software development. Integrated with external tools like Python interpreters or commandline interfaces, these agents can execute code actions and dynamically adjust the actions based on
observations (e.g., execution results) for multiple interaction runs. This capability allows agents
to interact with operating systems, leverage existing packages or install new ones [27], and use
automated feedback (e.g., error messages) to self-debug and improve task-solving [6]. However,
despite their impressive capabilities, these code agents are not risk-free. For example, if code agents
inadvertently suggest or execute code with security vulnerabilities, the consequences could be severe,
particularly when the code is integrated into critical systems or when the agents directly operate
∗
Equal Contribution. Work done during Chengquan’s internship at the University of Chicago and Xun’s
internship at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

