A Critical Evaluation of AI Feedback for Aligning
Large Language Models

Archit Sharma∗
Chelsea Finn∗

Sedrick Keh†

Eric Mitchell∗

Kushal Arora†

Thomas Kollar†

∗

Stanford University † Toyota Research Institute
architsh@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Learning from AI feedback (LAIF) is a popular paradigm for improving the
instruction-following abilities of powerful pre-trained language models. LAIF
first performs supervised fine-tuning (SFT) using demonstrations from a teacher
model and then further fine-tunes the model with reinforcement learning (RL) or
direct preference optimization (DPO), using feedback from a critic model. While
recent popular open-source models have demonstrated substantial improvements in
performance from the RL step, in this paper we question whether the complexity of
this RL step is truly warranted for AI feedback. We show that the improvements of
the RL step are virtually entirely due to the widespread practice of using a weaker
teacher model (e.g. GPT-3.5) for SFT data collection than the critic (e.g., GPT-4)
used for AI feedback generation. Specifically, we show that simple supervised
fine-tuning with GPT-4 as the teacher outperforms existing LAIF pipelines. More
generally, we find that the gains from LAIF vary substantially across base model
families, test-time evaluation protocols, and critic models. Finally, we provide a
mechanistic explanation for when SFT may outperform the full two-step LAIF
pipeline as well as suggestions for making LAIF maximally useful in practice.
Code is available at: https://github.com/architsharma97/dpo-rlaif.

1

Introduction

As the raw capabilities of open-source large language models (LLM) improve through pre-training at a
large scale [Touvron et al., 2023a,b, Jiang et al., 2023, 2024, Bai et al., 2023, Bi et al., 2024], methods
for effectively ‘aligning’ these models; i.e., steering them to follow user instructions effectively and
safely, has garnered increasing attention. Supervised fine-tuning (SFT) with large datasets of user
queries and human-written responses is one popular approach. Further refining a model fine-tuned
with SFT using reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF; Christiano et al. [2017]) has
been shown to further improve the quality of model responses, as judged by humans [Ouyang et al.,
2022, Stiennon et al., 2020]. However, collecting the data for SFT and RLHF is expensive, requiring
human annotations for both the SFT and preference rankings over several candidate responses to
a query to be used as feedback for the RL stage. Given the high cost of data collection as well as
the high level of disagreement among human annotators, many works such as Bai et al. [2022] and
Lee et al. [2023] have replaced the human annotators in both the SFT and RLHF stages with strong
language model annotators such as GPT-4 [Achiam et al., 2023]. The corresponding techniques,
supervised model distillation [Taori et al., 2023, Chiang et al., 2023, Ding et al., 2023] and learning
from AI feedback (LAIF; Bai et al. [2022], Lee et al. [2023], Cui et al. [2023]), have proven effective
in training state-of-the-art open source models [Tunstall et al., 2023, Ivison et al., 2023, Intel, 2023,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

