FairWire: Fair Graph Generation

O. Deniz Kose
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of California Irvine
Irvine, CA, USA
okose@uci.edu
Yanning Shen∗
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of California Irvine
Irvine, CA, USA
yannings@uci.edu

Abstract
Machine learning over graphs has recently attracted growing attention due to its
ability to analyze and learn complex relations within critical interconnected systems.
However, the disparate impact that is amplified by the use of biased graph structures
in these algorithms has raised significant concerns for their deployment in realworld decision systems. In addition, while synthetic graph generation has become
pivotal for privacy and scalability considerations, the impact of generative learning
algorithms on structural bias has not yet been investigated. Motivated by this, this
work focuses on the analysis and mitigation of structural bias for both real and
synthetic graphs. Specifically, we first theoretically analyze the sources of structural
bias that result in disparity for the predictions of dyadic relations. To alleviate the
identified bias factors, we design a novel fairness regularizer that offers a versatile
use. Faced with the bias amplification in graph generation models brought to light
in this work, we further propose a fair graph generation framework, FairWire, by
leveraging our fair regularizer design in a generative model. Experimental results
on real-world networks validate that the proposed tools herein deliver effective
structural bias mitigation for both real and synthetic graphs.

1

Introduction

The volume of graph-structured data has been explosively growing due to the advancement in
interconnected systems. In this context, machine learning (ML) over graphs attracts increasing
attention (1), where specifically graph neural networks (GNNs) (2; 3; 4) have been proven to handle
complex learning tasks over graphs, such as social recommendation (5), traffic flow forecasting (6).
Despite the increasing research focus on graph ML, the deployment of these algorithms in real-world
decision systems requires guarantees preventing disparate impacts. Here, algorithmic disparity refers
to the performance gap incurred by ML algorithms with respect to certain sensitive attributes protected
by anti-discrimination laws or social norms (e.g., ethnicity, religion). While algorithmic bias is a
concern over tabular data (7; 8), such bias becomes more critical for learning over graphs, as the use
of graph structure in the algorithm design has been demonstrated to amplify the already existing bias
(9). Motivated by this, in this work, we specifically focus on structural bias and consequently the
disparity in the predictions of dyadic relationships among nodes. Note that since the link predictions
∗

corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

