The Price of Implicit Bias in
Adversarially Robust Generalization

Nikolaos Tsilivis∗
New York University
nt2231@nyu.edu

Natalie S. Frank
New York University
nf1066@nyu.edu

Nathan Srebro
TTI-Chicago
nati@ttic.edu

Julia Kempe
New York University
Meta FAIR
kempe@nyu.edu

Abstract
We study the implicit bias of optimization in robust empirical risk minimization
(robust ERM) and its connection with robust generalization. In classification
settings under adversarial perturbations with linear models, we study what type
of regularization should ideally be applied for a given perturbation set to improve
(robust) generalization. We then show that the implicit bias of optimization in
robust ERM can significantly affect the robustness of the model and identify two
ways this can happen; either through the optimization algorithm or the architecture.
We verify our predictions in simulations with synthetic data and experimentally
study the importance of implicit bias in robust ERM with deep neural networks.

1

Introduction

Robustness is a highly desired property of any machine learning system. Since the discovery of
adversarial examples in deep neural networks [Szegedy et al., 2014, Biggio et al., 2013], adversarial
robustness - the ability of a model to withstand small, adversarial, perturbations of the input at test
time - has received significant attention. A canonical way to obtain a robust model f , parameterized
by w, is to optimize it for robustness during training, i.e. given a set of training examples (xi , yi )m
i=1 ,
optimize the empirical, worst-case, loss l, where worst-case refers to a predefined threat model ∆(·)
which encodes our notion of proximity for the task:
m

1 X
min
max l (f (x′i ; w), yi ) .
w m
x′ ∈∆(xi )
i=1 i

(1)

This method of robust Empirical Risk Minimization (robust ERM aka adversarial training [Madry
et al., 2018]) has been the workhorse in deep learning for optimizing robust models in the past few
years. However, despite the outstanding performance of deep networks in “standard” classification
settings, the same networks under robust ERM lag behind; progress, in terms of absolute performance,
has stagnated as measured on relevant benchmarks [Croce et al., 2021] and predicted by experimental
scaling laws for robustness [Debenedetti et al., 2023], and any advances mainly rely on extreme
amounts of synthetic data (see, e.g., [Wang et al., 2023]). Additionally, the (robust) generalization
gap of neural networks obtained with robust ERM is large and, during training, networks typically
exhibit overfitting [Rice et al., 2020]; (robust) test error goes up after initially going down, even
though (robust) train error continues to decrease. How can we reconcile all this with the modern
paradigm of deep learning, where overparameterized models interpolate their (even noisy) training
data and seamlessly generalize to new inputs [Belkin, 2021]? What is different in robust ERM?
In “standard” classification, it is now understood that the optimization procedure is responsible
for capacity control during ERM [Neyshabur et al., 2015] and this in turn permits generalization.
∗

Part of this work was done while author was with TTI-Chicago.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

