Transfer Learning for Latent Variable Network
Models
Arya Mazumdar
Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute & Dept of CSE
UC San Diego
arya@ucsd.edu

Akhil Jalan
Department of Computer Science
UT Austin
akhiljalan@utexas.edu
Soumendu Sundar Mukherjee
Statistics and Mathematics Unit (SMU)
Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata
ssmukherjee@isical.ac.in

Purnamrita Sarkar
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences
UT Austin
purna.sarkar@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
We study transfer learning for estimation in latent variable network models. In
our setting, the conditional edge probability matrices given the latent variables
are represented by P for the source and Q for the target. We wish to estimate
Q given two kinds of data: (1) edge data from a subgraph induced by an o(1)
fraction of the nodes of Q, and (2) edge data from all of P . If the source P has
no relation to the target Q, the estimation error must be Ω(1). However, we show
that if the latent variables are shared, then vanishing error is possible. We give an
efficient algorithm that utilizes the ordering of a suitably defined graph distance.
Our algorithm achieves o(1) error and does not assume a parametric form on the
source or target networks. Next, for the specific case of Stochastic Block Models
we prove a minimax lower bound and show that a simple algorithm achieves this
rate. Finally, we empirically demonstrate our algorithm’s use on real-world and
simulated network estimation problems.

1

Introduction

Within machine learning and statistics, the paradigm of transfer learning describes a setup where data
from a source distribution P is exploited to improve estimation of a target distribution Q for which a
small amount of data is available. Transfer learning is quite well-studied in learning theory, starting
with works such as Ben-David et al. (2006); Cortes et al. (2008); Crammer et al. (2008), and at the
same time has found applications in areas such as computer vision (Tzeng et al., 2017a) and speech
recognition (Huang et al., 2013). A fairly large body of work in transfer learning considers different
types of relations that may exist between P and Q, for example, Mansour et al. (2009); Hanneke and
Kpotufe (2019, 2022), with emphasis on model selection, multitask learning and domain adaptation.
On the other hand, optimal nonparametric rates for transfer learning have very recently been studied,
both for regression and classification problems (Cai and Wei, 2021; Cai and Pu, 2024).
In this paper, we study transfer learning in the context of random network/graph models. In our
setting, we observe Bernoulli samples from the full n × n edge probability matrix for the source P
and only a nQ × nQ submatrix of Q for nQ ≪ n. We would like to estimate the full n × n probability
matrix Q, using the full source data and limited target data, i.e., we are interested in the task of
estimating Q in the partially observed target network, utilizing information from the fully observed
source network. This is a natural extension of the transfer learning problem in classification/regression
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

