DiffPO: A causal diffusion model for learning
distributions of potential outcomes

Yuchen Ma, Valentyn Melnychuk, Jonas Schweisthal & Stefan Feuerriegel
LMU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning
yuchen.ma@lmu.de

Abstract
Predicting potential outcomes of interventions from observational data is crucial
for decision-making in medicine, but the task is challenging due to the fundamental
problem of causal inference. Existing methods are largely limited to point estimates
of potential outcomes with no uncertain quantification; thus, the full information
about the distributions of potential outcomes is typically ignored. In this paper,
we propose a novel causal diffusion model called DiffPO, which is carefully
designed for reliable inferences in medicine by learning the distribution of potential
outcomes. In our DiffPO, we leverage a tailored conditional denoising diffusion
model to learn complex distributions, where we address the selection bias through
a novel orthogonal diffusion loss. Another strength of our DiffPO method is that it
is highly flexible (e.g., it can also be used to estimate different causal quantities
such as CATE). Across a wide range of experiments, we show that our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

Predicting potential outcomes (POs) for patients from observational data is crucial for decisionmaking in medicine [16]. For example, in cancer care, one is interested in individualized predictions
of survival under different treatment plans, which can then help medical practitioners choose a
treatment plan that promises the largest chance of survival [48].
Predicting POs of interventions from observational data is challenging due to the fundamental problem
of causal inference, i.e., the fact that one cannot obverse all POs for each individual [27]. Further, in
observational data, treatments are generally not assigned completely randomly, and, as a result, the
distributions of covariates in the treatment and control groups differ [54]. If this covariate shift is not
taken into account, the distributions of POs given the covariates would be learned sub-optimally [13,
11].
In the causal inference literature, many existing methods are aimed at conditional average treatment
effect (CATE) estimation where POs are used as auxiliary quantities (e.g.,[1, 2, 3, 6, 10, 12, 13, 25, 28,
30, 31, 32, 37, 45, 64, 66]). In principle, some CATE methods could be used for predicting POs but
these are not tailored for POs and thus tend to underperform at predicting POs. The underlying reason
is that the estimator with the best performance in estimating CATE might not do best at predicting
POs in finite samples [11, 13]. Additionally, many state-of-the-art CATE estimators leverage an
inductive bias [13, 31], i.e., they assume that POs should share similar structures. As a result, they
assume that the CATE follows a much simpler function than the POs, so that it is easier to learn
the CATE than each PO separately. Moreover, most of these methods only focus on point estimates
instead of learning the distributions of POs. The latter is more difficult but very crucial for reliable
decision-making in medical applications.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

