Information-theoretic Limits of Online Classification
with Noisy Labels

Changlong Wu

Ananth Grama Wojciech Szpankowski
CSoI, Purdue University
wuchangl@hawaii.edu, {ayg,szpan}@purdue.edu

Abstract
We study online classification with general hypothesis classes where the true labels
are determined by some function within the class, but are corrupted by unknown
stochastic noise, and the features are generated adversarially. Predictions are made
using observed noisy labels and noiseless features, while the performance is measured via minimax risk when comparing against true labels. The noisy mechanism
is modeled via a general noisy kernel that specifies, for any individual data point, a
set of distributions from which the actual noisy label distribution is chosen. We
show that minimax risk is tightly characterized (up to a logarithmic factor of the hypothesis class size) by the Hellinger gap of the noisy label distributions induced by
the kernel, independent of other properties such as the means and variances of the
noise. Our main technique is based on a novel reduction to an online comparison
scheme of two-hypotheses, along with a new conditional version of Le Cam-Birgé
testing suitable for online settings. Our work provides the first comprehensive
characterization for noisy online classification with guarantees that apply to the
ground truth while addressing general noisy observations.

1

Introduction

Learning from noisy data is a fundamental problem in many machine learning applications. Noise
can originate from various sources, including low-precision measurements of physical quantities,
communication errors, or noise intentionally injected by methods such as differential privacy. In such
cases, one typically learns by training on noisy (or observed) data while aiming to build a model that
performs well on the true (or latent) data. This paper focuses on online learning [20] from noisy
labels, where one receives noiseless, adversarially generated features and corresponding noisy labels
sequentially, and predicts the true labels as the data arrive.
Online learning has been primarily studied in the agnostic setting [1, 19, 7], where one receives the
labels in their plain (noise-free) form and the prediction risk is evaluated on the observed labels.
It is typically assumed that both the features and observed labels are generated adversarially, and
prediction quality is measured via the notion of regret, which compares the actual cumulative risk
incurred by the predictor with the minimal cumulative risk incurred by the best expert in a hypothesis
class. While this approach is mathematically appealing, it does not adequately characterize online
learning scenarios when our goal is to achieve good performance with respect to grand truth data that
may be different from the observed (noisy) ones.
This paper considers an online learning scenario that differs from classical agnostic online learning
in two aspects: (i) we assume that the noisy labels are derived from a (semi-) stochastic mechanism
rather than from pure adversarial selections; (ii) our prediction risk is evaluated on the true labels,
not noisy observations. To better motivate the study of such a scenario, we consider the following
example first introduced by Ben-David et al. [1]:
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

