Deep Equilibrium Algorithmic Reasoning

Dobrik Georgiev
University of Cambridge

JJ Wilson
Independent Researcher

dgg30@cam.ac.uk

josephjwilson74@gmail.com

Davide Buffelli
MediaTek Research

Pietro Liò
University of Cambridge

davide.buffelli@mtkresearch.com

pl219@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Neural Algorithmic Reasoning (NAR) research has demonstrated that graph neural
networks (GNNs) could learn to execute classical algorithms. However, most
previous approaches have always used a recurrent architecture, where each iteration
of the GNN matches an iteration of the algorithm. In this paper we study neurally
solving algorithms from a different perspective: since the algorithm’s solution
is often an equilibrium, it is possible to find the solution directly by solving an
equilibrium equation. Our approach requires no information on the ground-truth
number of steps of the algorithm, both during train and test time. Furthermore,
the proposed method improves the performance of GNNs on executing algorithms
and is a step towards speeding up existing NAR models. Our empirical evidence,
leveraging algorithms from the CLRS-30 benchmark, validates that one can train
a network to solve algorithmic problems by directly finding the equilibrium. We
discuss the practical implementation of such models and propose regularisations to
improve the performance of these equilibrium reasoners.

1

Introduction

Algorithms, while straightforward in theory, become challenging to deploy in real-world scenarios.
They operate in abstract domains with very specific conditions and types of inputs, which are
represented with scalars. The main hurdle is the need to “collapse” reality into a scalar every time
an algorithm is used, something usually done based on intuition rather than principled science
[25]. Neural Algorithmic Reasoning (NAR; 46) has been proposed to address this issue by utilising
specialised neural network architectures to break this scalar bottleneck by executing algorithms in
higher-dimensional space made out of arrays of numbers (vectors). The task of mapping reality into
this vectorial space is delegated to automated gradient-based optimisation techniques rather than
relying on human operators.
While NAR does not provide the correctness guarantees of its classical counterparts, robust performance can be achieved through alignment [55] – submodules of the model architecture correspond to
easy-to-learn subparts of the algorithm (or class of). Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have emerged
as the most convenient architecture to execute all types of algorithms [29] and GNNs that align better
to the target algorithm achieve better generalisation. This alignment game [50] has led to a sequence
of exciting research – from aligning the architecture with iterative algorithms [42] to proving that
“graph neural networks are dynamic programmers” [13], especially if their message-passing function
[21] takes into account 3-node interactions.
0

Source code available here: https://github.com/HekpoMaH/DEAR

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

