Reward Machines for Deep RL
in Noisy and Uncertain Environments

Andrew C. Li
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
Pashootan Vaezipoor
Georgian.io
Vector Institute

Zizhao Chen∗
Cornell University

Toryn Q. Klassen†
University of Toronto
Vector Institute

Rodrigo Toro Icarte
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
Centro Nacional de Inteligencia Artificial

Sheila A. McIlraith†
University of Toronto
Vector Institute

Abstract
Reward Machines provide an automaton-inspired structure for specifying instructions, safety constraints, and other temporally extended reward-worthy behaviour.
By exposing the underlying structure of a reward function, they enable the decomposition of an RL task, leading to impressive gains in sample efficiency. Although
Reward Machines and similar formal specifications have a rich history of application towards sequential decision-making problems, prior frameworks have
traditionally ignored ambiguity and uncertainty when interpreting the domainspecific vocabulary forming the building blocks of the reward function. Such
uncertainty critically arises in many real-world settings due to factors like partial
observability or noisy sensors. In this work, we explore the use of Reward Machines
for Deep RL in noisy and uncertain environments. We characterize this problem
as a POMDP and propose a suite of RL algorithms that exploit task structure
under uncertain interpretation of the domain-specific vocabulary. Through theory
and experiments, we expose pitfalls in naive approaches to this problem while
simultaneously demonstrating how task structure can be successfully leveraged
under noisy interpretations of the vocabulary.
Code and videos are available at https://github.com/andrewli77/
reward-machines-noisy-environments.

1

Introduction

Formal languages, including programming languages such as Python and C, have long been used
for objective specification in sequential decision making. Using a vocabulary of domain-specific
properties, expressed as propositional variables, formal languages like Linear Temporal Logic (LTL)
[44] capture complex temporal patterns—such as the objectives of an agent—by composing variables
via temporal operators and logical connectives. These languages provide well-defined semantics while
enabling semantics-preserving transformations to normal-form representations such as automata,
which can expose the discrete structure underlying an objective to a decision-making agent. One
such representation is the increasingly popular Reward Machine, which combines expression of rich
temporally extended (non-Markovian) objectives via automata with algorithmic techniques such
as automated reward shaping, task decomposition, and counterfactual learning updates to garner
∗
†

Work done while at the University of Toronto.
Also affiliated with the Schwartz Reisman Institute for Technology and Society.
Correspondence to andrewli@cs.toronto.edu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

