Lower Bounds of Uniform Stability in Gradient-Based
Bilevel Algorithms for Hyperparameter Optimization

Rongzhen Wang1,2 , Chenyu Zheng1,2 , Guoqiang Wu3 ,
Xu Min4 , Xiaolu Zhang4 , Jun Zhou4 , Chongxuan Li1,2∗
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
3
School of Software, Shandong University 4 Ant Group
{wangrz,cyzheng,chongxuanli}@ruc.edu.cn; guoqiangwu@sdu.edu.cn;
minxu.mx@antgroup.com; {yueyin.zxl,jun.zhoujun}@antfin.com

Abstract
Gradient-based bilevel programming leverages unrolling differentiation (UD) or implicit function theorem (IFT) to solve hyperparameter optimization (HO) problems,
and is proven effective and scalable in practice. To understand the generalization
behavior, existing works establish upper bounds on the uniform stability of these
algorithms, while their tightness is still unclear. To this end, this paper attempts to
establish stability lower bounds for UD-based and IFT-based algorithms. A central
technical challenge arises from the dependency of each outer-level update on the
concurrent stage of inner optimization in bilevel programming. To address this
problem, we introduce lower-bounded expansion properties to characterize the
instability in update rules which can serve as general tools for lower-bound analysis.
These properties guarantee the hyperparameter divergence at the outer level and the
Lipschitz constant of inner output at the inner level in the context of HO. Guided
by these insights, we construct a quadratic example that yields tight lower bounds
for the UD-based algorithm and meaningful bounds for a representative IFT-based
algorithm. Our tight result indicates that uniform stability has reached its limit in
stability analysis for the UD-based algorithm.

1

Introduction

Hyperparameters significantly influence the convergence behavior of learning algorithms as well
as the efficiency and generalization performance of the trained model [1, 2, 3]. Hyperparameter
optimization (HO) algorithms aim to find the best hyperparameters (associated with the optimized
model parameters) on a validation set. Classical approaches for HO include grid search [4], random
search [5], Bayesian optimization [6, 7, 8], and evolutionary algorithms [9, 10], which often suffer
from the problem of scaling up. Recently, gradient-based methods have achieved excellent empirical
performance in high-dimensional HO problems [11, 3, 12].
In gradient-based methods, HO is formulated as a bilevel programming problem. The inner level
seeks the best model parameters on the training set given current hyperparameters. In the outer level,
hyperparameters are optimized with gradient descent. However, the gradient is difficult to compute as
it requires differentiating the optimized model parameters w.r.t. the hyperparameters. Two mainstream
strategies have been developed to obtain this Jacobian by explicitly unrolling differentiation (UD) [13,
2, 14] or approximately applying the implicit function theorem (IFT) [1, 15, 16, 12].
∗

Correspondence to Chongxuan Li.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

