Interpretable Mesomorphic Neural Networks
For Tabular Data
Arlind Kadra
Department of Representation Learning
University of Freiburg
kadraa@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Sebastian Pineda Arango
Department of Representation Learning
University of Freiburg
pineda@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Josif Grabocka
Department of Machine Learning
University of Technology Nuremberg
josif.grabocka@utn.de

Abstract
Even though neural networks have been long deployed in applications involving
tabular data, still existing neural architectures are not explainable by design. In
this work, we propose a new class of interpretable neural networks for tabular data
that are both deep and linear at the same time (i.e. mesomorphic). We optimize
deep hypernetworks to generate explainable linear models on a per-instance basis.
As a result, our models retain the accuracy of black-box deep networks while
offering free lunch explainability for tabular data by design. Through extensive
experiments, we demonstrate that our explainable deep networks have comparable
performance to state-of-the-art classifiers on tabular data and outperform current
existing methods that are explainable by design.

1

Introduction

Tabular data are arguably the most widely spread traditional data modality arising in a plethora of
real-world application domains (Bischl et al., 2021; Borisov et al., 2022). There exists a recent
trend to deploy neural networks for predictive tasks on tabular data (Kadra et al., 2021; Gorishniy
et al., 2021; Somepalli et al., 2022; Hollmann et al., 2023). In a series of such application realms,
it is important to be able to explain the predictions of deep learning models to humans (Ras et al.,
2022), especially when interacting with human decision-makers, such as in healthcare (Gulum et al.,
2021; Tjoa & Guan, 2021), or the financial sector (Sadhwani et al., 2020). Heavily parametrized
models such as deep neural networks can fit complex interactions in tabular datasets and achieve high
predictive accuracy, however, they are not explainable. In that context, achieving both high predictive
accuracy and explainability remains an open research question for the Machine Learning community.
In this work, we introduce mesomorphic neural architectures1 , a new class of deep models that are
both deep and locally linear at the same time, therefore, offering interpretability by design. In a
nutshell, we propose a new architecture that is simultaneously (i) deep and accurate, as well as (ii)
linear and explainable on a per-instance basis. Technically speaking, we learn deep hypernetworks
that generate linear models that are accurate concerning the data point we are interested in explaining.
Our interpretable mesomorphic networks for tabular data (dubbed IMN) are classification or regression
models that identify the relevant tabular features by design. It is important to highlight that this work
1
The etymology of the term mesomorphic is inspired by Chemistry as "pertaining to an intermediate phase of
matter". For instance, a liquid crystal qualifies as both solid and liquid.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

