The Power of Hard Attention Transformers on Data
Sequences: A Formal Language Theoretic Perspective

Pascal Bergsträßer
RPTU Kaiserslautern-Landau
67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany
bergstraesser@cs.uni-kl.de
Anthony Widjaja Lin
MPI-SWS and RPTU Kaiserslautern-Landau
67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany
awlin@mpi-sws.org

Chris Köcher
MPI-SWS
67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany
ckoecher@mpi-sws.org
Georg Zetzsche
MPI-SWS
67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany
georg@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
Formal language theory has recently been successfully employed to unravel the
power of transformer encoders. This setting is primarily applicable in Natural
Language Processing (NLP), as a token embedding function (where a bounded
number of tokens is admitted) is first applied before feeding the input to the
transformer. On certain kinds of data (e.g. time series), we want our transformers
to be able to handle arbitrary input sequences of numbers (or tuples thereof)
without a priori limiting the values of these numbers. In this paper, we initiate the
study of the expressive power of transformer encoders on sequences of data (i.e.
tuples of numbers). Our results indicate an increase in expressive power of hard
attention transformers over data sequences, in stark contrast to the case of strings.
In particular, we prove that Unique Hard Attention Transformers (UHAT) over
inputs as data sequences no longer lie within the circuit complexity class AC0 (even
without positional encodings), unlike the case of string inputs, but are still within
the complexity class TC0 (even with positional encodings). Over strings, UHAT
without positional encodings capture only regular languages. In contrast, we show
that over data sequences UHAT can capture non-regular properties. Finally, we
show that UHAT capture languages definable in an extension of linear temporal
logic with unary numeric predicates and arithmetics.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed the success of transformers [42] in different applications, including
natural language processing [12], computer vision [14], speech recognition [13], and time series
analysis [45, 46]. In the quest to better understand the ability and limitation of transformers, theoretical
investigations have actively been undertaken in the last few years. Among others, formal language
theory has been successfully applied to reveal deep insights into the expressive power of transformers,
e.g., see the recent survey [40] and [2, 3, 8, 15, 20, 21, 30, 32, 38, 39]. In particular, relevant
questions pertain to the power of various attention mechanisms, bounded/unbounded precision,
positional encoding functions, and interplay between encoders and decoders, among many others.
One common assumption in the formal language theoretic approach to transformers is that the input
sequence ranges over a finite set Σ (called alphabet), which is then to be fed into a transformer after
applying a token embedding function of the form f : Σ → Rd . As a by-product, the number of
tokens is finite. In certain applications (e.g. time series forecasting [28]), we want our transformers to
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

