Learning Low-Rank Feature for Thorax Disease
Classification
Yancheng Wang1 Rajeev Goel1 Utkarsh Nath1 Alvin C. Silva2 Teresa Wu1
Yingzhen Yang1
1
School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence, Arizona State University
{ywan1053, rgoel15, unath, teresa.wu, yingzhen.yang}@asu.edu
2
Mayo Clinic Arizona
silva.alvin@mayo.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks, including Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and
Visual Transformers (ViT), have achieved stunning success in the medical image
domain. We study thorax disease classification in this paper. Effective extraction
of features for the disease areas is crucial for disease classification on radiographic
images. While various neural architectures and training techniques, such as selfsupervised learning with contrastive/restorative learning, have been employed for
disease classification on radiographic images, there are no principled methods
that can effectively reduce the adverse effect of noise and background or nondisease areas on the radiographic images for disease classification. To address this
challenge, we propose a novel Low-Rank Feature Learning (LRFL) method in
this paper, which is universally applicable to the training of all neural networks.
The LRFL method is both empirically motivated by a Low Frequency Property
(LFP) and theoretically motivated by our sharp generalization bound for neural
networks with low-rank features. LFP not only widely exists in deep neural
networks for generic machine learning but also exists in all the thorax medical
datasets studied in this paper. In the empirical study, using a neural network such
as a ViT or a CNN pre-trained on unlabeled chest X-rays by Masked Autoencoders
(MAE), our novel LRFL method is applied on the pre-trained neural network
and demonstrates better classification results in terms of both multi-class area
under the receiver operating curve (mAUC) and classification accuracy than the
current state-of-the-art. The code of LRFL is available at https://github.com/
Statistical-Deep-Learning/LRFL.

1

Introduction

Following the huge success of deep learning, recent studies have developed deep neural networks
(DNNs) for various tasks in medical imaging, such as disease classification and abnormalities
detection in anatomy in chest X-rays [1, 2]. Accurate clinical decision-making with DNNs heavily
relies on learning informative medical feature representation. Early works adopt convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) such as U-Net [3] for representation learning on radiography images. Recently,
Visual Transformers (ViTs) [4] are also adopted to learn informative medical representations from
radiography images [2], utilizing their capabilities in capturing long-range feature dependencies.
Albeit the success of CNNs and ViTs in analyzing radiography images, their accuracy heavily relies
on the quality and quantity of data and annotations [5]. However, the collection of large amounts of
training data and high-quality annotations in the medical imaging domain are extremely hard [2]. To
∗

Indicates equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

