OSW ORLD: Benchmarking Multimodal Agents for
Open-Ended Tasks in Real Computer Environments

Tianbao Xie h Danyang Zhang h Jixuan Chen h Xiaochuan Li h Siheng Zhao h Ruisheng Cao h
Toh Jing Hua h Zhoujun Cheng h Dongchan Shin h Fangyu Lei h Yitao Liu h Yiheng Xu h
Shuyan Zhou c Silvio Savarese s Caiming Xiong s Victor Zhong w Tao Yu h
h

The University of Hong Kong c Carnegie Mellon University
s
Salesforce Research w University of Waterloo

Abstract
Autonomous agents that accomplish complex computer tasks with minimal human
interventions can significantly enhance accessibility and productivity of humancomputer interactions. Existing benchmarks either lack interactive environments
or are limited to specific applications/domains, failing to reflect the diversity and
complexity of real-world computer use and limiting agent scalability. We introduce
OSW ORLD, the first-of-its-kind scalable real computer environment for multimodal
agents, supporting task setup, interactive learning, and execution-based evaluation
of open-ended computer tasks across arbitrary applications in Ubuntu, Windows,
and macOS. Using OSW ORLD, we create a benchmark of 369 tasks involving
real web and desktop apps in open domains, OS file I/O, and multi-app workflows.
Each example derives from real-world use cases and includes detailed setup and
execution-based evaluation for reproducibility. Extensive evaluation of state-of-theart LLM/VLM agents on OSW ORLD reveals deficiencies in their ability to serve
as computer assistants. While humans accomplish 72.4% of the tasks, the best
agents achieve <12.2%, struggling with GUI grounding and operational knowledge.
Comprehensive analysis using OSW ORLD provides valuable insights for developing multimodal generalist agents that were not possible with previous benchmarks.
Implementation and experiments are at https://os-world.github.io.

1

Introduction

Humans interact with computers to perform essential tasks in the digital realm, including web
browsing, video editing, file management, data analysis, and software development. These task
workflows often involve multiple applications through graphical user interfaces (GUI) and command
line interfaces (CLI). Autonomous agents powered by large vision-language models (VLMs) can
revolutionize how we interact with computer environments [32, 48, 1]. By following natural language
instructions, these agents can make computers more accessible and vastly increase human productivity.
A major challenge in developing multimodal agents is the absence of a benchmark that covers
interactive, diverse, and complex real-world computer use across operating systems, interfaces, and
applications. Prior benchmarks that provide demonstration datasets without executable environments [12, 44, 25] assume a single solution for each task and limit potential research in interactive
learning and real-world exploration. Prior work with executable environments simplify the observation and action spaces of agents and limit task scopes to specific applications/domains such as
navigation of specific websites [48, 34, 63, 71], coding [62] and the combination [36, 59, 38]. These
restricted environments do not fully reflect real-world computer use, as they do not evaluate scenarios
that require navigating between applications and interfaces in open domains (Fig. 1).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

