Divide-and-Conquer Predictive Coding: a Structured
Bayesian Inference Algorithm

Eli Sennesh1 , Hao Wu2 , Tommaso Salvatori2,3
Department of Psychology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA
2
VERSES AI Research Lab, Los Angeles, USA
3
Vienna University of Technology, Vienna, Austria
eli.sennesh@vanderbilt.edu, wuhaomxhy@gmail.com, tommaso.salvatori@verses.ai
1

Abstract
Unexpected stimuli induce “error” or “surprise” signals in the brain. The theory
of predictive coding promises to explain these observations in terms of Bayesian
inference by suggesting that the cortex implements variational inference in a
probabilistic graphical model. However, when applied to machine learning tasks,
this family of algorithms has yet to perform on par with other variational approaches
in high-dimensional, structured inference problems. To address this, we introduce
a novel predictive coding algorithm for structured generative models, that we call
divide-and-conquer predictive coding (DCPC); it differs from other formulations
of predictive coding, as it respects the correlation structure of the generative model
and provably performs maximum-likelihood updates of model parameters, all
without sacrificing biological plausibility. Empirically, DCPC achieves better
numerical performance than competing algorithms and provides accurate inference
in a number of problems not previously addressed with predictive coding. We
provide an open implementation of DCPC in Pyro on Github.

1

Introduction

In recent decades, the fields of cognitive science, machine learning, and theoretical neuroscience have
borne witness to a flowering of successes in modeling intelligent behavior via statistical learning.
Each of these fields has taken a different approach: cognitive science has studied probabilistic inverse
inference [Chater et al., 2006, Pouget et al., 2013, Lake et al., 2017] in models of each task and
environment, machine learning has employed the backpropagation of errors [Rumelhart et al., 1986,
Lecun et al., 2015, Schmidhuber, 2015], and neuroscience has hypothesized that predictive coding
(PC) [Srinivasan et al., 1982, Rao and Ballard, 1999, Friston, 2005, Bastos et al., 2012, Spratling,
2017, Hutchinson and Barrett, 2019, Millidge et al., 2021] may explain neural activity in perceptual
tasks. These approaches share in common a commitment to “deep” models, in which task processing
emerges from the composition of elementary units.
In machine learning, PC-based algorithms have recently gained popularity for their theoretical
potential to provide a more biologically plausible alternative to backpropagation for training neural
networks [Salvatori et al., 2023, Song et al., 2024]. However, PC does not perform comparably in
these tasks to backpropagation due to limitations in current formulations. First, predictive coding
for gradient calculation typically models every node in the computation graph with a Gaussian, and
hence fails to express many common generative models. Recent work on PC has addressed this
by allowing approximating non-Gaussian energy functions with samples [Pinchetti et al., 2022].
Second, the Laplace approximation to the posterior infers only a maximum-a-posteriori (MAP)
estimate and Gaussian covariance for each latent variable, keeping PC from capturing multimodal
or correlated distributions. Third, this loose approximation to the posterior distribution results in
inaccurate, high-variance updates to the parameters of the generative model.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

