PV-Tuning: Beyond Straight-Through Estimation
for Extreme LLM Compression

Vladimir Malinovskii†
Yandex, HSE University

Denis Mazur†
Ivan Ilin†
Denis Kuznedelev
⋄
¶ AI Initiative, KAUST∗
Yandex, Skoltech
MIPT , SberDevices

Konstantin Burlachenko
Kai Yi
AI Initiative, KAUST∗
AI Initiative, KAUST∗

Dan Alistarh‡
Peter Richtarik‡
IST Austria, NeuralMagic AI Initiative, KAUST∗

Abstract
There has been significant interest in “extreme” compression of large language
models (LLMs), i.e., to 1-2 bits per parameter, which allows such models to be
executed efficiently on resource-constrained devices. Existing work focused on
improved one-shot quantization techniques and weight representations; yet, purely
post-training approaches are reaching diminishing returns in terms of the accuracyvs-bit-width trade-off. State-of-the-art quantization methods such as QuIP# and
AQLM include fine-tuning (part of) the compressed parameters over a limited
amount of calibration data; however, such fine-tuning techniques over compressed
weights often make exclusive use of straight-through estimators (STE), whose
performance is not well-understood in this setting. In this work, we question the
use of STE for extreme LLM compression, showing that it can be sub-optimal, and
perform a systematic study of quantization-aware fine-tuning strategies for LLMs.
We propose PV-Tuning — a representation-agnostic framework that generalizes and
improves upon existing fine-tuning strategies, and provides convergence guarantees
in restricted cases. On the practical side, when used for 1-2 bit vector quantization, PV-Tuning outperforms prior techniques for highly-performant models
such as Llama and Mistral. Using PV-Tuning, we achieve the first Pareto-optimal
quantization for Llama-2 family models at 2 bits per parameter.

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen the development of ever more capable large language models, attracting
immense interest from both researchers and industry. One of the driving factors behind progress
in this area is the availability of powerful open LLMs such as Llama [69], Mistral [34, 35], or
Phi [41]. The main advantage of open LLMs is that they can be run and fine-tuned locally by end
users; however, as state-of-the-art LLMs grow larger, they also become harder to run on commodity
hardware. For instance, in order to fit the best available Llama-3 model on a consumer GPU, the
model would have to be compressed to below 2 bits per parameter1 .
To achieve such “extreme” degrees of compression accurately, researchers have proposed a variety
of techniques, which can be roughly categorized into i) better quantized weight representations and
ii) better algorithms to learn these representations. The weight representations used for extreme
quantization include group quantization [22, 20], sparse high-precision outliers [17, 32], incoherence
processing of the weights [9, 70], or additive and residual quantization [21, 72]. In turn, the
calibration algorithms also vary between data-free methods [20], layer-wise calibration [22, 18],
block-wise or global fine-tuning [21, 71] or even quantization-aware training [78, 75]. However, the
†

Equal contribution. ‡ Equal senior authors. ⋄ Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Russia
Work performed while at Yandex. * King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Saudi Arabia
1
At the time of writing, the best open model (Llama-3 70B) occupies 130GB in FP16, while most consumer
GPUs have 8-24GiB DRAM, some of which must be reserved for the attention cache.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).
¶

