TOPA: Extending Large Language Models for
Video Understanding via Text-Only Pre-Alignment

Wei Li1,2

Hehe Fan1∗
Yongkang Wong3
Mohan Kankanhalli3
Yi Yang1,2
1
ReLER Lab, CCAI, Zhejiang University, China
2
The State Key Laboratory of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, China
3
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
{weili6,hehefan,yangyics}@zju.edu.cn
yongkang.wong@nus.edu.sg
mohan@comp.nus.edu.sg
https://github.com/dhg-wei/TOPA

Abstract
Recent advancements in image understanding have benefited from the extensive use
of web image-text pairs. However, video understanding remains a challenge despite
the availability of substantial web video-text data. This difficulty primarily arises
from the inherent complexity of videos and the inefficient language supervision
in recent web-collected video-text datasets. In this paper, we introduce Text-Only
Pre-Alignment (TOPA), a novel approach to extend large language models (LLMs)
for video understanding, without the need for pre-training on real video data.
Specifically, we first employ an advanced LLM to automatically generate Textual
Videos comprising continuous textual frames, along with corresponding annotations
to simulate real video-text pairs. Then, these annotated textual videos are used to
pre-align language-only LLMs with the video modality. To bridge the gap between
textual and real videos, we employ the CLIP model as the feature extractor to align
image and text modalities. During text-only pre-alignment, the continuous textual
frames, encoded as a sequence of CLIP text features, are analogous to continuous
CLIP image features, thus aligning the LLM with real video representation.
Extensive experiments, including zero-shot evaluation and finetuning on various
video understanding tasks, demonstrate that TOPA is an effective and efficient
framework for aligning video modality with LLMs. In particular, without training
on any video data, the TOPA-Llama2-13B model achieves a Top-1 accuracy of
51.0% on the challenging long-form video understanding benchmark, EgoSchema.
This performance surpasses previous video-text pre-training approaches and is
competitive with recent GPT-3.5-based video agents.

1

Introduction

Image-language understanding has made large advancements in both image-language alignment [26,
48] and Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [1, 27, 34, 89], aided by pre-training on
large-scale noise-paired image-text data collected from the web [6, 19, 51, 53, 52]. This raises a
question: Can we mirror this success in video-language understanding? Research [45, 64, 77, 86] has
explored pretraining video-language models on millions of web video-text data [3, 40, 65], achieving
promising results in basic video tasks such as video-text retrieval, video captioning, and video question
answering across conventional video benchmarks. However, recent research reveals that these models
struggle with a challenging long-form video understanding benchmark, i.e., EgoSchema [39], which
requires intrinsic temporal understanding capabilities. This highlights the gap in adapting web
video-text pretrained models to more comprehensive video understanding tasks.
*Hehe Fan is the corresponding author.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

