Spec-Gaussian: Anisotropic View-Dependent
Appearance for 3D Gaussian Splatting

Ziyi Yang1,3 Xinyu Gao1 Yang-Tian Sun2 Yi-Hua Huang2 Xiaoyang Lyu2
Wen Zhou3 Shaohui Jiao3 Xiaojuan Qi2† Xiaogang Jin1†
1
2

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
The University of Hong Kong 3 ByteDance Inc.

Abstract
The recent advancements in 3D Gaussian splatting (3D-GS) have not only facilitated real-time rendering through modern GPU rasterization pipelines but have
also attained state-of-the-art rendering quality. Nevertheless, despite its exceptional rendering quality and performance on standard datasets, 3D-GS frequently
encounters difficulties in accurately modeling specular and anisotropic components. This issue stems from the limited ability of spherical harmonics (SH) to
represent high-frequency information. To overcome this challenge, we introduce
Spec-Gaussian, an approach that utilizes an anisotropic spherical Gaussian (ASG)
appearance field instead of SH for modeling the view-dependent appearance of
each 3D Gaussian. Additionally, we have developed a coarse-to-fine training
strategy to improve learning efficiency and eliminate floaters caused by overfitting in real-world scenes. Our experimental results demonstrate that our method
surpasses existing approaches in terms of rendering quality. Thanks to ASG, we
have significantly improved the ability of 3D-GS to model scenes with specular
and anisotropic components without increasing the number of 3D Gaussians. This
improvement extends the applicability of 3D GS to handle intricate scenarios
with specular and anisotropic surfaces. Our codes and datasets are available at
https://ingra14m.github.io/Spec-Gaussian-website.

1

Introduction

High-quality reconstruction and photorealistic rendering from a collection of images are crucial for a
variety of applications, such as augmented reality/virtual reality (AR/VR), 3D content production,
and art creation. Classic methods employ primitive representations, like meshes [39] and points
[4, 67], and take advantage of the rasterization pipeline optimized for contemporary GPUs to achieve
real-time rendering. In contrast, neural radiance fields (NeRF) [37, 5, 38] utilize neural implicit
representation to offer a continuous scene representation and employ volumetric rendering to produce
rendering results. This approach allows for enhanced preservation of scene details and more effective
reconstruction of scene geometries.
Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) [23] has emerged as a leading technique, delivering stateof-the-art quality and real-time speed. This method optimizes a set of 3D Gaussians that capture the
appearance and geometry of a 3D scene simultaneously, offering a continuous representation that
preserves details and produces high-quality results. Besides, the CUDA-customized differentiable
rasterization pipeline for 3D Gaussians enables real-time rendering even at high resolution.
† Corresponding Authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

