Direct Consistency Optimization for Robust
Customization of Text-to-Image Diffusion Models

Kyungmin Lee1

Sangkyung Kwak1 Kihyuk Sohn2˚ Jinwoo Shin1
1
KAIST 2 Meta Reality Labs
{kyungmnlee, skkwak9806, jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr
kihyuk.sohn@gmail.com

Abstract
Text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models, when fine-tuned on a few personal images,
can generate visuals with a high degree of consistency. However, such fine-tuned
models are not robust; they often fail to compose with concepts of pretrained
model or other fine-tuned models. To address this, we propose a novel fine-tuning
objective, dubbed Direct Consistency Optimization, which controls the deviation between fine-tuning and pretrained models to retain the pretrained knowledge during
fine-tuning. Through extensive experiments on subject and style customization, we
demonstrate that our method positions itself on a superior Pareto frontier between
subject (or style) consistency and image-text alignment over all previous baselines;
it not only outperforms regular fine-tuning objective in image-text alignment, but
also shows higher fidelity to the reference images than the method that fine-tunes
with additional prior dataset. More importantly, the models fine-tuned with our
method can be merged without interference, allowing us to generate custom subjects in a custom style by composing separately customized subject and style
models. Notably, we show that our approach achieves better prompt fidelity and
subject fidelity than those post-optimized for merging regular fine-tuned models.2

1

Introduction

Text-to-image (T2I) models are for image generation guided by natural language prompts and have
seen rapid progress in recent years [1–8]. The compositional nature of the natural language has
enabled the creation of novel images, which compose multiple subjects with varying attributes in
different backgrounds or styles. However, the ambiguity of natural language in describing the visual
world makes it difficult to create an image of a specific subject, style, interaction, or background.
To overcome the lack of accuracy in natural language, there has been an emerging interest in teaching
the pretrained T2I models new concepts, such as subject [9, 10], style [11], interaction [12], or
background [13], whose precise visual description is given by a small set of reference images. As
proposed in DreamBooth [10], the fundamental idea is to fine-tune the pretrained T2I model on a
few images describing a new concept. The adoption of LoRA [14] or adapter fine-tuning [15] to T2I
models has made the process more accessible, fast and economical [16, 11]. Once fine-tuned, the
model can generate images by composing a new concept (e.g., my subject) and the knowledge of
the pretrained model (e.g., background, style). While these methods have shown great success, they
still suffer from reduced textual alignment and compositional generation capability [17], which is
problematic particularly when the number of reference images is small, e.g., one or two.
˚
2

Work done while at Google Research.
Project page: https://dco-t2i.github.io

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

