Out-Of-Distribution Detection with Diversification
(Provably)

Haiyun Yao1 , Zongbo Han1 , Huazhu Fu2 , Xi Peng3 , Qinghua Hu1 , Changqing Zhang1∗
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University1
Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR2
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University3
{yaohaiyun, zongbo, huqinghua, zhangchangqing}@tju.edu.cn,
hzfu@ieee.org, pengx.gm@gmail.com

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is crucial for ensuring reliable deployment
of machine learning models. Recent advancements focus on utilizing easily accessible auxiliary outliers (e.g., data from the web or other datasets) in training.
However, we experimentally reveal that these methods still struggle to generalize
their detection capabilities to unknown OOD data, due to the limited diversity of
the auxiliary outliers collected. Therefore, we thoroughly examine this problem
from the generalization perspective and demonstrate that a more diverse set of
auxiliary outliers is essential for enhancing the detection capabilities. However,
in practice, it is difficult and costly to collect sufficiently diverse auxiliary outlier
data. Therefore, we propose a simple yet practical approach with a theoretical guarantee, termed Diversity-induced Mixup for OOD detection (diverseMix), which
enhances the diversity of the auxiliary outlier set for training in an efficient way.
Extensive experiments show that diverseMix achieves superior performance on
commonly used and recent challenging large-scale benchmarks, which further
confirm the importance of the diversity of auxiliary outliers. Our code is available
at https://github.com/HaiyunYao/diverseMix.

1

Introduction

The OOD problem occurs when machine learning models encounter data that differs from the distribution of training data. In such scenarios, models may make incorrect predictions, leading to
safety-critical issues in real-world applications, e.g., autonomous driving [14] and medical diagnosis [27]. To ensure the reliability of the outputs of model, it is essential not only to achieve good
performance on in-distribution (ID) samples, but also to detect potential OOD samples, thus avoiding
making erroneous decisions in test. Therefore, OOD detection has become a critical challenge for the
secure deployment of machine learning models [1; 12; 24; 29].
Several significant studies [19; 23; 25] focus on detecting OOD examples using only ID data in
training. However, due to a lack of supervision information from unknown OOD data, it is difficult
for these methods to achieve satisfactory performance in detecting OOD samples. Recent methods
[20; 46; 6; 34] involve training model with easily available auxiliary outliers (e.g., data from the web
or other datasets), with the hope that the detection ability can generalize to unknown OOD. However,
as shown in Fig. 1(a)-(b), we experimentally find that while the use of outlier datasets can enhance
performance in OOD detection, the generalization capabilities of these methods remain significantly
limited. Specifically, there is a considerable risk of the model overfitting to the auxiliary outliers,
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

