NeuralClothSim: Neural Deformation Fields
Meet the Thin Shell Theory

Navami Kairanda

Marc Habermann

Christian Theobalt

Vladislav Golyanik

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus

Abstract
Despite existing 3D cloth simulators producing realistic results, they predominantly
operate on discrete surface representations (e.g., points and meshes) with a fixed
spatial resolution, which often leads to large memory consumption and resolutiondependent simulations. Moreover, back-propagating gradients through the existing
solvers is difficult, and they hence cannot be easily integrated into modern neural
architectures. In response, this paper re-thinks physically accurate cloth simulation:
We propose NeuralClothSim, i.e., a new quasistatic cloth simulator using thin shells,
in which surface deformation is encoded in neural network weights in the form of a
neural field. Our memory-efficient solver operates on a new continuous coordinatebased surface representation called neural deformation fields (NDFs); it supervises
NDF equilibria with the laws of the non-linear Kirchhoff-Love shell theory with a
non-linear anisotropic material model. NDFs are adaptive: They 1) allocate their
capacity to the deformation details and 2) allow surface state queries at arbitrary
spatial resolutions without re-training. We show how to train NeuralClothSim
while imposing hard boundary conditions and demonstrate multiple applications,
such as material interpolation and simulation editing. The experimental results
highlight the effectiveness of our continuous neural formulation. See our project
page: https://4dqv.mpi-inf.mpg.de/NeuralClothSim/.

1

Introduction

Realistic cloth simulation is a central, long-standing and challenging problem in computer graphics.
It arises in game engines, computer animation, movie production, digital art, and garment digitisation,
only to name a few areas. To date, it has been mostly addressed with physics-based simulators
operating on explicit geometric representations, i.e., meshes and particle systems. While recent
simulators [24, 60, 36, 33, 32, 38] can produce realistic 3D simulations that obey various types of
boundary conditions and consider secondary effects, but their operational principle remains limited
in several ways. First, they work on discrete surface representations such as meshes and points
inherently assuming a pre-defined spatial resolution that cannot be easily changed once the simulation
is accomplished. Second, re-running with different meshing of the same initial template leads to
different folds and wrinkles, which is often problematic for downstream applications. Third, explicit
geometries require notoriously large amounts of storage for the detailed simulation: the memory size
grows linearly with the number of points. Moreover, it is difficult to integrate simulators into learning
frameworks and to edit the output 3D state without re-running the simulation.
The recent advances in physics-informed neural networks [49, 25] as well as the success of neural
fields [43, 64, 62, 65], makes us question if continuous coordinate-based representations can alleviate
these limitations. All these considerations motivate us to rethink the fundamentals of physically
accurate cloth simulation and we introduce a new approach for cloth quasistatics, in which the surface
deformation is encoded in neural network weights. The proposed neural architecture is coordinate38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

