Neural Flow Diffusion Models: Learnable Forward
Process for Improved Diffusion Modelling

Grigory Bartosh
University of Amsterdam
g.bartosh@uva.nl

Dmitry Vetrov
Constructor University, Bremen
dvetrov@constructor.university

Christian A. Naesseth
University of Amsterdam
c.a.naesseth@uva.nl

Abstract
Conventional diffusion models often rely on a fixed forward process, which implicitly defines complex marginal distributions over latent variables. This can
often complicate the reverse process’ task in learning generative trajectories, and
results in costly inference for diffusion models. To address these limitations,
we introduce Neural Flow Diffusion Models (NFDM), a novel framework that
enhances diffusion models by supporting a broader range of forward processes
beyond the standard linear Gaussian. We also propose a novel parameterization
technique for learning the forward process. Our framework provides an end-to-end,
simulation-free optimization objective, effectively minimizing a variational upper
bound on the negative log-likelihood. Experimental results demonstrate NFDM’s
strong performance, evidenced by state-of-the-art likelihoods across a range of
image generation tasks. Furthermore, we investigate NFDM’s capacity for learning
generative dynamics with specific characteristics, such as deterministic straight
lines trajectories, and demonstrate how the framework can be adopted for learning
bridges between two distributions. The results underscores NFDM’s versatility and
its potential for a wide range of applications.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [56, 20] are a class of generative models constructed by two key processes: the
forward process and the reverse process. The forward process gradually corrupts the data distribution,
transforming it from its original form to a noised state. The reverse process learns to invert corruptions
of the forward process and restore the data distribution. This way, the model learns to generate
data from pure noise. Diffusion models have demonstrated remarkable results in various domains
[21, 48, 63, 69, 65]. Nevertheless, most existing diffusion models fix the forward process to be
predefined, usually linear, Gaussian which makes it unable to adapt to the task at hand or simplify the
target for the reverse process. At the same time there is a growing body of work that demonstrates how
modifications of the forward process improve performance in terms of generation quality [39, 66, 9],
likelihood estimation [28, 40, 4] or sampling speed [32, 44, 64].
In this paper, we present Neural Flow Diffusion Models (NFDM), a framework that allows for the
pre-specification and learning of complex latent variable distributions defined by the forward process.
Unlike conventional diffusion models [20], which rely on a conditional Gaussian forward process,
NFDM can accommodate any continuous (and learnable) distribution that can be expressed as an
invertible mapping applied to noise. We also derive, and leverage, a new end-to-end simulationfree optimization procedure for NFDM, that minimizes a variational upper bound on the negative
log-likelihood (NLL).
Furthermore, we propose an efficient neural network-based parameterization for the forward process,
enabling it to adapt to the reverse process during training and simplify the learning of the data
distribution. To demonstrate NFDM’s capabilities with a learnable forward process we provide
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

