A Data-Centric Perspective on Evaluating Machine
Learning Models for Tabular Data

Andrej Tschalzev∗
University of Mannheim

Sascha Marton
University of Mannheim

Christian Bartelt
University of Mannheim

Stefan Lüdtke
University of Rostock

Heiner Stuckenschmidt
University of Mannheim

Abstract
Tabular data is prevalent in real-world machine learning applications, and new models for supervised learning of tabular data are frequently proposed. Comparative
studies assessing the performance of models typically consist of model-centric evaluation setups with overly standardized data preprocessing. This paper demonstrates
that such model-centric evaluations are biased, as real-world modeling pipelines
often require dataset-specific preprocessing, which includes feature engineering.
Therefore, we propose a data-centric evaluation framework. We select 10 relevant datasets from Kaggle competitions and implement expert-level preprocessing
pipelines for each dataset. We conduct experiments with different preprocessing
pipelines and hyperparameter optimization (HPO) regimes to quantify the impact
of model selection, HPO, feature engineering, and test-time adaptation. Our main
findings are: 1. After dataset-specific feature engineering, model rankings change
considerably, performance differences decrease, and the importance of model
selection reduces. 2. Recent models, despite their measurable progress, still significantly benefit from manual feature engineering. This holds true for both tree-based
models and neural networks. 3. While tabular data is typically considered static,
samples are often collected over time, and adapting to distribution shifts can be
important even in supposedly static data. These insights suggest that research
efforts should be directed toward a data-centric perspective, acknowledging that
tabular data requires feature engineering and often exhibits temporal characteristics.
Our framework is available under: https://github.com/atschalz/dc_tabeval.

1

Introduction

Since ancient times, tables have been used as a data structure, i.e., to record astronomical observations
[69] or financial transactions [6]. Many traditional machine learning (ML) methods, like logistic
regression or the first artificial neural networks, were initially developed for tabular data [14, 54, 62].
Even nowadays, in the age of AI, tabular data is the most prevalent modality in real-world applications,
including medicine [34], finance [8], manufacturing [75], retail [50], and many others [64, 5]. Several
novel deep learning architectures have been contributed in recent years to improve supervised machine
learning for tabular data [59, 79, 53, 33, 2, 7, 25, 66, 11, 42, 24].
To evaluate existing approaches, various comparative studies were conducted in recent years [4, 22,
21, 25, 64, 5, 55]. While motivated by different goals, they all have one in common: The focus is on
evaluating models on tabular datasets using predefined cross-validation splits and one standardized
preprocessing for all datasets. In this paper, we challenge such model-centric evaluation setups by
∗

Correspondence to: andrej.tschalzev@uni-mannheim.de

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

