On the Optimality of Dilated Entropy and Lower
Bounds for Online Learning in Extensive-Form Games

Zhiyuan Fan
MIT
fanzy@mit.edu

Christian Kroer
Columbia University
christian.kroer@columbia.edu
Gabriele Farina
MIT
gfarina@mit.edu

Abstract
First-order methods (FOMs) are arguably the most scalable algorithms for equilibrium computation in large extensive-form games. To operationalize these methods,
a distance-generating function, acting as a regularizer for the strategy space, must
be chosen. The ratio between the strong convexity modulus and the diameter of
the regularizer is a key parameter in the analysis of FOMs. A natural question is
then: what is the optimal distance-generating function for extensive-form decision
spaces? In this paper, we make a number of contributions, ultimately establishing that the weight-one dilated entropy (DilEnt) distance-generating function is
optimal up to logarithmic factors. The DilEnt regularizer is notable due to its
iterate-equivalence with Kernelized OMWU (KOMWU)—the algorithm with stateof-the-art dependence on the game tree size in extensive-form games—when used
in conjunction with the online mirror descent (OMD) algorithm. However, the
standard analysis for OMD is unable to establish such a result; the only current
analysis is by appealing to the iterate equivalence to KOMWU. We close this gap
by introducing a pair of primal-dual treeplex norms, which we contend form the
natural analytic viewpoint for studying the strong convexity of DilEnt. Using these
norm pairs, we recover the diameter-to-strong-convexity ratio that predicts the same
performance as KOMWU. Along with a new regret lower bound for online learning
in sequence-form strategy spaces, we show that this ratio is nearly optimal. Finally,
we showcase our analytic techniques by refining the analysis of Clairvoyant OMD
when paired with DilEnt, establishing an O(n log |V| log T /T ) approximation rate
to coarse correlated equilibrium in n-player games, where |V| is the number of
reduced normal-form strategies of the players, establishing the new state of the art.

1

Introduction

Extensive-form games (EFG) are a popular framework for modeling sequential games with imperfect
information. The framework has been widely used to build superhuman AI agents in real-world
imperfect information games [5, 31, 6, 8]. Several notions of equilibrium, including Nash equilibrium
[32] in two-player zero-sum and coarse correlated equilibrium in general multiplayer EFGs, can be
computed in polynomial time in the size of the game tree under the standard hypothesis of perfect
recall [41, 35, 23, 24]. These polynomial-time algorithms, however, require running the ellipsoid
method or polynomial algorithm for linear programming, both of which are impractical for large-scale
games, due to the high memory usage and large per-iteration computational costs [38].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

