Communication Bounds for the Distributed Experts
Problem
Zhihao Jia
Carnegie Mellon University
zhihao@cmu.edu
David Woodruff
Carnegie Mellon University
dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu

Qi Pang
Carnegie Mellon University
qipang@cmu.edu
Zhihao Zhang
Carnegie Mellon University
zhihaoz3@cs.cmu.edu

Trung Tran
University of Pittsburgh
tbt8@pitt.edu
Wenting Zheng
Carnegie Mellon University
wenting@cmu.edu

Abstract
In this work, we study the experts problem in the distributed setting where an
expert’s cost needs to be aggregated across multiple servers. Our study considers
various communication models such as the message-passing model and the broadcast model, along with multiple aggregation functions, such as summing and taking
the ℓp norm of an expert’s cost across servers. We propose the first communicationefficient protocols that achieve near-optimal regret in these settings, even against
a strong adversary who can choose the inputs adaptively. Additionally, we give a
conditional lower bound showing that the communication of our protocols is nearly
optimal. Finally, we implement our protocols and demonstrate empirical savings
on the HPO-B benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Online prediction with expert advice is an indispensable task in many fields, including bandit learning
(Auer et al., 2002; Lattimore & Szepesvári, 2020), online optimization (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2012;
Hazan et al., 2016), robot control (Doyle et al., 2013), and financial decision making (Dixon et al.,
2020). The problem involves n experts making individual predictions and receiving corresponding
costs on each of T days. On each day, we choose an expert based on the historical costs of the
experts on previous days, and we receive the cost of the selected expert on that day. The objective is
to compete with the best single expert in hindsight, i.e., to minimize the average regret, defined as
the additional cost the algorithm incurs against the best expert in a horizon of T days. It is known
that the Exponential Weights Algorithm
(EWA) and Multiplicative Weight Update (MWU) method
q
log n
achieve an optimal regret of O(
T ) given all historical information, even in the presence of a
strong adversary Arora et al. (2012). With less information, the exponential-weight
algorithm for
q
n
exploration and exploitation (Exp3) achieves near-optimal regret O( n log
) in the adversarial
T
bandit setup, where only the cost of one expert is observed on a single day.

For a large number of experts and days, it may not be feasible to run classical low-regret algorithms.
Motivated by this, recent work (Srinivas et al., 2022; Peng & Zhang, 2022; Woodruff et al., 2023; Peng
& Rubinstein, 2023; Aamand et al., 2023) considers the experts problem in the data stream model,
where the expert predictions are typically streamed through main memory, and a small summary of
historical information is stored.
In this paper, we consider an alternative model in the big data setting, namely, the distributed model,
where expert costs are split across s servers, and there is a central coordinator who can run a low-regret
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

