Towards Calibrated Robust Fine-Tuning of
Vision-Language Models

Changdae Oh∗,c,n
University of Wisconsin–Madison
Dongyoon Han
NAVER AI Lab
Alexander Hauptmann
Carnegie Mellon University

Hyesu Lim∗,c
KAIST AI
Sangdoo Yun
NAVER AI Lab
Zhi-Qi Cheng†
Carnegie Mellon University

Mijoo Kimc
Chung-Ang University
Jaegul Choo
KAIST AI
Kyungwoo Song†
Yonsei University

Abstract
Improving out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization during in-distribution (ID)
adaptation is a primary goal of robust fine-tuning of zero-shot models beyond
naive fine-tuning. However, despite decent OOD generalization performance from
recent robust fine-tuning methods, confidence calibration for reliable model output
has not been fully addressed. This work proposes a robust fine-tuning method
that improves both OOD accuracy and confidence calibration simultaneously in
vision language models. Firstly, we show that both OOD classification and OOD
calibration errors have a shared upper bound consisting of two terms of ID data: 1)
ID calibration error and 2) the smallest singular value of the ID input covariance
matrix. Based on this insight, we design a novel framework that conducts finetuning with a constrained multimodal contrastive loss enforcing a larger smallest
singular value, which is further guided by the self-distillation of a moving-averaged
model to achieve calibrated prediction as well. Starting from empirical evidence
supporting our theoretical statements, we provide extensive experimental results
on ImageNet distribution shift benchmarks that demonstrate the effectiveness of
our theorem and its practical implementation. Our code is available here.

1

Introduction

Foundation models [6] such as CLIP [47] have been extensively utilized on diverse domains via
pretrain-finetune approaches. Their generalized knowledge shaped after large-scale pre-training
enables them to easily adapt to downstream tasks through zero-shot inference or fine-tuning. However,
it has been steadily reported that a naive fine-tuning approach comprises foundation models’ strong
out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization capability during adaptation to in-distribution (ID) data
[61, 30]. To ensure robustness under distribution shifts, a wide range of research has followed [61,
30, 17, 32, 57, 43, 42] so-called robust fine-tuning. Despite the advancements of the robust finetuning methods, we are aware that an important criterion for trustworthy machine learning has
been overlooked – confidence calibration [39, 8] that quantifies how close the confidence of our
predictor is to the actual correctness of predictions. As shown in Figure 1, existing robust fine-tuning
methods hurt the confidence calibration in terms of expected calibration error (ECE) [40] on OOD
data compared to the zero-shot evaluation while they show improvements on OOD accuracy. In this
*
Equal contribution (changdae@cs.wisc.edu; hyesulim@kaist.ac.kr), Work partly done at c Carnegie Mellon
University and n NAVER AI Lab, †Co-correspondence (zhiqic@cs.cmu.edu; kyungwoo.song@yonsei.ac.kr)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

