Listenable Maps for Zero-Shot Audio Classifiers

Francesco Paissan∗ 1,2,5 , Luca Della Libera2,3 , Mirco Ravanelli2,3 , Cem Subakan2,3,4
1
Fondazione Bruno Kessler, 2 Mila, Québec AI Institute, 3 Concordia University,
4
Laval University, 5 University of Trento

Abstract
Interpreting the decisions of deep learning models, including audio classifiers, is
crucial for ensuring the transparency and trustworthiness of this technology. In this
paper, we introduce LMAC-ZS (Listenable Maps for Zero-Shot Audio Classifiers),
which, to the best of our knowledge, is the first decoder-based post-hoc explanation
method for explaining the decisions of zero-shot audio classifiers. The proposed
method utilizes a novel loss function that aims to closely reproduce the original
similarity patterns between text-and-audio pairs in the generated explanations. We
provide an extensive evaluation using the Contrastive Language-Audio Pretraining
(CLAP) model to showcase that our interpreter remains faithful to the decisions in
a zero-shot classification context. Moreover, we qualitatively show that our method
produces meaningful explanations that correlate well with different text prompts.

1

Introduction

The widespread adoption of AI in critical decision-making processes makes interpreting the decisions
of deep learning models crucial for ensuring transparency and trustworthiness. Recently, significant
research has been devoted to explainable machine learning [1]. These efforts aim to either employ
interpretable models or explain the decisions of black-box models using posthoc explanation methods.
In the audio domain, however, only a few works exist on interpretable audio classifiers [2, 3, 4]
as well as on posthoc explanation methods [5, 6, 7, 8]. The latter contributions are limited to
standard closed-set classification and do not explore the challenging topic of interpreting zero-shot
classifiers. Zero-shot classifiers, on the other hand, are gaining popularity for their exceptional
adaptability, as they define audio classes based on a set of textual prompts [9]. The class labels are not
necessarily predefined but can be generated dynamically during inference via natural language. The
increased flexibility of zero-shot classifiers comes with a drawback: their predictions are challenging
to interpret. This difficulty arises from their multi-modal nature, as learning an interpreter in the
joint representation space between text and audio is required. A notable example of a zero-shot
classifier is Contrastive Language Audio Pretraining (CLAP) [10], which jointly trains audio and text
representations using contrastive learning, that we also work with in this paper.
This paper addresses the problem of posthoc explanations for zero-shot audio classifiers. To the best
of our knowledge, this has never been attempted before in the literature. Following the masking
idea proposed in [8], we propose LMAC-ZS (Listenable Maps for Audio Classifiers in the ZeroShot context), which consists of a decoder (the interpreter) that outputs a saliency map capable of
highlighting the regions within the input audio that trigger the zero-shot classification. We introduce
a novel loss function that incentives faithfully following the similarity between the original audio and
the corresponding text prompt. Our method provides listenable explanations for linear and non-linear
frequency-scale short-time Fourier transform (STFT) representations of audio waveforms. It can also
operate on the raw audio domain directly. We applied our explanation method on top of a pretrained
version of the popular CLAP [10] by considering different zero-shot classification datasets, including
∗

Correspondance to fpaissan@fbk.eu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

