Ultrafast classical phylogenetic method beats large
protein language models on variant effect prediction

Sebastian Prillo∗
University of California, Berkeley
sprillo@berkeley.edu

Wilson Wu∗
University of California, Berkeley
nosliw@berkeley.edu

Yun S. Song
University of California, Berkeley
yss@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Amino acid substitution rate matrices are fundamental to statistical phylogenetics
and evolutionary biology. Estimating them typically requires reconstructed trees
for massive amounts of aligned proteins, which poses a major computational
bottleneck. In this paper, we develop a near-linear time method to estimate these
rate matrices from multiple sequence alignments (MSAs) alone, thereby speeding
up computation by orders of magnitude. Our method relies on a near-linear time
cherry reconstruction algorithm which we call FastCherries and it can be easily
applied to MSAs with millions of sequences. On both simulated and real data, we
demonstrate the speed and accuracy of our method as applied to the classical model
of protein evolution. By leveraging the unprecedented scalability of our method,
we develop a new, rich phylogenetic model called SiteRM, which can estimate
a general site-specific rate matrix for each column of an MSA. Remarkably, in
variant effect prediction for both clinical and deep mutational scanning data in
ProteinGym, we show that despite being an independent-sites model, our SiteRM
model outperforms large protein language models that learn complex residueresidue interactions between different sites. We attribute our increased performance
to conceptual advances in our probabilistic treatment of evolutionary data and our
ability to handle extremely large MSAs. We anticipate that our work will have a
lasting impact across both statistical phylogenetics and computational variant effect
prediction. FastCherries and SiteRM are implemented in the CherryML package
https://github.com/songlab-cal/CherryML.

1

Introduction

Amino acid substitution rate matrices are crucial to statistical phylogenetics and evolutionary biology.
Perhaps best known for their use in phylogenetic tree reconstruction [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], these transition-rate
matrices allow us to infer the evolutionary history of a protein family. This has given insights into
protein evolution, function, and fitness, which among other important applications, has informed the
development of vaccines during the COVID-19 pandemic [6]. Statistically speaking, transition-rate
matrices are parameters of continuous-time Markov chain models describing protein evolution. One
of the most popular such models to date is the seminal model of Le and Gascuel [7] (LG for short),
which posits that each site of a protein evolves independently following a continuous-time Markov
chain parameterized by a global transition-rate matrix Q ∈ R20×20 up to site-specific rates.
∗

Equal contribution; authors listed alphabetically

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

