SOI: Scaling Down Computational Complexity by
Estimating Partial States of the Model

Grzegorz Stefański1 , Paweł Daniluk2 , Artur Szumaczuk2 , Jakub Tkaczuk2
1
Samsung AI Center Warsaw 2 Samsung R&D Institute Poland
{g.stefanski, p.daniluk, a.szumaczuk, j.tkaczuk}@samsung.com

Abstract
Consumer electronics used to follow the miniaturization trend described by Moore’s
Law. Despite increased processing power in Microcontroller Units (MCUs), MCUs
used in the smallest appliances are still not capable of running even moderately big,
state-of-the-art artificial neural networks (ANNs) especially in time-sensitive scenarios. In this work, we present a novel method called Scattered Online Inference
(SOI) that aims to reduce the computational complexity of ANNs. SOI leverages
the continuity and seasonality of time-series data and model predictions, enabling
extrapolation for processing speed improvements, particularly in deeper layers. By
applying compression, SOI generates more general inner partial states of ANN,
allowing skipping full model recalculation at each inference.

1

Introduction

Moore’s Law (Moore, 1998) predicts that the number of transistors on a microchip will double every
2 years. As the number of transistors increases, the computational capacity of systems-on-chip (SoCs)
also grows. Accompanied by the further miniaturization of components, the increased complexity of
SoCs allows for the production of more compact appliances with equal or higher capabilities.
Despite the continuous development of more advanced hardware, the smallest appliances still cannot
fully benefit from increasingly popular neural-based solutions, as they are not able to run them
efficiently. Examples of such appliances include wireless in-ear headphones, smart watches, and AR
glasses. Furthermore, the size of state-of-the-art neural networks is growing at much faster rate than
that described by Moore’s Law (Xu et al., 2018). Adding to the challenge, according to researchers
(Leiserson et al., 2020), Moore’s Law is starting to decelerate due to the physical constraints of
semiconductors, and the “room at the bottom” is depleting.
Currently available neural network technologies enable machines to outperform humans in numerous
applications in terms of measured performance (Nguyen et al., 2020; Bakhtin et al., 2022; Schrittwieser et al., 2020). However, despite this achievement, the same models fall significantly short
when it comes to energy efficiency compared to humans. The human brain consumes a mere 20
Watts of power (Laughlin et al., 1998; Sengupta & Stemmler, 2014; Balasubramanian, 2021) and
according to Xu et al. (2018) it is estimated to be over five orders of magnitude more energy efficient
than modern neural networks.
This disparity in energy efficiency can be attributed to the common pursuit of the highest model
quality in the literature, showcasing the full capabilities of the developed technology, often at the
expense of efficiency. This behavior is justifiable due to the ease of comparing different solutions
using well-defined metrics that are independent of the hardware and software. Conversely, estimating
a model’s energy efficiency is a more complex task, influenced by various factors including the
running environment.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

