Cryptographic Hardness of Score Estimation

Min Jae Song
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Washington
mjsong32@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
We show that L2 -accurate score estimation, in the absence of strong assumptions
on the data distribution, is computationally hard even when sample complexity is
polynomial in the relevant problem parameters. Our reduction builds on the result of
Chen et al. (ICLR 2023), who showed that the problem of generating samples from
an unknown data distribution reduces to L2 -accurate score estimation. Our hard-toestimate distributions are the “Gaussian pancakes” distributions, originally due to
Diakonikolas et al. (FOCS 2017), which have been shown to be computationally
indistinguishable from the standard Gaussian under widely believed hardness
assumptions from lattice-based cryptography (Bruna et al., STOC 2021; Gupte et
al., FOCS 2022).

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [70, 72, 42, 73] have firmly established themselves as a powerful approach to
generative modeling, serving as the foundation for leading image generation models such as DALL-E
2 [62], Imagen [66], and Stable Diffusion [65]. A diffusion model consists of a pair of forward and
reverse processes. In the forward process, noise drawn from a standard distribution, such as the
standard Gaussian, is sequentially applied to data samples, leading its distribution to a pure noise
distribution in the limit. The reverse process, as the name suggests, reverses the noising process and
takes the pure noise distribution “backward in time” to the original data distribution, thereby allowing
us to generate new samples from the data distribution. A key element in implementing the reverse
process is the score function of the data distribution, which is the gradient of its log density. Since the
data distribution is typically unknown, the score function must be learned from samples [44, 78, 72].
Recent advances in the theory of diffusion models have revealed that the task of sampling, in fact,
reduces to score estimation under minimal assumptions on the data distribution [9, 23, 53, 61, 22, 17,
51, 6]. In particular, Chen et al. [17] have shown that L2 -accurate score estimates along the forward
process are sufficient for efficient sampling. Thus, assuming access to an oracle for L2 -accurate score
estimation, one can efficiently sample from essentially any data distribution. However, this leaves
open the question of whether score estimation oracles themselves can be implemented efficiently, in
terms of both required sample size and computation, for interesting classes of distributions.
We show that L2 -accurate score estimation, in the absence of strong assumptions on the data distribution, is computationally hard, even when sample complexity is polynomial in the relevant problem
parameters. This establishes a statistical-to-computational gap for L2 -accurate score estimation,
which refers to an intrinsic gap between what is statistically achievable and computationally feasible. Our hard-to-estimate distributions are the “Gaussian pancakes” distributions, which previous
works [31, 13, 39] have shown are computationally indistinguishable from the standard Gaussian under plausible and widely believed hardness assumptions. In fact, “breaking” the hardness of Gaussian
pancakes, by means of an efficient detection or estimation algorithm, has profound implications for
lattice-based cryptography, which is central to the post-quantum cryptography standardization led
by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) [58]. Building on the sampling-to38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

