Understanding the Limits of Vision Language Models
Through the Lens of the Binding Problem
Declan Campbell1 , Sunayana Rane2 , Tyler Giallanza2 , Nicolò De Sabbata3 , Kia Ghods1 ,
Amogh Joshi1 , Alexander Ku2 , Steven M. Frankland4 , Thomas L. Griffiths2,5* , Jonathan D.
Cohen1,2* , and Taylor Webb6*
1

Princeton Neuroscience Institute
Department of Psychology, Princeton University
3
Department of Computer Science, EPFL
4
Department of Cognitive Science, Dartmouth College
5
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
6
Microsoft Research
* Equal contribution
2

Abstract
Recent work has documented striking heterogeneity in the performance of stateof-the-art vision language models (VLMs), including both multimodal language
models and text-to-image models. These models are able to describe and generate
a diverse array of complex, naturalistic images, yet they exhibit surprising failures
on basic multi-object reasoning tasks – such as counting, localization, and simple
forms of visual analogy – that humans perform with near perfect accuracy. To
better understand this puzzling pattern of successes and failures, we turn to theoretical accounts of the binding problem in cognitive science and neuroscience, a
fundamental problem that arises when a shared set of representational resources
must be used to represent distinct entities (e.g., to represent multiple objects in an
image), necessitating the use of serial processing to avoid interference. We find that
many of the puzzling failures of state-of-the-art VLMs can be explained as arising
due to the binding problem, and that these failure modes are strikingly similar to
the limitations exhibited by rapid, feedforward processing in the human brain.

1

Introduction

Recent progress in training large-scale neural networks on internet-scale datasets has led to the
creation of AI systems with capabilities rivaling human performance across a broad range of complex
tasks. Most recently, this has given rise to an array of vision language models (VLMs), including
multimodal language models such as GPT-4v that can generate text descriptions of multimodal text
and image inputs [1], and text-to-image models such as DALL-E 3 that can generate images from
natural language descriptions [24]. However, despite the considerable success of VLMs across many
tasks, these models still perform poorly on several surprisingly simple multi-object reasoning tasks –
such as counting [23, 25, 40], relational image generation [7], relational scene understanding [15, 31],
and simple visual analogy tasks [20, 38] – on which humans achieve near perfect accuracy.
Drawing from theoretical work both in cognitive science and neuroscience, we turn to the binding
problem [9, 10, 29, 33, 36] as a potential explanation for these limitations. ‘Binding’ refers to the
ability to associate one feature of an object (e.g., its color) with the other features of that object (e.g.,
its shape and location), and the ‘binding problem’ refers to the question of how the brain accomplishes
this without interference between the features for different objects. It is widely recognized that the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

