Learning Optimal Tax Design in Nonatomic
Congestion Games

Qiwen Cui
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science
Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
qwcui@cs.washington.edu

Maryam Fazel
Department of Electrical
Computer Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
mfazel@uw.edu

Simon S. Du
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science
Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
ssdu@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
In multiplayer games, self-interested behavior among the players can harm the
social welfare. Tax mechanisms are a common method to alleviate this issue
and induce socially optimal behavior. In this work, we take the initial step of
learning the optimal tax that can maximize social welfare with limited feedback in
congestion games. We propose a new type of feedback named equilibrium feedback,
where the tax designer can only observe the Nash equilibrium after deploying a
tax plan. Existing algorithms are not applicable due to the exponentially large tax
function space, nonexistence of the gradient, and nonconvexity of the objective.
To tackle these challenges, we design a computationally efficient algorithm that
leverages several novel components: (1) a piece-wise linear tax to approximate
the optimal tax; (2) extra linear terms to guarantee a strongly convex potential
function; (3) an efficient subroutine to find the exploratory tax that can provide
critical information about the game. The algorithm can find an ϵ-optimal tax with
O(βF 2 /ϵ) sample complexity, where β is the smoothness of the cost function and
F is the number of facilities.

1

Introduction

In modern society, large-scale systems often consist of many self-interested players with shared
resources, such as transportation and communication networks. Importantly, the objectives of
individual players are not always aligned with the system efficiency, and the system designer should
take this into consideration. A widely known example is Braess’s paradox, where adding more roads
to a network can make the network more congested [Braess, 1968]. Price of anarchy is a notion that
measures the inefficiency caused by selfish behavior compared with optimal centralized behavior
[Koutsoupias and Papadimitriou, 1999]. Characterizing such inefficiency has been an active research
area with applications in resource allocation [Marden and Roughgarden, 2014], traffic congestion
[Roughgarden and Tardos, 2004], and others. The inefficiency motivates research on how to design
mechanisms to improve performance even when the players are still behaving selfishly.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

