A Full-duplex Speech Dialogue Scheme Based On
Large Language Model
Peng Wang∗ Songshuo Lu∗ Yaohua Tang∗
Sijie Yan Wei Xia Yuanjun Xiong
MThreads AI
w8ngp1ng@gmail.com, lusongshuo97@gmail.com, tangyaohua28@gmail.com
yysijie@gmail.com, weixiaee@gmail.com, bitxiong@gmail.com

Abstract
We present a generative dialogue system capable of operating in a full-duplex
manner, allowing for seamless interaction. It is based on a large language model
(LLM) carefully aligned to be aware of a perception module, a motor function
module, and the concept of a simple ﬁnite state machine (called neural FSM) with
two states. The perception and motor function modules operate in tandem, allowing the system to simultaneously speak and listen to the user. The LLM generates
textual tokens for inquiry responses and makes autonomous decisions to start responding to, wait for, or interrupt the user by emitting control tokens to the neural
FSM. All these tasks of the LLM are carried out as next token prediction on a
serialized view of the dialogue in real-time. In automatic quality evaluations simulating real-life interaction, the proposed system reduces the average conversation
response latency by more than 3 folds compared with LLM-based half-duplex dialogue systems while responding within less than 500 milliseconds in more than
50% of evaluated interactions. Running a LLM with only 8 billion parameters,
our system exhibits a 8% higher interruption precision rate than the best available
commercial LLM for voice-based dialogue.

1

Introduction

In a conversation between two persons, one person is either a speaker or a listener at a time. The listener listens to the speaker’s speech but is free to interrupt when necessary. The speaker speaks, but
either concedes the speech or continues it when the listener tries to speak. We refer to this type of interaction as full-duplex dialogue. Instead, most existing chat-enabled large language models (LLMs)
[Eloundou et al., 2023, Achiam et al., 2023] view dialogue as a round-based process, where each
participant will produce a full sentence before the other party responds, resulting in a half-duplex
dialogue. The half duplex dialogue mode is sensible when building a text-based chatbot. However,
due to the bloated response latency and difﬁculty properly interrupting the other party, it becomes
infeasible for a human-like conversation experience, and thus, full-duplex dialogue capability is
desired.
Despite LLMs’ success in dramatically improving response quality, full-duplex dialogue is nontrivial to realize when considering LLM alone. A common chat-ﬁnetuned LLM [Achiam et al., 2023,
Touvron et al., 2023] does not know the current time nor allow input while generating responses. It
also has no awareness of any perception or motor function, which humans conveniently possess and
operate in parallel to allow them to respond to external stimuli in real-time. As shown in Fig. 1, we
tackle this problem by imaging an ideal agent for full-duplex dialogue. It involves one LLM and two
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

