Optimal Private and Communication Constraint
Distributed Goodness-of-Fit Testing for Discrete
Distributions in the Large Sample Regime

Lasse Vuursteen
Department of Statistics and Data Science
The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
lassev@wharton.upenn.edu

Abstract
We study distributed goodness-of-fit testing for discrete distribution under bandwidth and differential privacy constraints. Information constraint distributed
goodness-of-fit testing is a problem that has received considerable attention recently.
The important case of discrete distributions is theoretically well understood in the
classical case where all data is available in one “central” location. In a federated
setting, however, data is distributed across multiple “locations” (e.g. servers) and
cannot readily be shared due to e.g. bandwidth or privacy constraints that each
server needs to satisfy. We show how recently derived results for goodness-of-fit
testing for the mean of a multivariate Gaussian model extend to the discrete distributions, by leveraging Le Cam’s theory of statistical equivalence. In doing so, we
derive matching minimax upper- and lower-bounds for the goodness-of-fit testing
for discrete distributions under bandwidth or privacy constraints in the regime
where number of samples held locally are large.
Keywords: distributed inference, goodness-of-fit testing, differential privacy, communication constraint, federated learning, statistical equivalence.

1

Introduction

Federated learning is a fundamental problem in statistics and machine learning, where data is
distributed across multiple locations (e.g. servers) and cannot readily be shared due to e.g. bandwidth
or privacy constraints that each server needs to satisfy. The primary goal in these distributed data
settings is to perform a single global inference task, such as hypothesis testing, regression, or
classification, by aggregating the local information from each server.
Starting a few decades ago, investigations into distributed settings with bandwidth and other information constraints originated in the electrical engineering community, under the names “decentralized
decision theory / the CEO problem” e.g. [90, 12, 92, 18, 58, 87] or “inference under multiterminal
compression” (see [88] for an overview). These were largely motivated by applications where data
is by construction observed and processed locally, such as astronomy, meteorology, seismology,
surveillance systems, wireless communication, military radar or air traffic control systems.
Modern federated learning often involves data distributed across siloed data centers (e.g., hospitals)
or networks of cellphone users, applied in areas such as word prediction, facial and voice recognition,
virtual assistants like Siri or Google Assistant, autonomous vehicles, and earthquake prediction [65,
56, 51, 73, 67, 31]. In these settings, bandwidth often becomes a limited or costly resource [57].
Similarly, with advances in electronic record keeping, privacy has become a more and more pressing
issue. These issues are prominent in tech industry products [32], including many federated learning
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

