ImOV3D: Learning Open-Vocabulary Point Clouds
3D Object Detection from Only 2D Images

1

Timing Yang1,2∗ Yuanliang Ju1,2∗ Li Yi2,3,1†
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, 2 IIIS, Tsinghua University, 3 Shanghai AI Lab

Abstract
Open-vocabulary 3D object detection (OV-3Det) aims to generalize beyond the
limited number of base categories labeled during the training phase. The biggest
bottleneck is the scarcity of annotated 3D data, whereas 2D image datasets are
abundant and richly annotated. Consequently, it is intuitive to leverage the wealth
of annotations in 2D images to alleviate the inherent data scarcity in OV-3Det. In
this paper, we push the task setup to its limits by exploring the potential of using
solely 2D images to learn OV-3Det. The major challenges for this setup is the
modality gap between training images and testing point clouds, which prevents
effective integration of 2D knowledge into OV-3Det. To address this challenge, we
propose a novel framework ImOV3D to leverage pseudo multimodal representation
containing both images and point clouds (PC) to close the modality gap. The key
of ImOV3D lies in flexible modality conversion where 2D images can be lifted
into 3D using monocular depth estimation and can also be derived from 3D scenes
through rendering. This allows unifying both training images and testing point
clouds into a common image-PC representation, encompassing a wealth of 2D
semantic information and also incorporating the depth and structural characteristics
of 3D spatial data. We carefully conduct such conversion to minimize the domain
gap between training and test cases. Extensive experiments on two benchmark
datasets, SUNRGBD and ScanNet, show that ImOV3D significantly outperforms
existing methods, even in the absence of ground truth 3D training data. With the
inclusion of a minimal amount of real 3D data for fine-tuning, the performance
also significantly surpasses previous state-of-the-art. Codes and pre-trained models
are released on the https://github.com/yangtiming/ImOV3D.

1

Introduction

In the 3D vision community, there is a notable surge in interest surrounding open-vocabulary 3D
object detection (OV-3Det). This task focuses on the detection of objects from unbounded categories
that were not present during the training phase, using 3D point clouds as input. Such capability holds
immense significance in dynamic 3D environments where a wide range of object categories constantly
emerge and evolve, which is critical in downstream applications including robotics[8, 18, 28, 23],
autonomous driving [31, 46], and augmented reality [35, 44].
With the advancements in OV-3Det, which is not only scarce in terms of labels but also in the
data itself. However, the collection and annotation of 3D point clouds scenes pose significant
challenges. The availability of accessible and scannable scenes (e.g. indoor scenes) may be limited.
Additionally, obtaining 3D annotations often requires substantial human effort and time-consuming.
These limitations impact the model’s performance in handling novel objects. Existing methods
[30, 29, 28, 10, 49] seek help from powerful open-vocabulary 2D detectors. A common method
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

