MoLE
: Enhancing Human-centric Text-to-image
Diffusion via Mixture of Low-rank Experts

1

Jie Zhu1,2 , Yixiong Chen3 , Mingyu Ding4 , Ping Luo5 , Leye Wang1,2∗ , Jingdong Wang6∗
Key Lab of High Confidence Software Technologies (Peking University), Ministry of Education, China
2
School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China, 3 Johns Hopkins University
4
UC Berkeley, 5 The University of Hong Kong, 6 Baidu
zhujie@stu.pku.edu.cn, ychen646@jh.edu, myding@berkeley.edu,
pluo@cs.hku.hk, leyewang@pku.edu.cn, wangjingdong@outlook.com

this shirtless
young man is
wearing a tie

a man wears
a striped suit,
a purple tie,
and a paper
flower on
his lapel

a hand
holding
a black
cord

MoLE

SD v1.5

SD-XL

VQ-Diffusion

Versatile Diffusion

Figure 1: Compare MoLE with other diffusion models. Pay more attention to the face and (especially)
hand. Zoom in for a better view.

Abstract

Text-to-image diffusion has attracted vast attention due to its impressive imagegeneration capabilities. However, when it comes to human-centric text-to-image
generation, particularly in the context of faces and hands, the results often fall
short of naturalness due to insufficient training priors. We alleviate the issue
in this work from two perspectives. 1) From the data aspect, we carefully collect a human-centric dataset comprising over one million high-quality humanin-the-scene images and two specific sets of close-up images of faces and hands.
These datasets collectively provide a rich prior knowledge base to enhance the
human-centric image generation capabilities of the diffusion model. 2) On the
methodological front, we propose a simple yet effective method called Mixture of
Low-rank Experts (MoLE) by considering low-rank modules trained on close-up
hand and face images respectively as experts. This concept draws inspiration from
our observation of low-rank refinement, where a low-rank module trained by a
customized close-up dataset has the potential to enhance the corresponding image
part when applied at an appropriate scale. To validate the superiority of MoLE in
the context of human-centric image generation compared to state-of-the-art, we
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

