Learning segmentation from point trajectories

Laurynas Karazija, Iro Laina, Christian Rupprecht, Andrea Vedaldi
Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
{laurynas,iro,chrisr,vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We consider the problem of segmenting objects in videos based on their motion and
no other forms of supervision. Prior work has often approached this problem by
using the principle of common fate, namely the fact that the motion of points that
belong to the same object is strongly correlated. However, most authors have only
considered instantaneous motion from optical flow. In this work, we present a way
to train a segmentation network using long-term point trajectories as a supervisory
signal to complement optical flow. The key difficulty is that long-term motion,
unlike instantaneous motion, is difficult to model – any parametric approximation is
unlikely to capture complex motion patterns over long periods of time. We instead
draw inspiration from subspace clustering approaches, proposing a loss function
that seeks to group the trajectories into low-rank matrices where the motion of
object points can be approximately explained as a linear combination of other point
tracks. Our method outperforms the prior art on motion-based segmentation, which
shows the utility of long-term motion and the effectiveness of our formulation.

1

Introduction

Segmentation, the task of delineating and isolating distinct objects, is a fundamental problem in
computer vision. Much of the current approaches are supervised, relying on expensive manual
annotations. Attempts to approach this task without supervision have largely relied on manual
heuristics or exploited the rich semantics of self-supervised feature extractors. Video data, however,
offers an additional option as it contains motion, which can be exploited for an additional inductive
bias. Such approaches are rooted in the principle of common fate from Gestalt psychology [66],
which posits that elements that move together are more likely to belong together.
Motion information is usually captured by optical flow. Flow is attractive as it arises from lowlevel visual properties and can provide a signal before scenes are parsed and objects are discovered.
Furthermore, optical flow estimators, such as RAFT [60] or FlowFormer [24], can be trained purely
on synthetic artificial data, transferring to real-world scenes with remarkable accuracy and without
manual annotation. This has led many to consider optical flow as a critical modality to discover and
learn objects from video data by learning to attribute and explain the motions of objects.
Optical flow, however, only describes the instantaneous motion of the scene, which can create
blindspots: not all objects are necessarily in motion at all times. Similarly, groups of objects might
coincidentally move together. Recent advances in point tracking [14, 15, 22, 28] offer an alternative
form of motion information. Point trackers “lock on” to a set of query points and describe their
position and visibility over the course of the whole video. This provides long-term motion information.
Like optical flow estimators, point trackers are trained on synthetic data. However, unlike optical
flow, point trajectories describe only a sparse set of points.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

