Off-Dynamics Reinforcement Learning via Domain
Adaptation and Reward Augmented Imitation

Yihong Guo1 , Yixuan Wang1 , Yuanyuan Shi2 , Pan Xu3 , Anqi Liu1
1
Johns Hopkins University
2
University of California San Diego
3
Duke University
{yguo80,ywang830,aliu.cs}@jhu.edu, yyshi@ucsd.edu, pan.xu@duke.edu

Abstract
Training a policy in a source domain for deployment in the target domain under
a dynamics shift can be challenging, often resulting in performance degradation.
Previous work tackles this challenge by training on the source domain with modified
rewards derived by matching distributions between the source and the target optimal
trajectories. However, pure modified rewards only ensure the behavior of the
learned policy in the source domain resembles trajectories produced by the target
optimal policies, which does not guarantee optimal performance when the learned
policy is actually deployed to the target domain. In this work, we propose to utilize
imitation learning to transfer the policy learned from the reward modification to the
target domain so that the new policy can generate the same trajectories in the target
domain. Our approach, Domain Adaptation and Reward Augmented Imitation
Learning (DARAIL), utilizes the reward modification for domain adaptation and
follows the general framework of generative adversarial imitation learning from
observation (GAIfO) by applying a reward augmented estimator for the policy
optimization step. Theoretically, we present an error bound for our method under
a mild assumption regarding the dynamics shift to justify the motivation of our
method. Empirically, our method outperforms the pure modified reward method
without imitation learning and also outperforms other baselines in benchmark
off-dynamics environments.

1

Introduction

The objective of reinforcement learning (RL) is to learn an optimal policy that maximizes rewards
through interaction and observation of environmental feedback. However, in domains such as medical
treatment [1] and autonomous driving [2], we cannot interact with the environment freely as the errors
are too costly or the amount of access to the environment is limited. Instead, we might have access to
a simpler or similar source domain. This requires domain adaptation in reinforcement learning. In
this paper, we study a specific problem of domain adaptation in reinforcement learning (RL), where
only the dynamics (transition probability) are different in two domains. This is called off-dynamics
RL [3–5]. Specifically, we focus on a problem setting in which we have limited access to rollout
data from the target domain, but we do not have access to the target domain reward, following the
previous off-dynamics work [3–5].
Previous work on off-dynamics RL, such as Domain Adaptation with Rewards from Classifiers
(DARC) [3] and [6, 5], focuses on training the policy in the source domain with a modified reward
function that compensates for the dynamics differences. The reward modification is derived so
that the distribution of the learning policy’s experience in the source domain matches that of the
optimal trajectories in the target domain. As a result, their experience in the source domain will
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

