Semidefinite Relaxations of the Gromov-Wasserstein
Distance
Junyu Chen ∗

Binh T. Nguyen ∗

Shang Hui Koh

Yong Sheng Soh

Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
chenjunyu@u.nus.edu,binhnt@nus.edu.sg,matsys@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
The Gromov-Wasserstein (GW) distance is an extension of the optimal transport
problem that allows one to match objects between incomparable spaces. At its
core, the GW distance is specified as the solution of a non-convex quadratic program and is not known to be tractable to solve. In particular, existing solvers for
the GW distance are only able to find locally optimal solutions. In this work,
we propose a semi-definite programming (SDP) relaxation of the GW distance.
The relaxation can be viewed as the Lagrangian dual of the GW distance augmented with constraints that relate to the linear and quadratic terms of transportation plans. In particular, our relaxation provides a tractable (polynomial-time)
algorithm to compute globally optimal transportation plans (in some instances)
together with an accompanying proof of global optimality. Our numerical experiments suggest that the proposed relaxation is strong in that it frequently computes the globally optimal solution. Our Python implementation is available at
https://github.com/tbng/gwsdp.

1

Introduction

The optimal transport (OT) problem concerns the task of finding a transportation plan between two
probability distributions to minimize some costs. The problem has applications in a wide range of
scientific and engineering applications. For instance, in the context of machine learning, the OT
problem forms the backbone of recent breakthroughs in generative modeling (Arjovsky et al., 2017;
Liu et al., 2022; Lipman et al., 2022), natural language processing (Kusner et al., 2015), domain
adaptation (Courty et al., 2017), and single-cell alignment (Schiebinger et al., 2019; Bunne et al.,
2023, 2024).
Let α ∈ ΣmPand β ∈ Σm be discrete probability distributions over a metric space – here Σm :=
m
m×n
{α ∈ Rm
be the matrix such
+,
i=1 αi = 1} denotes the probability simplex. Let C ∈ R
that Ci,j models the transportation cost between points xi ∼ α and yj ∼ β. The (Kantorovich)
formulation of the discrete OT problem (Kantorovich, 1942; Villani et al., 2009; Santambrogio,
2015; Peyré et al., 2019) is defined as the solution of the following convex optimization instance
def.

πW = argmin ⟨C, π⟩.

(1)

π∈Π(α,β)

Here, Π(α, β) = {π ∈ Rm×n
: π 1n = α, π ⊤ 1m = β} denotes the set of couplings between
+
probability distributions α, β ∈ Σm , while 1m ∈ Rm denotes the vector of ones. The OT problem
(1) is an instance of a linear program (LP), and hence admits a global minimizer.
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

