Accelerating Relative Entropy Coding
with Space Partitioning

Jiajun He
University of Cambridge
jh2383@cam.ac.uk

Gergely Flamich
University of Cambridge
gf332@cam.ac.uk

José Miguel Hernández-Lobato
University of Cambridge
jmh233@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Relative entropy coding (REC) algorithms encode a random sample following a
target distribution Q, using a coding distribution P shared between the sender and
receiver. Sadly, general REC algorithms suffer from prohibitive encoding times, at
least on the order of 2DKL rQ||P s , and faster algorithms are limited to very specific
settings. This work addresses this issue by introducing a REC scheme utilizing
space partitioning to reduce runtime in practical scenarios. We provide theoretical
analyses of our method and demonstrate its effectiveness with both toy examples
and practical applications. Notably, our method successfully handles REC tasks
with DKL rQ||P s about three times greater than what previous methods can manage,
and reduces the bitrate by approximately 5-15% in VAE-based lossless compression
on MNIST and INR-based lossy compression on CIFAR-10, compared to previous
methods, significantly improving the practicality of REC for neural compression.

1

Introduction

Let’s consider a two-party communication problem where the sender wants to transmit some data
X to the receiver. A widely used approach is transform coding (Ballé et al., 2020), where X is first
transformed to a discrete variable Z and entropy coded to achieve an optimal codelength on average.
However, directly finding a discrete Z is difficult in many scenarios. For example, in lossy image
compression, X represents some image, and Z represents the latent embedding output by an encoder
network in a model akin to the variational auto-encoder (Kingma and Welling, 2013). A common
solution to obtain a discrete Z is to first learn a continuous variable and quantize it (Ballé et al., 2017).
However, perhaps surprisingly, there is also a way to directly handle a continuous Z in this pipeline.
Specifically, instead of a deterministic value, the sender transmits a random sample following a
posterior Z „ QZ|X 1 . These algorithms are referred to as relative entropy coding (REC, Flamich
et al., 2020), and also known as channel simulation or reverse channel coding (Theis and Yosri, 2022).
Li and El Gamal (2018) showed that the codelength of such an algorithm is upper-bounded by the
mutual information2 between X and Z plus some logarithmic and constant overhead:
IrX; Zs ` log2 pIrX; Zs ` 1q ` Op1q.

(1)

REC has a clear advantage over quantization: quantization is a non-differentiable operation, while
REC directly works for continuous variables and eases the training of some neural compression
models, which highly rely on gradient descent. Also, Theis and Agustsson (2021) exemplified that
stochastic encoders can be significantly better than their deterministic counterpart if we target realism.
1

To avoid notation overload, we will use Q for the posterior, omitting its dependence on X unless needed.
Throughout this paper, unless otherwise stated, we use log2 to calculate the log density ratio, the KullbackLeibler (KL) divergence DKL , the mutual information I and the Rényi-8 divergence D8 . We use upper-case
letters (e.g., Q and P ) to represent probability measures and lower-case letters (e.g., q and p) for their densities.
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

