FouRA: Fourier Low Rank Adaptation

Shubhankar Borse∗ § Shreya Kadambi∗§ Nilesh Prasad Pandey† Kartikeya Bhardwaj
Viswanath Ganapathy† Sweta Priyadarshi† Risheek Garrepalli Rafael Esteves
Munawar Hayat§ Fatih Porikli§
Qualcomm AI Research‡
§
{sborse, skadambi, mhayat, fporikli}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
While Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) has proven beneficial for efficiently finetuning large models, LoRA fine-tuned text-to-image diffusion models lack diversity
in the generated images, as the model tends to copy data from the observed training
samples. This effect becomes more pronounced at higher values of adapter strength
and for adapters with higher ranks which are fine-tuned on smaller datasets. To
address these challenges, we present FouRA, a novel low-rank method that learns
projections in the Fourier domain along with learning a flexible input-dependent
adapter rank selection strategy. Through extensive experiments and analysis, we
show that FouRA successfully solves the problems related to data copying and
distribution collapse while significantly improving the generated image quality. We
demonstrate that FouRA enhances the generalization of fine-tuned models thanks
to its adaptive rank selection. We further show that the learned projections in the
frequency domain are decorrelated and prove effective when merging multiple
adapters. While FouRA is motivated for vision tasks, we also demonstrate its
merits for language tasks on commonsense reasoning and GLUE benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Figure 1: Distribution collapse with LoRA. Visual results generated by the Realistic Vision 3.0 model trained
with LoRA and FouRA, for "Blue Fire" and "Origami" style adapters across four seeds. While LoRA images
suffer from distribution collapse and lack diversity, we observe diverse images generated by FouRA.

Parameter-Efficient FineTuning (PEFT) [27] methods such as Low-Rank Adaptation [17] provide a
promising solution to quickly adapt large foundation models, including large vision models (LVMs)
and large language models (LLMs) to new tasks [26, 22, 3]. The LoRA module has an elegant design,
allowing quick adaptation to new styles or concepts without changing the underlying base model,
thus effectively retaining previous knowledge and preventing catastrophic forgetting.
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Work done while employed at Qualcomm AI Research.
‡
Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

