Fully Explicit Dynamic Gaussian Splatting

Junoh Lee1 , Changyeon Won2 , Hyunjun Jung2 , Inhwan Bae2 , Hae-Gon Jeon1,2
1
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science 2 AI Graduate School
Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology
{juno,cywon1997,hyunjun.jung,inhwanbae}@gm.gist.ac.kr, haegonj@gist.ac.kr

Abstract
3D Gaussian Splatting has shown fast and high-quality rendering results in static
scenes by leveraging dense 3D prior and explicit representations. Unfortunately,
the benefits of the prior and representation do not involve novel view synthesis for
dynamic motions. Ironically, this is because the main barrier is the reliance on them,
which requires increasing training and rendering times to account for dynamic
motions. In this paper, we design Explicit 4D Gaussian Splatting (Ex4DGS). Our
key idea is to firstly separate static and dynamic Gaussians during training, and
to explicitly sample positions and rotations of the dynamic Gaussians at sparse
timestamps. The sampled positions and rotations are then interpolated to represent
both spatially and temporally continuous motions of objects in dynamic scenes
as well as reducing computational cost. Additionally, we introduce a progressive
training scheme and a point-backtracking technique that improves Ex4DGS’s
convergence. We initially train Ex4DGS using short timestamps and progressively
extend timestamps, which makes it work well with a few point clouds. The pointbacktracking is used to quantify the cumulative error of each Gaussian over time,
enabling the detection and removal of erroneous Gaussians in dynamic scenes.
Comprehensive experiments on various scenes demonstrate the state-of-the-art
rendering quality from our method, achieving fast rendering of 62 fps on a single
2080Ti GPU.

1

Introduction

The recent flood of video content has encouraged view synthesis techniques for highly engaging,
visually rich content creation to maintain viewer interest. However, even short form videos require a
huge time for both data pre-processing, computing frame-wise 3D point clouds, and training time in
novel view synthesis for dynamic motions. Furthermore, these techniques must be considered for
running on mobile devices which have a limited computing power and storage space. In this aspect, it
is crucial to not only achieve photorealistic rendering results, but also reduce the computational cost
related to storage, memory and rendering pipeline. To achieve this, the spatio-temporal representation
should be explicit and efficient to handle the complexity of dynamic motions in videos.
Recent methods for dynamic view synthesis are typically based on Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [1],
which uses implicit multi-layer perceptron (MLP) with a combination of 5-DoF spatial coordinates
and the additional time axis [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. The MLP-based methods have shown high-fidelity
rendering quality. However, the inevitable cost of decoding the implicit representation makes rendering
critically slow. Various methods try to reduce the cost by adapting explicit representation, such as
voxel [9, 10] and matrix decomposition [11, 12]. Nevertheless, since NeRF-based approaches require
per-pixel ray sampling and dense sampling for each ray, it is hard to achieve real-time and highresolution renderings.
Meanwhile, a promising alternative, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [13], has emerged, which
achieves photo-realistic rendering results with significantly faster training and rendering speeds.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

