Association Pattern-aware Fusion for
Biological Entity Relationship Prediction

Lingxiang Jia1 Yuchen Ying1 Zunlei Feng1,2∗ Zipeng Zhong1 Shaolun Yao1
Jiacong Hu1 Mingjiang Duan1 Xingen Wang1,3 Jie Song1 Mingli Song1,2
2

1
State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
3
Bangsheng Technology Co, Ltd.

Abstract
Deep learning-based methods significantly advance the exploration of associations
among triple-wise biological entities (e.g., drug-target protein-adverse reaction),
thereby facilitating drug discovery and safeguarding human health. However, existing researches only focus on entity-centric information mapping and aggregation,
neglecting the crucial role of potential association patterns among different entities.
To address the above limitation, we propose a novel association pattern-aware
fusion method for biological entity relationship prediction, which effectively integrates the related association pattern information into entity representation learning.
Additionally, to enhance the missing information of the low-order message passing,
we devise a bind-relation module that considers the strong bind of low-order entity
associations. Extensive experiments conducted on three biological datasets quantitatively demonstrate that the proposed method achieves about 4%-23% hit@1
improvements compared with state-of-the-art baselines. Furthermore, the interpretability of association patterns is elucidated in detail, thus revealing the intrinsic
biological mechanisms and promoting it to be deployed in real-world scenarios. Our
data and code are available at https://github.com/hry98kki/PatternBERP.

1

Introduction

Exploring potential associations among triple-wise biological entities (e.g., drug-target proteinadverse reaction) [1–6] holds significant implications for elucidating underlying biological mechanisms and advancing personalized therapies [7–9], thus promoting pharmaceutical innovation and
ensuring human health. Recent deep learning-based methods have propelled auxiliary prediction tasks
concerning biological entity relationship, with most focusing on binary associations (e.g., drug-target
protein), while only a few methods offer insights for more complex triple-wise associations. Existing
solutions for the association prediction task can be broadly categorized into three types: (1) non-graph
methods [10–12]; (2) graph-based methods [13–16]; (3) hypergraph-based methods [17–22].
As illustrated in Figure 1, non-graph methods typically concatenate the features of different entities,
which are independently mapped by their respective entity encoders, to serve as representations.
Graph-based methods adopt nodes and edges of the graph to represent entities and their relationships,
and leverage the graph structure for feature propagation, thereby achieving effective representation
learning of entity nodes. Similar yet distinct, hypergraph-based methods employ the hypergraph
structure to obtain entity representations using the complex feature aggregation strategy. However,
none of the aforementioned methods consider the significance of path patterns in the graph structure,
which contain a vast amount of crucial information including hidden context and co-occurrence.
∗

Correspondence to zunleifeng@zju.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

