Sequential Probability Assignment with Contexts:
Minimax Regret, Contextual Shtarkov Sums, and
Contextual Normalized Maximum Likelihood
Ziyi Liu
University of Toronto & Vector Institute
kevind.liu@mail.utoronto.ca

Idan Attias
Ben-Gurion University & Vector Institute
idanatti@post.bgu.ac.il

Daniel M. Roy
University of Toronto & Vector Institute
daniel.roy@utoronto.ca

Abstract
We study the fundamental problem of sequential probability assignment, also
known as online learning with logarithmic loss, with respect to an arbitrary, possibly nonparametric hypothesis class. Our goal is to obtain a complexity measure
for the hypothesis class that characterizes the minimax regret and to determine
a general, minimax optimal algorithm. Notably, the sequential ℓ∞ entropy, extensively studied in the literature (Rakhlin and Sridharan, 2015, Bilodeau et al.,
2020, Wu et al., 2023), was shown to not characterize minimax regret in general.
Inspired by the seminal work of Shtarkov (1987) and Rakhlin, Sridharan, and
Tewari (2010), we introduce a novel complexity measure, the contextual Shtarkov
sum, corresponding to the Shtarkov sum after projection onto a multiary context
tree, and show that the worst case log contextual Shtarkov sum equals the minimax regret. Using the contextual Shtarkov sum, we derive the minimax optimal
strategy, dubbed contextual Normalized Maximum Likelihood (cNML). Our results hold for sequential experts, beyond binary labels, which are settings rarely
considered in prior work. To illustrate the utility of this characterization, we provide a short proof of a new regret upper bound in terms of sequential ℓ∞ entropy,
unifying and sharpening state-of-the-art bounds by Bilodeau et al. (2020) and Wu
et al. (2023).

1

Introduction

Sequential probability assignment is a fundamental problem with connections to information theory
[Ris84; MF98; XB00], machine learning [CL06; Vov95; RST15; FKLMS18; Sha20], and portfolio
optimization [Kel56; Cov74; Cov91; CO96; Fed91]. In the original non-contextual setup, the learner
aims to assign probabilities to a series of labels, which are revealed sequentially. The goal is to offer
probabilistic forecasts over the label set such that the probability assigned to any observed sequence
is comparable to that assigned by the best model in any fixed class of models.
The celebrated work of Shtarkov [Sht87] characterized minimax regret for context-free sequential
probability assignment in terms of what is now known as the Shtarkov sum, and subsequently described the minimax algorithm, Normalized Maximum Likelihood (NML). NML represents the ideal
probabilistic forecast in the sense of minimax regret, providing a benchmark for universal coding
and prediction strategies. While often not used directly due to its computational complexity, NML
has guided the design of practical algorithms and informed the development of efficient approxima38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

