Dual Lagrangian Learning for Conic Optimization

Mathieu Tanneau, Pascal Van Hentenryck
H. Milton Steward School of Industrial and Systems Engineering
NSF AI Institute for Advances in Optimization
Georgia Institute of Technology
{mathieu.tanneau,pascal.vanhentenryck}@isye.gatech.edu

Abstract
This paper presents Dual Lagrangian Learning (DLL), a principled learning methodology for dual conic optimization proxies. DLL leverages conic duality and the
representation power of ML models to provide high-duality, dual-feasible solutions,
and therefore valid Lagrangian dual bounds, for linear and nonlinear conic optimization problems. The paper introduces a systematic dual completion procedure,
differentiable conic projection layers, and a self-supervised learning framework
based on Lagrangian duality. It also provides closed-form dual completion formulae for broad classes of conic problems, which eliminate the need for costly
implicit layers. The effectiveness of DLL is demonstrated on linear and nonlinear
conic optimization problems. The proposed methodology significantly outperforms a state-of-the-art learning-based method, and achieves 1000x speedups over
commercial interior-point solvers with optimality gaps under 0.5% on average.

1

Introduction

From power systems and manufacturing to supply chain management, logistics and healthcare,
optimization technology underlies most aspects of the economy and society. Over recent years, the
substantial achievements of Machine Learning (ML) have spurred significant interest in combining
the two methodologies. This integration has led to the development of new optimization algorithms
(and the revival of old ones) taylored to ML problems, as well as new ML techniques for improving
the resolution of hard optimization problems [1]. This paper focuses on the latter (ML for optimization), specifically, the development of so-called optimization proxies, i.e., ML models that provide
approximate solutions to parametric optimization problems, see e.g., [2].
In that context, considerable progress has been made in learning primal solutions for a broad range of
problems, from linear to discrete and nonlinear, non-convex optimization problems. State-of-the-art
methods can now predict high-quality, feasible or close-to-feasible solutions for various applications
[2]. This paper complements these methods by learning dual solutions which, in turn, certify the
(sub)optimality of learned primal solutions. Despite the fundamental role of duality in optimization,
there is no dedicated framework for dual optimization proxies, which have seldom received any
attention in the literature. The paper addresses this gap by proposing, for the first time, a principled
learning methodology that combines conic duality theory with Machine Learning. As a result, it
becomes possible, for a large class of optimization problems, to design a primal proxy to deliver a
high-quality primal solution and an associated dual proxy to obtain a quality certificate.
1.1

Contributions and outline

The core contribution of the paper is the Dual Lagrangian Learning (DLL) methodology for learning
dual-feasible solutions for parametric conic optimization problems. DLL leverages conic duality to
design a self-supervised Lagrangian loss for training dual conic optimization proxies. In addition, the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

