Mission Impossible: A Statistical Perspective on
Jailbreaking LLMs

Jingtong Su∗
NYU & Meta AI, FAIR

Julia Kempe†
NYU & Meta AI, FAIR

Karen Ullrich†
Meta AI, FAIR

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) are trained on a deluge of text data with limited
quality control. As a result, LLMs can exhibit unintended or even harmful behaviours, such as leaking information, fake news or hate speech. Countermeasures,
commonly referred to as preference alignment, include fine-tuning the pretrained
LLMs with carefully crafted text examples of desired behaviour. Even then, empirical evidence shows preference aligned LLMs can be enticed to harmful behaviour.
This so called jailbreaking of LLMs is typically achieved by adversarially modifying the input prompt to the LLM. Our paper provides theoretical insights into the
phenomenon of preference alignment and jailbreaking from a statistical perspective.
Under our framework, we first show that pretrained LLMs will mimic harmful
behaviour if present in the training corpus. Under that same framework, we then
introduce a statistical notion of alignment, and lower-bound the jailbreaking
probability, showing that it is unpreventable under reasonable assumptions.
Based on our insights, we propose an alteration to the currently prevalent alignment
strategy RLHF. Specifically, we introduce a simple modification to the RLHF
objective, we call E-RLHF, that aims to increase the likelihood of safe responses.
E-RLHF brings no additional training cost, and is compatible with other methods.
Empirically, we demonstrate that E-RLHF outperforms RLHF on all alignment
problems put forward by the AdvBench [1] and HarmBench project [2] without
sacrificing model performance as measured by the MT-Bench project [3].

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized the field of deep learning due to their remarkable
capabilities across various domains, serving as assistants, in code generation [4], healthcare [5],
and theorem proving [6]. The training process of a LLM typically includes two stages: pretraining
with massive corpora, and an alignment step using Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) to further align model behavior with human preferences. The latter step typically involves
large amounts of humanly annotated data, and can be decomposed into a supervised fine-tuning
(SFT) step, a reward modeling step, and an RL Fine-Tuning step. Despite their ability to perform
multiple tasks effectively, LLMs are susceptible to generating offensive or inappropriate content
including hate-speech, malware, fake information or social biases, due to the unavoidable presence
of harmful elements within their pretraining datasets [7–9]. Social media showcase an abundance
of tricks on how to attack ChatGPT [10] to elicit harmful responses, e.g., the “Do Anything Now”
(DAN) prompts [11] or the “Grandma Exploit” hack [12]. On the other hand, behavior diversity in
the training corpus is essential to for example capturing different cultural preferences. What is and
isn’t harmful ultimately depends on user preferences, hence the alignment step is not universal but
depends on the specific use case under which a model will be employed.
∗
†

Correspondence to: Jingtong Su <js12196@nyu.edu>.
Equal senior authorship.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

