Dissecting Query-Key Interaction in Vision
Transformers

1

Xu Pan1,2 Aaron Philip 3 Ziqian Xie 4 Odelia Schwartz 1
University of Miami 2 Harvard University 3 Michigan State University
4
University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
xupan@fas.harvard.edu philipaa@msu.edu
ziqian.xie@uth.tmc.edu odelia@cs.miami.edu

Abstract
Self-attention in vision transformers is often thought to perform perceptual grouping where tokens attend to other tokens with similar embeddings, which could
correspond to semantically similar features of an object. However, attending to
dissimilar tokens can be beneficial by providing contextual information. We propose to analyze the query-key interaction by the singular value decomposition of
the interaction matrix (i.e. Wq ⊤ Wk ). We find that in many ViTs, especially those
with classification training objectives, early layers attend more to similar tokens,
while late layers show increased attention to dissimilar tokens, providing evidence
corresponding to perceptual grouping and contextualization, respectively. Many of
these interactions between features represented by singular vectors are interpretable
and semantic, such as attention between relevant objects, between parts of an object, or between the foreground and background. This offers a novel perspective
on interpreting the attention mechanism, which contributes to understanding how
transformer models utilize context and salient features when processing images.

Figure 1: We propose a new way to study query-key interactions via the singular value decomposition
of the query-key interaction matrix. Many of the modes (i.e. pairs of singular vectors corresponding
to the query and the key respectively), are semantically interpretable. Two example modes are shown.
Top row: ViT layer 8 head 7 mode 2. Bottom row: DINO layer 8 head 9 mode 2. The red channel
indicates the projection value of embedding onto the left singular vector which corresponds to the
query; the cyan channel indicates the projection value of embedding onto the right singular vector
which corresponds to the key.

1

Introduction

Vision transformers (ViTs) are a family of models that have significantly advanced the computer
vision field in recent years [14]. The core computation of ViTs, self-attention, is designed to promote
interactions between tokens corresponding to relevant image features [14]. But this mechanism
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

