The Implicit Bias of Gradient Descent toward
Collaboration between Layers: A Dynamic Analysis of
Multilayer Perceptions

Zheng Wang
Geyong Min
Department of Computer Science
University of Exeter
{zw360;G.Min}@exeter.ac.uk

Wenjie Ruan∗
School of Computer Science
USTC
rwjie@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
The implicit bias of gradient descent has long been considered the primary mechanism explaining the superior generalization of over-parameterized neural networks
without overfitting, even when the training error is zero. However, the implicit bias
toward adversarial robustness has rarely been considered in the research community, although it is crucial for the trustworthiness of machine learning models. To
fill this gap, in this paper, we explore whether layers in neural networks collaborate to strengthen adversarial robustness during gradient descent. By quantifying
this collaboration between layers using our proposed concept, co-correlation, we
demonstrate a monotonically increasing trend in co-correlation, which implies a
decreasing trend in adversarial robustness during gradient descent. Additionally,
we observe different behaviours between narrow and wide neural networks during
gradient descent. We conducted extensive experiments that verified our proposed
theorems.

1

Introduction

As Artificial Intelligence (AI) has been widely applied in many industrial sectors, understanding the
theoretical properties behind modern machine learning models is important, especially for neural
networks due to their black-box nature. One such property is implicit bias, stemming from the
phenomenon where over-parameterized neural networks, trained in a gradient descent manner, often
exhibit great generalization without over-fitting. This implicit bias of gradient descent is often
explained as steering neural networks towards solutions characterized by max-margin [3, 23, 12].
Another intriguing phenomenon is the existence of adversarial examples — imperceptible perturbations of inputs that alter classification results. Apart from existing work on attacks — algorithms for
generating adversarial examples [5, 39, 37], defences against attacks, e.g., adversarial training [25, 36]
and distillation [28], and verification [40, 34] to identify safe regions guaranteeing the absence of adversarial examples, recently some works are aiming at a theoretical understanding behind adversarial
robustness. However, a principled way to comprehend the core contributors to the vulnerability of
neural networks, especially a theoretical understanding of their relation to generalization capabilities,
remains fragmented. This fragmentation is largely due to the intricate nature of neural networks,
where robustness is interconnected with many factors spanning across input data distribution [33, 14],
sampling complexity [1, 27], optimization techniques [25], weight initialization strategies [41], and
model capacity and architectures [32, 2, 18, 35]. Not to mention that only very few works can address
both generalization and adversarial robustness in a uniform framework. One such research by Frei
et al. [13] investigates the implicit bias concerning both generalization and adversarial robustness,
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

