MEQA: A Benchmark for Multi-hop Event-centric
Question Answering with Explanations

Ruosen Li, Zimu Wang, Son Quoc Tran, Lei Xia, Xinya Du
Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Dallas
{ruosen.li, zimu.wang, lei.xia, xinya.du}@utdallas.edu

Abstract
Existing benchmarks for multi-hop question answering (QA) primarily evaluate
models based on their ability to reason about entities and the relationships between
them. However, there’s a lack of insight into how these models perform in terms
of both events and entities. In this paper, we introduce a novel semi-automatic
question generation strategy by composing event structures from information
extraction (IE) datasets and present the first Multi-hop Event-centric Question
Answering (MEQA) benchmark1 . It contains (1) 2,243 challenging questions that
require a diverse range of complex reasoning over entity-entity, entity-event, and
event-event relations; (2) corresponding multi-step QA-format event reasoning
chain (explanation) which leads to the answer for each question. We also introduce
two metrics for evaluating explanations: completeness and logical consistency.
We conduct comprehensive benchmarking and analysis, which shows that MEQA
is challenging for the latest state-of-the-art models encompassing large language
models (LLMs); and how they fall short of providing faithful explanations of the
event-centric reasoning process.

1

Introduction

Multi-hop Question Answering (QA) is an important task that challenges NLP models’ ability,
including large language models (LLMs), to perform multi-step reasoning to answer the given
question based on pieces of information (and their relationships) from the context [Yang et al., 2018;
Mavi et al., 2022]. The ability to conduct multiple reasoning steps is important because it empowers
models to understand and perform complicated real-world tasks that require information aggregation
in/across documents. Examples include sentence fusion [Brook Weiss et al., 2022], multi-document
summarization [Haghighi and Vanderwende, 2009], timeline summarization [Yan et al., 2011], and
event logical/temporal reasoning [Yang et al., 2020, 2023, 2024a,b].
However, current research predominantly focuses on entity-centric questions, leaving event structure
and event-event relations underrepresented in semantic sources and corresponding QA datasets
[Souza Costa et al., 2020]. For instance, Figure 1 illustrates an event-centric question encompassing
both entities and events, a domain often overlooked by popular QA benchmarks [Ho et al., 2020;
Trivedi et al., 2022]. Event-centric questions are inherently more complex than entity-centric ones, as
discussed in the subsequent section. They demand a compositional understanding of both entity and
event knowledge, presenting significant challenges for NLP models, including LLMs, and serving as
a robust benchmark for evaluating reasoning capabilities [Souza Costa et al., 2020].
Motivated by this gap in the QA and machine reading comprehension literature, we present the first
Multi-hop Event-centric Question Answering (MEQA) dataset. It includes 2,243 questions, requiring
1

Our benchmark is publicly available at https://github.com/du-nlp-lab/MEQA.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

