Verifiably Robust Conformal Prediction

Linus Jeary∗
Department of Informatics
King’s College London, UK
linus.jeary@kcl.ac.uk

Tom Kuipers∗
Department of Informatics
King’s College London, UK
tom.kuipers@kcl.ac.uk

Mehran Hosseini
Department of Informatics
King’s College London, UK
mehran.hosseini@kcl.ac.uk

Nicola Paoletti
Department of Informatics
King’s College London, UK
nicola.paoletti@kcl.ac.uk

Abstract
Conformal Prediction (CP) is a popular uncertainty quantification method that
provides distribution-free, statistically valid prediction sets, assuming that training
and test data are exchangeable. In such a case, CP’s prediction sets are guaranteed to
cover the (unknown) true test output with a user-specified probability. Nevertheless,
this guarantee is violated when the data is subjected to adversarial attacks, which
often result in a significant loss of coverage. Recently, several approaches have been
put forward to recover CP guarantees in this setting. These approaches leverage
variations of randomised smoothing to produce conservative sets which account
for the effect of the adversarial perturbations. They are, however, limited in that
they only support ℓ2 -bounded perturbations and classification tasks. This paper
introduces VRCP (Verifiably Robust Conformal Prediction), a new framework
that leverages recent neural network verification methods to recover coverage
guarantees under adversarial attacks. Our VRCP method is the first to support
perturbations bounded by arbitrary norms including ℓ1 , ℓ2 , and ℓ∞ , as well as
regression tasks. We evaluate and compare our approach on image classification
tasks (CIFAR10, CIFAR100, and TinyImageNet) and regression tasks for deep
reinforcement learning environments. In every case, VRCP achieves above nominal
coverage and yields significantly more efficient and informative prediction regions
than the SotA.

1

Introduction

Conformal Prediction (CP) (Vovk et al., 2005; Angelopoulos and Bates, 2021) is a popular uncertainty
quantification method. In essence, it is a model-agnostic, distribution-free framework that allows one
to construct prediction sets that are guaranteed to include the true (unknown) output with probability
greater than 1 − α, where α ∈ (0, 1) is a user-specified miscoverage/error rate. In other words, for
a test point (xn+1 , yn+1 ), CP seeks to construct a prediction set C(xn+1 ) such that the following
coverage (a.k.a. validity) guarantee holds:
Pxn+1 ,yn+1 [yn+1 ∈ C(xn+1 )] ≥ 1 − α.

(1)

Importantly, the above guarantee holds when the calibration data, used to construct C(xn+1 ), and
the test point are exchangeable (a special case is when calibration and test data are i.i.d.).
∗

Authors contributed equally.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

