Beyond Redundancy: Information-aware
Unsupervised Multiplex Graph Structure Learning
Zhixiang Shen∗, Shuo Wang∗, Zhao Kang†
School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, Sichuan, China
zhixiang.zxs@gmail.com zkang@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised Multiplex Graph Learning (UMGL) aims to learn node representations on various edge types without manual labeling. However, existing research
overlooks a key factor: the reliability of the graph structure. Real-world data often exhibit a complex nature and contain abundant task-irrelevant noise, severely
compromising UMGL’s performance. Moreover, existing methods primarily rely
on contrastive learning to maximize mutual information across different graphs,
limiting them to multiplex graph redundant scenarios and failing to capture viewunique task-relevant information. In this paper, we focus on a more realistic and
challenging task: to unsupervisedly learn a fused graph from multiple graphs
that preserve sufﬁcient task-relevant information while removing task-irrelevant
noise. Speciﬁcally, our proposed Information-aware Unsupervised Multiplex
Graph Fusion framework (InfoMGF) uses graph structure reﬁnement to eliminate irrelevant noise and simultaneously maximizes view-shared and view-unique
task-relevant information, thereby tackling the frontier of non-redundant multiplex
graph. Theoretical analyses further guarantee the effectiveness of InfoMGF. Comprehensive experiments against various baselines on different downstream tasks
demonstrate its superior performance and robustness. Surprisingly, our unsupervised method even beats the sophisticated supervised approaches. The source code
and datasets are available at https://github.com/zxlearningdeep/InfoMGF.

1

Introduction

Multiplex graph (multiple graph layers span across a common set of nodes), as a special type
of heterogeneous graph, provides richer information and better modeling capabilities, leading to
challenges in learning graph representation [1]. Recently, unsupervised multiplex graph learning
(UMGL) has attracted signiﬁcant attention due to its exploitation of more detailed information from
diverse sources [2, 3], using graph neural networks (GNNs) [4] and self-supervised techniques [5].
UMGL has become a powerful tool in numerous real-world applications [6, 7], e.g., social network
mining and biological network analysis, where multiple relationship types exist or various interaction types occur.
Despite the signiﬁcant progress made by UMGL, a substantial gap in understanding how to take
advantage of the richness of the multiplex view is still left. In particular, a fundamental issue is
largely overlooked: the reliability of graph structure. Typically, the messaging-passing mechanism
in GNNs assumes the reliability of the graph structure, implying that the connected nodes tend to
have similar labels. All UMGL methods are graph-ﬁxed, assuming that the original structure is
sufﬁciently reliable for learning [3, 8–10]. Unfortunately, there has been evidence that practical
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

