Gradient-Free Methods for Nonconvex Nonsmooth
Stochastic Compositional Optimization

Zhuanghua Liu
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
CNRS@CREATE LTD, 1 Create Way, #08-01 CREATE Tower, Singapore 138602
liuzhuanghua9@gmail.com
Luo Luo∗
School of Data Science, Fudan University
Shanghai Key Laboratory for Contemporary Applied Mathematics
luoluo@fudan.edu.cn
Bryan Kian Hsiang Low
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Stochastic compositional optimization (SCO) problems are popular in many realworld applications, including risk management, reinforcement learning, and metalearning. However, most of the previous methods for SCO require the smoothness
assumption on both the outer and inner functions, which limits their applications
to a wider range of problems. In this paper, we study the SCO problem in that
both the outer and inner functions are Lipschitz continuous but possibly nonconvex
and nonsmooth. In particular, we propose gradient-free stochastic methods for
finding the (δ, ϵ)-Goldstein stationary points of such problems with non-asymptotic
convergence rates. Our results also lead to an improved convergence rate for the
convex nonsmooth SCO problem. Furthermore, we conduct numerical experiments
to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed methods.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the following stochastic compositional optimization (SCO) problem:
min Φ(x) ≜ f (g(x)),

x∈Rd

(1)

where the outer and inner functions f : Rm → R and g : Rd → Rm has the form of
f (y) ≜ Eξ [F (y; ξ)]

and

g(x) := Eζ [G(x; ζ)],

and the stochastic components F (y; ξ) and G(x; ζ) are Lipschitz continuous but possibly nonconvex
and nonsmooth. Random variables ξ and ζ are independent. Such formulation is popular in many realworld applications, including risk management [1], statistical learning [2], reinforcement learning [3],
and model agnostic meta-learning [4].
Most of the existing work [2, 5, 6, 7, 8] for nonconvex SCO problem is based on the assumption that both functions f (·) and g(·) are smooth. Unfortunately, many modern machine learning
∗

The corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

