DF40: Toward Next-Generation Deepfake Detection
†

Zhiyuan Yan1 , Taiping Yao2 , Shen Chen2 , Yandan Zhao2 , Xinghe Fu2 , Junwei Zhu2 ,
†
Donghao Luo2 , Chengjie Wang2 , Shouhong Ding2 , Yunsheng Wu2 , Li Yuan1
1

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
2
Tencent Youtu Lab
{zhiyuanyan@stu.,yuanli-ece@}pku.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose a new comprehensive benchmark to revolutionize the current deepfake
detection field to the next generation. Predominantly, existing works identify
top-notch detection algorithms and models by adhering to the common practice:
training detectors on one specific dataset (e.g., FF++ [62]) and testing them on
other prevalent deepfake datasets. This protocol is often regarded as a "golden
compass" for navigating SoTA detectors. But can these stand-out "winners" be
truly applied to tackle the myriad of realistic and diverse deepfakes lurking in the
real world? If not, what underlying factors contribute to this gap? In this work,
we found the dataset (both train and test) can be the "primary culprit" due to the
following: (1) forgery diversity: Deepfake techniques are commonly referred to as
both face forgery (face-swapping and face-reenactment) and entire face synthesis
(especially face). Most existing datasets only contain partial types of them, with
limited forgery methods implemented (e.g., 2 swapping and 2 reenactment methods
in FF++); (2) forgery realism: The dominated training dataset, FF++, contains
out-of-date forgery techniques from the past four years. "Honing skills" on these
forgeries makes it difficult to guarantee effective detection generalization toward
nowadays’ SoTA deepfakes; (3) evaluation protocol: Most detection works perform
evaluations on one type, e.g., training and testing on face-swapping types only,
which hinders the development of universal deepfake detectors.
To address this dilemma, we construct a highly diverse and large-scale deepfake
detection dataset called DF40, which comprises 40 distinct deepfake techniques
(10 times larger than FF++). We then conduct comprehensive evaluations using
4 standard evaluation protocols and 8 representative detection methods, resulting
in over 2,000 evaluations. Through these evaluations, we provide an extensive
analysis from various perspectives, leading to 7 new insightful findings contributing
to the field. We also open up 4 valuable yet previously underexplored research
questions to inspire future works. We release our dataset, code, and checkpoints at
https://github.com/YZY-stack/DF40.

1

Introduction

We are currently in 2024, an explosive era of Artificial Intelligence Generated Content (AIGC), a
world where you can effortlessly make anyone say anything at any time, a realm where reality and
fiction blend seamlessly, creating a mesmerizing tapestry of digital artistry and potential deception.
†

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

