realSEUDO for real-time calcium imaging analysis

Iuliia Dmitrieva
Applied Math and Statistics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218, USA

Sergey Babkin
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA, USA

Adam S. Charles
Biomedical Data Science
Center for Imaging Science
Mathematical Institute for Data Science
Kavli Neuroscience Discovery Institute
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
adamsc@jhu.edu

Abstract
Closed-loop neuroscience experimentation, where recorded neural activity is used
to modify the experiment on-the-fly, is critical for deducing causal connections and
optimizing experimental time. A critical step in creating a closed-loop experiment
is real-time inference of neural activity from streaming recordings. One challenging
modality for real-time processing is multi-photon calcium imaging (CI). CI enables
the recording of activity in large populations of neurons however, often requires
batch processing of the video data to extract single-neuron activity from the fluorescence videos. We use the recently proposed robust time-trace estimator—Sparse
Emulation of Unused Dictionary Objects (SEUDO) algorithm—as a basis for a
new on-line processing algorithm that simultaneously identifies neurons in the
fluorescence video and infers their time traces in a way that is robust to as-yet
unidentified neurons. To achieve real-time SEUDO (realSEUDO), we optimize the
core estimator via both algorithmic improvements and an fast C-based implementation, and create a new cell finding loop to enable realSEUDO to also identify new
cells. We demonstrate comparable performance to offline algorithms (e.g., CNMF),
and improved performance over the current on-line approach (OnACID) at speeds
of 120 Hz on average.

1

Introduction

Closed loop experiments enable neuroscientists to adapt presented stimuli or introduce perturbations
(e.g., optogenetic stimulation) in real-time based on incoming observations of the neural activity.
Such experiments are critical for both optimizing experimental time, e.g., by optimally selecting
stimuli to fit neural response models [10], or by deducing causality by perturbing possible causeand-effect hypotheses. Despite this critical need, closed loop experiments at the level of populations
of single neurons is incredibly difficult as they require real-time processing of neural data, which
can be computationally intensive to process. In particular, population-level recordings using modern
technologies often require significant computation to extract individual neuronal activity traces,
e.g., spike sorting for high-density electrode electrophysiology or cell detection in fluorescence
microscopy [6, 9].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

