Towards Accurate and Fair Cognitive Diagnosis via
Monotonic Data Augmentation

Zheng Zhang1,2 Wei Song1,2 Qi Liu1,2 Qingyang Mao1,2 Yiyan Wang3
Weibo Gao1,2 Zhenya Huang1,2 Shijin Wang2∗ Enhong Chen1,2
1: University of Science and Technology of China
2: State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence
3: Beijing Normal University
{zhangzheng,sw2,maoqy0503,weibogao}@mail.ustc.edu.cn;
{qiliuql,huangzhy,cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn;
wangyiyan@mail.bnu.edu.cn;
sjwang3@ifytek.com

Abstract
Intelligent education stands as a prominent application of machine learning. Within
this domain, cognitive diagnosis (CD) is a key research focus that aims to diagnose
students’ proficiency levels in specific knowledge concepts. As a crucial task
within the field of education, cognitive diagnosis encompasses two fundamental
requirements: accuracy and fairness. Existing studies have achieved significant
success by primarily utilizing observed historical logs of student-exercise interactions. However, real-world scenarios often present a challenge, where a substantial
number of students engage with a limited number of exercises. This data sparsity
issue can lead to both inaccurate and unfair diagnoses. To this end, we introduce
a monotonic data augmentation framework, CMCD, to tackle the data sparsity
issue and thereby achieve accurate and fair CD results. Specifically, CMCD integrates the monotonicity assumption, a fundamental educational principle in CD,
to establish two constraints for data augmentation. These constraints are general
and can be applied to the majority of CD backbones. Furthermore, we provide
theoretical analysis to guarantee the accuracy and convergence speed of CMCD.
Finally, extensive experiments on real-world datasets showcase the efficacy of our
framework in addressing the data sparsity issue with accurate and fair CD results.

1

Introduction

Intelligent education is a significant domain within machine learning that focuses on exploring
students’ learning patterns. In the past decades, research in this interdisciplinary field has garnered
substantial attention from scholars across various disciplines [29, 26, 10, 45], including education,
machine learning, and psychology. Within intelligent education, cognitive diagnosis (CD) stands out
as a crucial research area that aims to measure students’ proficiency levels in specific knowledge
domains, such as Geometry [39, 15, 7, 21]. For instance, as illustrated in Figure 1, students practice
some exercises e1 , e2 , e3 and obtain associated responses indicating correctness, which are then
utilized to perform CD to infer the students’ mastery levels of the corresponding concepts. With
a comprehensive understanding of students’ abilities, CD can be applied to various applications,
including student assessment [4, 56] and educational recommendation systems [19].
As a crucial task within the field of education, CD encompasses two fundamental requirements: 1)
Accurate Diagnoses: It is imperative to precisely evaluate students’ mastery of knowledge to facilitate
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

