Benchmarking Estimators for Natural Experiments:
A Novel Dataset and a Doubly Robust Algorithm

R. Teal Witter
New York University
rtealwitter@nyu.edu

Christopher Musco
New York University
cmusco@nyu.edu

Abstract
Estimating the effect of treatments from natural experiments, where treatments
are pre-assigned, is an important and well-studied problem. We introduce a novel
natural experiment dataset obtained from an early childhood literacy nonprofit.
Surprisingly, applying over 20 established estimators to the dataset produces inconsistent results in evaluating the nonprofit’s efficacy. To address this, we create a
benchmark to evaluate estimator accuracy using synthetic outcomes, whose design
was guided by domain experts. The benchmark extensively explores performance
as real world conditions like sample size, treatment correlation, and propensity
score accuracy vary. Based on our benchmark, we observe that the class of doubly robust treatment effect estimators, which are based on simple and intuitive
regression adjustment, generally outperform other more complicated estimators
by orders of magnitude. To better support our theoretical understanding of doubly
robust estimators, we derive a closed form expression for the variance of any such
estimator that uses dataset splitting to obtain an unbiased estimate. This expression
motivates the design of a new doubly robust estimator that uses a novel loss function when fitting functions for regression adjustment. We release the dataset and
benchmark in a Python package; the package is built in a modular way to facilitate
new datasets and estimators.1

1

Introduction

In this work we consider the problem of treatment effect estimation, which is ubiquitous in the
sciences, social sciences, economics, and a number of other fields [MLDF15, JT16, AI16]. We focus
on the challenging setting where we do not have access to data from a randomized control trial.
Instead, treatment effect must be estimated from a natural experiment: a dataset of individuals and
effects, where we have knowledge of which individuals received treatment, but no control over how
those treatments were assigned.
The natural experiment setting presents a number of challenges. Notably, treatments in a natural
experiment can be assigned in a way that is correlated with the outcomes [CBGGB20, CCB+ 22].
So a direct comparison of the outcomes for the treatment and control groups would give a flawed
estimate of the treatment effect. Perhaps even more difficult, the treatments can be correlated with the
treatment effect itself [Lea19, dVKM+ 21]. Before giving a formal problem statement, we describe a
real-world case study where these difficulties arise.
1

https://github.com/rtealwitter/naturalexperiments

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

