DART-Eval: A Comprehensive DNA Language Model
Evaluation Benchmark on Regulatory DNA

Aman Patel1∗ Arpita Singhal1∗ Austin Wang1∗
Anusri Pampari1 Maya Kasowski2,3 Anshul Kundaje1,2
∗
Equal contribution (authors ordered alphabetically)
1
Department of Computer Science, School of Engineering, Stanford University
2
Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, Stanford University
3
Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Stanford University
{patelas,arpitas,atwang,anusri,kasowski,akundaje}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in self-supervised models for natural language, vision, and protein
sequences have catalyzed the development of genomic DNA language models
(DNALMs). These models aim to learn generalizable representations of diverse
DNA elements, potentially enabling various downstream genomic prediction, interpretation and design tasks. However, existing benchmarks do not adequately assess
the capabilities of DNALMs on an important class of non-coding DNA elements
critical for regulating gene activity. Here, we introduce DART-Eval, a suite of
representative benchmarks focused on regulatory DNA to evaluate performance of
DNALMs across zero-shot, probed, and fine-tuned settings against contemporary
ab initio models as baselines. DART-Eval addresses biologically relevant tasks
including sequence motif discovery, cell-type specific regulatory activity prediction, and counterfactual prediction of regulatory genetic variants. Our systematic
evaluations reveal that current annotation-agnostic DNALMs exhibit inconsistent
performance and do not offer compelling gains over alternative baseline models
for most tasks, despite requiring significantly more computational resources. We
discuss potentially promising modeling, data curation, and evaluation strategies
for the next generation of DNALMs. Our benchmark datasets and evaluation
framework are available at https://github.com/kundajelab/DART-Eval

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized natural language processing [31] by learning
complex patterns, contextual relationships, and hierarchical structure within text in a self-supervised
manner. In the biological domain, self-supervised language models trained on protein sequences have
enabled high-performance tools for protein structure prediction and design [42, 29, 27]. Building on
these advances, analogous DNA Language Models (DNALMs) have been recently developed to learn
rich representations of genomic DNA sequences from one or more species, aiming to enhance DNA
sequence design, functional syntax discovery, and evolutionary analyses [23].
The human genome is 3 billion base pairs of DNA and encodes two main classes of functional
elements (See Appendix B for biological background). Protein coding sequences of approximately
20,000 genes span around 1.5% of the genome. These sequences encode a dense, information-rich
syntax and serve as templates for transcription to RNA and translation to proteins. In contrast, millions
of non-coding regulatory control elements, estimated to collectively span 5 to 20% of the genome,
orchestrate complex programs of gene transcription and translation that define cell state, fate, and
response [11]. The DNA sequence of transcriptional regulatory elements typically encode cell-type
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

