Reparameterization invariance in approximate
Bayesian inference

Hrittik Roy† , Marco Miani†
Technical University of Denmark
{hroy, mmia}@dtu.dk

Philipp Hennig, Marvin Pförtner, Lukas Tatzel
University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center
{philipp.hennig, lukas.tatzel,
marvin.pfoertner}@uni-tuebingen.de

Carl Henrik Ek
University of Cambridge,
Karolinska Institutet
che29@cam.ac.uk
Søren Hauberg
Technical University of Denmark
sohau@dtu.dk

Abstract
Current approximate posteriors in Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) exhibit a
crucial limitation: they fail to maintain invariance under reparameterization, i.e.
BNN s assign different posterior densities to different parametrizations of identical
functions. This creates a fundamental flaw in the application of Bayesian principles
as it breaks the correspondence between uncertainty over the parameters with
uncertainty over the parametrized function. In this paper, we investigate this
issue in the context of the increasingly popular linearized Laplace approximation.
Specifically, it has been observed that linearized predictives alleviate the common
underfitting problems of the Laplace approximation. We develop a new geometric
view of reparametrizations from which we explain the success of linearization.
Moreover, we demonstrate that these reparameterization invariance properties can
be extended to the original neural network predictive using a Riemannian diffusion
process giving a straightforward algorithm for approximate posterior sampling,
which empirically improves posterior fit.

1

Introduction

Bayesian deep learning has not seen the same degree of success as deep learning in general. Theoretically, Bayesian posteriors should be superior to point estimates (Devroye et al., 1996), but the
practical benefits of having the posterior are all too often not significant enough to justify their
additional computational burden. This has raised the question if we even should attempt to estimate
full posteriors of all network parameters (Sharma et al., 2023).
As an example, consider the Laplace approximation (MacKay, 1992), which places a Gaussian in
weight space through a second-order Taylor expansion of the log-posterior. When applied to neural
networks, this is known to significantly underfit and assign significant probability mass to functions
that fail to fit the training data (Lawrence, 2001; Immer et al., 2021a). Fig. 2 (top-left) exemplifies this
failure mode for a small regression problem. Interestingly, this behavior is rarely observed outside
neural network models, and the failure appears linked to Bayesian deep learning.
Recently, the linearized Laplace approximation (LLA) has been shown to significantly improve on
Laplace’s approximation through an additional linearization of the neural network (Immer et al.,
2021b; Khan et al., 2019). We are unaware of any theoretical justification for this rather counterintuimprove the posterior fit?
itive result: why would an additional degree of approximation improve
†

Equal contribution authors listed in random order.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

