TransAgent: Transfer Vision-Language Foundation
Models with Heterogeneous Agent Collaboration

Yiwei Guo1,2 Shaobin Zhuang∗3,4 Kunchang Li∗1,2,3 Yu Qiao3 Yali Wang†1,3
1
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Vision-language foundation models (such as CLIP) have recently shown their power
in transfer learning, owing to large-scale image-text pre-training. However, target
domain data in the downstream tasks can be highly different from the pre-training
phase, which makes it hard for such a single model to generalize well. Alternatively,
there exists a wide range of expert models that contain diversified vision and/or
language knowledge pre-trained on different modalities, tasks, networks, and
datasets. Unfortunately, these models are "isolated agents" with heterogeneous
structures, and how to integrate their knowledge for generalizing CLIP-like models
has not been fully explored. To bridge this gap, we propose a general and concise
TransAgent framework, which transports the knowledge of the isolated agents
in a unified manner, and effectively guides CLIP to generalize with multi-source
knowledge distillation. With such a distinct framework, we flexibly collaborate
with 11 heterogeneous agents to empower vision-language foundation models,
without further cost in the inference phase. Finally, our TransAgent achieves stateof-the-art performance on 11 visual recognition datasets. Under the same low-shot
setting, it outperforms the popular CoOp with around 10% on average, and 20%
on EuroSAT which contains large domain shifts. The code will be released at
https://github.com/markywg/transagent.

1

Introduction

Recently, Vision-Language (V-L) foundation models are mainly pre-trained by contrastive learning
with massive image-text pairs from web [61, 38, 15]. As a result, they show the potential on a
number of downstream visual recognition tasks, by transferring their representations with prompt
learning [87, 86] and/or model adaptation [31, 80]. However, target domain data in the open
world are diversified, e.g., EuroSAT [35] refers to satellite images that are highly different from
web images in the pre-training. With this large domain shift, it is challenging to achieve good
generalization only by adopting such a single model (e.g., CLIP), especially under low-shot regime.
Alternatively, with the fast development in vision and NLP, there arises a wide range of expert models
[33, 9, 43, 49, 7, 18, 64, 11, 46, 12] which contain rich knowledge by pre-training on different
modalities, tasks, networks, and datasets. Hence, the natural question is, is it possible to integrate
such knowledge to boost vision-language foundation models?
To answer this question, we should further analyze the form of knowledge in these models. The
simplest form is the model output, which explicitly exhibits what kind of tasks these models can
tackle. However, these models have heterogeneous network structures and outputs, making direct
knowledge combinations infeasible. Hence, existing works often choose cascades of these models
∗

Interns at Shanghai AI Laboratory.

†Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

