Preference Learning Algorithms Do Not Learn
Preference Rankings

Angelica Chen
New York University
ac5968@nyu.edu

Sadhika Malladi
Princeton University
smalladi@princeton.edu

Xinyi Chen
Google DeepMind; Princeton University
xinyic@google.com
Rajesh Ranganath
New York University
rajeshr@cims.nyu.edu

Lily H. Zhang
New York University
lily.h.zhang@nyu.edu
Qiuyi Zhang
Google DeepMind
qiuyiz@google.com

Kyunghyun Cho
New York University; Genentech; CIFAR LMB
kyunghyun.cho@nyu.edu

Abstract
Preference learning algorithms (e.g., RLHF and DPO) are frequently used to
steer LLMs to produce generations that are more preferred by humans, but our
understanding of their inner workings is still limited. In this work, we study
the conventional wisdom that preference learning trains models to assign higher
likelihoods to more preferred outputs than less preferred outputs, measured via
ranking accuracy. Surprisingly, we find that most state-of-the-art preference-tuned
models achieve a ranking accuracy of less than 60% on common preference datasets.
We also derive the idealized ranking accuracy that a preference-tuned LLM would
achieve if it optimized the DPO or RLHF objective perfectly. We demonstrate
that existing models exhibit a significant alignment gap – i.e., a gap between the
observed and idealized ranking accuracies. We attribute this discrepancy to the
DPO objective, which is empirically and theoretically ill-suited to fix even mild
ranking errors in the reference model, and derive a simple and efficient formula
for quantifying the difficulty of learning a given preference datapoint. Finally,
we show that ranking accuracy strongly correlates with the empirically popular
win rate metric when the model is close to the reference model, shedding further
light on the differences between on-policy (e.g., RLHF) and off-policy (e.g., DPO)
preference learning algorithms.

1

Introduction

Recent work on aligning LLMs has focused predominantly on tuning models to adhere to human
preferences – commonly through reinforcement learning (RLHF; Stiennon et al. [47]) or directly
via offline supervision (DPO; Rafailov et al. [41]). Preference learning algorithms [20, 55, 58] were
originally designed to use a dataset of pairwise preferences over candidates to train a model with high
ranking accuracy – that is, the model can precisely rank preferred outputs over dispreferred ones. In
the case of language models, the ranking is determined by the likelihood assigned to each candidate.
Many LLM alignment techniques are designed to yield models with a high preference ranking
accuracy, including SLiC [68, 67], RAFT [8], PRO [46], and RRHF [64]. Most prominently, Rafailov
et al. [41] claimed that their popular direct preference optimization (DPO) algorithm “increases
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

