TAPTRv2: Attention-based Position Update Improves
Tracking Any Point

Hongyang Li1,2
Feng Li2,3

Hao Zhang2,3
Shilong Liu2,4
Zhaoyang Zeng2
2
5
Tianhe Ren
Bohan Li
Lei Zhang1,2∗
1
South China University of Technology.
2
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA).
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
4
Dept. of CST., BNRist Center, Institute for AI, Tsinghua University.
5
Shanghai Jiao Tong University.

Abstract
In this paper, we present TAPTRv2, a Transformer-based approach built upon
TAPTR for solving the Tracking Any Point (TAP) task. TAPTR borrows designs
from DEtection TRansformer (DETR) and formulates each tracking point as a
point query, making it possible to leverage well-studied operations in DETR-like
algorithms. TAPTRv2 improves TAPTR by addressing a critical issue regarding
its reliance on cost-volume, which contaminates the point query’s content feature
and negatively impacts both visibility prediction and cost-volume computation. In
TAPTRv2, we propose a novel attention-based position update (APU) operation and
use key-aware deformable attention to realize. For each query, this operation uses
key-aware attention weights to combine their corresponding deformable sampling
positions to predict a new query position. This design is based on the observation
that local attention is essentially the same as cost-volume, both of which are
computed by dot-production between a query and its surrounding features. By
introducing this new operation, TAPTRv2 not only removes the extra burden of
cost-volume computation, but also leads to a substantial performance improvement.
TAPTRv2 surpasses TAPTR and achieves state-of-the-art performance on many
challenging datasets, demonstrating the superiority.

1

Introduction

Tracking any point (TAP) in videos is a more fine-grained task compared to tracking objects using
bounding boxes [29, 38, 49, 52] or their instance masks [3, 34, 48, 50, 41, 33]. As point correspondence and its visibility prediction in long video sequence is fundamental to many downstream
applications, such as augmented reality, 3D reconstruction, and visual imitation [40], TAP has
received increasing attention in the past few years [14, 9, 20, 26].
Some works solve TAP from the 3D perspective [28, 11, 51, 13, 22, 45, 43], where they learn an
underlying 3D representation of the scene and enable it to transform over time. Although such an
approach has obtained impressive results, the learning of the 3D representation is nontrivial and
challenging. Thus most methods are not general and have to be fine-tuned for each video.
To develop a more general solution while keeping a good performance, some methods [9, 7, 14, 56,
32, 31] solve the TAP task in 2D space directly. Building upon existing optical flow methods [39, 47,
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

