Lips Are Lying: Spotting the Temporal Inconsistency
between Audio and Visual in Lip-Syncing DeepFakes

Weifeng Liu1,∗ , Tianyi She1,∗ , Jiawei Liu1 , Boheng Li2 , Dongyu Yao3 , Ziyou Liang1 , Run Wang1,†
1

Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing,
Ministry of Education, School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, China
2
Nanyang Technological University
3
Carnegie Mellon University
{weifengliu, tianyishe, jiaweiliu, wangrun}@whu.edu.cn
boheng001@e.ntu.edu.sg
raindy@cmu.edu

Figure 1: A visualization comparison between common deepfakes and our studied lip-syncing
deepfakes (LipSync). The former exhibits a substantial forgery area and identity manipulation, such
as face or gender swapping, whereas the latter, relies on the synchronization of the minor lip region
and given audio, without any alterations to the subject’s identity. As illustrated in the comparison
above, discerning the authenticity of an image sequence becomes arduous in the absence of labels.

Abstract
In recent years, DeepFake technology has achieved unprecedented success in highquality video synthesis, but these methods also pose potential and severe security
threats to humanity. DeepFake can be bifurcated into entertainment applications
like face swapping and illicit uses such as lip-syncing fraud. However, lip-forgery
videos, which neither change identity nor have discernible visual artifacts, present
a formidable challenge to existing DeepFake detection methods. Our preliminary
experiments have shown that the effectiveness of the existing methods often drastically decrease or even fail when tackling lip-syncing videos. In this paper, for
the first time, we propose a novel approach dedicated to lip-forgery identification
that exploits the inconsistency between lip movements and audio signals. We also
mimic human natural cognition by capturing subtle biological links between lips
and head regions to boost accuracy. To better illustrate the effectiveness and advances of our proposed method, we create a high-quality LipSync dataset, AVLips,
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

