Mind the Gap: A Causal Perspective on Bias
Amplification in Prediction & Decision-Making

Drago Plecko and Elias Bareinboim
Causal Artificial Intelligence Lab
Columbia University
dp3144@columbia.edu, eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
As society increasingly relies on AI-based tools for decision-making in socially
sensitive domains, investigating fairness and equity of such automated systems has
become a critical field of inquiry. Most of the literature in fair machine learning
focuses on defining and achieving fairness criteria in the context of prediction,
while not explicitly focusing on how these predictions may be used later on in
the pipeline. For instance, if commonly used criteria, such as independence or
sufficiency, are satisfied for a prediction score S used for binary classification, they
need not be satisfied after an application of a simple thresholding operation on S (as
commonly used in practice). In this paper, we take an important step to address this
issue in numerous statistical and causal notions of fairness. We introduce the notion
of a margin complement, which measures how much a prediction score S changes
due to a thresholding operation. We then demonstrate that the marginal difference
in the optimal 0/1 predictor Yb between groups, written P (ŷ | x1 ) − P (ŷ | x0 ),
can be causally decomposed into the influences of X on the L2 -optimal prediction
score S and the influences of X on the margin complement M , along different
causal pathways (direct, indirect, spurious). We then show that under suitable
causal assumptions, the influences of X on the prediction score S are equal to
the influences of X on the true outcome Y . This yields a new decomposition of
the disparity in the predictor Yb that allows us to disentangle causal differences
inherited from the true outcome Y that exists in the real world vs. those coming
from the optimization procedure itself. This observation highlights the need for
more regulatory oversight due to the potential for bias amplification, and to address
this issue we introduce new notions of weak and strong business necessity, together
with an algorithm for assessing whether these notions are satisfied. We apply our
method to three real-world datasets and derive new insights on bias amplification
in prediction and decision-making.

1

Introduction

Automated systems based on machine learning and artificial intelligence are increasingly used for
decision-making in a variety of real-world settings. These applications include hiring decisions,
university admissions, law enforcement, credit lending and loan approvals, health care interventions,
and many other high-stakes scenarios in which the automated system may significantly affect the
well-being of individuals [Khandani et al., 2010, Mahoney and Mohen, 2007, Brennan et al., 2009].
In this context, society is increasingly concerned about the implications and consequences of using
automated systems, compared to the currently implemented decision processes. Prior works highlight
the potential of automated systems to perpetuate or even amplify inequities between demographic
groups, with a range of examples from decision support systems for (among others) sentencing
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

