Gated Inference Network: Inference and Learning
State-Space Models

Hamidreza Hashempoor
Seoul National University
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
hamidreza.hashemp@snu.ac.kr
Wan Choi
Seoul National University
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
wanchoi@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
This paper advances temporal reasoning within dynamically changing highdimensional noisy observations, focusing on a latent space that characterizes
the nonlinear dynamics of objects in their environment. We introduce the Gated
Inference Network (GIN), an efficient approximate Bayesian inference algorithm
for state space models (SSMs) with nonlinear state transitions and emissions. GIN
disentangles two latent representations: one representing the object derived from a
nonlinear mapping model, and another representing the latent state describing its
dynamics. This disentanglement enables direct state estimation and missing data
imputation as the world evolves. To infer the latent state, we utilize a deep extended
Kalman filter (EKF) approach that integrates a novel compact RNN structure to
compute both the Kalman Gain (KG) and smoothing gain (SG), completing the
data flow. This design results in a computational cost per step that is linearly
faster than EKF but introduces issues such as the exploding gradient problem.
To mitigate the exploding gradients caused by the compact RNN structure in our
model, we propose a specialized learning method that ensures stable training and
inference. The model is then trained end-to-end on videos depicting a diverse range
of simulated and real-world physical systems, and outperforms its counterparts
—RNNs, autoregressive models, and variational approaches— in state estimation
and missing data imputation tasks.

1

Introduction

A state-space model is a type of graphical model that effectively represents noise-afflicted data
[1]. Typically, the objective is to conduct inference, which involves obtaining accurate estimates of
the posterior distribution of latent states or noise-free measurements. In videos, inferring the state
space presents a complex challenge owing to the high dimensionality of noisy observations, which
only offer partial information about the states. Previous methods have proposed various inference
approaches such as sampling [2], variational inference [3], or belief propagation [4]. Within the
framework of a hidden Markov process, classical methods like the celebrated Kalman filter (KF) and
smoother [5, 6], along with their extensions like EKF and UKF, [7, 8] have been employed to address
the posterior inference problem. However, the reliance of these methods on accurate knowledge of
the underlying dynamics, coupled with computationally intensive matrix inversions, poses challenges
in scalability to high-dimensional latent spaces.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

