On Improved Conditioning Mechanisms and
Pre-training Strategies for Diffusion Models

Tariq Berrada1,2

Pietro Astolfi1

Yohann Benchetrit1

Marton Havasi1

Adriana Romero-Soriano1,3,4,5
1

FAIR at Meta
3

Melissa Hall1

2

Reyhane Askari-Hemmat1

Matthew Muckley1
Jakob Verbeek1

Karteek Alahari2
Michal Drozdzal1

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, France

McGill University

4

Mila, Quebec AI institute

5

Canada CIFAR AI chair

Abstract
Large-scale training of latent diffusion models (LDMs) has enabled unprecedented
quality in image generation. However, the key components of the best performing
LDM training recipes are oftentimes not available to the research community,
preventing apple-to-apple comparisons and hindering the validation of progress
in the field. In this work, we perform an in-depth study of LDM training recipes
focusing on the performance of models and their training efficiency. To ensure
apple-to-apple comparisons, we re-implement five previously published models
with their corresponding recipes. Through our study, we explore the effects of
(i) the mechanisms used to condition the generative model on semantic information
(e.g., text prompt) and control metadata (e.g., crop size, random flip flag, etc.) on the
model performance, and (ii) the transfer of the representations learned on smaller
and lower-resolution datasets to larger ones on the training efficiency and model
performance. We then propose a novel conditioning mechanism that disentangles
semantic and control metadata conditionings and sets a new state-of-the-art in classconditional generation on the ImageNet-1k dataset – with FID improvements of
7% on 256 and 8% on 512 resolutions – as well as text-to-image generation on the
CC12M dataset – with FID improvements of 8% on 256 and 23% on 512 resolution.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have emerged as a powerful class of generative models and demonstrated unprecedented ability at generating high-quality and realistic images. Their superior performance is evident
across a spectrum of applications, encompassing image [7, 14, 39, 41] and video synthesis [35],
denoising [52], super-resolution [49] and layout-to-image synthesis [51]. The fundamental principle
underpinning diffusion models is the iterative denoising of an initial sample from a trivial prior distribution, that progressively transforms it to a sample from the target distribution. The popularity of
diffusion models can be attributed to several factors. First, they offer a simple yet effective approach
for generative modeling, often outperforming traditional approaches such as Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) [3, 16, 24, 25] and Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [29, 48] in terms of visual
fidelity and sample diversity. Second, diffusion models are generally more stable and less prone to
mode collapse compared to GANs, which are notoriously difficult to stabilize without careful tuning
of hyperparameters and training procedures [23, 30].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

