MAC Advice for Facility Location Mechanism Design

Zohar Barak
School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University
zoharbarak@mail.tau.ac.il

Anupam Gupta
New York University and Google Research
anupam.g@nyu.edu

Inbal Talgam-Cohen
School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University
inbaltalgam@gmail.com

Abstract
Algorithms with predictions are gaining traction across various domains, as a way
to surpass traditional worst-case bounds through (machine-learned) advice. We
study the canonical problem of k-facility location mechanism design, where the n
agents are strategic and might misreport their locations. We receive a prediction
for each agent’s location, and these predictions are crucially allowed to be only
“mostly” and “approximately” correct (M AC for short): a δ-fraction of the predicted
locations are allowed to be arbitrarily incorrect, and the remainder of the predictions
are required to be correct up to an ε-error. Moreover, we make no assumption on
the independence of the errors. Can such “flawed” predictions allow us to beat the
current best bounds for strategyproof facility location?
We show how natural robustness of the 1-median (also known as the geometric
median) of a set of points leads to an algorithm for single-facility location with
MAC predictions. We extend our results to a natural “balanced” variant of the
k-facility case, and show that without balancedness, robustness completely breaks
down even for k = 2 facilities on a line. As our main result, for this “unbalanced”
setting we devise a truthful random mechanism, which outperforms the best known
mechanism (with no predictions) by Lu et al. [2010]. En route, we introduce the
problem of “second” facility location, in which the first facility location is already
fixed. Our robustness findings may be of independent interest, as quantitative
versions of classic breakdown-point results in robust statistics.

1

Introduction

Algorithms with predictions is a popular field of study in recent years within the paradigm of
beyond the worst case analysis of algorithms — see Mitzenmacher and Vassilvitskii (2022) for a
comprehensive survey. Motivated by developments in machine learning, this area assumes that
algorithms can access predictions regarding the input or solution, thus leveraging predictability in
typical computational problems. Recently, Agrawal et al. (2022) and Xu and Lu (2022) proposed to
study predictions in the context of mechanism design, where they have the potential to transform
existing designs by adding information about agents’ private knowledge (see Balkanski et al. (2023a)).
Our focus in this work is on the canonical problem of facility location. The (utilitarian) k-facility
location problem is as follows: Consider a multi-set of n points X ⊂ Rd and k facility locations; the
cost of point x ∈ X is the minimum distance between x and any of the k locations. The goal is to
compute k locations that minimize the utilitarian cost, which is the total cost of points in X. In the
context of mechanism design, the points X are the privately-known true locations of strategic agents,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

