SEA: State-Exchange Attention for High-Fidelity
Physics Based Transformers

Parsa Esmati
University of Bristol
parsa.esmati@bristol.ac.uk

Amirhossein Dadashzadeh
University of Bristol
a.dadashzadeh@bristol.ac.uk

Vahid Goodarzi Ardakani
Sabe Technology Limited
vahid.goodarzi@sabe.tech

Nicolas Larrosa
University of Bristol
nicolas.larrosa@bristol.ac.uk

Nicolò Grilli
University of Bristol
nicolo.grilli@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
Current approaches using sequential networks have shown promise in estimating
field variables for dynamical systems, but they are often limited by high rollout
errors. The unresolved issue of rollout error accumulation results in unreliable
estimations as the network predicts further into the future, with each step’s error compounding and leading to an increase in inaccuracy. Here, we introduce
the State-Exchange Attention (SEA) module, a novel transformer-based module
enabling information exchange between encoded fields through multi-head crossattention. The cross-field multidirectional information exchange design enables all
state variables in the system to exchange information with one another, capturing
physical relationships and symmetries between fields. Additionally, we introduce
an efficient ViT-like mesh autoencoder to generate spatially coherent mesh embeddings for a large number of meshing cells. The SEA integrated transformer
demonstrates the state-of-the-art rollout error compared to other competitive baselines. Specifically, we outperform PbGMR-GMUS Transformer-RealNVP and
GMR-GMUS Transformer, with a reduction in error of 88% and 91%, respectively.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that the SEA module alone can reduce errors by 97%
for state variables that are highly dependent on other states of the system. The
repository for this work is available at: https://github.com/ParsaEsmati/SEA

1

Introduction

Solving partial differential equations (PDE) has been a primary concern of many fields in science
and engineering, including physics [Salvini et al., 2024], chemistry [Grilli et al., 2020], and material
sciences [Grilli et al., 2018, Esmati et al., 2024]. In many cases where a direct analytical solution of
the PDE is impossible to obtain, numerical simulations are used. To solve these equations numerically,
the domain is discretized into smaller cells using a discretization method such as finite element or
finite volume methods. In some cases, the domain of interest is divided into millions of smaller
elements forming large matrices representing the equation [Moukalled et al., 2016]. Solving these
discretized equations typically follows an iterative technique, which can take days and sometimes
weeks of runtime to converge to the full solution on the defined temporal domain [Liu et al., 2024,
Jiang et al., 2023]. In some cases to resolve some specific features of the system a fine mesh is
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

