LoRANN: Low-Rank Matrix Factorization for
Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search

Elias Jääsaari † Ville Hyvönen ‡ Teemu Roos †
Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki
‡
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University
{elias.jaasaari,teemu.roos}@helsinki.fi; ville.2.hyvonen@aalto.fi
†

Abstract
Approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) search is a key component in many modern
machine learning pipelines; recent use cases include retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) and vector databases. Clustering-based ANN algorithms, that use
score computation methods based on product quantization (PQ), are often used in
industrial-scale applications due to their scalability and suitability for distributed
and disk-based implementations. However, they have slower query times than the
leading graph-based ANN algorithms. In this work, we propose a new supervised
score computation method based on the observation that inner product approximation is a multivariate (multi-output) regression problem that can be solved
efficiently by reduced-rank regression. Our experiments show that on modern
high-dimensional data sets, the proposed reduced-rank regression (RRR) method
is superior to PQ in both query latency and memory usage. We also introduce
LoRANN1 , a clustering-based ANN library that leverages the proposed score computation method. LoRANN is competitive with the leading graph-based algorithms and
outperforms the state-of-the-art GPU ANN methods on high-dimensional data sets.

1

Introduction

In modern machine learning applications, data is often stored as embeddings, i.e., as vectors in
a high-dimensional vector space where representations of semantically similar items are close to
each other. Consequently, similarity search in high-dimensional vector spaces is a key algorithmic
primitive used in many pipelines, such as semantic search engines and recommendation systems.
Since the data sets are usually both large and high-dimensional, approximate nearest neighbor (ANN)
search is deployed to speed up similarity search in many applications (Li et al., 2019).
Recent use cases of ANN search include retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020;
Guu et al., 2020; Borgeaud et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2024) and approximate attention computation in
Transformer-based architectures (Kitaev et al., 2020; Vyas et al., 2020; Roy et al., 2021). ANN search
is also a key operation in vector databases that are used to store embeddings for industrial-scale
applications (see, e.g., Wang et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2022; Pan et al., 2024).
The state-of-the-art methods for ANN search can be classified into clustering-based and graph-based
algorithms (for a recent survey, see Bruch, 2024). In the comprehensive ANN benchmark (Aumüller
et al., 2020), the leading graph algorithms HNSW (Malkov and Yashunin, 2018) and NGT (Iwasaki
and Miyazaki, 2018) have faster query times than clustering-based algorithms. However, clusteringbased algorithms are often used in industrial-scale applications (see, e.g., Chen et al., 2021; Douze
et al., 2024) due to their smaller memory footprints and faster index construction times. They are
1

https://github.com/ejaasaari/lorann

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

