Efficient Φ-Regret Minimization with Low-Degree
Swap Deviations in Extensive-Form Games

Brian Hu Zhang
Carnegie Mellon University
bhzhang@cs.cmu.edu

Ioannis Anagnostides
Carnegie Mellon University
ianagnos@cs.cmu.edu

Gabriele Farina
MIT
gfarina@mit.edu

Tuomas Sandholm
Carnegie Mellon University
Strategic Machine, Inc.
Strategy Robot, Inc.
Optimized Markets, Inc.
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Recent breakthrough results by Dagan, Daskalakis, Fishelson and Golowich
[2023] and Peng and Rubinstein [2023] established an efficient algorithm
attaining at most ϵ swap regret over extensive-form strategy spaces of dimension
N in N Õ(1/ϵ) rounds. On the other extreme, Farina and Pipis [2023] developed
an efficient algorithm for minimizing the weaker notion of linear-swap regret in
poly(N )/ϵ2 rounds. In this paper, we develop efficient parameterized algorithms
for regimes between these two extremes. We introduce the set of k-mediator
deviations, which generalize the untimed communication deviations recently
introduced by Zhang, Farina and Sandholm [2024] to the case of having multiple
mediators, and we develop algorithms for minimizing the regret with respect
to this set of deviations in N O(k) /ϵ2 rounds. Moreover, by relating k-mediator
deviations to low-degree polynomials, we show that regret minimization against
3
degree-k polynomial swap deviations is achievable in N O(kd) /ϵ2 rounds,
where d is the depth of the game, assuming a constant branching factor. For
a fixed degree k, this is polynomial for Bayesian games and quasipolynomial
more broadly when d = polylogN —the usual balancedness assumption on the
game tree. The first key ingredient in our approach is a relaxation of the usual
notion of a fixed point required in the framework of Gordon, Greenwald and
Marks [2008]. Namely, for a given deviation ϕ, we show that it suffices to
compute what we refer to as a fixed point in expectation; that is, a distribution
π such that Ex∼π [ϕ(x) − x] ≈ 0. Unlike the problem of computing an actual
(approximate) fixed point x ≈ ϕ(x), which we show is PPAD-hard, there is
a simple and efficient algorithm for finding a solution that satisfies our relaxed
notion. As a byproduct, we provide, to our knowledge, the fastest algorithm for
computing ϵ-correlated equilibria in normal-form games in the medium-precision
regime, obviating the need to solve a linear system in every round. Our second
main contribution is a characterization of the set of low-degree deviations, made
possible through a connection to low-depth decisions trees from Boolean analysis.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

