Sample and Computationally Efficient
Robust Learning of Gaussian Single-Index Models

Puqian Wang
Department of Computer Science
University of Wisconsin, Madison
pwang333@wisc.edu

Nikos Zarifis
Department of Computer Science
University of Wisconsin, Madison
zarifis@wisc.edu

Ilias Diakonikolas
Department of Computer Science
University of Wisconsin, Madison
ilias@cs.wisc.edu

Jelena Diakonikolas
Department of Computer Science
University of Wisconsin, Madison
jelena@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
A single-index model (SIM) is a function of the form σ(w∗ · x), where σ : R → R
is a known link function and w∗ is a hidden unit vector. We study the task of
learning SIMs in the agnostic (a.k.a. adversarial label noise) model with respect
to the L22 -loss under the Gaussian distribution. Our main result is a sample and
computationally efficient agnostic proper learner that attains L22 -error of O(OPT)+
ϵ, where OPT is the optimal loss. The sample complexity of our algorithm is
∗
Õ(d⌈k /2⌉ + d/ϵ), where k ∗ is the information-exponent of σ corresponding to the
degree of its first non-zero Hermite coefficient. This sample bound nearly matches
known CSQ lower bounds, even in the realizable setting. Prior algorithmic work
in this setting had focused on learning in the realizable case or in the presence
of semi-random noise. Prior computationally efficient robust learners required
significantly stronger assumptions on the link function.

1

Introduction

Single-index models (SIMs) [Ich93, HJS01, HMS+ 04, DJS08, KS09, KKSK11, DH18, DGK+ 20,
DKTZ22, WZDD23, DNGL23] are a classical supervised learning model characterized by hidden
low-dimensional structure. The term SIM refers to any function f of the form f (x) = σ(w · x),
where σ : R → R is the link (or activation) function and w ∈ Rd is the hidden vector. In most
settings of interest, the link function is assumed to satisfy certain regularity properties. Indeed, for an
arbitrary function, learnability is information-theoretically impossible.
The efficient learnability of SIMs has been the focus of extensive investigation for several decades.
For example, the special case where σ is the sign function corresponds to Linear Threshold Functions
whose study goes back to the Perceptron algorithm [Ros58]. Classical early works [KS09, KKSK11]
studied the efficient learnability of SIMs for monotone and Lipschitz link functions. They showed
that a gradient method efficiently learns SIMs for any distribution on the unit ball. More recently,
there has been a resurgence of research on the topic with a focus on first-order methods. Indeed, the
non-convex optimization landscape of SIMs exhibits rich structure and has become a useful testbed
for the analysis of such methods. [Sol17] showed that SGD efficiently learns SIMs for the case that σ
is the ReLU activation and the distribution is Gaussian. [CLS15, CCFM19, SQW18] showed that
gradient descent succeeds for the phase retrieval problem, corresponding to σ(t) = t2 or σ(t) = |t|.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

