Continuous Heatmap Regression for Pose Estimation
via Implicit Neural Representation

Shengxiang Hu1 , Huaijiang Sun1∗, Dong Wei1 , Xiaoning Sun1 , Jin Wang2
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
Nantong University, Nantong, China
{hushengxiang,sunhuaijiang}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Heatmap regression has dominated human pose estimation due to its superior
performance and strong generalization. To meet the requirements of traditional
explicit neural networks for output form, existing heatmap-based methods discretize
the originally continuous heatmap representation into 2D pixel arrays, which leads
to performance degradation due to the introduction of quantization errors. This
problem is significantly exacerbated as the size of the input image decreases, which
makes heatmap-based methods not much better than coordinate regression on
low-resolution images. In this paper, we propose a novel neural representation for
human pose estimation called NerPE to achieve continuous heatmap regression.
Given any position within the image range, NerPE regresses the corresponding
confidence scores for body joints according to the surrounding image features,
which guarantees continuity in space and confidence during training. Thanks to
the decoupling from spatial resolution, NerPE can output the predicted heatmaps
at arbitrary resolution during inference without retraining, which easily achieves
sub-pixel localization precision. To reduce the computational cost, we design
progressive coordinate decoding to cooperate with continuous heatmap regression,
in which localization no longer requires the complete generation of high-resolution
heatmaps. The code is available at https://github.com/hushengxiang/NerPE.

1

Introduction

Human pose estimation (HPE) is a fundamental task in the field of computer vision, which is widely
used in various human-centered applications [41, 29, 37, 9, 55, 53]. In multi-person pose estimation,
the top-down framework is a mainstream two-stage pipeline, in which the person areas are firstly
cropped out and then the body joints within them are located. According to the way to describe the
positions of body joints, pose estimation methods can be further divided into coordinate regression
[44, 43, 20, 22, 28] and heatmap regression [31, 48, 42, 24, 52]. Due to better performance brought
by spatial encoding of heatmap representation, heatmap regression has received more attention than
coordinate regression. Recently, most heatmap-based methods [11, 51, 50] focus on the design of
network structure but ignore the importance of heatmap generation. Only a few works [26, 23] have
noticed the irrationality in the standard heatmap representation widely used in existing methods.
In the top-down framework, the ground-truth coordinates of body joints in the original image are
mapped to the input plane of a keypoint detector, through the same affine transformation applied to
the cropped image patch. To supervise the output of traditional explicit neural networks, the current
heatmap generation strategy yields 2D pixel arrays to reflect the spatial distribution of body joints,
which means that the originally continuous heatmap representation needs to be discretized as shown
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

