Temporal-Difference Learning Using Distributed
Error Signals

Jonas Guan1,2 , Shon Eduard Verch1 , Claas Voelcker1,2 , Ethan C. Jackson1 ,
Nicolas Papernot1,2 , William A. Cunningham1,2,3
1
2
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
3
Schwartz Reisman Institute for Technology and Society

Abstract
A computational problem in biological reward-based learning is how credit
assignment is performed in the nucleus accumbens (NAc) to update synaptic
weights. Much research suggests that NAc dopamine encodes temporal-difference
(TD) errors for learning value predictions. However, dopamine is synchronously
distributed in regionally homogeneous concentrations, which does not support
explicit credit assignment (like used by backpropagation). It is unclear whether
distributed errors alone are sufficient for synapses to make coordinated updates
to learn complex, nonlinear reward-based learning tasks. We design a new deep
Q-learning algorithm, A RTIFICIAL D OPAMINE, to computationally demonstrate
that synchronously distributed, per-layer TD errors may be sufficient to learn
surprisingly complex RL tasks. We empirically evaluate our algorithm on MinAtar,
the DeepMind Control Suite, and classic control tasks, and show it often achieves
comparable performance to deep RL algorithms that use backpropagation.

1

Introduction

Computer science and neuroscience have enjoyed a longstanding and mutually beneficial relationship.
This synergy is exemplified by the inception of artificial neural networks, which drew inspiration from
biological neural networks. Neuroscience also adopted temporal-difference (TD) learning [62] from
reinforcement learning (RL) as a framework for biological reward-based learning in the midbrain [23,
59]. At the intersection of these ideas, deep RL has much benefited from and contributed to
interdisciplinary progress between the two fields [45, 11].
An interesting problem raised in biological learning is how signals transmitted by the neuromodulator
dopamine computationally induce coordinated reward-based learning. In the mesolimbic system,
dopamine is synthesized by dopamine neurons in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and transmitted
through the mesolimbic pathway to several regions, including the nucleus accumbens (NAc). There,
it is synchronously distributed in regionally homogeneous concentrations [58], and serves as a reward
prediction error signal for synaptic adjustments via TD learning [9, 23].1 Figure 1 shows a conceptual
illustration: the medium spiny neurons in the NAc receive error signals distributed locally in their
region via dopamine. Computationally, however, this theory faces the credit assignment problem [25]:
the individual synaptic updates using just local errors must somehow work in coordination to improve
the collective prediction.2 Are distributed error signals alone sufficient to coordinate neurons to learn
complex reward-based learning tasks?
1
NAc dopamine also serves many roles beyond signaling reward prediction errors [18]; its full responsibilities
are an active area of research. We only focus on its role in error signaling, which is most pertinent to our problem.
2
For clarity, this is different from the temporal credit assignment problem, oft discussed in RL literature.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

