Meta-DiffuB: A Contextualized Sequence-to-Sequence
Text Diffusion Model with Meta-Exploration

Yun-Yen Chuang1,2 , Hung-Min Hsu3 , Kevin Lin4 ,
Chen-Sheng Gu1,2 , Ling Zhen Li1,2 , Ray-I Chang2 , Hung-yi Lee2
1
Maxora AI 2 National Taiwan University
3
University of Washington 4 Microsoft
yunyenchuang@maxora.ai, hmhsu@uw.edu, keli@microsoft.com,
chenshenggu@maxora.ai, lingzhenli@maxora.ai,
rayichang@ntu.edu.tw, hungyilee@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
The diffusion model, a new generative modeling paradigm, has achieved significant
success in generating images, audio, video, and text. It has been adapted for
sequence-to-sequence text generation (Seq2Seq) through DiffuSeq, termed the
S2S-Diffusion model. Existing S2S-Diffusion models predominantly rely on
fixed or hand-crafted rules to schedule noise during the diffusion and denoising
processes. However, these models are limited by non-contextualized noise, which
fails to fully consider the characteristics of Seq2Seq tasks. In this paper, we
propose the Meta-DiffuB framework—a novel scheduler-exploiter S2S-Diffusion
paradigm designed to overcome the limitations of existing S2S-Diffusion models.
We employ Meta-Exploration to train an additional scheduler model dedicated to
scheduling contextualized noise for each sentence. Our exploiter model, an S2SDiffusion model, leverages the noise scheduled by our scheduler model for updating
and generation. Meta-DiffuB achieves state-of-the-art performance compared to
previous S2S-Diffusion models and fine-tuned pre-trained language models (PLMs)
across four Seq2Seq benchmark datasets. We further investigate and visualize the
impact of Meta-DiffuB’s noise scheduling on the generation of sentences with
varying difficulties. Additionally, our scheduler model can function as a "plugand-play" model to enhance DiffuSeq without the need for fine-tuning during the
inference stage. 1

1

Introduction

The diffusion model, a novel generative approach, operates through a two-step process: it first
introduces noise to real data and then systematically removes this noise to facilitate data generation
[12, 40, 30]. This model has demonstrated significant efficacy across several domains, including
image [13, 29, 38], audio [36, 18], video [18, 14], and text generation [1, 15, 21, 3, 24, 34]. The
diffusion model utilizes a technique known as noise scheduling to control the amount of noise imposed
at each diffusion step [12]. DiffuSeq [8] has adapted this model to discrete generation tasks like
sequence-to-sequence text generation (Seq2Seq), under a framework termed S2S-Diffusion. However,
DiffuSeq employs fixed noise scheduling and does not accommodate the specific characteristics of
Seq2Seq tasks [45, 44].
Seq2Seq is a foundational technique in natural language processing (NLP) that generates target
sentences from specified conditional sentences. It supports a range of downstream tasks, including
1

Code and datasets for Meta-DiffuB are available at: https://github.com/Meta-DiffuB/
Meta-DiffuB.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

