Understanding and Improving Adversarial
Collaborative Filtering for Robust Recommendation

Kaike Zhang1,2 , Qi Cao1∗, Yunfan Wu1,2 , Fei Sun1 , Huawei Shen1 , Xueqi Cheng1
1
CAS Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China
{zhangkaike21s, caoqi, wuyunfan19b, sunfei, shenhuawei, cxq}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Adversarial Collaborative Filtering (ACF), which typically applies adversarial
perturbations at user and item embeddings through adversarial training, is widely
recognized as an effective strategy for enhancing the robustness of Collaborative
Filtering (CF) recommender systems against poisoning attacks. Besides, numerous studies have empirically shown that ACF can also improve recommendation
performance compared to traditional CF. Despite these empirical successes, the
theoretical understanding of ACF’s effectiveness in terms of both performance and
robustness remains unclear. To bridge this gap, in this paper, we first theoretically
show that ACF can achieve a lower recommendation error compared to traditional
CF with the same training epochs in both clean and poisoned data contexts. Furthermore, by establishing bounds for reductions in recommendation error during
ACF’s optimization process, we find that applying personalized magnitudes of
perturbation for different users based on their embedding scales can further improve
ACF’s effectiveness. Building on these theoretical understandings, we propose
Personalized Magnitude Adversarial Collaborative Filtering (PamaCF). Extensive
experiments demonstrate that PamaCF effectively defends against various types of
poisoning attacks while significantly enhancing recommendation performance.

1

Introduction

Collaborative Filtering (CF) is widely recognized as a powerful tool for providing personalized recommendations [1, 2, 3] across various domains [4, 5]. However, the inherent openness of recommender
systems allows attackers to inject fake users into the training data, aiming to manipulate recommendations, also known as poisoning attacks [6, 7]. Such manipulations can skew the distribution of item
exposure, degrading the overall quality of the recommender system, thus harming the user experience
and hindering the long-term development of the recommender system [8].
Existing methods for defending against poisoning attacks in CF can be categorized into two types [8]:
(1) detecting and mitigating the influence of fake users [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14], and (2) developing
robust models via adversarial training, also known as Adversarial Collaborative Filtering (ACF) [15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. The first strategy focuses on detecting and removing fake users from the dataset
before training [9, 10, 11, 14] or mitigating their impact during the training phase [12, 13]. These
methods often rely on predefined assumptions about attacks [9, 12] or require labeled data related
to attacks [10, 11, 12, 13]. Consequently, deviations from predefined attack patterns may lead to
misclassification, failing to resist attacks while potentially harming genuine users’ experience [13].
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

