Balancing Context Length and Mixing Times for
Reinforcement Learning at Scale

Matthew Riemer∗
IBM Research, Mila, Université de Montréal
Janarthanan Rajendran†
Dalhousie University

Khimya Khetarpal
Mila

Sarath Chandar
Mila, École Polytechnique de Montréal

Abstract
Due to the recent remarkable advances in artificial intelligence, researchers have
begun to consider challenging learning problems such as learning to generalize
behavior from large offline datasets or learning online in non-Markovian environments. Meanwhile, recent advances in both of these areas have increasingly relied
on conditioning policies on large context lengths. A natural question is if there is a
limit to the performance benefits of increasing the context length if the computation
needed is available. In this work, we establish a novel theoretical result that links
the context length of a policy to the time needed to reliably evaluate its performance
(i.e., its mixing time) in large scale partially observable reinforcement learning
environments that exhibit latent sub-task structure. This analysis underscores a key
tradeoff: when we extend the context length, our policy can more effectively model
non-Markovian dependencies, but this comes at the cost of potentially slower policy
evaluation and as a result slower downstream learning. Moreover, our empirical
results highlight the relevance of this analysis when leveraging Transformer based
neural networks. This perspective will become increasingly pertinent as the field
scales towards larger and more realistic environments, opening up a number of
potential future directions for improving the way we design learning agents.

1

Introduction

Scaling the Context Length: As the field of AI moves towards harder problems where agents must
model higher order non-Markovian dependencies, it is only natural to consider conditioning models
on larger context lengths of the interaction history. When considering only small context lengths or
single observations, models become restricted to some lesser notion of the best possible performance
in comparison to what is achievable with an infinite context length [1]. Meanwhile, there are two
obvious downsides to increasing the context length an agent considers. The first downside is the
increase in necessary computation. However, there is also ongoing research related to minimizing
the needed quantity of computation [2; 3], increasing the parallelism of computation [4; 5; 6], and
increasing the throughput of computation on modern hardware [7]. The second downside is the
high dimensionality of the input representation we must process and the difficulty of learning and
generalizing from this kind of input. But it is unclear how worried researchers and practitioners
should be about this downside given the recent improvements in processing long sequences that came
with attention models [8; 9] and particularly the Transformer architecture [10]. Additionally, there
has been a trend towards training on internet-scale datasets [11; 12; 13] that far exceed the quantity
∗
†

Please direct correspondences to mdriemer@us.ibm.com.
Work done during Postdoc at Mila, Université de Montréal.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

