Instance-Specific Asymmetric Sensitivity in
Differential Privacy

David Durfee
Mozilla Anonym
ddurfee@mozilla.com

Abstract
We provide a new algorithmic framework for differentially private estimation of
general functions that adapts to the hardness of the underlying dataset. We build
upon previous work that gives a paradigm for selecting an output through the
exponential mechanism based upon closeness of the inverse to the underlying
dataset, termed the inverse sensitivity mechanism. Our framework will slightly
modify the closeness metric and instead give a simple and efficient application
of the sparse vector technique. While the inverse sensitivity mechanism was
shown to be instance optimal, it was only with respect to a class of unbiased
mechanisms such that the most likely outcome matches the underlying data.
We break this assumption in order to more naturally navigate the bias-variance
tradeoff, which will also critically allow for extending our method to unbounded
data. In consideration of this tradeoff, we provide theoretical guarantees and
empirical validation that our technique will be particularly effective when the
distances to the underlying dataset are asymmetric. This asymmetry is inherent to a range of important problems including fundamental statistics such as
variance, as well as commonly used machine learning performance metrics for
both classification and regression tasks. We efficiently instantiate our method in
𝑂(𝑛) time for these problems and empirically show that our techniques will give
substantially improved differentially private estimations.

1

Introduction

We consider the general problem of estimating aggregate functions or statistics of a dataset with
differential privacy. The massive increase in data collection to improve analytics and modelling
across industries has made such data computations invaluable, but can also leak sensitive individual
information. Rigorously measuring such leakage can be achieved through differential privacy,
which quantifies the extent that one individual’s data can affect the output. Much of the focus
within the field of differential privacy is upon constructing algorithms that give both accurate
output and privacy guarantees by injecting specific types of randomness. One of the most canonical
mechanisms for achieving this considers the maximum effect one individual’s data could have upon
the output of a given function, referred to as the sensitivity of the function, and adds proportional
noise to the function output. In general, the notion of sensitivity plays a central role in many
differentially private algorithms, directly affecting the accuracy of the output.
While using the worst-case sensitivity across all potential datasets will ensure privacy guarantees,
the utility can be improved by using variants of sensitivity that are specific to the underlying dataset.
This notion was initially considered in Nissim et al. (2007), introducing smooth sensitivity, an
interpolation between worst-case sensitivity and local sensitivity of the underlying data, by which
noise could be added proportionally. The smooth sensitivity adapts well to the underlying data and
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

