Instance-adaptive Zero-shot Chain-of-Thought
Prompting

Xiaosong Yuan1,2† , Chen Shen3‡ , Shaotian Yan3 , Xiaofeng Zhang4
∗
Liang Xie5 , Wenxiao Wang6 , Renchu Guan1,2 , Ying Wang1,2 , Jieping Ye3
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University
2
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering, MoE, Jilin University
3
Alibaba Cloud Computing
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
5
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology
6
College of Software, Zhejiang University
yuanxs19@mails.jlu.edu.cn, zjushenchen@gmail.com

Abstract
Zero-shot Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting emerges as a simple and effective
strategy for enhancing the performance of large language models (LLMs) in realworld reasoning tasks. Nonetheless, the efficacy of a singular, task-level prompt
uniformly applied across the whole of instances is inherently limited since one
prompt cannot be a good partner for all, a more appropriate approach should consider the interaction between the prompt and each instance meticulously. This work
introduces an instance-adaptive prompting algorithm as an alternative zero-shot
CoT reasoning scheme by adaptively differentiating good and bad prompts. Concretely, we first employ analysis on LLMs through the lens of information flow to
detect the mechanism under zero-shot CoT reasoning, in which we discover that information flows from question to prompt and question to rationale jointly influence
the reasoning results most. We notice that a better zero-shot CoT reasoning needs
the prompt to obtain semantic information from the question, and then the rationale
aggregates sufficient information from the question directly and via the prompt
indirectly. On the contrary, lacking any of those would probably lead to a bad one.
Stem from that, we further propose an instance-adaptive prompting strategy (IAP)
for zero-shot CoT reasoning. Experiments conducted with LLaMA-2, LLaMA3, and Qwen on math, logic, and commonsense reasoning tasks (e.g., GSM8k,
MMLU, Causal Judgement) obtain consistent improvement, demonstrating that the
instance-adaptive zero-shot CoT prompting performs better than other task-level
methods with some curated prompts or sophisticated procedures, showing the
significance of our findings in the zero-shot CoT reasoning mechanism.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated capabilities at tackling copious reasoning tasks
through Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [1–10]. Compared to the few-shot setting for CoT generally,
zero-shot CoT prompting can achieve approximate performance with merely one natural language
prompt rather than complicated demonstrations, which has been proven as a simple and efficient
paradigm [2]. Numerous efforts have been thrown into searching for better prompts that can benefit
zero-shot CoT reasoning. Plan-and-Solve [6] employs a human-crafted prompt to break down the
† Work done during an internship at Alibaba Cloud Computing
∗
Corresponding author

‡ Project lead

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

