Tracing Hyperparameter Dependencies for Model
Parsing via Learnable Graph Pooling Network

Xiao Guo, Vishal Asnani, Sijia Liu, Xiaoming Liu
Michigan State University
{guoxia11, asnanivi, liusiji5, liuxm}@msu.edu

Abstract
Model Parsing defines the task of predicting hyperparameters of the generative
model (GM), given a GM-generated image as the input. Since a diverse set of
hyperparameters is jointly employed by the generative model, and dependencies
often exist among them, it is crucial to learn these hyperparameter dependencies
for improving the model parsing performance. To explore such important dependencies, we propose a novel model parsing method called Learnable Graph
Pooling Network (LGPN), in which we formulate model parsing as a graph node
classification problem, using graph nodes and edges to represent hyperparameters
and their dependencies, respectively. Furthermore, LGPN incorporates a learnable
pooling-unpooling mechanism tailored to model parsing, which adaptively learns
hyperparameter dependencies of GMs used to generate the input image. Also,
we introduce a Generation Trace Capturing Network (GTC) that can efficiently
identify generation traces of input images, enhancing the understanding of generated images’ provenances. Empirically, we achieve state-of-the-art performance
in model parsing and its extended applications, showing the superiority of the
proposed LGPN. The source code is available at link.

1

Introduction

Generative Models (GMs) [22, 73, 11, 44, 33, 60, 32, 34, 50], e.g., Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs), Variational Autoencoder (VAEs), and Diffusion Models (DMs), have gained significant
attention, offering remarkable capabilities in generating visually compelling images. However, the
proliferation of such Artificial Intelligence Generated Content (AIGC) can inadvertently propagate
inaccurate or biased information. To mitigate such negative impact, various image forensics [52]
methods have been proposed [62, 54, 20, 6, 24, 64, 31, 76, 56, 71, 1]. Alongside these defensive
efforts, the recent work [2] defines a novel research topic called “model parsing”, which predicts 37
GM hyperparameters using the generated image as the input, as detailed in Fig. 1a.
Model parsing requires analyzing GM hyperparameters and gaining insights into origins of generated
images, which facilitate defenders to develop effective countermeasures. For example, one can
reasonably determine if there exists coordinated attacks [2] — two images are generated from the
same GM that is unseen during the training, using predicted hyperparameters from the model parsing
algorithm. In light of this, the previous method [2] introduces a clustering-based approach that
achieves effective model parsing performance. However, this approach neglects the learning of
hyperparameter dependencies. For instance, an inherent dependency exists between GM’s layer
number and parameter number, as GM’s layer number is positively proportional to its parameter
number. A similar proportional relationship exists between the number of convolutional layers and
convolutional filters. In contrast, the use of the L1 loss is negatively correlated with the use of the
L2 loss, as GMs typically do not employ both losses as objective functions simultaneously. We
believe the neglect of such dependencies might cause a suboptimized performance. Therefore, in
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

