Graph Learning for Numeric Planning

1

Dillon Z. Chen1,2
Sylvie Thiébaux1,2
2
LAAS-CNRS, University of Toulouse The Australian National University
{dillon.chen,sylvie.thiebaux}@laas.fr

Abstract
Graph learning is naturally well suited for use in symbolic, object-centric planning
due to its ability to exploit relational structures exhibited in planning domains and
to take as input planning instances with arbitrary numbers of objects. Numeric
planning is an extension of symbolic planning in which states may now also exhibit
numeric variables. In this work, we propose data-efficient and interpretable machine learning models for learning to solve numeric planning tasks. This involves
constructing a new graph kernel for graphs with both continuous and categorical attributes, as well as new optimisation methods for learning heuristic functions for numeric planning. Experiments show that our graph kernels are vastly more efficient
and generalise better than graph neural networks for numeric planning, and also
yield competitive coverage performance compared to domain-independent numeric
planners. Code is available at https://github.com/DillonZChen/goose

1

Introduction

Planning requires long range reasoning over combinatorially large state spaces. Numeric planning
is an extension of classical planning in which states have numeric variables and the underlying
transition system is built from inequality conditions and assignments over arithmetic expressions of
such variables. It was formalised in PDDL 2.1 [FL03] and is undecidable in the general case [Hel02]
which makes it more difficult than classical planning which is PSPACE-complete [Byl94]. Numeric
planning is a well-established problem in the symbolic AI community and exhibits significant research
effort [CCFL13, IM17, SHTR20, KSP+ 22, KSB23, SKB23], but this expressivity result implies that
building a general, scalable numeric planner is a challenging problem.
Learning for Planning (L4P) is a research direction which focuses on learning to solve problems from
a specified domain in an automated supervised manner [TTTX20, STT20, FGT+ 22, KS21, SBG22,
SBG23, MLTK23, CTT24a, SDS+ 24, RTG+ 24, APK24]. Planning tasks in L4P are assumed to
exhibit a factored, symbolic representation, which allow us to generate training data in a matter of
seconds from easy to solve tasks with a domain-independent planner. We can then learn domain
knowledge in a supervised manner that scales planners to significantly larger planning tasks.
This is in contrast to Reinforcement Learning where agents do not require access to well-defined models but spend significant amounts of time exploring and learning from rewards [SB98]. Regardless,
several works have showed that encoding or learning symbolic models for sequential decision making reasoning and embodied AI tasks [LCZ+ 21, ZYP+ 22, LSS+ 22, SCK+ 23, KVS+ 23, LPM23]
provided better performance and transparency over end-to-end reinforcement learning methods.
Furthermore, it was shown recently that classical ML methods are much better suited for L4P than
deep learning methods for symbolic planning [CTT24b] as they (1) can generalise well from small
training data, (2) are orders of magnitude more efficient to train and evaluate than deep learning
methods, which is important in time sensitive tasks such as planning, and (3) have interpretable
features to understand what is being learned.
In this paper we study whether this fact carries over to Learning for Numeric Planning (L4NP) [WT24]
which now requires reasoning over logic and arithmetic. It is reasonable to think that because neural
networks are function approximators, they may offer better reasoning capabilities over numbers than
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

