Visual Decoding and Reconstruction via EEG
Embeddings with Guided Diffusion

1

Dongyang Li1∗ Chen Wei1∗ Shiying Li1 Jiachen Zou1 Quanying Liu1†
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology,
Shenzhen, China
{lidy2023, weic3}@mail.sustech.edu.cn
liuqy@sustech.edu.cn

Visual Perception Sequence Brain Encoding

Seen Images

...

Relax

＋

Rest

＋

Visual

Visual

t1

t2

t3

t3

...

Classification
Generation

...

Retrieval

Our Reconstructed Images
Decode

Brain Embedding

Figure 1: EEG/MEG-based zero-shot brain decoding and reconstruction. Left: Overview of three
visual decoding tasks using EEG/MEG data under natural image stimulus. Right: Our reconstruction
examples.

Abstract
How to decode human vision through neural signals has attracted a long-standing
interest in neuroscience and machine learning. Modern contrastive learning and
generative models improved the performance of visual decoding and reconstruction
based on functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI). However, the high cost
and low temporal resolution of fMRI limit their applications in brain-computer
interfaces (BCIs), prompting a high need for visual decoding based on electroencephalography (EEG). In this study, we present an end-to-end EEG-based visual
reconstruction zero-shot framework, consisting of a tailored brain encoder, called
the Adaptive Thinking Mapper (ATM), which projects neural signals from different
sources into the shared subspace as the clip embedding, and a two-stage multi-pipe
EEG-to-image generation strategy. In stage one, EEG is embedded to align the highlevel clip embedding, and then the prior diffusion model refines EEG embedding
into image priors. A blurry image also decoded from EEG for maintaining the lowlevel feature. In stage two, we input both the high-level clip embedding, the blurry
image and caption from EEG latent to a pre-trained diffusion model. Furthermore,
we analyzed the impacts of different time windows and brain regions on decoding
and reconstruction. The versatility of our framework is demonstrated in the magnetoencephalogram (MEG) data modality. The experimental results indicate that our
EEG-based visual zero-shot framework achieves SOTA performance in classification, retrieval and reconstruction, highlighting the portability, low cost, and high
temporal resolution of EEG, enabling a wide range of BCI applications. Our code
is available at https://github.com/ncclab-sustech/EEG_Image_decode.
∗
†

D. Li and C. Wei contributed equally.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

