Global Rewards in Restless Multi-Armed Bandits
Naveen Raman
Carnegie Mellon University
naveenr@cmu.edu

Zheyuan Ryan Shi
University of Pittsburgh
ryanshi@pitt.edu

Fei Fang
Carnegie Mellon University
feifang@cmu.edu

Abstract
Restless multi-armed bandits (RMAB) extend multi-armed bandits so pulling an
arm impacts future states. Despite the success of RMABs, a key limiting assumption
is the separability of rewards into a sum across arms. We address this deficiency by
proposing restless-multi-armed bandit with global rewards (RMAB - G), a generalization of RMABs to global non-separable rewards. To solve RMAB - G, we develop the
Linear- and Shapley-Whittle indices, which extend Whittle indices from RMABs to
RMAB - G s. We prove approximation bounds but also point out how these indices
could fail when reward functions are highly non-linear. To overcome this, we
propose two sets of adaptive policies: the first computes indices iteratively, and
the second combines indices with Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS). Empirically,
we demonstrate that our proposed policies outperform baselines and index-based
policies with synthetic data and real-world data from food rescue.

1

Introduction

Restless multi-armed bandits (RMAB) are models of resource allocation that combine multi-armed
bandits with states for each bandit’s arm. Such a model is “restless” because arms can change state
even when not pulled. RMABs are an enticing framework because optimal decisions can be efficiently
made using pre-computed Whittle indices [1, 2]. As a result, RMAB have been used in scheduling [3],
autonomous driving [4], multichannel access [5], and maternal health [6].
The existing RMAB model assumes that rewards are separable into a sum of per-arm rewards. However,
many real-world objectives are non-separable functions of the arms pulled. We find this situation in
food rescue platforms. These platforms notify subsets of volunteers about upcoming food rescue trips
and aim to maximize the trip completion rate [7]. When modeling this with RMABs, arms correspond
to volunteers, arm pulls correspond to notifications, and the reward corresponds to the trip completion
rate. The trip completion rate is non-separable as we only need one volunteer to complete each trip
(more details in Section 3). Beyond food rescue, RMABs can potentially model problems in peer
review [8], blood donation [9], and emergency dispatch [10], but the rewards are again non-separable.
Motivated by these situations, we propose the restless multi-armed bandit with global rewards (RMAB G ), a generalization of RMAB s to non-separable rewards. Whittle indices from RMAB s [1] fail for
RMAB - G s due to the non-separability of the reward. Because of this, we propose a generalization
of Whittle indices to global rewards called the Linear-Whittle and Shapley-Whittle indices. Our
approximation bounds demonstrate that these policies perform well for near-linear rewards but
struggle for highly non-linear rewards. We address this by developing adaptive policies that combine

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

