Aligning Individual and Collective Objectives
in Multi-Agent Cooperation

Yang Li
The University of Manchester
yang.li-4@manchester.ac.uk
Jianhong Wang†
INFORMED-AI Hub
University of Bristol
jianhong.wang@bristol.ac.uk

Wenhao Zhang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
wenhao_zhang@sjtu.edu.cn

Shao Zhang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
shaozhang@sjtu.edu.cn

Ying Wen∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
ying.wen@sjtu.edu.cn

Yali Du
King’s College London
yali.du@kcl.ac.uk

Wei Pan∗
The University of Manchester
wei.pan@manchester.ac.uk

Abstract
Among the research topics in multi-agent learning, mixed-motive cooperation is one
of the most prominent challenges, primarily due to the mismatch between individual
and collective goals. The cutting-edge research is focused on incorporating domain
knowledge into rewards and introducing additional mechanisms to incentivize
cooperation. However, these approaches often face shortcomings such as the effort
on manual design and the absence of theoretical groundings. To close this gap, we
model the mixed-motive game as a differentiable game for the ease of illuminating
the learning dynamics towards cooperation. More detailed, we introduce a novel
optimization method named Altruistic Gradient Adjustment (AgA) that employs
gradient adjustments to progressively align individual and collective objectives.
Furthermore, we theoretically prove that AgA effectively attracts gradients to stable
fixed points of the collective objective while considering individual interests, and
we validate these claims with empirical evidence. We evaluate the effectiveness
of our algorithm AgA through benchmark environments for testing mixed-motive
collaboration with small-scale agents such as the two-player public good game
and the sequential social dilemma games, Cleanup and Harvest, as well as our
self-developed large-scale environment in the game StarCraft II.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent cooperation primarily focuses on learning how to promote collaborative behavior in
shared environments. In general, multi-agent cooperation research is categorized into two prominent
areas: pure-motive cooperation and mixed-motive cooperation [Du et al., 2023, McKee et al., 2020].
Recent progress in cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has been primarily
focusing on pure-motive cooperation, also known as common payoff games. This game models
situations where each agent’s individual goal fully aligns with the collective objectives [Yu et al.,
2022, Wang et al., 2020, Zhong et al., 2024, Li et al., 2024]. Nevertheless, mixed-motive cooperation
∗

Corresponding authors. † Jianhong Wang is a visiting researcher at the University of Manchester.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

