Interpretable Generalized Additive Models for
Datasets with Missing Values

Hayden McTavish∗
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27705
hayden.mctavish@duke.edu

Jon Donnelly*
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27705
jon.donnelly@duke.edu

Margo Seltzer
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4
mseltzer@cs.ubc.ca

Cynthia Rudin
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27705
cynthia@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
Many important datasets contain samples that are missing one or more feature
values. Maintaining the interpretability of machine learning models in the presence of such missing data is challenging. Singly or multiply imputing missing
values complicates the model’s mapping from features to labels. On the other
hand, reasoning on indicator variables that represent missingness introduces a
potentially large number of additional terms, sacrificing sparsity. We solve these
problems with M-GAM, a sparse, generalized, additive modeling approach that
incorporates missingness indicators and their interaction terms while maintaining
sparsity through ℓ0 regularization. We show that M-GAM provides similar or
superior accuracy to prior methods while significantly improving sparsity relative
to either imputation or naı̈ve inclusion of indicator variables.

1

Introduction

Interpretability is essential for a wide range of machine learning applications Rudin et al. (2022).
Missing data pose a challenge to interpretability, because many simple models (e.g., linear models)
are not well-defined when data are missing. This raises the question: how can interpretability be
maintained for datasets with missing values?
We introduce an interpretable model class, M-GAM, that extends Generalized Additive Models
(GAMs) to handle missing data. GAMs take the form of a linear combination of univariate component
functions, with one function corresponding to each feature; this univariate nature is the core reason for
their interpretability (Rudin et al., 2022). We introduce two sets of boolean variables for each feature.
The first consists of missingness indicators that identify which features have missing values. The
second consists of missingness adjustment terms that adjust the shape curves for other features for
each missing features in a sample. This maintains our ability to view a GAM as a sum of univariate
shape functions even when modeling interactions with missing data. As such, an M-GAM is much
simpler to interpret than a GAM built on imputed data, since it avoids creating multivariate features
as happens when imputing features from multiple others. This is illustrated in Figure 1.
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

