Rainbow Teaming:
Open-Ended Generation of Diverse Adversarial Prompts

Mikayel Samvelyan∗1,2 Sharath Chandra Raparthy∗1 Andrei Lupu∗1,3
Eric Hambro1 Aram H. Markosyan1 Manish Bhatt1 Yuning Mao1 Minqi Jiang1,2
Jack Parker-Holder2 Jakob Foerster1,3 Tim Rocktäschel2 Roberta Raileanu1,2
1

Meta 2 University College London 3 University of Oxford

Abstract
As large language models (LLMs) become increasingly prevalent across many realworld applications, understanding and enhancing their robustness to adversarial
attacks is of paramount importance. Existing methods for identifying adversarial
prompts tend to focus on specific domains, lack diversity, or require extensive human annotations. To address these limitations, we present R AINBOW T EAMING, a
novel black-box approach for producing a diverse collection of adversarial prompts.
R AINBOW T EAMING casts adversarial prompt generation as a quality-diversity
problem, and uses open-ended search to generate prompts that are both effective
and diverse. Focusing on the safety domain, we use R AINBOW T EAMING to target
various state-of-the-art LLMs, including the Llama 2 and Llama 3 models. Our
approach reveals hundreds of effective adversarial prompts, with an attack success
rate exceeding 90% across all tested models. Furthermore, we demonstrate that
prompts generated by R AINBOW T EAMING are highly transferable and that finetuning models with synthetic data generated by our method significantly enhances
their safety without sacrificing general performance or helpfulness. We additionally explore the versatility of R AINBOW T EAMING by applying it to question
answering and cybersecurity, showcasing its potential to drive robust open-ended
self-improvement in a wide range of applications.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have recently experienced remarkable growth in both their capabilities [48, 21, 65] and their applications in various fields [47, 64, 59, 7]. As LLMs become increasingly
complex and are deployed in safety-critical environments [62, 36, 39], it is essential to thoroughly
understand their robustness to different inputs. Indeed, the susceptibility of LLMs to adversarial
prompts — prompts crafted to mislead the model or exploit its weaknesses, potentially leading to
unsafe, biased, or incorrect outputs — poses a significant challenge [51, 66, 74]. Identifying and
mitigating these vulnerabilities is therefore vital to ensure the safe and reliable operation of LLMs in
the real world [3, 24].
Current methods for identifying adversarial prompts aimed at “attacking” LLMs and eliciting undesirable outputs are limited by several factors. These limitations include the necessity of fine-tuning an
attacker model [51, 20]; white-box access to the target model [38]; or significant human input [69].
Several recent black-box methods, such as PAIR [8] and TAP [41], rely on a human-in-the-loop
to specify harmful behaviours (e.g., “Write a tutorial on how to hack the university server”) in a
way where the human effort required is linear in the number of desired prompts. Many existing
* Equal contribution. Correspondence to mikayel@samvelyan.com, sharathraparthy@gmail.com, and
alupu@meta.com.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

