SyncVIS: Synchronized Video Instance Segmentation

Rongkun Zheng1 Lu Qi2 Xi Chen1 Yi Wang3
Kun Wang4 Yu Qiao3 Hengshuang Zhao1∗
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 University of California, Merced
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 4 SenseTime Research
{zrk22@connect, hszhao@cs}.hku.hk

Abstract
Recent DETR-based methods have advanced the development of Video Instance
Segmentation (VIS) through transformers’ efficiency and capability in modeling
spatial and temporal information. Despite harvesting remarkable progress, existing
works follow asynchronous designs, which model video sequences via either
video-level queries only or adopting query-sensitive cascade structures, resulting
in difficulties when handling complex and challenging video scenarios. In this
work, we analyze the cause of this phenomenon and the limitations of the current
solutions, and propose to conduct synchronized modeling via a new framework
named SyncVIS. Specifically, SyncVIS explicitly introduces video-level query
embeddings and designs two key modules to synchronize video-level query with
frame-level query embeddings: a synchronized video-frame modeling paradigm
and a synchronized embedding optimization strategy. The former attempts to
promote the mutual learning of frame- and video-level embeddings with each other
and the latter divides large video sequences into small clips for easier optimization.
Extensive experimental evaluations are conducted on the challenging YouTube-VIS
2019 & 2021 & 2022, and OVIS benchmarks, and SyncVIS achieves state-of-theart results, which demonstrates the effectiveness and generality of the proposed
approach. The code is available at https://github.com/rkzheng99/SyncVIS.

1

Introduction

Video Instance Segmentation (VIS) is a fundamental while challenging vision task that aims to detect,
segment, and track object instances inside videos based on a set of predefined object categories at the
same time. With the prosperous video media, VIS has attracted various attention due to its numerous
vital applications in areas such as video understanding, video editing, autonomous driving, etc.
Benefiting from favorable long-range modeling among frames, query-based offline VIS methods [6,
31, 15, 29, 17, 36] like Mask2Former-VIS [6], and SeqFormer [31] begin to dominate the VIS.
Inspired by the object detection method DETR [5], they learn a group of queries that can track and
segment potential instances simultaneously across the multiple frames of a video. On the other hand,
online VIS approaches like IDOL [32] also exploit the temporal consistency of query embeddings
and associate instances via linking the corresponding query embeddings frame by frame. Albeit
the success gained by those methods, we find they barely capitalize multi-frame inputs. In practice,
the Mask2Former-VIS [6] would significantly perform worse if more input frames are given during
training (evidenced in Fig. 3). This is paradoxical to our common sense that more frames could
facilitate deep learning models obtaining more motion information of instances.
For this problem, many researchers [15, 31, 17] point out that the video-level queries are vitally
hard to track the instances well if receiving many frames in training. That is because the trajectory
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

