GLBench: A Comprehensive Benchmark for Graph
with Large Language Models
Yuhan Li1∗, Peisong Wang2∗, Xiao Zhu1 , Aochuan Chen1 , Haiyun Jiang3†, Deng Cai4 , Victor Wai Kin Chan2 , Jia Li1†
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 2 Tsinghua University
3
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 Tencent AI Lab
# Primary contact: jialee@ust.hk

Abstract
The emergence of large language models (LLMs) has revolutionized the way
we interact with graphs, leading to a new paradigm called GraphLLM. Despite
the rapid development of GraphLLM methods in recent years, the progress and
understanding of this field remain unclear due to the lack of a benchmark with
consistent experimental protocols. To bridge this gap, we introduce GLBench, the
first comprehensive benchmark for evaluating GraphLLM methods in both supervised and zero-shot scenarios. GLBench provides a fair and thorough evaluation
of different categories of GraphLLM methods, along with traditional baselines
such as graph neural networks. Through extensive experiments on a collection of
real-world datasets with consistent data processing and splitting strategies, we have
uncovered several key findings. Firstly, GraphLLM methods outperform traditional
baselines in supervised settings, with LLM-as-enhancers showing the most robust
performance. However, using LLMs as predictors is less effective and often leads
to uncontrollable output issues. We also notice that no clear scaling laws exist
for current GraphLLM methods. In addition, both structures and semantics are
crucial for effective zero-shot transfer, and our proposed simple baseline can even
outperform several models tailored for zero-shot scenarios. The data and code of
the benchmark can be found at https://github.com/NineAbyss/GLBench.

1

Introduction

Graphs are ubiquitous in modeling the relational and structural aspects of real-world objects, encompassing a wide range of real-world scenarios [58, 11, 60, 59, 50, 65]. Many of these graphs have
nodes that are associated with text attributes, resulting in the emergence of text-attributed graphs, such
as citation graphs [17, 36] and web links [37]. For example, in citation graphs, each node represents
a paper, and its textual description (e.g., title and abstract) is treated as the node’s text attributes.
To tackle graphs with both node attributes and graph structural information, conventional pipelines
typically fall into two categories. Firstly, graph neural networks (GNNs) [24, 12, 27, 57, 33] have
emerged as the dominant approach through recursive message passing and aggregation mechanisms
among nodes. They often utilize non-contextualized shallow embeddings, such as bag-of-words [13]
and skip-gram [38], as shown in the previous benchmarks [42, 17]. Secondly, pretrained language
models (PLMs) can be directly employed to encode the text associated with each node, transforming
the problem into a text classification task without considering graph structures [61, 8]. Following [52],
we refer to these two learning paradigms as GNN-based and PLM-based methods.
In recent years, the advent of large language models (LLMs) with massive context-aware knowledge
and semantic comprehension capabilities (e.g., LLaMA [46], GPTs [1], Mistral [20]) marks a
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

