On Statistical Rates and Provably Efficient Criteria
of Latent Diffusion Transformers (DiTs)
Jerry Yao-Chieh Hu∗†‡
Sophia Pi‡
†

Weimin Wu∗†‡

Zhao Song§

Zhuoru Li♭

Han Liu†‡♮

Center for Foundation Models and Generative AI, ‡ Department of Computer Science, ♮ Department of Statistics
and Data Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA
§
Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
{jhu,wwm}@u.northwestern.edu;
magic.linuxkde@gmail.com; hanliu@northwestern.edu

Abstract
We investigate the statistical and computational limits of latent Diffusion
Transformers (DiTs) under the low-dimensional linear latent space assumption.
Statistically, we study the universal approximation and sample complexity of the
DiTs score function, as well as the distribution recovery property of the initial data.
Specifically, under mild data assumptions, we derive an approximation error bound
for the score network of latent DiTs, which is sub-linear in the latent space dimension. Additionally, we derive the corresponding sample complexity bound and show
that the data distribution generated from the estimated score function converges
toward a proximate area of the original one. Computationally, we characterize
the hardness of both forward inference and backward computation of latent DiTs,
assuming the Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis (SETH). For forward inference,
we identify efficient criteria for all possible latent DiTs inference algorithms and
showcase our theory by pushing the efficiency toward almost-linear time inference.
For backward computation, we leverage the low-rank structure within the gradient
computation of DiTs training for possible algorithmic speedup. Specifically, we
show that such speedup achieves almost-linear time latent DiTs training by casting
the DiTs gradient as a series of chained low-rank approximations with bounded
error. Under the low-dimensional assumption, we show that the statistical rates and
the computational efficiency are all dominated by the dimension of the subspace,
suggesting that latent DiTs have the potential to bypass the challenges associated
with the high dimensionality of initial data.

1

Introduction

We investigate the statistical and computational limits of latent diffusion transformers (DiTs), assuming the data is supported on an unknown low-dimensional linear subspace. This analysis is not only
practical but also timely. On one hand, DiTs have demonstrated revolutionary success in generative
AI and digital creation by using Transformers as score networks [Esser et al., 2024, Ma et al., 2024,
Chen et al., 2024a, Mo et al., 2023, Peebles and Xie, 2023]. On the other hand, they require significant
computational resources [Liu et al., 2024], making them challenging to train outside of specialized
industrial labs. Therefore, it is natural to ask whether it is possible to make them lighter and faster
without sacrificing performance. Answering these questions requires a fundamental understanding of
the DiT architecture. This work provides a timely theoretical analysis of the fundamental limits of
DiT architecture, aided by the analytical feasibility provided by the low-dimensional data assumption.
∗

Equal contribution. Version: January 3, 2025. Future updates are on arXiv.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

