From Causal to Concept-Based
Representation Learning

Goutham Rajendran1∗
Bryon Aragam3
1

Simon Buchholz2∗

Bernhard Schölkopf2,4

Pradeep Ravikumar1

Machine Learning Dept., Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
2
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
3
University of Chicago, Chicago, USA
4
ELLIS Institute, Tübingen, Germany

Abstract
To build intelligent machine learning systems, modern representation learning
attempts to recover latent generative factors from data, such as in causal representation learning. A key question in this growing field is to provide rigorous conditions
under which latent factors can be identified and thus, potentially learned. Motivated
by extensive empirical literature on linear representations and concept learning, we
propose to relax causal notions with a geometric notion of concepts. We formally
define a notion of concepts and show rigorously that they can be provably recovered from diverse data. Instead of imposing assumptions on the “true” generative
latent space, we assume that concepts can be represented linearly in this latent
space. The tradeoff is that instead of identifying the “true” generative factors, we
identify a subset of desired human-interpretable concepts that are relevant for a
given application. Experiments on synthetic data, multimodal CLIP models and
large language models supplement our results and show the utility of our approach.
In this way, we provide a foundation for moving from causal representations to
interpretable, concept-based representations by bringing together ideas from these
two neighboring disciplines.

1

Introduction

A key goal of modern machine learning is to learn representations of complex data that are humaninterpretable and can be controlled. Although existing models are known to extract features that are
useful and intuitive to humans (e.g. color, shape, size), the sensitivity of these models in capturing
these features is notorious [10, 25, 71]: The enormous capacity of contemporary models means that
it is possible to reconstruct the input data with meaningless representations (e.g. posterior collapse
[39, 24, 129]). Accordingly, understanding how and when useful features can be captured, along with
providing assurances on the quality of learned representations, is an ongoing endeavor [27].
A natural approach to this problem is to model the input data X = (X1 , . . . , Xdx ) as X = f (Z),
where f is a nonlinear transformation that maps structured underlying latent generative factors
Z = (Z1 , . . . , Zdz ) to X, and then to attempt to recover the model parameters Z, f from X. This is
an appealing approach since it implies no restrictions on the data X, and has the interpretation of
recovering “ground truth” factors that generated the data. It is well-known that without additional
∗

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

