Analytically deriving Partial Information
Decomposition for affine systems of stable and
convolution-closed distributions
Chaitanya Goswami
Electrical & Computer Engineering,
Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, PA-15213.
cgoswami@andrew.cmu.edu

Amanda Merkley
Electrical & Computer Engineering,
Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, PA-15213.
amerkley@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Bivariate partial information decomposition (PID) has emerged as a promising
tool for analyzing interactions in complex systems, particularly in neuroscience.
PID achieves this by decomposing the information that two sources (e.g., different
brain regions) have about a target (e.g., a stimulus) into unique, redundant, and
synergistic terms. However, the computation of PID remains a challenging problem,
often involving optimization over distributions. While several works have been
proposed to compute PID terms numerically, there is a surprising dearth of work
on computing PID terms analytically. The only known analytical PID result
is for jointly Gaussian distributions. In this work, we present two theoretical
advances that enable analytical calculation of the PID terms for numerous wellknown distributions, including distributions relevant to neuroscience, such as
Poisson, Cauchy, and binomial. Our first result generalizes the analytical Gaussian
PID result to the much larger class of stable distributions. We also discover a
theoretical link between PID and the emerging fields of data thinning and data
fission. Our second result utilizes this link to derive analytical PID terms for two
more classes of distributions: convolution-closed distributions and a sub-class
of the exponential family. Furthermore, we provide an analytical upper bound
for approximately computing PID for convolution-closed distributions, whose
tightness we demonstrate in simulation.

1

Introduction

Bivariate partial information decomposition1 (PID) is an information-theoretic framework developed
for answering a central inquiry in many neuroscientific and machine learning studies: how do
two sources, X and Y , jointly process information about a target M ? PID answers this question
by quantifying the M -specific information contained in different interactions between X and Y .
Specifically, it decomposes the total information X and Y have about M into four components: (i)
the information about M contained uniquely in X, (ii) the information about M contained uniquely
in Y , (iii) the redundant information about M contained in both X and Y , and (iv) the synergistic
information about M which arises from the interaction between X and Y .
The PID terms offer novel insights for understanding interactions within complex systems, particularly
in neuroscience. For instance, PID has been used to understand the firing patterns of grid cells [1, 2]
and to study the flow of information in the visual cortex [3]. The following list of works [1,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8] demonstrate the application of PID in studying diverse neuroscientific questions.
1

Throughout this work we refer to bivariate PID as PID.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

