PACE: Marrying generalization in PArameter-efficient
fine-tuning with Consistency rEgularization

Yao Ni† Shan Zhang‡,† Piotr Koniusz∗,§,†
The Australian National University § Data61 CSIRO
‡
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide
†

†

yao.ni@anu.edu.au ‡ shan.zhang@adelaide.edu.au § piotr.koniusz@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) effectively adapts pre-trained transformers
to downstream tasks. However, the optimization of tasks performance often comes
at the cost of generalizability in fine-tuned models. To address this issue, we
theoretically connect smaller weight gradient norms during training and larger
datasets to the improvements in model generalization. Motivated by this connection,
we propose reducing gradient norms for enhanced generalization and aligning finetuned model with the pre-trained counterpart to retain knowledge from large-scale
pre-training data. Yet, naive alignment does not guarantee gradient reduction and
can potentially cause gradient explosion, complicating efforts to manage gradients.
To address such an issue, we propose PACE, marrying generalization of PArameterefficient fine-tuning with Consistency rEgularization. We perturb features learned
from the adapter with the multiplicative noise and ensure the fine-tuned model
remains consistent for same sample under different perturbations. Theoretical
analysis shows that PACE not only implicitly regularizes gradients for enhanced
generalization, but also implicitly aligns the fine-tuned and pre-trained models to
retain knowledge. Experimental evidence supports our theories. PACE surpasses
existing PEFT methods in visual adaptation tasks (VTAB-1k, FGVC, few-shot
learning, domain adaptation) showcasing its potential for resource-efficient finetuning. It also improves LoRA in text classification (GLUE) and mathematical
reasoning (GSM-8K). The code is available at github.com/MaxwellYaoNi/PACE.

1

Introduction

Transformers [68], with the self-attention mechanism [3] capturing long-range dependencies in data,
succeed in various deep learning tasks, including image classification (ViT [16]), multimodal learning
(CLIP [55]), image synthesis (StableDiffusion [57]), semantic segmentation (SAM [33]) and text
generation (LLaMA [65]). The success of transformers can be largely attributed to the availability
of abundant data, such as ImageNet [11] and Laion5B [60], which empower researchers to scale up
these models by training them under an enormous number of parameters.
Such huge models, with knowledge from large-scale pre-training [63], constitute on foundation
models that can be easily adapted to various downstream tasks through full fine-tuning or linear
probing [20], eliminating the need for task-specific model design [8]. However, full fine-tuning is
storage-intensive and infeasible for maintaining separate model weights as the number of tasks grows,
while linear probing, which only trains the last head layer, yields inferior adaptation performance.
To overcome these limitations, Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) [24] fine-tunes only a small
subset of parameters, thereby reducing storage requirements while surpassing the performance of
∗

The corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

