Learning Structure-Aware Representations of
Dependent Types
Konstantinos Kogkalidis1,2

Orestis Melkonian3

Jean-Philippe Bernardy4,5

kokos.kogkalidis@aalto.fi

orestis.melkonian@iohk.io

jean-philippe.bernardy@gu.se

1

Aalto University
University of Bologna
3
Input Output (IOG)
4
University of Gothenburg
5
Chalmers University of Technology
2

Abstract
Agda is a dependently-typed programming language and a proof assistant, pivotal
in proof formalization and programming language theory. This paper extends the
Agda ecosystem into machine learning territory, and, vice versa, makes Agdarelated resources available to machine learning practitioners. We introduce and
release a novel dataset of Agda program-proofs that is elaborate and extensive
enough to support various machine learning applications – the first of its kind.
Leveraging the dataset’s ultra-high resolution, which details proof states at the
sub-type level, we propose a novel neural architecture targeted at faithfully representing dependently-typed programs on the basis of structural rather than nominal
principles. We instantiate and evaluate our architecture in a premise selection setup,
where it achieves promising initial results, surpassing strong baselines.

1

Introduction

Automation on theorem proving over arbitrary domains has been a staple task for computer science
and artificial intelligence, and a concept that in fact predates the inception of both fields. Over the
last decade, the success of gradient-based optimization and large-scale neural models has brought
this once elusive goal within reach. Capitalizing on that fact, community efforts have led to a wider
availability of language-specific theorem-proving datasets. This, in turn, has led to a constant stream of
milestones and achievements. Rather than threatening theorists worldwide with premature retirement,
this development empowers mathematicians and computer scientists on the individual scale, and
potentiates an unprecedented acceleration for the formal sciences on the collective level.
Theorem-proving tasks can take on many forms, one of which is premise selection. In a premise
selection setup, the model is presented with a goal statement and a collection of theorems or lemmas,
some of which are potentially relevant for the proof process, whereas others are not. The model
is then tasked with selecting which of those lemmas are relevant. A successful model can relieve
burden from the human operator by dramatically reducing or even trivializing the proof search space.
From an epistemic perspective, premise selection epitomizes the good aspects of neurosymbolic AI.
Human and machine get to interact and collaborate towards a common goal. Meanwhile, the model’s
predictions are made safe by virtue of being confined within (and verified by) a trustworthy white
box: the proof assistant.
Depending on the logic employed by the prover, the line between proof search and program synthesis
may become blurry. Concretely, the Curry-Howard correspondence asserts an equivalence between
intuitionistic logics and constructive type theories; proofs in such logics are indistinguishable from
programs in some corresponding functional programming language, and vice versa. This marvel
has been the foundational core behind the development of type-theoretic proof assistants, such as
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

