FIRE: A Dataset for Feedback Integration
and Refinement Evaluation of Multimodal Models

Pengxiang Li1,2∗ Zhi Gao2,3∗ Bofei Zhang2∗ Tao Yuan2 Yuwei Wu1,5
Mehrtash Harandi4 Yunde Jia5,1 Song-Chun Zhu2,3,6 Qing Li2
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology,
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI
3
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
4
Department of Electrical and Computer System Engineering, Monash University
5
Guangdong Laboratory of Machine Perception and Intelligent Computing, Shenzhen MSU-BIT University
6
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University

mm-fire.github.io
USER

LLAVA

FIRE

Which kind of vehicle is
waiting for the traffic light?

Question

Initial Response

What do you see in this image?

The vehicles look like typical vehicles used for
personal transport. The vehicles are motorcycles.

Motorcycles are not correct. Look again at the
structure and features of the vehicles, such as
the number of wheels and the body shape.
Upon reevaluating the image, the vehicles are
indeed motorcycles.

GPT-4V

A sign with a red circle and a slash over a skateboard
symbol, indicating that skateboarding is prohibited.
Enhance your response by specifying the exact text.
Mention background details.
The sign has a specific text under the skateboard symbol that
reads "SKATEBOARDS SEC. 3.02 P.C. FINE $76.00". The sign is
attached to a pole and there is a building in the background.

Considering the feedback about wheels and
body shape, the vehicles have four wheels
and a enclosed body structure. The vehicles
are cars.

The sign prohibits skateboarding and is attached to a pole. It
features a red circle and slash over a skateboard symbol.
Below symbol, there is text that reads "No Skateboarding"
and "SEC. 30.2 C.F. Fine $76.00". Background includes a
building and a clear blue sky.

Considering the feedback and looking more
closely, the vehicles have four wheels and
enclosed bodies, which are typical of another
common type of personal vehicle. The
vehicles are cars.

The sign in the image has a universal "No" symbol over a black
silhouette of a skateboard, indicating no skateboarding
allowed. It is mounted on a gray pole. Below the symbol, there
is text that mentions a section of a code and a fine amount.

Feedback

Refined Response

Find the area of the rhombus.
A:38 B:84 C:168 D:336

12 ft and 7 ft are the lengths of the sides of the
rhombus, not realizing these are the diagonals. The
answer is B:84
There's a mistake about what these
measurements represent. In addition, the area
can be calculated using the lengths of the
diagonals, not the sides.

The diagonals are 12 ft and 7 ft. The area of a
rhombus is calculated by multiplying the lengths
of the two diagonals. The area of the rhombus is:
Area = Diagonal 1 x Diagonal 2, Area = 12 ft x 7 ft,
Area = 84 sq ft. The correct answer is B: 84.
12 ft and 7 ft are the half of the diagonals. The
area is calculated as half the product of its
diagonals. Thus, The answer is C:168
Recalculate carefully this time, using the correct
formula and ensuring the multiplication and
division are done accurately. The answer is C:168

Figure 1: The comparison of the feedback-refining capability among different models. While the
original LLaVA hardly improves its responses, our model trained on FIRE can effectively integrate
the user feedback and produce much better responses, which are closer to those of GPT-4V.

Abstract
Vision language models (VLMs) have achieved impressive progress in diverse
applications, becoming a prevalent research direction. In this paper, we build
FIRE, a feedback-refinement dataset, consisting of 1.1M multi-turn conversations
that are derived from 27 source datasets, empowering VLMs to spontaneously
refine their responses based on user feedback across diverse tasks. To scale up
the data collection, FIRE is collected in two components: FIRE-100K and FIRE1M, where FIRE-100K is generated by GPT-4V, and FIRE-1M is freely generated
via models trained on FIRE-100K. Then, we build FIRE-Bench, a benchmark
to comprehensively evaluate the feedback-refining capability of VLMs, which
contains 11K feedback-refinement conversations as the test data, two evaluation
settings, and a model to provide feedback for VLMs. We develop the FIRELLaVA model by fine-tuning LLaVA on FIRE-100K and FIRE-1M, which shows
remarkable feedback-refining capability on FIRE-Bench and outperforms untrained
VLMs by 50%, making more efficient user-agent interactions and underscoring the
significance of the FIRE dataset.
∗

Equal contribution.

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

