Approaching Human-Level Forecasting with Language
Models
Danny Halawi*

Fred Zhang*

Chen Yueh-Han*

Jacob Steinhardt
UC Berkeley
{dhalawi, z0, john0922ucb, jsteinhardt}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Forecasting future events is important for policy and decision making. In this work,
we study whether language models (LMs) can forecast at the level of competitive
human forecasters. Towards this goal, we develop a retrieval-augmented LM system designed to automatically search for relevant information, generate forecasts,
and aggregate predictions. To facilitate our study, we collect a large dataset of
questions from competitive forecasting platforms. Under a test set published after
the knowledge cut-offs of our LMs, we evaluate the end-to-end performance of our
system against the aggregates of human forecasts. On average, the system nears
the crowd aggregate of competitive forecasters, and in some settings surpasses it.
Our work suggests that using LMs to forecast the future could provide accurate
predictions at scale and help to inform institutional decision making.

1

Introduction

Forecasting events is important in the modern world. Governments rely on economic and geopolitical
forecasts for decision-making. Companies hire and invest based on forecasts of market conditions
(Armstrong, 2001). In 2020, epidemiological forecasts for COVID-19 prompted national lockdowns
across the globe (Adam, 2020).
There are two main approaches to forecasting. Statistical forecasting primarily uses tools from
time-series modeling. This methodology typically excels when data are abundant and under minimal
distributional shift. By contrast, in judgmental forecasting, human forecasters assign probabilities to
future events based on their own judgments, making use of historical data, domain knowledge, Fermi
estimates, and intuition. They draw information from diverse sources and reason based on detailed
contexts of the task. This enables accurate forecasts even with scarce past observations or under
significant distributional shift (Tetlock and Gardner, 2015). We will refer to judgmental forecasting
simply as “forecasting”.
Since forecasting relies on human effort and expertise, it can be expensive, delayed, or applicable
only in specific domains. Moreover, most human forecasts contain little or no explanatory reasoning.
These limitations motivate using language models (LMs) to automate forecasting (Hendrycks et al.,
2021). Because they can parse and produce texts rapidly, LMs can provide cheap and timely forecasts.
Because they are pre-trained on web-scale data, they are endowed with massive, cross-domain
knowledge. And because we can elicit their reasonings through prompts, we can examine them to
(partially) understand the final forecast.
In this work, we build a LM pipeline for automated forecasting, with a focus on predicting binary
outcomes. Our system implements and automates three key components in the traditional forecasting
*

Equal Contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

