GFlowNet Assisted Biological Sequence Editing

Pouya M. Ghari∗
University of California Irvine
Gökcen Eraslan
Genentech

Alex M. Tseng
Genentech

Romain Lopez
Genentech, Stanford University

Tommaso Biancalani
Genentech

Ehsan Hajiramezanali†
Genentech

Gabriele Scalia
Genentech

Abstract
Editing biological sequences has extensive applications in synthetic biology and
medicine, such as designing regulatory elements for nucleic-acid therapeutics and
treating genetic disorders. The primary objective in biological-sequence editing
is to determine the optimal modifications to a sequence which augment certain
biological properties while adhering to a minimal number of alterations to ensure
predictability and potentially support safety. In this paper, we propose GFNSeqEditor, a novel biological-sequence editing algorithm which builds on the recently
proposed area of generative flow networks (GFlowNets). Our proposed GFNSeqEditor identifies elements within a starting seed sequence that may compromise a
desired biological property. Then, using a learned stochastic policy, the algorithm
makes edits at these identified locations, offering diverse modifications for each
sequence to enhance the desired property. The number of edits can be regulated
through specific hyperparameters. We conducted extensive experiments on a range
of real-world datasets and biological applications, and our results underscore the superior performance of our proposed algorithm compared to existing state-of-the-art
sequence editing methods.

1

Introduction

Editing biological sequences has a multitude of applications in biology, medicine, and biotechnology.
For instance, gene editing serves as a tool to elucidate the role of individual gene products in
diseases [28] and offers the potential to rectify genetic mutations in afflicted tissues and cells for
therapeutic interventions [9]. The primary objective in biological-sequence editing is to enhance
specific biological attributes of a starting seed sequence, while minimizing the number of edits. This
reduction in the number of alterations not only has the potential to improve safety but also facilitates
the predictability and precision of modification outcomes.
Existing methodologies that leverage generative modeling in the context of biological sequences have
predominantly concentrated on de novo generation of sequences with desired properties [52, 61, 3].
A common feature of these approaches is generating entirely new sequences from scratch. As a result,
there is an inherent risk of deviating significantly from naturally occurring sequences, compromising
safety (e.g., the risk of designing sequences that might trigger an immune response) and predictability
(e.g., obtaining misleading predictions from models that are trained on genomic sequences due to
∗
†

Work has been done while interning at Genentech
Corresponding author: hajiramezanali.ehsan@gene.com.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

