SegVol: Universal and Interactive Volumetric Medical
Image Segmentation

Yuxin Du1,2 , Fan Bai1,2,3 , Tiejun Huang2,4 , Bo Zhao1,2†
1

2

School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
BAAI 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Peking University
†
Corresponding author: Bo Zhao <bo.zhao@sjtu.edu.cn>

Abstract
Precise image segmentation provides clinical study with instructive information.
Despite the remarkable progress achieved in medical image segmentation, there is
still an absence of a 3D foundation segmentation model that can segment a wide
range of anatomical categories with easy user interaction. In this paper, we propose
a 3D foundation segmentation model, named SegVol, supporting universal and
interactive volumetric medical image segmentation. By scaling up training data to
90K unlabeled Computed Tomography (CT) volumes and 6K labeled CT volumes,
this foundation model supports the segmentation of over 200 anatomical categories
using semantic and spatial prompts. To facilitate efficient and precise inference
on volumetric images, we design a zoom-out-zoom-in mechanism. Extensive
experiments on 22 anatomical segmentation tasks verify that SegVol outperforms
the competitors in 19 tasks, with improvements up to 37.24% compared to the
runner-up methods. We demonstrate the effectiveness and importance of specific
designs by ablation study. We expect this foundation model can promote the
development of volumetric medical image analysis. The model and code are
publicly available at: https://github.com/BAAI-DCAI/SegVol.

1

Introduction

Volumetric medical segmentation, involving extracting 3D regions of interest, such as organs, lesions,
and tissues, plays a pivotal role in medical image analysis by accurately modeling the 3D structural
information of the human body from volumetric medical images such as CT or MRI. The accurate
segmentation can benefit numerous clinical applications including tumors monitoring[1, 2], surgical
planning[3, 4], disease diagnosis[5], therapy optimization[6, 7], etc.
Compared to 2D medical image segmentation[8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17], volumetric
image segmentation is notably more challenging due to the labor-intensive annotation and resourceconsuming computation. Recently, the research of volumetric medical image segmentation has
garnered substantial attention, leading to a series of advancements[18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23]. However,
existing volumetric medical segmentation methods have several key limitations which prevent their
application in challenging tasks, e.g., liver tumor or colon cancer segmentation[24, 25, 26, 27], and
real-world tasks, e.g., human-interactive segmentation[28, 29, 30, 31, 32].
Firstly, the publicly available volumetric medical image datasets usually consist of a small number of
mask annotations from a few varying categories. Due to the different label spaces, the traditional
task-specific segmentation models trained on one dataset have difficulty in generalizing to others. For
example, the CT-ORG dataset[33, 34, 24, 35] contains the ‘lungs’ category, while this category is
split into two sub-classes and named ‘left lung’ and ‘right lung’ in the LUNA16 dataset[36]. Hence,
a universal segmentation model has to understand the semantics of anatomical categories. Secondly,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

