Hydra: Bidirectional State Space Models
Through Generalized Matrix Mixers

Sukjun Hwang∗,1 , Aakash Lahoti∗,1 , Ratish Puduppully†,2 , Tri Dao3 , and Albert Gu1,4
1

Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University
2
IT University of Copenhagen
3
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
4
Cartesia AI
{sukjunh,alahoti}@cs.cmu.edu, rapu@itu.dk, tri@tridao.me, agu@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
A wide array of sequence models are built on a framework modeled after Transformers, comprising alternating sequence mixer and channel mixer layers. This paper
studies a unifying matrix mixer view of sequence mixers that can be conceptualized
as a linear map on the input sequence. This framework encompasses a broad range
of well-known sequence models, including the self-attention of Transformers as
well as recent strong alternatives such as structured state space models (SSMs), and
allows understanding downstream characteristics such as efficiency and expressivity
through properties of their structured matrix class. We identify a key axis of matrix
parameterizations termed sequence alignment, which increases the flexibility and
performance of matrix mixers, providing insights into the strong performance of
Transformers and recent SSMs such as Mamba. Furthermore, the matrix mixer
framework offers a systematic approach to developing sequence mixers with desired
properties, allowing us to develop several new sub-quadratic sequence models.
In particular, we propose a natural bidirectional extension of the Mamba model
(Hydra), parameterized as a quasiseparable matrix mixer, which demonstrates superior performance over other sequence models including Transformers on non-causal
tasks. As a drop-in replacement for attention layers, Hydra outperforms BERT by
0.8 points on the GLUE benchmark and ViT by 2% Top-1 accuracy on ImageNet.

1

Introduction

Large-scale pretrained models such as GPT [35], BERT [10], and ViT [11] exhibit state-of-the-art performance across a wide range of tasks in multiple domains, including language and vision. A large number
of these pretrained models follow a multi-layer architectural blueprint: a sequence mixer, such as
Self-Attention1 [42], aggregates information across the input sequence, followed by a channel mixer processes information within each sequence element. Over the years, Attention has been the predominant
choice for sequence mixing due to its ability to facilitate direct pairwise interactions between elements
of the input sequence in a single step. However, this capability incurs a quadratic cost with respect to
sequence length, making the training and deployment of these models prohibitively expensive for longer
sequences. Although numerous alternatives have been proposed, designing principled sequence models
that match the performance and versatility of attention-based systems remains a substantial challenge.
One general strategy in designing alternative sequence models involves substituting the Attention
matrix with different matrix parameterizations as the core sequence mixer. These modifications are
motivated by various goals. For instance, simplifying the sequence mixer has led to the development of
models such as MLP-Mixer [40], which uses dense matrices, and FNet [23], which utilizes the Discrete
* Equal Contributions.
†
1

Work done at A*STAR, Singapore.
In this paper, Attention [3] exclusively refers to Self-Attention.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

