A Metalearned Neural Circuit for
Nonparametric Bayesian Inference

Jake C. Snell
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
jsnell@princeton.edu

Gianluca M. Bencomo
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
gb5435@princeton.edu

Thomas L. Griffiths
Department of Computer Science
Department of Psychology
Princeton University
tomg@princeton.edu

Abstract
Most applications of machine learning to classification assume a closed set of balanced classes. This is at odds with the real world, where class occurrence statistics
often follow a long-tailed power-law distribution, rarely revealing the entire problem domain in a single sample. Nonparametric Bayesian models naturally capture
this phenomenon, but have significant practical barriers to widespread adoption,
namely implementation complexity and computational inefficiency. To address
this, we present a method for extracting the inductive bias from a nonparametric
Bayesian model and transferring it to an artificial neural network. By simulating
data with a nonparametric Bayesian prior, we can metalearn a sequence model that
performs inference over an unlimited set of classes. After training, this “neural
circuit” has distilled the corresponding inductive bias and can successfully perform
sequential inference over an open set of classes. Our experimental results show
that the metalearned neural circuit achieves comparable or better performance
than particle filter-based methods that explicitly perform Bayesian nonparametric
inference while being faster and simpler to use.

1

Introduction

Standard machine learning approaches to classification assume that the set of possible classes is
known a priori. Classification in this setting thus involves selecting the most appropriate class label
from a closed set. However, this is not the case for human learners. Imagine European explorers
in Australia seeing a kangaroo for the first time. Rather than trying to classify this observation into
an existing class – is it a deer or a rabbit? – they recognized that a new class needs to be created.
Although this is easy for humans, current machine learning systems struggle to identify novel classes
and use them in predictions [46].
Bayesian statistics offers an elegant solution to the problem of novel classes: define a model in a
way that does not make a commitment to an upper bound on the number of classes. This idea is
expressed in nonparametric Bayesian models, namely the Dirichlet process mixture model (DPMM)
[3]. In this model, a new data point is assumed to be generated from an existing class with probability
proportional to the number of previous observations from that class and from a new class with a
probability proportional to α, a hyperparameter of the model. This makes it possible to both postulate
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

