Bridging OOD Detection and Generalization:
A Graph-Theoretic View

Han Wang∗
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
hanw14@illinois.edu

Yixuan Li
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
sharonli@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
In the context of modern machine learning, models deployed in real-world scenarios often encounter diverse data shifts like covariate and semantic shifts, leading to
challenges in both out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization and detection. Despite
considerable attention to these issues separately, a unified framework for theoretical
understanding and practical usage is lacking. To bridge the gap, we introduce a
graph-theoretic framework to jointly tackle both OOD generalization and detection
problems. By leveraging the graph formulation, data representations are obtained
through the factorization of the graph’s adjacency matrix, enabling us to derive
provable error quantifying OOD generalization and detection performance. Empirical results showcase competitive performance in comparison to existing methods,
thereby validating our theoretical underpinnings. Code is publicly available at
https://github.com/deeplearning-wisc/graph-spectral-ood.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models deployed in real-world applications often confront data that deviates
from the training distribution in unforeseen ways. As depicted in Figure 1, a model trained on
in-distribution (ID) data (e.g., seabirds) may encounter data exhibiting covariate shifts, such as birds
in forest environments. In this scenario, the model must retain its ability to accurately classify these
covariate-shifted out-of-distribution (OOD) samples as birds—an essential capability known as OOD
generalization [1, 2]. Alternatively, the model may encounter data with novel semantics, like dogs,
which it has not seen during training. In this case, the model must recognize these semantic-shifted
OOD samples and abstain from making incorrect predictions, underscoring the significance of OOD
detection [3, 4]. Thus, for a model to be considered robust and reliable, it must excel in both OOD
generalization and detection, tasks that are often addressed separately in current research.
Recently, Bai et al. [5] introduced a framework that addresses both OOD generalization and detection
simultaneously. The problem setting leverages unlabeled wild data naturally arising in the model’s
operational environment, representing it as a composite distribution of ID, covariate-shifted OOD,
and semantic-shifted OOD data. While such data is ubiquitously available in many real-world
applications, harnessing the power of wild data is challenging due to the heterogeneity of the wild
data distribution—the learner lacks clear membership (ID, Covariate-OOD, Semantic-OOD) for
samples drawn from the wild data distribution. Despite empirical progress made, a formalized
understanding of how wild data impacts OOD generalization and detection is still lacking.
In this paper, we formalize a graph-theoretic framework for understanding OOD generalization and
detection problems jointly. We begin by formulating a graph, where the vertices are all the data points
and edges connect similar data points. These edges are defined based on a combination of supervised
∗

Work done while visiting UW-Madison.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

