Classifier Clustering and Feature Alignment for
Federated Learning under Distributed Concept Drift

Junbao Chen
Beijing Institute of Technology
junbaochen@bit.edu.cn

Jingfeng Xue
Beijing Institute of Technology
xuejf@bit.edu.cn

Yong Wang
Beijing Institute of Technology
wangyong@bit.edu.cn

Zhenyan Liu∗
Beijing Institute of Technology
zhenyanliu@bit.edu.cn

Lu Huang
Beijing Institute of Technology
luhuang@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Data heterogeneity is one of the key challenges in federated learning, and many
efforts have been devoted to tackling this problem. However, distributed concept
drift with data heterogeneity, where clients may additionally experience different
concept drifts, is a largely unexplored area. In this work, we focus on real drift,
where the conditional distribution P (Y|X ) changes. We first study how distributed
concept drift affects the model training and find that local classifier plays a critical
role in drift adaptation. Moreover, to address data heterogeneity, we study the
feature alignment under distributed concept drift, and find two factors that are
crucial for feature alignment: the conditional distribution P (Y|X ) and the degree
of data heterogeneity. Motivated by the above findings, we propose FedCCFA,
a federated learning framework with classifier clustering and feature alignment.
To enhance collaboration under distributed concept drift, FedCCFA clusters local
classifiers at class-level and generates clustered feature anchors according to the
clustering results. Assisted by these anchors, FedCCFA adaptively aligns clients’
feature spaces based on the entropy of label distribution P (Y), alleviating the
inconsistency in feature space. Our results demonstrate that FedCCFA significantly
outperforms existing methods under various concept drift settings. Code is available
at https://github.com/Chen-Junbao/FedCCFA.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) [28] is an emerging privacy-preserving machine learning paradigm that
allows multiple clients to collaboratively train a global model without sharing their raw data. In FL,
clients train the models on their local data and send the updated models to the server for aggregation.
Driven by the growing need for privacy protection, FL has been widely applied in various real-world
scenarios [8, 16, 30, 44].
One significant challenge in FL is data heterogeneity, which denotes the discrepancies in the data
distributions across clients. Such discrepancies can hinder the convergence of the global model.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

