Spatio-Temporal Interactive Learning for Efficient
Image Reconstruction of Spiking Cameras

Bin Fan1∗ Jiaoyang Yin2,3∗ Yuchao Dai4 Chao Xu1 Tiejun Huang2,3 Boxin Shi2,3†
1
Nat’l Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
State Key Lab of Multimedia Info. Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
Nat’l Eng. Research Ctr. of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
4
School of Electronics and Information, Northwestern Polytechnical University
{binfan,shiboxin,tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn, yinjiaoyang@stu.pku.edu.cn,
xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn, daiyuchao@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
The spiking camera is an emerging neuromorphic vision sensor that records highspeed motion scenes by asynchronously firing continuous binary spike streams.
Prevailing image reconstruction methods, generating intermediate frames from
these spike streams, often rely on complex step-by-step network architectures that
overlook the intrinsic collaboration of spatio-temporal complementary information.
In this paper, we propose an efficient spatio-temporal interactive reconstruction
network to jointly perform inter-frame feature alignment and intra-frame feature
filtering in a coarse-to-fine manner. Specifically, it starts by extracting hierarchical
features from a concise hybrid spike representation, then refines the motion fields
and target frames scale-by-scale, ultimately obtaining a full-resolution output.
Meanwhile, we introduce a symmetric interactive attention block and a multimotion field estimation block to further enhance the interaction capability of the
overall network. Experiments on synthetic and real-captured data show that our
approach exhibits excellent performance while maintaining low model complexity.
The code is available at https://github.com/GitCVfb/STIR.

1

Introduction

High-speed imaging has become a high-profile topic in fields such as autonomous driving, industrial
monitoring, and robotics, due to its ability to precisely capture the continuous light intensity behaviour
in a scene. Conventional digital cameras often rely on expensive specialized sensors when capturing
fast-moving objects, so the trade-off between frame rate and cost has limited the widespread adoption
and further development of high-speed cameras. In recent years, neuromorphic cameras, especially
event cameras [31, 40, 1, 19] and spiking cameras [7, 26], have emerged as innovative vision sensors.
They possess characteristics such as high temporal resolution, high dynamic range, and low latency,
opening up new possibilities for high-speed imaging of consumer-grade cameras.
The spiking camera achieves integral sampling with 40,000Hz by emulating the central fovea’s
sampling mechanism in the retina [34, 47]. Each photoreceptive unit continuously and independently
captures photons, and asynchronously fires spikes once the accumulated intensity exceeds a given
threshold. Unlike event cameras that only record relative changes in light intensity (i.e., differential
sampling), spiking cameras have the ability to encode the absolute light intensity because the spike
firing rate is proportional to the scene brightness. Consequently, the spiking camera can preserve
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

