Contrastive-Equivariant Self-Supervised Learning
Improves Alignment with Primate Visual Area IT

Thomas Yerxa 1 ∗ Jenelle Feather 1,2 Eero P. Simoncelli 1,2 SueYeon Chung1,2
1
Center for Neural Science, New York University
2
Center for Computational Neuroscience, Flatiron Institute, Simons Foundation

Abstract
Models trained with self-supervised learning objectives have recently matched or
surpassed models trained with traditional supervised object recognition in their
ability to predict neural responses of object-selective neurons in the primate visual system. A self-supervised learning objective is arguably a more biologically
plausible organizing principle, as the optimization does not require a large number
of labeled examples. However, typical self-supervised objectives may result in
network representations that are overly invariant to changes in the input. Here, we
show that a representation with structured variability to input transformations is
better aligned with known features of visual perception and neural computation.
We introduce a novel framework for converting standard invariant SSL losses into
“contrastive-equivariant” versions that encourage preservation of input transformations without supervised access to the transformation parameters. We demonstrate
that our proposed method systematically increases the ability of models to predict
responses in macaque inferior temporal cortex. Our results demonstrate the promise
of incorporating known features of neural computation into task-optimization for
building better models of visual cortex.

1

Introduction

In the past decade, task-optimized deep neural networks (DNNs) have been used to predict responses
of object-selective neurons in primates to natural image stimuli [Yamins et al., 2014, Schrimpf et al.,
2020, Willeke et al., 2023]. Such networks have a pronounced advantage over more traditional
models for explaining responses in deeper areas with more abstract representations, such as inferior
temporal cortex (IT). This observation naturally leads to the hypothesis that task optimization can
provide a normative account for IT neuron tuning properties: late-stage visual representations are
shaped by the need to perform ecologically relevant tasks.
However, the task that initially led to these advances was that of supervised object classification, a
specific task that relies on an implausibly large number of labeled examples [Lindsay, 2021]. More
recently, computer vision has undergone a “self-supervised learning” (SSL) revolution. A variety of
methods have been proposed to learn representations that match or surpass supervised training on
multiple tasks by deriving sources of supervision from the data itself rather than relying on human
annotations. For example, many popular SSL strategies aim to unify representations of different
transformations of the same image (commonly referred to as “views”), while enforcing diversity
among representations of distinct images. Additionally, self-supervised representations can predict
primate neural responses with fidelity comparable to supervised representations [Zhuang et al., 2021,
Konkle and Alvarez, 2022, Parthasarathy et al., 2024].
∗

Corresponding Author: tey214@nyu.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

