DeSparsify: Adversarial Attack Against
Token Sparsification Mechanisms

Oryan Yehezkel∗ , Alon Zolfi∗ , Amit Baras, Yuval Elovici, Asaf Shabtai
Department of Software and Information Systems Engineering
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel
{oryanyeh,zolfi,barasa}@post.bgu.ac.il, {elovici,shabtaia}@bgu.ac.il

Abstract
Vision transformers have contributed greatly to advancements in the computer
vision domain, demonstrating state-of-the-art performance in diverse tasks (e.g.,
image classification, object detection). However, their high computational requirements grow quadratically with the number of tokens used. Token sparsification
mechanisms have been proposed to address this issue. These mechanisms employ
an input-dependent strategy, in which uninformative tokens are discarded from the
computation pipeline, improving the model’s efficiency. However, their dynamism
and average-case assumption makes them vulnerable to a new threat vector – carefully crafted adversarial examples capable of fooling the sparsification mechanism,
resulting in worst-case performance. In this paper, we present DeSparsify, an
attack targeting the availability of vision transformers that use token sparsification
mechanisms. The attack aims to exhaust the operating system’s resources, while
maintaining its stealthiness. Our evaluation demonstrates the attack’s effectiveness
on three token sparsification mechanisms and examines the attack’s transferability
between them and its effect on the GPU resources. To mitigate the impact of the
attack, we propose various countermeasures. The source code is available online1 .

1

Introduction

In the last few years, vision transformers have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in computer
vision tasks, outperforming traditional convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in various tasks such
as image classification, object detection, and segmentation [13]. While vision transformers have
excellent representational capabilities, the computational demands of their transformer blocks make
them unsuitable for deployment on edge devices. These demands mainly arise from the quadratic
number of interactions (inter-/intra-calculations) between tokens [13]. Therefore, to reduce the
computational requirements, various techniques have been proposed to improve their resource
efficiency. Token sparsification (TS), in which tokens are dynamically sampled based on their
significance, is a prominent technique used for this purpose. The TS approaches proposed include:
ATS [5], AdaViT [20], and A-ViT [33], each of which adaptively allocates resources based on the
complexity of the input image (i.e., input-dependent inference) by deactivating uninformative tokens,
resulting in improved throughput with a slight drop in accuracy. Despite the fact that TS has been
proven to be effective in improving the resource efficiency of vision transformers, their test-time
dynamism and average-case performance assumption creates a new attack surface for adversaries
aiming to compromise model availability. Practical implications include various scenarios, such as:
attacks on cloud-based IoT applications (e.g., surveillance cameras) and attacks on real-time DNN
inference for resource- and time-constrained scenarios (e.g., autonomous vehicles) [10].
*
1

Equal contribution
https://github.com/oryany12/DeSparsify-Adversarial-Attack

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

