Back to the Continuous Attractor
Ábel Ságodi, Guillermo Martín-Sánchez, Piotr Sokół, Il Memming Park
Champalimaud Centre for the Unknown
Champalimaud Foundation, Lisbon, Portugal
{abel.sagodi,guillermo.martin,memming.park}@research.fchampalimaud.org
piotr.sokol@protonmail.com

Abstract
Continuous attractors offer a unique class of solutions for storing continuousvalued variables in recurrent system states for indefinitely long time intervals.
Unfortunately, continuous attractors suffer from severe structural instability in
general—they are destroyed by most infinitesimal changes of the dynamical law
that defines them. This fragility limits their utility especially in biological systems
as their recurrent dynamics are subject to constant perturbations. We observe that
the bifurcations from continuous attractors in theoretical neuroscience models
display various structurally stable forms. Although their asymptotic behaviors to
maintain memory are categorically distinct, their finite-time behaviors are similar.
We build on the persistent manifold theory to explain the commonalities between
bifurcations from and approximations of continuous attractors. Fast-slow decomposition analysis uncovers the existence of a persistent slow manifold that survives
the seemingly destructive bifurcation, relating the flow within the manifold to the
size of the perturbation. Moreover, this allows the bounding of the memory error
of these approximations of continuous attractors. Finally, we train recurrent neural
networks on analog memory tasks to support the appearance of these systems as
solutions and their generalization capabilities. Therefore, we conclude that continuous attractors are functionally robust and remain useful as a universal analogy for
understanding analog memory.

1

Introduction

Biological systems exhibit robust behaviors that require neural information processing of analog
variables such as intensity, direction, and distance. Virtually all neural models of working memory for
continuous-valued information rely on persistent internal representations through recurrent dynamics.
The continuous attractor structure in their recurrent dynamics has been a pivotal theoretical tool due
to their ability to maintain activity patterns indefinitely through neural population states 1–4 . They are
hypothesized to be the neural mechanism for the maintenance of eye positions, heading direction,
self-location, target location, sensory evidence, working memory, and decision variables, to name a
few 5–7 . Observations of persistent neural activity across many brain areas, organisms, and tasks have
corroborated the existence of continuous attractors 7–15 .
Despite their widespread adoption as models of analog memory, continuous attractors are brittle
mathematical objects, casting significant doubts on their ontological value and hence suitability in
accurately representing biological functions. Even the smallest arbitrary change in recurrent dynamics
can be problematic, destroying the continuum of fixed points essential for continuous-valued working
memory. In neuroscience, this vulnerability is well-known and often referred to as the “fine-tuning
problem” 5,16–20 . There are two primary sources of perturbations in the recurrent network dynamics:
(1) the stochastic nature of online learning signals that act via synaptic plasticity, and (2) spontaneous
fluctuations in synaptic weights 21,22 . Thus, additional mechanisms are necessary to compensate for
the degradation in particular implementations, by bringing the short-term behavior closer to that
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

