FedGMark: Certifiably Robust Watermarking for
Federated Graph Learning

Yuxin Yang1,2 Qiang Li1 Yuan Hong3 Binghui Wang2∗
1
2

College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, China
Department of Computer Science, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois, USA
3
School of Computing, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut, USA

Abstract
Federated graph learning (FedGL) is an emerging learning paradigm to collaboratively train graph data from various clients. However, during the development and
deployment of FedGL models, they are susceptible to illegal copying and model
theft. Backdoor-based watermarking is a well-known method for mitigating these
attacks, as it offers ownership verification to the model owner. We take the first
step to protect the ownership of FedGL models via backdoor-based watermarking.
Existing techniques have challenges in achieving the goal: 1) they either cannot
be directly applied or yield unsatisfactory performance; 2) they are vulnerable to
watermark removal attacks; and 3) they lack of formal guarantees. To address all
the challenges, we propose FedGMark, the first certified robust backdoor-based watermarking for FedGL. FedGMark leverages the unique graph structure and client
information in FedGL to learn customized and diverse watermarks. It also designs
a novel GL architecture that facilitates defending against both the empirical and theoretically worst-case watermark removal attacks. Extensive experiments validate
the promising empirical and provable watermarking performance of FedGMark.
Source code is available at: https://github.com/Yuxin104/FedGMark.

1

Introduction

Federated Graph Learning (FedGL) [Xie et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022a; Tan et al., 2023; Yao et al.,
2024] leverages a server and multiple clients to collaboratively train GL methods [Kipf and Welling,
2017; Hamilton et al., 2017] via federated learning (FL) [McMahan et al., 2017; Li et al., 2021;
Karimireddy et al., 2020]. In recent years, FedGL has attracted increasing interest in domains such as
disease prediction [Peng et al., 2022], recommendation systems [Baek et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2022;
Li et al., 2022b], and molecular classification [He et al., 2022]. In addition, several industries have
deployed/open-sourced their FedGL frameworks, such as Alibaba’s FederatedScope-GNN [Wang et
al., 2022b] and Amazon’s FedML-GNN [Vidya et al.]. However, FedGL models are typically left
unprotected, rendering them vulnerable to threats like illegal copying, model theft, and malicious
distribution. For instance, a business competitor may replicate a model to gain competitive advantages
or a malicious user may sell the model for profits. These threats waste the model owner’s investment
(e.g., labor costs, time, and energy) and infringe upon the legitimate copyrights of the model.
Backdoor-based watermarking [Uchida et al., 2017; Adi et al., 2018; Bansal et al., 2022] is a de
facto model ownership verification technique to mitigate the above threats. This technique typically
consists of two steps: 1) Embedding the target model with a watermark. The model owner injects a
specific backdoor trigger (i.e., watermark) into some clean samples and trains the target model with
∗

Corresponding Author (bwang70@iit.edu)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

