Learning the Infinitesimal Generator
of Stochastic Diffusion Processes
Vladimir R. Kostic
CSML, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
University of Novi Sad

Karim Lounici
CMAP-Ecole Polytechnique
karim.lounici@polytechnique.edu

vladimir.kostic@iit.it

Hélène Halconruy
SAMOVAR, Télécom Sud-Paris
MODAL’X, Université Paris Nanterre

Timothée Devergne
CSML & ATSIM, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
timothee.devergne@iit.it

helene.halconruy@telecom-sudparis.eu

Massimiliano Pontil
CSML, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
AI Centre, University College London
massimiliano.pontil@iit.it

Abstract
We address data-driven learning of the infinitesimal generator of stochastic diffusion processes, essential for understanding numerical simulations of natural and
physical systems. The unbounded nature of the generator poses significant challenges, rendering conventional analysis techniques for Hilbert-Schmidt operators
ineffective. To overcome this, we introduce a novel framework based on the energy
functional for these stochastic processes. Our approach integrates physical priors
through an energy-based risk metric in both full and partial knowledge settings. We
evaluate the statistical performance of a reduced-rank estimator in reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHS) in the partial knowledge setting. Notably, our approach
provides learning bounds independent of the state space dimension and ensures
non-spurious spectral estimation. Additionally, we elucidate how the distortion
between the intrinsic energy-induced metric of the stochastic diffusion and the
RKHS metric used for generator estimation impacts the spectral learning bounds.

1

Introduction

Continuous-time processes are often modeled using ordinary differential equations (ODEs), assuming
deterministic dynamics. However, real systems in science and engineering that are modeled by ODEs
are subject to unfeasible-to-model influences, necessitating the extension of deterministic models
through stochastic differential equations (SDEs), see [40, 42] and references therein. SDEs are
advantageous for modeling inherently random phenomena. For instance, in finance, they specify
the stochastic process governing asset behavior, a crucial step in constructing pricing models for
financial derivatives [41]. Another compelling application arises in atomistic simulations, where
SDEs are used to model the evolution of atomic systems subjected to thermal fluctuations through
the Boltzmann distribution [37].
A diverse range of SDEs can be represented as dXt = a(Xt )dt + b(Xt )dWt , where X0 = x. Here,
W denotes a (possibly multi-dimensional) Brownian motion, and the functions a and b are commonly
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

