Carrot and Stick:
Eliciting Comparison Data and Beyond

Yiling Chen
Harvard University
yiling@seas.harvard.edu

Shi Feng
Harvard University
shifeng@fas.harvard.edu

Fang-Yi Yu
George Mason University
fangyiyu@gmu.edu

Abstract
Comparison data elicited from people are fundamental to many machine learning
tasks, including reinforcement learning from human feedback for large language
models and estimating ranking models. They are typically subjective and not
directly verifiable. How to truthfully elicit such comparison data from rational
individuals? We design peer prediction mechanisms for eliciting comparison data
using a bonus-penalty payment [11]. Our design leverages on the strong stochastic
transitivity for comparison data [60, 13] to create symmetrically strongly truthful
mechanisms such that truth-telling 1) forms a strict Bayesian Nash equilibrium, and
2) yields the highest payment among all symmetric equilibria. Each individual only
needs to evaluate one pair of items and report her comparison in our mechanism.
We further extend the bonus-penalty payment concept to eliciting networked data,
designing a symmetrically strongly truthful mechanism when agents’ private signals
are sampled according to the Ising models. We provide the necessary and sufficient
conditions for our bonus-penalty payment to have truth-telling as a strict Bayesian
Nash equilibrium. Experiments on two real-world datasets further support our
theoretical discoveries.

1

Introduction

In the past two decades, researchers have been embracing the challenge of eliciting private information
from individuals when there is no ground truth available to evaluate the quality of elicited contributions, and have made amazing progress. Many mechanisms, collectively called peer prediction [42],
have been developed to incentivize individuals to strictly truthfully report their information at a
Bayesian Nash equilibrium (BNE), by artful design of payment functions that only depend on reports
from individuals. Moreover, in multi-task peer prediction mechanisms, the truthful BNE gives each
individual the highest expected payoff among all BNEs (i.e. it’s a strongly truthful BNE). [11, 57, 30]
However, all prior multi-task peer prediction mechanisms require tasks being ex-ante identical, and
hence individuals’ private information is independently and identically distributed (iid) for each task.
Multi-task peer prediction leverages this structure of information to succeed at truthful elicitation.
But what if such structure of information doesn’t hold for an information elicitation problem?
One notable application is to elicit pair-wise comparisons of multiple alternatives, such as preferences
for consumer products [53], translation [34], peer grading [55], and relevance of language model
outputs [9, 10]. Such pair-wise comparison data are crucial for estimating a ranking of the alternatives
and for devising reward functions for reinforcement learning. Comparison tasks for different pairs
are clearly not ex-ante identical — answers to the tasks demonstrate a certain degree of transitivity
(e.g. if 𝑎 is preferred to 𝑎 ′ and 𝑎 ′ is preferred to 𝑎 ′′ , then it’s more likely that 𝑎 is preferred to 𝑎 ′′ ),
rendering existing peer prediction mechanisms not applicable.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

