Visual S KETCHPAD: Sketching as a Visual Chain of
Thought for Multimodal Language Models
Yushi Hu∗1,2 Weijia Shi∗1 Xingyu Fu3 Dan Roth3 Mari Ostendorf1
Luke Zettlemoyer1 Noah A. Smith1,2 Ranjay Krishna1,2
1

University of Washington

2

Allen Institute for AI

3

University of Pennsylvania

Abstract
Humans draw to facilitate reasoning: we draw auxiliary lines when solving geometry problems; we mark and circle when reasoning on maps; we use sketches
to amplify our ideas and relieve our limited-capacity working memory. However,
such actions are missing in current multimodal language models (LMs). Current
chain-of-thought and tool-use paradigms only use text as intermediate reasoning
steps. In this work, we introduce S KETCHPAD, a framework that gives multimodal
LMs a visual sketchpad and tools to draw on the sketchpad. The LM conducts
planning and reasoning according to the visual artifacts it has drawn. Different from
prior work, which uses text-to-image models to enable LMs to draw, S KETCHPAD
enables LMs to draw with lines, boxes, marks, etc., which is closer to human
sketching and better facilitates reasoning. S KETCHPAD can also use specialist
vision models during the sketching process (e.g., draw bounding boxes with object
detection models, draw masks with segmentation models), to further enhance visual
perception and reasoning. We experiment on a wide range of math tasks (including
geometry, functions, graph, chess) and complex visual reasoning tasks. S KETCH PAD substantially improves performance on all tasks over strong base models with
no sketching, yielding an average gain of 12.7% on math tasks, and 8.6% on vision
tasks. GPT-4o with S KETCHPAD sets a new state of the art on all tasks, including
V ∗ Bench (80.3%), BLINK spatial reasoning (83.9%), and visual correspondence
(80.8%).All codes and data are in https://visualsketchpad.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Sketching is a fundamental human activity, serving as a versatile tool for communication [11],
ideation [48], and problem-solving [47]. Unlike written language, sketches have the advantage of
conveying visuo-spatial ideas directly, for example by using spatial relations on paper to convey
spatial relations or other more abstract relationships in the world. This may explain their ubiquity;
maps [40] and architectural plans [12] have been found incised in stone, etched on leather, impressed
in clay, and drawn on paper in diverse cultures scattered across the world [39]. Sketches are so
fundamental that we use them to teach school children how to solve geometry problems by drawing
support lines, to aid engineers conveying prototypes, to support architects creating blueprints, and to
allow scientists like us to convey scientific contributions (see Figure 1).
As multimodal language models (LMs) [35, 42, 28, 27, 1, 3, 49, 7, 31, 41, 6, 5] have begun to
mature, we now expect them to solve tasks like the ones mentioned above, i.e., ones where people
draw intermediate sketches to simplify reasoning. Popular benchmarks now include questions
*

Equal Contribution. Correspond to <Yushi Hu: yushihu@uw.edu>, <Weijia Shi: swj0419@uw.edu>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

