A Comprehensive Analysis on the Learning Curve
in Kernel Ridge Regression

Tin Sum Cheng, Aurelien Lucchi
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
University of Basel, Switzerland
tinsum.cheng@unibas.ch, aurelien.lucchi@unibas.ch
Anastasis Kratsios
Department of Mathematics
McMaster University and The Vector Institute
Ontario, Canada
kratsioa@mcmaster.ca

David Belius
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science
UniDistance Suisse
Switzerland david.belius@cantab.ch

Abstract
This paper conducts a comprehensive study of the learning curves of kernel ridge
regression (KRR) under minimal assumptions. Our contributions are three-fold: 1)
we analyze the role of key properties of the kernel, such as its spectral eigen-decay,
the characteristics of the eigenfunctions, and the smoothness of the kernel; 2) we
demonstrate the validity of the Gaussian Equivalent Property (GEP), which states
that the generalization performance of KRR remains the same when the whitened
features are replaced by standard Gaussian vectors, thereby shedding light on the
success of previous analyzes under the Gaussian Design Assumption; 3) we derive
novel bounds that improve over existing bounds across a broad range of setting
such as (in)dependent feature vectors and various combinations of eigen-decay
rates in the over/underparameterized regimes.

1

Introduction

Kernel ridge regression (KRR) is a central tool in machine learning due to its ability to provide
a flexible and efficient framework for capturing intricate patterns within data. Additionally, it
stands as one of the earliest endeavors in statistical machine learning, with ongoing research into its
generalization properties [12, 45]. Over the past few years, kernels have experienced a resurgence in
importance in the field of deep learning theory [49, 8, 6], partly because many deep neural networks
(DNNs) can be interpreted as approaching specific kernel limits as they converge [25, 1, 9].
One central topic in machine learning theory is the learning curve of the regressor in the fixed
input dimensional setting as the sample size grows to infinity. Formally: let n be the sample size,
λ = λ(n) be the ridge regularization parameter depending on n and Rn be the test error/excess risk
of the ridge regression. For large n, the test error Rn should decay with n as Rn = On,P (g(n)) for
n→∞
some function g : R → R such that g(n) −−−−→ 0. The decay of g with respect to n provides an
upper bound on the learning curve of the ridge regressor and will be the main focus of this paper. To
conduct our analysis, we concentrate on several crucial properties of the kernel, including its spectral
eigen-decay and the characteristics of the eigenfunctions, which we will elaborate on next.
Properties of the eigenfunctions In a series of studies [10, 16, 34], the feature vectors are substituted by random Gaussian vectors following the Gaussian Design (GD) Assumption, and the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

