Quality-Improved and Property-Preserved
Polarimetric Imaging via Complementarily Fusing

Chu Zhou1† Yixing Liu2,3 Chao Xu4 Boxin Shi2,3*
1
National Institute of Informatics, Japan
2
State Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of CS, Peking University, China
3
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of CS, Peking University, China
4
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, School of IST, Peking University, China
zhou_chu@hotmail.com,
{luiginixy@stu., xuchao@cis., shiboxin@}pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Polarimetric imaging is a challenging problem in the field of polarization-based
vision, since setting a short exposure time reduces the signal-to-noise ratio, making
the degree of polarization (DoP) and the angle of polarization (AoP) severely degenerated, while if setting a relatively long exposure time, the DoP and AoP would
tend to be over-smoothed due to the frequently-occurring motion blur. This work
proposes a polarimetric imaging framework that can produce clean and clear polarized snapshots by complementarily fusing a degraded pair of noisy and blurry ones.
By adopting a neural network-based three-phase fusing scheme with speciallydesigned modules tailored to each phase, our framework can not only improve the
image quality but also preserve the polarization properties. Experimental results
show that our framework achieves state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

Polarimetric imaging aims to obtain the degree of polarization (DoP) and the angle of polarization
(AoP) of the scene to provide physical clues for downstream polarization-based vision applications
(e.g., reflection removal [16], shape from polarization [5], dehazing [31], etc.). In practice, the DoP
and AoP cannot be captured directly, but are usually calculated from polarized snapshots1 in an
indirect manner. However, since a polarizer would block part of the light, selecting an appropriate
exposure time could be challenging, making the captured polarized snapshots often degrade [15, 33].
As shown in Fig. 1 (left), setting a short exposure time would result in a very low signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR), making the DoP and AoP severely degenerated; while if setting a relatively long exposure time
to increase the SNR, motion blur is more likely to occur, making the DoP and AoP over-smoothed,
as shown in Fig. 1 (middle). To deal with the above issues, several methods have been proposed
to handle the low-light noise [10, 25, 15, 32] or motion blur [33] in the polarized images. Since
these methods can work in a polarization-aware manner (i.e., they explicitly take the preservation of
polarization properties into consideration), they usually demonstrate higher performance compared
with the corresponding methods designed for conventional images [3, 29, 14, 23]. However, due to
the ill-posedness of the problems they face, the quality of their results is still limited.
Considering the fact that different types of degraded polarized snapshots would provide complementary knowledge, i.e., the short-exposure noisy ones tend to be clear while the long-exposure blurry
† Most of this work was done as a PhD student at Peking University.
* Corresponding author.
1
A polarized snapshot consists of four polarized images with different polarizer angles (0◦ , 45◦ , 90◦ , 135◦ ),
which can be captured using a polarization camera in a single shot or using a polarizer in multiple shots.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

