Principled Probabilistic Imaging using Diffusion
Models as Plug-and-Play Priors

Zihui Wu1 Yu Sun4 Yifan Chen5 Bingliang Zhang1 Yisong Yue1 Katherine L. Bouman1,2,3
1
Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, Caltech
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, Caltech
3
Department of Astronomy, Caltech
4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Johns Hopkins University
5
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University

Abstract
Diffusion models (DMs) have recently shown outstanding capabilities in modeling
complex image distributions, making them expressive image priors for solving
Bayesian inverse problems. However, most existing DM-based methods rely on
approximations in the generative process to be generic to different inverse problems,
leading to inaccurate sample distributions that deviate from the target posterior
defined within the Bayesian framework. To harness the generative power of DMs
while avoiding such approximations, we propose a Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithm that performs posterior sampling for general inverse problems by reducing it
to sampling the posterior of a Gaussian denoising problem. Crucially, we leverage
a general DM formulation as a unified interface that allows for rigorously solving
the denoising problem with a range of state-of-the-art DMs. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed method on six inverse problems (three linear and
three nonlinear), including a real-world black hole imaging problem. Experimental
results indicate that our proposed method offers more accurate reconstructions and
posterior estimation compared to existing DM-based imaging inverse methods.

1

Introduction

Inverse problems arise in many computational imaging applications, where the goal is to recover an
image x ∈ Rn from a set of sparse and noisy measurements y ∈ Rm . The relationship between x
and y can be described by
y = A(x) + n,
(1)

where A(·) : Rn → Rm is the forward operator (linear or nonlinear) and n is the random measurement noise in Rm . Since the sparsity and noisiness of y often lead to significant uncertainty in x, it is
preferable to sample the posterior distribution p(x|y) over all possible solutions based on some prior
distribution p(x), rather than finding a single deterministic solution. Traditional posterior sampling
methods often rely on simple image priors that do not reflect the sophistication of real-world image
distributions. On the other hand, diffusion models (DMs) have recently emerged as a powerful tool
for modeling highly complex image distributions [33, 63]. Nevertheless, it remains a challenge to
turn DMs into reliable imaging inverse solvers, which motivates us to develop a principled Bayesian
method that leverages DMs as priors for posterior sampling.
Diffusion models generate samples from a distribution by reversing a diffusion process from the
target distribution to a simple (usually Gaussian) distribution [33, 63]. In particular, it estimates a
clean image x0 from a noise image xT by successively denoising noisy images, where xt ∼ pt
is the intermediate noisy image at time t ∈ [0, T ]. Reversing diffusion requires one to estimate
the time-varying gradient log density (score function) ∇ log pt (xt ) along the diffusion process, or
∇ log pt (xt |y) in the case of sampling the posterior p(x|y).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

