dattri: A Library for Efficient Data Attribution

Junwei Deng1*
Hao Huang1
1

Ting-Wei Li1*

Xinhe Wang2

Shiyuan Zhang1

Pingbang Hu1

Shixuan Liu2

Xingjian Zhang2

Yijun Pan2
Jiaqi W. Ma1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 University of Michigan
*
Equal Contribution

Abstract
Data attribution methods aim to quantify the influence of individual training samples on the prediction of artificial intelligence (AI) models. As training data plays
an increasingly crucial role in the modern development of large-scale AI models,
data attribution has found broad applications in improving AI performance and
safety. However, despite a surge of new data attribution methods being developed recently, there lacks a comprehensive library that facilitates the development,
benchmarking, and deployment of different data attribution methods. In this work,
we introduce dattri, an open-source data attribution library that addresses the
above needs. Specifically, dattri highlights three novel design features. Firstly,
dattri proposes a unified and easy-to-use API, allowing users to integrate different data attribution methods into their PyTorch-based machine learning pipeline
with a few lines of code changed. Secondly, dattri modularizes low-level utility
functions that are commonly used in data attribution methods, such as Hessianvector product, inverse-Hessian-vector product or random projection, making it
easier for researchers to develop new data attribution methods. Thirdly, dattri
provides a comprehensive benchmark framework with pre-trained models and
ground truth annotations for a variety of benchmark settings, including generative
AI settings. We have implemented a variety of state-of-the-art efficient data attribution methods that can be applied to large-scale neural network models, and
will continuously update the library in the future. Using the developed dattri
library, we are able to perform a comprehensive and fair benchmark analysis across
a wide range of data attribution methods. The source code of dattri is available
at https://github.com/TRAIS-Lab/dattri.

1

Introduction

Data attribution is a family of methods that aim to quantify the influence of individual training
samples on the output of artificial intelligence (AI) models. As training data is becoming increasingly
critical for the advancement of modern AI models, especially for large foundation models [19], there
has been a surge of data attribution methods developed recently [22, 29, 36, 27]. These methods have
found broad data-centric applications in improving the performance and safety of AI models, such as
noisy label detection [22], data selection [9], and copyright compensation [6].
However, a comprehensive infrastructural library that facilitates the development, benchmarking, and
deployment of efficient data attribution methods is lacking. This absence hinders the standardization
and acceleration of research in this area, creating inefficiencies and inconsistencies in how data
attribution methods are developed and applied. Although there have been a couple of prior efforts [33,
28, 18] for unifying APIs and benchmarking, many missing opportunities remain unaddressed,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

