Rethinking Transformer for Long Contextual
Histopathology Whole Slide Image Analysis

Honglin Li1,3 Yunlong Zhang1,3 Pingyi Chen1,3 Zhongyi Shui1,3
Chenglu Zhu2,3∗ Lin Yang2,3∗
1
Zhejiang University
2
Research Center for Industries of the Future and 3 School of Engineering, Westlake University
{lihonglin,zhuchenglu,yanglin}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
Histopathology Whole Slide Image (WSI) analysis serves as the gold standard for
clinical cancer diagnosis in the daily routines of doctors. To develop computeraided diagnosis model for histopathology WSIs, previous methods typically employ Multi-Instance Learning to enable slide-level prediction given only slide-level
labels. Among these models, vanilla attention mechanisms without pairwise interactions have traditionally been employed but are unable to model contextual
information. More recently, self-attention models have been utilized to address this
issue. To alleviate the computational complexity of long sequences in large WSIs,
methods like HIPT use region-slicing, and TransMIL employs Nyströmformer as
an approximation of full self-attention. Both approaches suffer from suboptimal
performance due to the loss of key information. Moreover, their use of absolute
positional embedding struggles to effectively handle long contextual dependencies
in shape-varying WSIs. In this paper, we first analyze how the low-rank nature
of the long-sequence attention matrix constrains the representation ability of WSI
modelling. Then, we demonstrate that the rank of attention matrix can be improved
by focusing on local interactions via a local attention mask. Our analysis shows
that the local mask aligns with the attention patterns in the lower layers of the
Transformer. Furthermore, the local attention mask can be implemented during
chunked attention calculation, reducing the quadratic computational complexity
to linear with a small local bandwidth. Additionally, this locality helps the model
generalize to unseen or under-fitted positions more easily. Building on this, we
propose a local-global hybrid Transformer for both computational acceleration and
local-global information interactions modelling. Our method, Long-contextual
MIL (LongMIL), is evaluated through extensive experiments on various WSI tasks
to validate its superiority in: 1) overall performance, 2) memory usage and speed,
and 3) extrapolation ability compared to previous methods. Our code will be
available at https://github.com/invoker-LL/Long-MIL.

1

Introduction

Though digital pathology images have been widely used for Cancer diagnosis [50, 65, 89, 94, 17, 44]
and prognosis [9, 12, 71] and gene expression [82] via automatic computer-assisted analysis, the
Giga-pixels of resolution, as large as 150, 000 × 150, 000 pixels [50, 12, 60] of Whole Slide Image
(WSI), still poses great challenges on both annotation labelling and efficient computation for model
training [42]. Thus, previous methods [9, 12, 42, 5, 40, 92, 93, 41] focus on developing annotation∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

