General Detection-based Text Line Recognition

Raphael Baena, Syrine Kalleli, Mathieu Aubry
LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS
Marne-la-Vallée, France
firstname.lastname@enpc.fr

Abstract
We introduce a general detection-based approach to text line recognition, be it
printed (OCR) or handwritten (HTR), with Latin, Chinese, or ciphered characters.
Detection-based approaches have until now been largely discarded for HTR because
reading characters separately is often challenging, and character-level annotation
is difficult and expensive. We overcome these challenges thanks to three main
insights: (i) synthetic pre-training with sufficiently diverse data enables learning
reasonable character localization for any script; (ii) modern transformer-based
detectors can jointly detect a large number of instances, and, if trained with an
adequate masking strategy, leverage consistency between the different detections;
(iii) once a pre-trained detection model with approximate character localization is
available, it is possible to fine-tune it with line-level annotation on real data, even
with a different alphabet. Our approach, dubbed DTLR, builds on a completely
different paradigm than state-of-the-art HTR methods, which rely on autoregressive
decoding, predicting character values one by one, while we treat a complete line
in parallel. Remarkably, we demonstrate good performance on a large range of
scripts, usually tackled with specialized approaches. In particular, we improve
state-of-the-art performances for Chinese script recognition on the CASIA v2
dataset, and for cipher recognition on the Borg and Copiale datasets. Our code and
models are available at https://github.com/raphael-baena/DTLR.

1

Introduction

A popular approach in early Optical Character Recognition (OCR) was to localize individual characters before processing them independently [7]. Such an approach, while still used for specific cases
such as Chinese script [56], cipher [41], or scene text recognition [58], has been largely discarded for
Latin script Handwritten Text Recognition (HTR) in favor of implicit segmentation approaches. In
this paper, we revisit character detection for text line recognition, demonstrate its effectiveness for
HTR, and show results on a diverse range of datasets that we believe have not been demonstrated in
prior work.
Designing a general detection-based approach for handwritten text recognition is challenging. Individual characters are often not well separated in handwritten texts, and they are not always readable
independently of their context. Thus, most datasets provide only line-level annotations, without character bounding boxes. This comes in addition to the common challenges of text recognition – such as
diversity in writers, very rare characters, different kinds of noise and degradation – and challenges
unique to certain datasets, for which specific approaches have been designed, e.g., Chinese script
which has a very large alphabet, or ciphers for which the amount of annotated data is limited. Most
recent methods for HTR for Latin script rely on recurrent or autoregressive models, and very few are
devoid of any recurrence [10]. However, we believe that a detection-based approach could be general,
tackle HTR with any script, and provide potential advantages in terms of interpretability – since the
position of each character is clearly identified, and errors can be explained by mis-localization or
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

