A RK VALE: Efficient Generative LLM Inference with
Recallable Key-Value Eviction

Renze Chen
Peking University
crz@pku.edu.cn

Zhuofeng Wang
Peking University
2200012827@stu.pku.edu.cn

Beiquan Cao
Peking University
2200012988@stu.pku.edu.cn

Tong Wu
Peking University
2200013212@stu.pku.edu.cn

Size Zheng
Peking University
zhengsz@pku.edu.cn

Xiuhong Li
Peking University
lixiuhong@pku.edu.cn

Xuechao Wei
Peking University
xuechao.wei@pku.edu.cn

Shengen Yan
Infinigence-AI
yanshengen@gmail.com

Meng Li
Peking University
meng.li@pku.edu.cn

Yun Liang∗
Peking University
ericlyun@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) are widely used in today’s tasks of natural language processing. To support applications like multi-turn chats, document understanding, and content generation, models with long context lengths are growing in
importance. However, managing long contexts brings substantial challenges due to
the expansion of key-value cache (KV cache). Longer KV cache requires larger
memory, limiting the batch-size and thus decreasing throughput. Also, computing
attention over long KV cache incurs more memory access, hurting the end-to-end
latency. Prior works find that it is sufficient to use only the recent and high-impact
tokens for attention computation, allowing the eviction of less vital tokens to
reduce memory footprint. Nonetheless, we observe a dynamic shift in token importance across different decoding steps. Tokens initially evicted might regain
importance after certain decoding steps. To address this, we propose A RK VALE,
a page-based KV cache manager that can recognize and recall important tokens
evicted before. We asynchronously copy the filled page into external memory
(e.g., CPU memory) as backup and summarize/compress it into a much smaller
digest by constructing the bounding-volume of the keys in the KV-page. Before
attention computation, we measure all pages’ importance based on their digests,
recall the important ones, evict the unimportant ones, and select the top-ranked
pages for attention computation. Experiment results show that A RK VALE performs
well on various long context tasks with negligible accuracy loss under 2k∼4k
cache budget and can improve decoding latency up to 2.2× (1.7× in average) and
batching throughput up to 4.6× (3.5× in average). Our code is now available at
https://github.com/pku-liang/ArkVale.

∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

