MINT-1T:
Scaling Open-Source Multimodal Data by 10x:
A Multimodal Dataset with One Trillion Tokens
Anas Awadalla1,2∗ Le Xue2 Oscar Lo1 Manli Shu2
Hannah Lee1 Etash Guha1 Matt Jordan4 Sheng Shen5 Mohamed Awadalla1
Silvio Savarese⋄,2,3 Caiming Xiong⋄,2 Ran Xu⋄,2 Yejin Choi⋄,1 Ludwig Schmidt⋄,1
4

1
University of Washington, 2 Salesforce Research, 3 Stanford University,
University of Texas at Austin, 5 University of California, Berkeley, ⋄ Senior Authors

Abstract
Multimodal interleaved datasets featuring free-form interleaved sequences of images and text are crucial for training frontier large multimodal models (LMMs).
Despite the rapid progression of open-source LMMs, there remains a pronounced
scarcity of large-scale, open-source multimodal interleaved datasets. In response,
we introduce MINT-1T, the most extensive and diverse open-source Multimodal
INTerleaved dataset to date.
MINT-1T comprises of one trillion text tokens and
3.4 billion images, a 10x scale-up from existing open-source datasets. Additionally,
we include previously untapped sources such as PDFs and ArXiv papers. As scaling multimodal interleaved datasets requires substantial engineering effort, sharing
the data curation process and releasing the dataset greatly benefits the community.
Our experiments show that LMMs trained on MINT-1T rival the performance of
models trained on the previous leading dataset, OBELICS. We release our data at
https://github.com/mlfoundations/MINT-1T.

800

Open Source
Closed Source

600

MINT-1T

400

HTML

200
0

MM
C4
OB
EL
ICS
CM
3
M
Ch M1
am
ele
on
MI
NT
-1T

Number of Text Tokens (in Billions)

1000

Multimodal Interleaved Dataset

PDF

OBELICS
MMC4

HTML

HTML

Figure 1:
MINT-1T is a one trillion token multimodal interleaved pre-training dataset. This is the
largest dataset of its kind and is more diverse than previous open-source datasets.
∗

Work done while interning at Salesforce Research

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

