Toward Global Convergence of Gradient EM for
Over-Parameterized Gaussian Mixture Models
Weihang Xu
University of Washington
xuwh@cs.washington.edu

Maryam Fazel
University of Washington
mfazel@uw.edu

Simon S. Du
University of Washington
ssdu@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
We study the gradient Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm for Gaussian
Mixture Models (GMM) in the over-parameterized setting, where a general GMM
with n > 1 components learns from data that are generated by a single ground
truth Gaussian distribution. While results for the special case of 2-Gaussian
mixtures are well-known, a general global convergence analysis for arbitrary n
remains unresolved and faces several new technical barriers since the convergence
becomes sub-linear and non-monotonic. To address these challenges, we construct
a novel likelihood-based convergence analysis framework and rigorously
prove
√
that gradient EM converges globally with a sublinear rate O(1/ t). This is the
first global convergence result for Gaussian mixtures with more than 2 components.
The sublinear convergence rate is due to the algorithmic nature of learning overparameterized GMM with gradient EM. We also identify a new emerging technical
challenge for learning general over-parameterized GMM: the existence of bad local
regions that can trap gradient EM for an exponential number of steps.

1

Introduction

Learning Gaussian Mixture Models (GMM) is a fundamental problem in machine learning with
broad applications. In this problem, data generated from a mixture of n ≥ 2 ground truth Gaussians
are observed without the label (the index of component Gaussian that data is sampled from), and the
goal is to retrieve the maximum likelihood estimation of Gaussian components. The Expectation
Maximization (EM) algorithm is arguably the most widely-used algorithm for this problem. Each
iteration of the EM algorithm consists of two steps. In the expectation (E) step, it computes the
posterior probability of unobserved mixture membership label according to the current parameterized
model. In the maximization (M) step, it computes the maximizer of the Q function, which is the
likelihood with respect to posterior estimation of the hidden label computed in the E step.
Gradient EM, as a popular variant of EM, is often used in practice when the maximization step
of EM is costly or even intractable. It replaces the M step of EM with taking one gradient step
on the Q function. Learning Gaussian Mixture Models with EM/gradient EM is an important and
widely-studied problem. Starting from the seminal work [Balakrishnan et al., 2014], a flurry of work
Daskalakis et al. [2017], Xu et al. [2016], Dwivedi et al. [2018a], Kwon and Caramanis [2020],
Dwivedi et al. [2019] have studied the convergence guarantee for EM/gradient EM in various settings.
However, these works either only prove local convergence, or consider the special case of 2-Gaussian
mixtures. A general global convergence analysis of EM/gradient EM on n-Gaussian mixtures still
remains unresolved. Jin et al. [2016] is a notable negative result in this regard, where the authors
show that on GMM with n ≥ 3 components, randomly initialized EM will get trapped in a spurious
local minimum with high probability.
Over-parameterized Gaussian Mixture Models. Motivated by the negative results, a line of work
considers the over-parameterized setting where the model uses more Gaussian components than
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

