Is the MMI Criterion Necessary for Interpretability?
Degenerating Non-causal Features to Plain Noise for
Self-Rationalization
Wei Liu1 Zhiying Deng1∗ Zhongyu Niu1 Jun Wang2∗
Haozhao Wang1∗ YuanKai Zhang1 Ruixuan Li1∗
1
School of Computer Science and Technology,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
iWudao Tech
1
{idc_lw, dengzhiyingdd, zy_niu, hz_wang, yuankai_zhang, rxli}@hust.edu.cn
2
jwang@iwudao.tech

Abstract
An important line of research in the field of explainability is to extract a small
subset of crucial rationales from the full input. The most widely used criterion for
rationale extraction is the maximum mutual information (MMI) criterion. However,
in certain datasets, there are spurious features non-causally correlated with the
label and also get high mutual information, complicating the loss landscape of
MMI. Although some penalty-based methods have been developed to penalize the
spurious features (e.g., invariance penalty, intervention penalty, etc) to help MMI
work better, these are merely remedial measures. In the optimization objectives of
these methods, spurious features are still distinguished from plain noise, which hinders the discovery of causal rationales. This paper aims to develop a new criterion
that treats spurious features as plain noise, allowing the model to work on datasets
rich in spurious features as if it were working on clean datasets, thereby making rationale extraction easier. We theoretically observe that removing either plain noise
or spurious features from the input does not alter the conditional distribution of the
remaining components relative to the task label. However, significant changes in
the conditional distribution occur only when causal features are eliminated. Based
on this discovery, the paper proposes a criterion for Maximizing the Remaining
Discrepancy (MRD). Experiments on six widely used datasets show that our MRD
criterion improves rationale quality (measured by the overlap with human-annotated
rationales) by up to 10.4% as compared to several recent competitive MMI variants.
Code: https://github.com/jugechengzi/Rationalization-MRD.

1

Introduction

With the success of deep learning, there are growing concerns over interpretability (Lipton, 2018).
Ideally, the explanation should be both faithful (reflecting the model’s actual behavior) and plausible
(aligning with human understanding) (Jacovi and Goldberg, 2020; Chan et al., 2022). Post-hoc
explanations, which are trained separately from the prediction process, may not faithfully represent an
agent’s decision, despite appearing plausible (Lipton, 2018). In contrast to post-hoc methods, ante-hoc
∗
Corresponding authors.
This paper is a collaboration between Intelligent and Distributed Computing Laboratory, Huazhong University
of Science and Technology and iWudao Tech. The companion pieces to this research series can be found at
https://jugechengzi.github.io/WeiLiu.github.io/.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

