Fair Online Bilateral Trade
Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi
Department of Computer Science
Università degli Studi di Milano
DEIB
Politecnico di Milano
Milano, Italy, 20133
cesa-bianchi@di.unimi.it

François Bachoc
IMT
Université Paul Sabatier
Toulouse, France, 31062
Institut universitaire de France (IUF)
francois.bachoc
@math.univ-toulouse.fr
Tommaso Cesari
EECS
University of Ottawa
Ottawa, Canada, K1N 6N5
tcesari@uottawa.ca

Roberto Colomboni
DEIB
Politecnico di Milano
Department of Computer Science
Università degli Studi di Milano
Milano, Italy, 20133
roberto.colomboni@polimi.it

Abstract
In online bilateral trade, a platform posts prices to incoming pairs of buyers and
sellers that have private valuations for a certain good. If the price is lower than the
buyers’ valuation and higher than the sellers’ valuation, then a trade takes place.
Previous work focused on the platform perspective, with the goal of setting prices
maximizing the gain from trade (the sum of sellers’ and buyers’ utilities). Gain
from trade is, however, potentially unfair to traders, as they may receive highly
uneven shares of the total utility. In this work we enforce fairness by rewarding the
platform with the fair gain from trade, defined as the minimum between sellers’
and buyers’ utilities. After showing that any no-regret learning algorithm designed
to maximize the sum of the utilities may fail badly with fair gain from trade, we
present our main contribution: a complete characterization of the regret regimes
for fair gain from trade when, after each interaction, the platform only learns
whether each trader accepted the current price. Specifically, we prove the following
regret bounds: Θ(ln T ) in the deterministic setting, Ω(T ) in the stochastic setting,
and ̃
Θ(T 2/3 ) in the stochastic setting when sellers’ and buyers’ valuations are
independent of each other. We conclude by providing tight regret bounds when,
after each interaction, the platform is allowed to observe the true traders’ valuations.

1

Introduction

In the online bilateral trade problem, at each round t = 1, 2, . . . a seller and a buyer with private
valuations for a certain good connect to a trading platform. The seller’s valuation St is the smallest
price at which they are willing to sell the good. Similarly, the buyer’s valuation Bt is the highest
price they would pay to get the good. The platform posts a price Pt to both buyer and seller. A trade
happens if and only if both agents agree to trade, i.e., St ≤ Pt ≤ Bt . At the end of the round, St and
Bt remain unknown and the platform only observes I{St ≤ Pt } (i.e., whether the seller accepted the
deal) and I{Pt ≤ Bt } (i.e., whether the buyer accepted the deal).
Previous works [12, 2, 9, 13, 7, 5] focused on minimizing regret with respect to the gain from trade
function GFT∶ (p, s, b) ↦ (b − s)I{s ≤ p ≤ b}. The quantity GFT(Pt , St , Bt ) corresponds to the sum
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

