Provably Transformers Harness Multi-Concept Word
Semantics for Efficient In-Context Learning

Dake Bu1 , Wei Huang2∗, Andi Han2 , Atsushi Nitanda3,4 , Taiji Suzuki5,2 ,
Qingfu Zhang1 , Hau-San Wong1∗
1

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR
2
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN, Japan
3
CFAR and IHPC, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A⋆STAR), Singapore
4
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
5
Department of Mathematical Informatics, the University of Tokyo, Japan
dakebu2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, {wei.huang.vr, andi.han}@riken.jp,
atsushi_nitanda@cfar.a-star.edu.sg, taiji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp,
{qingfu.zhang, cshswong}@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Transformer-based large language models (LLMs) have displayed remarkable creative prowess and emergence capabilities. Existing empirical studies have revealed
a strong connection between these LLMs’ impressive emergence abilities and their
in-context learning (ICL) capacity, allowing them to solve new tasks using only
task-specific prompts without further fine-tuning. On the other hand, existing
empirical and theoretical studies also show that there is a linear regularity of the
multi-concept encoded semantic representation behind transformer-based LLMs.
However, existing theoretical work fail to build up an understanding of the connection between this regularity and the innovative power of ICL. Additionally,
prior work often focuses on simplified, unrealistic scenarios involving linear transformers or unrealistic loss functions, and they achieve only linear or sub-linear
convergence rates. In contrast, this work provides a fine-grained mathematical
analysis to show how transformers leverage the multi-concept semantics of words
to enable powerful ICL and excellent out-of-distribution ICL abilities, offering
insights into how transformers innovate solutions for certain unseen tasks encoded
with multiple cross-concept semantics. Inspired by empirical studies on the linear
latent geometry of LLMs, the analysis is based on a concept-based low-noise sparse
coding prompt model. Leveraging advanced techniques, this work showcases the
exponential 0-1 loss convergence over the highly non-convex training dynamics,
which pioneeringly incorporates the challenges of softmax self-attention, ReLUactivated MLPs, and cross-entropy loss. Empirical simulations corroborate the
theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Recently, a variety of transformer-based large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance across a broad spectrum of machine learning tasks, including natural language
understanding [1], symbolic reasoning [2], and even heuristics design [3, 4]. One crucial emerging
ability of these models is their in-context learning (ICL) capacity [5], which allows them to learn
from a few demonstrations and conduct predictions on new queries without requiring any further
∗

Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

