Unveiling the Hidden:
Online Vectorized HD Map Construction with
Clip-Level Token Interaction and Propagation

Nayeon Kim∗
Hongje Seong∗
Daehyun Ji
Sujin Jang†
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT)
{nayeon.kim, hongje.seong, derek.ji, s.steve.jang}@samsung.com

Abstract
Predicting and constructing road geometric information (e.g., lane lines, road
markers) is a crucial task for safe autonomous driving, while such static map
elements can be repeatedly occluded by various dynamic objects on the road. Recent
studies have shown significantly improved vectorized high-definition (HD) map
construction performance, but there has been insufficient investigation of temporal
information across adjacent input frames (i.e., clips), which may lead to inconsistent
and suboptimal prediction results. To tackle this, we introduce a novel paradigm
of clip-level vectorized HD map construction, MapUnveiler, which explicitly
unveils the occluded map elements within a clip input by relating dense image
representations with efficient clip tokens. Additionally, MapUnveiler associates
inter-clip information through clip token propagation, effectively utilizing longterm temporal map information. MapUnveiler runs efficiently with the proposed
clip-level pipeline by avoiding redundant computation with temporal stride while
building a global map relationship. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that
MapUnveiler achieves state-of-the-art performance on both the nuScenes and
Argoverse2 benchmark datasets. We also showcase that MapUnveiler significantly
outperforms state-of-the-art approaches in a challenging setting, achieving +10.7%
mAP improvement in heavily occluded driving road scenes. The project page can
be found at https://mapunveiler.github.io.

1

Introduction

Vectorized HD map construction (VHC) is a task of predicting instance-wise vectorized representations of map elements (e.g., pedestrian crossings, lane dividers, road boundaries). Such static map elements are crucial information for self-driving vehicles, including applications like lane keeping [1, 6],
path planning [29, 24, 15], and trajectory prediction [30, 40, 11]. Prior approaches to constructing
dense and high-quality HD maps typically rely on SLAM-based offline methods (e.g., [48, 37, 38]).
Such an offline method generally involves a series of steps including feature extraction and selection
(e.g., edge, plane), odometry estimation via feature matching, and mapping. However, these processes
involve complicated and computationally burdensome tasks, limiting their use to offline applications.
More recently, camera-based multi-view VHC has been actively investigated as a cost-efficient and
real-time alternative to existing expensive offline approaches. Current works on camera-based VHC
typically aim to extract unified 3D Bird’s Eye View (BEV) features that cover the surrounding
environment of the ego-vehicle [20, 22, 23], relying on various Perspective View (PV) to BEV
transformation methods [50, 32, 21, 5]. Subsequently, a task-specific head follows to decode and
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

