Multilingual Diversity Improves Vision-Language
Representations

Thao Nguyen1∗

Matthew Wallingford1

Sewoong Oh1

Ludwig Schmidt1

1

University of Washington

2

Sebastin Santy1
Pang Wei Koh1,2

Wei-Chiu Ma1,2
Ranjay Krishna1,2

Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
Massive web-crawled image-text datasets lay the foundation for recent progress
in multimodal learning. These datasets are designed with the goal of training
a model to do well on standard computer vision benchmarks, many of which,
however, have been shown to be English-centric (e.g., ImageNet). Consequently,
existing data curation techniques gravitate towards using predominantly English
image-text pairs and discard many potentially useful non-English samples. Our
work questions this practice. Multilingual data is inherently enriching not only
because it provides a gateway to learn about culturally salient concepts, but also
because it depicts common concepts differently from monolingual data. We thus
conduct a systematic study to explore the performance benefits of using more
samples of non-English origins with respect to English vision tasks. By translating
all multilingual image-text pairs from a raw web crawl to English and re-filtering
them, we increase the prevalence of (translated) multilingual data in the resulting
training set. Pre-training on this dataset outperforms using English-only or Englishdominated datasets on ImageNet, ImageNet distribution shifts, image-English-text
retrieval and on average across 38 tasks from the DataComp benchmark. On a
geographically diverse task like GeoDE, we also observe improvements across all
regions, with the biggest gain coming from Africa. In addition, we quantitatively
show that English and non-English data are significantly different in both image
and (translated) text space. We hope that our findings motivate future work to be
more intentional about including multicultural and multilingual data, not just when
non-English or geographically diverse tasks are involved, but to enhance model
capabilities at large.

1

Introduction

Today, the predominant pre-training paradigm for vision-language models relies on large quantities
of image-text pairs scraped from the web [35, 24]. As raw web data contains a significant amount of
noise, automatic data filtering approaches are designed to curate a high-quality subset and maximize
the performance of a model trained on this subset on standard computer vision benchmarks (e.g.,
ImageNet). However, these benchmarks typically only evaluate in English, and many of them
have been shown to be geographically biased: for instance, ImageNet images are mostly sourced
from North America and Western Europe [43]. Consequently, it is possible that we are designing
data curation algorithms that propagate a monolingual bias, i.e., filtered datasets are increasingly
dominated by English image-text pairs. In fact, a lot of highly cited work—including CLIP [35],
ALIGN [21] and BASIC [33]—relies exclusively on English data. Using more multilingual data for
training is often only a deliberate design decision when non-English tasks are involved [45, 15, 26].
∗

Correspondence to thaottn@cs.washington.edu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

