From Instance Training to Instruction Learning:
Task Adapters Generation from Instructions

Huanxuan Liao1,2 , Shizhu He1,2∗, Yao Xu1,2 , Yuanzhe Zhang1,2 ,
Yanchao Hao3 , Shengping Liu4 , Kang Liu1,2 , Jun Zhao1,2
1
The Key Laboratory of Cognition and Decision Intelligence for Complex Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Platform and Content Group, Tencent, Beijing, China 4 Unisound, Beijing, China
liaohuanxuan2023@ia.ac.cn {shizhu.he, yao.xu, kliu, jzhao}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have acquired the ability to solve general tasks by
utilizing instruction finetuning (IFT). However, IFT still relies heavily on instance
training of extensive task data, which greatly limits the adaptability of LLMs
to real-world scenarios where labeled task instances are scarce and broader task
generalization becomes paramount. Contrary to LLMs, humans acquire skills
and complete tasks not merely through repeated practice but also by understanding and following instructional guidelines. This paper is dedicated to simulating
human learning to address the shortcomings of instance training, focusing on instruction learning to enhance cross-task generalization. Within this context, we
introduce Task Adapters Generation from Instructions (TAGI), which automatically constructs the task-specific model in a parameter generation manner based
on the given task instructions without retraining for unseen tasks. Specifically,
we utilize knowledge distillation to enhance the consistency between TAGI developed through Learning with Instruction and task-specific models developed
through Training with Instance, by aligning the labels, output logits, and adapter
parameters between them. TAGI is endowed with cross-task generalization capabilities through a two-stage training process that includes hypernetwork pretraining
and finetuning. We evaluate TAGI on the Super-Natural Instructions and P3
datasets. The experimental results demonstrate that TAGI can match or even outperform traditional meta-trained models and other hypernetwork models, while
significantly reducing computational requirements. Our code will be available at
https://github.com/Xnhyacinth/TAGI.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have acquired the ability to solve general tasks by utilizing instruction finetuning (IFT), which describes different tasks in the same natural language format [3; 6; 23].
However, IFT still relies heavily on instance training of extensive task data {(Description, [Demostrations], Source, Target)} [37; 39], which faces significant limitations in adapting LLMs to real-world
scenarios where labeled task instances are scarce and broader task generalization becomes paramount.
Therefore, for better cross-task generalization, the "zero-shot" learning ability of LLMs is crucial for
real-world applications: models learned with instructions can achieve non-trivial performance on
unseen tasks with just a single instruction that provides a comprehensive description of the task (e.g.,
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

