Efficient multi-prompt evaluation of LLMs

Felipe Maia Polo1∗, Ronald Xu2.6 , Lucas Weber3 , Mírian Silva4,5,6 , Onkar Bhardwaj5,6
Leshem Choshen2,5,6 , Allysson Flavio Melo de Oliveira5,6 , Yuekai Sun1 , Mikhail Yurochkin5,6
1
University of Michigan, 2 MIT, 3 University Pompeu Fabra, 4 Federal University of Minas Gerais
5
IBM Research, 6 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract
Most popular benchmarks for comparing LLMs rely on a limited set of prompt
templates, which may not fully capture the LLMs’ abilities and can affect the
reproducibility of results on leaderboards. Many recent works empirically verify
prompt sensitivity and advocate for changes in LLM evaluation. In this paper,
we consider the problem of estimating the performance distribution across many
prompt variants instead of finding a single prompt to evaluate with. We introduce
PromptEval, a method for estimating performance across a large set of prompts
borrowing strength across prompts and examples to produce accurate estimates
under practical evaluation budgets. The resulting distribution can be used to
obtain performance quantiles to construct various robust performance metrics (e.g.,
top 95% quantile or median). We prove that PromptEval consistently estimates
the performance distribution and demonstrate its efficacy empirically on three
prominent LLM benchmarks: MMLU, BIG-bench Hard, and LMentry; for example,
PromptEval can accurately estimate performance quantiles across 100 prompt
templates on MMLU with a budget equivalent to two single-prompt evaluations.
Moreover, we show how PromptEval can be useful in LLM-as-a-judge and best
prompt identification applications.2

1

Introduction

Estimation error

MMLU
In recent years, the rapid progress of large
language models (LLMs) has significantly
0.08
influenced various fields by enhancing automated text generation and comprehenBudget
0.06
×1
sion. As these models advance in com×2
plexity and functionality, a key challenge
0.04
×3
that arises is their robust evaluation [Perlitz
×4
et al., 2023]. Common evaluation meth0.02
ods, which often rely on a single or limited
number of prompt templates, may not ad0.00
equately reflect the typical model’s capa5
25
50
75
95
bilities [Weber et al., 2023b]. Furthermore,
Quantile
this approach can lead to unreliable and inconsistent rankings on LLM leaderboards, Figure 1: Average estimation error for performance
as different models may perform better or quantiles across 100 templates given a limited budget
worse depending on the specific prompt (in multiples of one-template MMLU evaluations).
∗

Corresponding author. E-mail: felipemaiapolo@gmail.com
Our code can be found in https://github.com/felipemaiapolo/prompteval and the MMLU data
can be found in https://huggingface.co/PromptEval. PromptEval is also integrated into PromptBench
[Zhu et al., 2024]; please check https://github.com/microsoft/promptbench.
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

