PiSSA: Principal Singular Values and Singular
Vectors Adaptation of Large Language Models

Fanxu Meng1,2 , Zhaohui Wang1 , Muhan Zhang1,2∗
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
2
State Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
https://github.com/GraphPKU/PiSSA
1

Abstract
To parameter-efficiently fine-tune (PEFT) large language models (LLMs), the lowrank adaptation (LoRA) method approximates the model changes ∆W ∈ Rm×n
through the product of two matrices A ∈ Rm×r and B ∈ Rr×n , where
r ≪ min(m, n), A is initialized with Gaussian noise, and B with zeros. LoRA
freezes the original model W and updates the “Noise & Zero” adapter, which
may lead to slow convergence. To overcome this limitation, we introduce Principal
Singular values and Singular vectors Adaptation (PiSSA). PiSSA shares the same
architecture as LoRA, but initializes the adaptor matrices A and B with the principal components of the original matrix W , and put the remaining components into a
residual matrix W res ∈ Rm×n which is frozen during fine-tuning. Compared to
LoRA, PiSSA updates the principal components while freezing the “residual”
parts, allowing faster convergence and enhanced performance. Comparative experiments of PiSSA and LoRA across 11 different models, ranging from 184M to
70B, encompassing 5 NLG and 8 NLU tasks, reveal that PiSSA consistently outperforms LoRA under identical experimental setups. On the GSM8K benchmark,
Gemma-7B fine-tuned with PiSSA achieves an accuracy of 77.7%, surpassing
LoRA’s 74.53% by 3.25%. Due to the same architecture, PiSSA is also compatible with quantization to further reduce the memory requirement of fine-tuning.
Compared to QLoRA, QPiSSA (PiSSA with 4-bit quantization) exhibits smaller
quantization errors in the initial stages. Fine-tuning LLaMA-3-70B on GSM8K,
QPiSSA attains an accuracy of 86.05%, exceeding the performance of QLoRA at
81.73%. Leveraging a fast SVD technique, PiSSA can be initialized in only a few
seconds, presenting a negligible cost for transitioning from LoRA to PiSSA.

1

Introduction

Fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) is a highly effective technique for boosting their capabilities in various tasks [1, 2, 3, 4], ensuring models to follow instructions [5, 6, 7], and instilling models
with desirable behaviors while eliminating undesirable ones [8, 9]. However, the fine-tuning process
for very large models is accompanied by prohibitive costs. For example, regular 16-bit fine-tuning
of a LLaMA 65B parameter model requires over 780 GB of GPU memory [10], and the VRAM
consumption for training GPT-3 175B reaches 1.2TB [11]. Consequently, various parameter-efficient
fine-tuning (PEFT) [12, 13] methods have been proposed to reduce the number of parameters and
memory usage required for fine-tuning. Due to the ability to maintain the performance of full finetuning without adding additional inference latency, Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [11] has emerged
as a popular PEFT method.
∗

Correspondence to: Muhan Zhang <muhan@pku.edu.cn>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

