AdaFlow: Imitation Learning with Variance-Adaptive
Flow-Based Policies
Xixi Hu, Bo Liu, Xingchao Liu, Qiang Liu
The University of Texas at Austin
{hxixi,bliu,xcliu,lqiang}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Diffusion-based imitation learning improves Behavioral Cloning (BC) on multimodal decision-making, but comes at the cost of significantly slower inference
due to the recursion in the diffusion process. It urges us to design efficient policy
generators while keeping the ability to generate diverse actions. To address this
challenge, we propose AdaFlow, an imitation learning framework based on flowbased generative modeling. AdaFlow represents the policy with state-conditioned
ordinary differential equations (ODEs), which are known as probability flows. We
reveal an intriguing connection between the conditional variance of their training
loss and the discretization error of the ODEs. With this insight, we propose a
variance-adaptive ODE solver that can adjust its step size in the inference stage,
making AdaFlow an adaptive decision-maker, offering rapid inference without
sacrificing diversity. Interestingly, it automatically reduces to a one-step generator
when the action distribution is uni-modal. Our comprehensive empirical evaluation
shows that AdaFlow achieves high performance with fast inference speed.

Low-Variance State

High-Variance State

High

Low
1

Diffusion
Policy
Noise

AdaFlow

Step 50

Step 100

Noise

Step 50

Step 100

Action

Noise

Step 5

Step 10

1 Step
Noise

State Variance

Figure 1: AdaFlow is a fast imitation learning policy. It adaptively adjust the number of simulation steps when
generating actions. For low-variance states, it functions as a one-step action generator. For high-variance states,
it employs more steps to ensure accurate action generation. This adaptive approach enables AdaFlow to achieve
an average generation speed close to one step per task completion.

1

Introduction

Imitation Learning (IL) is a widely adopted method in robot learning [1, 2]. In IL, an agent is given a
demonstration dataset from a human expert finishing a certain task, and the goal is for it to complete
the task by learning from this dataset. IL is notably effective for learning complex, non-declarative
motions, yielding remarkable successes in training real robots [3–6].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

