Reinforcement Learning with LTL and ω-Regular
Objectives via Optimality-Preserving Translation to
Average Rewards

Xuan-Bach Le1∗ Dominik Wagner1∗
Leon Witzman1 Alexander Rabinovich2 Luke Ong1
1
NTU Singapore 2 Tel Aviv University
{bach.le,dominik.wagner,luke.ong}@ntu.edu.sg
witz0001@e.ntu.edu.sg
rabinoa@tauex.tau.ac.il

Abstract
Linear temporal logic (LTL) and, more generally, ω-regular objectives are alternatives to the traditional discount sum and average reward objectives in reinforcement
learning (RL), offering the advantage of greater comprehensibility and hence explainability. In this work, we study the relationship between these objectives. Our
main result is that each RL problem for ω-regular objectives can be reduced to
a limit-average reward problem in an optimality-preserving fashion, via (finitememory) reward machines. Furthermore, we demonstrate the efficacy of this
approach by showing that optimal policies for limit-average problems can be found
asymptotically by solving a sequence of discount-sum problems approximately.
Consequently, we resolve an open problem: optimal policies for LTL and ω-regular
objectives can be learned asymptotically.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a machine learning paradigm whereby an agent aims to accomplish
a task in a generally unknown environment [37]. Traditionally, tasks are specified via a scalar
reward signal obtained continuously through interactions with the environment. These rewards are
aggregated over entire trajectories either through averaging or by summing the exponentially decayed
rewards. However, in many applications, there are no reward signals that can naturally be extracted
from the environment. Moreover, reward signals that are supplied by the user are prone to error in
that the chosen low-level rewards often fail to accurately capture high-level objectives. Generally,
policies derived from local rewards-based specifications are hard to understand because it is difficult
to express or explain their global intent.
As a remedy, it has been proposed to specify tasks using formulas in Linear Temporal Logic (LTL)
[41, 30, 9, 38, 15, 34, 14] or ω-regular languages more generally [30]. In this framework, the aim is
to maximise the probability of satisfying a logical specification. LTL can precisely express a wide
range of high-level behavioural properties such as liveness (infinitely often P ), safety (always P ),
stability (eventually always P ), and priority (P then Q then T ).
Motivated by this, a growing body of literature study learning algorithms for RL with LTL and
ω-regular objectives (e.g. [41, 15, 30, 7, 32, 20, 21, 16]). However, to the best of our knowledge, all
of these approaches may fail to learn provably optimal policies without prior knowledge of a generally
unknown parameter such as the optimal ϵ-return mixing time [15] or the ϵ-recurrence time [30],
*

These authors contributed equally to this work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

