UniIF: Unified Molecule Inverse Folding

Zhangyang Gao 1,2, † , Jue Wang 1,2, † , Cheng Tan 1,2, † ,
Lirong Wu 2 , Yufei Huang 2 , Siyuan Li 2 , Zhirui Ye 2 , Stan Z. Li 2, ∗
1
Zhejiang University 2 Westlake University

Abstract
Molecule inverse folding has been a long-standing challenge in chemistry and biology, with the potential to revolutionize drug discovery and material science. Despite
specified models have been proposed for different small- or macro-molecules, few
have attempted to unify the learning process, resulting in redundant efforts. Complementary to recent advancements in molecular structure prediction, such as
RoseTTAFold All-Atom and AlphaFold3, we propose the unified model UniIF for
the inverse folding of all molecules. We do such unification in two levels: 1) DataLevel: We propose a unified block graph data form for all molecules, including
the local frame building and geometric feature initialization. 2) Model-Level: We
introduce a geometric block attention network, comprising a geometric interaction,
interactive attention and virtual long-term dependency modules, to capture the 3D
interactions of all molecules. Through comprehensive evaluations across various
tasks such as protein design, RNA design, and material design, we demonstrate
that our proposed method surpasses state-of-the-art methods on all tasks. UniIF
offers a versatile and effective solution for general molecule inverse folding.

1

Introduction

Molecule inverse folding plays a pivotal role in drug and material design, enabling scientists to
synthesize novel molecules with the desired structure. Previously, many studies focus on either
macromolecules [19, 33, 21, 9, 17, 4, 10, 17, 8, 34] or small molecules [6, 26, 16, 28, 14, 31]
separately, leaving the challenge of inverse folding general molecules. For example, the advanced
small molecule model [6, 31] take atoms as basic units; the macromolecule models [8, 10] consider
predefined microstructures (such as amino acids and nucleotides) as the basic units. Additionally,
even for the same molecule, different models employ varying strategies to extract geometric features.
Complementary to the great success of RoseTTAFold All-Atom [25] and AlphaFold3 [1] in molecular
structure prediction, we propose a unified model, UniIF, for the inverse folding of all molecules.

Structure

Tokens

By comparing small- and macro-molecules, we
20 Amino acids
4 Nucleotides
118 Atoms
identify three challenges toward the unified model:
(1) Unit Discrepancy: The macromolecules takes
predefined microstructures (amino acids and nucleotides) as the basic units, while small molecules
Unified Inverse Folding Model
takes atoms as basic units. (2) Geometric Featurizer: Different studies employ various strategies
for extracting geometric features from structures,
such as distance, angles and tensor product; there
are lack of unified featurization strategy. (3) System Size: The small-molecules allow the full attention transformer to learn long-term dependenProtein
RNA
Molecule
cies, but the quadratic computing cost limits the
mechanism scalling up to macro-molecular sysFigure 1: Unified molecule inverse folding.
tems. Alternatively, previous research use sparse
GNN, which suffers from the limited local receptive field that causes over-smoothing and oversquashing [29]. In addition, developing a unified model working well for all molecules is challenging.
†

Equal Contribution, ∗ Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

