Offline Behavior Distillation
Shiye Lei
School of Computer Science
The University of Sydney
shiye.lei@sydney.edu.au

Sen Zhang
School of Computer Science
The University of Sydney
sen.zhang@sydney.edu.au

Dacheng Tao
College of Computing & Data Science
Nanyang Technological University
dacheng.tao@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Massive reinforcement learning (RL) data are typically collected to train policies
offline without the need for interactions, but the large data volume can cause training inefficiencies. To tackle this issue, we formulate offline behavior distillation
(OBD), which synthesizes limited expert behavioral data from sub-optimal RL data,
enabling rapid policy learning. We propose two naive OBD objectives, DBC and
PBC, which measure distillation performance via the decision difference between
policies trained on distilled data and either offline data or a near-expert policy. Due
to intractable bi-level optimization, the OBD objective is difficult to minimize to
small values, which deteriorates PBC by its distillation performance guarantee
with quadratic discount complexity O(1/(1 − γ)2 ). We theoretically establish the
equivalence between the policy performance and action-value weighted decision
difference, and introduce action-value weighted PBC (Av-PBC) as a more effective
OBD objective. By optimizing the weighted decision difference, Av-PBC achieves
a superior distillation guarantee with linear discount complexity O(1/(1 − γ)).
Extensive experiments on multiple D4RL datasets reveal that Av-PBC offers significant improvements in OBD performance, fast distillation convergence speed,
and robust cross-architecture/optimizer generalization. The code is available at
https://github.com/LeavesLei/OBD.

1

Introduction

Due to the costs and dangers associated with interactions in reinforcement learning (RL), learning
policies from pre-collected RL data has become increasingly popular [Levine et al., 2020]. Consequently, numerous offline RL datasets have been constructed [Fu et al., 2020]. However, these
offline data are typically massive and collected by sub-optimal or even random policies, leading to
inefficiencies in policy training. Inspired by dataset distillation (DD) [Wang et al., 2018, Zhao et al.,
2021, Lei and Tao, 2024], which synthesizes a small number of training images while preserving
model training effects, we further investigate the following question: Can we distill vast sub-optimal
RL data into limited expert behavioral data? Achieving this would enable rapid offline policy learning
via behavioral cloning (BC) [Pomerleau, 1991], which can (1) reduce the training cost and enable
green AI; (2) facilitate downstream tasks by using distilled data as prior knowledge (e.g. continual RL
[Gai et al., 2023], multi-task RL [Yu et al., 2021], efficient policy pretraining [Goecks et al., 2019],
offline-to-online fine-tuning [Zhao et al., 2022]); and (3) protect data privacy [Qiao and Wang, 2023].
Unlike DD whose objective is prediction accuracy and directly obtainable from real data, the policy
performance in RL is measured by the expected return through interactions with environment. In an
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

