Is Multiple Object Tracking a Matter of
Specialization?

Gianluca Mancusi

Mattia Bernardi

Aniello Panariello

Rita Cucchiara

Angelo Porrello

Simone Calderara

AImageLab - University of Modena and Reggio Emilia
name.surname@unimore.it

Abstract
End-to-end transformer-based trackers have achieved remarkable performance on
most human-related datasets. However, training these trackers in heterogeneous
scenarios poses significant challenges, including negative interference – where the
model learns conflicting scene-specific parameters – and limited domain generalization, which often necessitates expensive fine-tuning to adapt the models to
new domains. In response to these challenges, we introduce Parameter-efficient
Scenario-specific Tracking Architecture (PASTA), a novel framework that combines Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) and Modular Deep Learning (MDL).
Specifically, we define key scenario attributes (e.g., camera-viewpoint, lighting
condition) and train specialized PEFT modules for each attribute. These expert
modules are combined in parameter space, enabling systematic generalization to
new domains without increasing inference time. Extensive experiments on MOTSynth, along with zero-shot evaluations on MOT17 and PersonPath22 demonstrate
that a neural tracker built from carefully selected modules surpasses its monolithic
counterpart. We release models and code.

1

Introduction

Video Surveillance is essential for enhancing security, supporting law enforcement, improving safety,
and increasing operational efficiency across various sectors. In this respect, Multiple Object Tracking
(MOT) is a widely studied topic due to its inherent complexity. Nowadays, MOT is commonly tackled
with two main paradigms: tracking-by-detection (TbD) [3, 51, 61, 28, 43, 38, 29] or query-based
tracking [56, 58, 63, 12] (i.e., tracking-by-attention). Although tracking-by-detection methods have
proven effective across multiple datasets, their performance struggles to scale on larger datasets due
to the non-differentiable mechanism used for linking new detections to existing tracks. To this end,
query-based methods are being employed to unify the detection and association phase.
Nevertheless, training such end-to-end transformer-based methods presents significant challenges,
as they tend to overfit specific scenario settings [37, 55] (e.g., camera viewpoint, indoor vs. outdoor
environments), require vast amounts of data [63], and incur substantial computational costs. Moreover,
these methods degrade under domain shifts, struggling to outperform traditional TbD methods.
In light of these challenges, we propose a novel framework, Parameter-efficient Scenario-specific
Tracking Architecture (PASTA), aimed at reducing the computational costs and enhancing the transfer
capabilities of such models. Leveraging Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) techniques [16, 34]
can significantly decrease computational expenses and training time, starting with a frozen backbone
pre-trained on synthetic data. However, the model may still experience negative interference [49,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

