Time-MMD: Multi-Domain Multimodal Dataset
for Time Series Analysis

Haoxin Liu†∗, Shangqing Xu† , Zhiyuan Zhao† , Lingkai Kong† ,
Harshavardhan Kamarthi† , Aditya B. Sasanur† , Megha Sharma† ,
Jiaming Cui† , Qingsong Wen§ , Chao Zhang† , B. Aditya Prakash†∗
†

Georgia Institute of Technology

§

Squirrel AI

Abstract
Time series data are ubiquitous across a wide range of real-world domains. While
real-world time series analysis (TSA) requires human experts to integrate numerical series data with multimodal domain-specific knowledge, most existing TSA
models rely solely on numerical data, overlooking the significance of information beyond numerical series. This oversight is due to the untapped potential
of textual series data and the absence of a comprehensive, high-quality multimodal dataset. To overcome this obstacle, we introduce Time-MMD, the first
multi-domain, multimodal time series dataset covering 9 primary data domains.
Time-MMD ensures fine-grained modality alignment, eliminates data contamination, and provides high usability. Additionally, we develop MM-TSFlib, the
first-cut multimodal time-series forecasting (TSF) library, seamlessly pipelining
multimodal TSF evaluations based on Time-MMD for in-depth analyses. Extensive
experiments conducted on Time-MMD through MM-TSFlib demonstrate significant performance enhancements by extending unimodal TSF to multimodality,
evidenced by over 15% mean squared error reduction in general, and up to 40%
in domains with rich textual data. More importantly, our datasets and library
revolutionize broader applications, impacts, research topics to advance TSA. The
dataset is available at https://github.com/AdityaLab/Time-MMD.

1

Introduction

Time series (TS) data are ubiquitous across a wide range of domains, including economics, urban
computing, and epidemiology (52; 56; 29). Analytical tasks on such datasets hence find broad
applications in various real-world scenarios such as energy forecasting, traffic planning, and epidemic
policy formulation. Human experts typically complete such Time-Series Analysis (TSA) tasks by
integrating multiple modalities of time-series data. For instance, epidemiologists combine numerical
data on influenza infections with textual domain knowledge, policies, and reports to predict future
epidemiological trends. However, most existing TSA models (59; 42; 78; 44; 81; 32; 80; 48) are
unimodal, solely using numerical series.
Recently, with the development of Large Language Models (LLMs), the field of TSA is also undergoing an exciting transformative moment with the integration of natural language (73; 34). Existing
LLM-based TSA methods incorporate endogenous text derived from numerical series, such as linguistic descriptions of statistical information, which has demonstrated promising benefits (22; 25; 6; 40).
However, the potential of exogenous or auxiliary textual signals—such as information on concurrent
events and policies that provide additional context to time series—remains untapped. This observation prompts a crucial question for multimodal TSA: Can multimodal TSA models utilize these
∗

Correspondence to: Haoxin Liu <hliu763@gatech.edu>, B. Aditya Prakash <badityap@cc.gatech.edu>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

