High-Resolution Image Harmonization with
Adaptive-Interval Color Transformation

Quanling Meng1 , Qinglin Liu1 , Zonglin Li1 , Xiangyuan Lan2 ,
Shengping Zhang1,2,∗, Liqiang Nie1
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
quanling.meng@hit.edu.cn, qinglin.liu@outlook.com, zonglin.li@hit.edu.cn
lanxy@pcl.ac.cn, s.zhang@hit.edu.cn, nieliqiang@gmail.com

Abstract
Existing high-resolution image harmonization methods typically rely on global
color adjustments or the upsampling of parameter maps. However, these methods
ignore local variations, leading to inharmonious appearances. To address this
problem, we propose an Adaptive-Interval Color Transformation method (AICT),
which predicts pixel-wise color transformations and adaptively adjusts the sampling interval to model local non-linearities of the color transformation at high
resolution. Specifically, a parameter network is first designed to generate multiple
position-dependent 3-dimensional lookup tables (3D LUTs), which use the color
and position of each pixel to perform pixel-wise color transformations. Then, to
enhance local variations adaptively, we separate a color transform into a cascade of
sub-transformations using two 3D LUTs to achieve the non-uniform sampling intervals of the color transform. Finally, a global consistent weight learning method is
proposed to predict an image-level weight for each color transform, utilizing global
information to enhance the overall harmony. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our AICT achieves state-of-the-art performance with a lightweight architecture.
The code is available at https://github.com/aipixel/AICT.

1

Introduction

Image composition [3, 2, 24, 51] aims to combine a foreground object with a background image to create a realistic composite, which holds
significant potential across various domains, including art, entertainment, commerce [3, 43, 52],
and data augmentation [11, 30, 26]. However,
since the foreground and background may be
captured under different conditions, directly
pasting the foreground onto the background usually results in an inconsistent appearance. To
address this problem, image harmonization endeavors to adjust the color of the foreground to
seamlessly integrate with the background, which
plays a pivotal role in image editing.

𝑦(𝑖, 𝑗) = 𝐺 𝑥(𝑖, 𝑗)
ො

Transform
𝑥(𝑖, 𝑗)

𝑦ො ( 𝑖, 𝑗 )

Downsample

Adaptive Interval

Parameter
Network
Parameter Maps

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Figure 1: Our method predicts pixel-wise color
transformations at low resolution and adaptively
the adjusts sampling interval to model local nonlinearities of the color transform at high resolution.

Traditional image harmonization methods [5, 19, 27, 28, 29, 36, 37] primarily concentrate on aligning
the color statistics of the foreground to match the background using hand-crafted features. Since
∗

Corresponding author (s.zhang@hit.edu.cn).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

