Differentiable Structure Learning with Partial Orders

Taiyu Ban

Lyuzhou Chen

Xiangyu Wang∗

Xin Wang

Derui Lyu

Huanhuan Chen∗

University of Science and Technology of China
{banty, clz31415, wz520, drlv}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{sa312, hchen}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Differentiable structure learning is a novel line of causal discovery research that
transforms the combinatorial optimization of structural models into a continuous
optimization problem. However, the ﬁeld has lacked feasible methods to integrate
partial order constraints, a critical prior information typically used in real-world
scenarios, into the differentiable structure learning framework. The main difﬁculty
lies in adapting these constraints, typically suited for the space of total orderings,
to the continuous optimization context of structure learning in the graph space.
To bridge this gap, this paper formalizes a set of equivalent constraints that map
partial orders onto graph spaces and introduces a plug-and-play module for their
efﬁcient application. This module preserves the equivalent effect of partial order
constraints in the graph space, backed by theoretical validations of correctness
and completeness. It signiﬁcantly enhances the quality of recovered structures
while maintaining good efﬁciency, which learns better structures using 90% fewer
samples than the data-based method on a real-world dataset. This result, together
with a comprehensive evaluation on synthetic cases, demonstrates our method’s
ability to effectively improve differentiable structure learning with partial orders.

1

Introduction

Learning directed acyclic graph (DAG) structures from observational data is fundamental for causal
discovery in scientiﬁc research [Opgen-Rhein and Strimmer, 2007; Pearl and others, 2000]. Traditionally, it has been approached as a combinatorial optimization problem dominated by independence tests and score-and-search methods [Heinze-Deml et al., 2018]. Zheng et al. [2018] reformed
it as a continuous optimization problem through a novel characterization of the acyclicity constraint
in a differentiable form. Subsequently, numerous studies have proposed various learner architectures [Yu et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2020], acyclicity characterizations [Yu et al.,
2019; Ng et al., 2022; Bello et al., 2022], and optimization techniques [Wei et al., 2020; Deng et al.,
2023a,b] to advance differentiable structure learning.
In practical scenarios of causal discovery, researchers often possess prior knowledge of ordering,
such as known gene activation sequences in genetics [Olson, 2006], standard treatment sequences
in healthcare management [Denton et al., 2007], and sequential seasonal weather patterns in meteorology [Bruffaerts et al., 2018]. Such prior information can be generally formalized as a set
O = {(x, y) | x, y ∈ X} of partial orders, where the binary relation (x, y) represents that variable
x precedes y in the ordering, denoted as x ≺ y. For traditional score-and-search structure learning
methods, the constraints of partial orders can reduce the space of total orderings in which the search
algorithms2 are usually performed [Teyssier and Koller, 2005]. Thus, the prior partial order informs
the search process to ﬁnd more genuine structures, which is essential for practical causal discovery.
∗
2

Corresponding authors.
Such algorithms are known as order-based search in the literature, see Appendix A for details.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

