SleeperNets: Universal Backdoor Poisoning Attacks
Against Reinforcement Learning Agents

Ethan Rathbun∗, Christopher Amato† , Alina Oprea†
Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) is an actively growing field that is seeing increased
usage in real-world, safety-critical applications – making it paramount to ensure the
robustness of RL algorithms against adversarial attacks. In this work we explore a
particularly stealthy form of training-time attacks against RL – backdoor poisoning.
Here the adversary intercepts the training of an RL agent with the goal of reliably
inducing a particular action when the agent observes a pre-determined trigger at
inference time. We uncover theoretical limitations of prior work by proving their
inability to generalize across domains and MDPs. Motivated by this, we formulate
a novel poisoning attack framework which interlinks the adversary’s objectives with
those of finding an optimal policy – guaranteeing attack success in the limit. Using
insights from our theoretical analysis we develop “SleeperNets” as a universal
backdoor attack which exploits a newly proposed threat model and leverages
dynamic reward poisoning techniques. We evaluate our attack in 6 environments
spanning multiple domains and demonstrate significant improvements in attack
success over existing methods, while preserving benign episodic return.

1

Introduction

Interest in Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods has grown exponentially, in part sparked by the
development of powerful Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) algorithms such as Deep Q-Networks
(DQN) [24] and Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [31]. With this effort comes large scale
adoption of RL methods in safety and security critical settings, including fine-tuning Large Language
Models [26], operating self-driving vehicles [15], organizing robots in distribution warehouses [17],
managing stock trading profiles [13], and even coordinating space traffic [5].
These RL agents, both physical and virtual, are given massive amounts of responsibility by the
developers and researchers allowing them to interface with the real world and real people. Poorly
trained or otherwise compromised agents can cause significant damage to those around them [8], thus
it is crucial to ensure the robustness of RL algorithms against all forms of adversarial attacks, both at
training time and deployment time.
Backdoor attacks [9] [14] are particularly powerful and difficult to detect training-time attacks. In
these attacks the adversary manipulates the training of an RL agent on a given Markov Decision
Process (MDP) with the goal of solving two competing objectives. The first is high attack success,
i.e., the adversary must be able to reliably induce the agent to take a target action a+ whenever they
observe the fixed trigger pattern δ at inference time – irrespective of consequence. At the same time,
the adversary wishes to maintain attack stealth by allowing the agent to learn a near-optimal policy
on the training task – giving the illusion that the agent was trained properly.
Prior works on backdoor attacks in RL [14] [4] [35] use static reward poisoning techniques with
inner-loop threat models. Here the trigger is embedded into the agent’s state-observation and their
reward is altered to a fixed value of ±c during each episode. These attacks have proven effective in
∗

Primary Contact Author - rathbun.e@northeastern.edu ; † Equal Advising

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

