DenseFormer: Enhancing Information Flow in
Transformers via Depth Weighted Averaging

Matteo Pagliardini∗
EPFL
matteo.pagliardini@epfl.ch

Amirkeivan Mohtashami∗
EPFL
amirkeivan.mohtashami@epfl.ch

Francois Fleuret
University of Geneva
Francois.Fleuret@unige.ch

Martin Jaggi
EPFL
martin.jaggi@epfl.ch

Abstract
The transformer architecture by Vaswani et al. [31] is now ubiquitous across
application domains, from natural language processing to speech processing and
image understanding. We propose DenseFormer, a simple modification to the
standard architecture that improves the perplexity of the model without increasing
its size—adding at most a few thousand parameters for large-scale models. Our
approach relies on an additional averaging step after each transformer block, which
computes a weighted average of current and past representations—we refer to this
operation as Depth-Weighted-Average (DWA). The learned DWA weights exhibit
coherent patterns of information flow, revealing the strong and structured reuse
of activations from distant layers. Experiments demonstrate that DenseFormer
is more data efficient, reaching the same perplexity of much deeper transformer
models, and that for the same perplexity, these new models outperform transformer
baselines in terms of memory efficiency and inference time.

1

Introduction

The transformer architecture [31] is the workhorse of modern natural language processing. Recent
leaps in the state of the art can be attributed in a large part to efforts scaling this architecture, from
millions of parameters [3] to large billion-parameter models [1, 18, 23, 29, 30]. Unfortunately, those
larger models come with an increased computational cost, and a large memory footprint. This renders
them impractical to use in a wide range of use-cases, limiting who can benefit from them to a handful
of big corporations. As an attempt to mitigate this issue, Touvron et al. [29] propose training a smaller
model for more steps. However, longer training requires larger datasets which becomes challenging as
we are reaching scales where even extremely large datasets fall short of sufficient amounts of data [32].
Furthermore, recent observations suggest that we are reaching the state of diminishing returns where
increasing the depth of the model beyond a certain point does not significantly improve performance
[21]. Interestingly, a similar state of diminishing returns has been observed in the field of computer
vision focused on the training of deep convolutional neural networks. Various solutions were proposed
to address this issue, including DenseNets [11] which alleviated the problem by allowing subsequent
layers to directly access outputs of earlier layers.
In this work, using a similar intuition as DenseNets, we propose the DenseFormer architecture. In
particular, instead of only having skip connections from one block to the next, in DenseFormer, a
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

