Certified Machine Unlearning
via Noisy Stochastic Gradient Descent

Eli Chien
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Georgia, U.S.A.
ichien6@gatech.edu
Haoyu Wang
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Georgia, U.S.A.
haoyu.wang@gatech.edu

Ziang Chen
Department of Mathematics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Massachusetts, U.S.A.
ziang@mit.edu

Pan Li
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Georgia, U.S.A.
panli@gatech.edu

Abstract
“The right to be forgotten” ensured by laws for user data privacy becomes increasingly important. Machine unlearning aims to efficiently remove the effect of certain
data points on the trained model parameters so that it can be approximately the
same as if one retrains the model from scratch. We propose to leverage projected
noisy stochastic gradient descent for unlearning and establish its first approximate
unlearning guarantee under the convexity assumption. Our approach exhibits several benefits, including provable complexity saving compared to retraining, and
supporting sequential and batch unlearning. Both of these benefits are closely related to our new results on the infinite Wasserstein distance tracking of the adjacent
(un)learning processes. Extensive experiments show that our approach achieves a
similar utility under the same privacy constraint while using 2% and 10% of the gradient computations compared with the state-of-the-art gradient-based approximate
unlearning methods for mini-batch and full-batch settings, respectively.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models usually learn from user data where data privacy has to be respected. Certain
laws, such as European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), are in place to ensure
“the right to be forgotten”, which requires corporations to erase all information pertaining to a user
if they request to remove their data. It is insufficient to comply with such privacy regulation by
only removing user data from the dataset, as machine learning models can memorize training data
information and risk information leakage [1, 2]. A naive approach to adhere to this privacy regulation
is to retrain the model from scratch after every data removal request. Apparently, this approach
is prohibitively expensive in practice for frequent data removal requests and the goal of machine
unlearning is to perform efficient model updates so that the resulting model is (approximately)
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

