Off to new Shores: A Dataset & Benchmark for
(near-)coastal Flood Inundation Forecasting

Brandon Victor
La Trobe University
b.victor@latrobe.edu.au
Peter Naylor
ESA Φ-lab
peter.naylor@esa.int

Mathilde Letard
University of Rennes
mathilde.letard@univ-rennes.fr

Karim Douch
ESA Science Hub
karim.douch@esa.int

Zhen He
La Trobe University
z.he@latrobe.edu.au

Nicolas Longépé
ESA Φ-lab
nicolas.longepe@esa.int

Patrick Ebel
ESA Φ-lab
patrick.ebel@esa.int

Abstract
Floods are among the most common and devastating natural hazards, imposing
immense costs on our society and economy due to their disastrous consequences.
Recent progress in weather prediction and spaceborne flood mapping demonstrated
the feasibility of anticipating extreme events and reliably detecting their catastrophic effects afterwards. However, these efforts are rarely linked to one another
and there is a critical lack of datasets and benchmarks to enable the direct forecasting of flood extent. To resolve this issue, we curate a novel dataset enabling a timely
prediction of flood extent. Furthermore, we provide a representative evaluation
of state-of-the-art methods, structured into two benchmark tracks for forecasting
flood inundation maps i) in general and ii) focused on coastal regions. Altogether,
our dataset and benchmark provide a comprehensive platform for evaluating flood
forecasts, enabling future solutions for this critical challenge. Data, code & models
are shared at https://github.com/Multihuntr/GFF under a CC0 license.

1

Introduction

Floods are among the most impactful natural disasters, both in terms of the societal as well as
the economic costs they impose (15). The consent amongst climate scientists and disaster relief
experts is that this trend will aggravate in the coming decades(50; 36; 27; 61), close by rivers
(21) and in particular near the coastlines due to rising sea levels and more severe extreme weather
events (35; 10; 45; 65; 64; 46). Yet, closeness to waterways is of economical importance such that
endangered regions have grown in population, thus bringing more people at the risk of floods (66; 60).
Hence, international collaborations and efforts e.g. in the context of the United Nations (UN)
Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) (62; 58) tackle climate change mitigation and adaptation.
According to the Early warnings for all initiative of the World Meteorological Organization and the
UN, every person on Earth shall be protected by early warning systems until 2027 (67), but to date
significantly more effort is required towards covering the Global South and developing early warning
systems for coastal inundation (71). In line with these needs, our contribution is a global dataset and
benchmark for a timely forecasting of flood extent maps. Our novel Global Flood Forecasting (GFF)
dataset represents climate zone and continent distributions of events as reported in the Dartmouth
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

