Emergence of Hidden Capabilities:
Exploring Learning Dynamics in Concept Space

arXiv:2406.19370v4 [cs.LG] 11 Dec 2024

Core Francisco Park∗1,2,3 , Maya Okawa∗1,3 , Andrew Lee4
Hidenori Tanaka†1,3 , Ekdeep Singh Lubana†1,3
1

CBS-NTT Program in Physics of Intelligence, Harvard University
2
Department of Physics, Harvard University
3
Physics & Informatics Laboratories, NTT Research, Inc.
4
EECS Department, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

Abstract
Modern generative models demonstrate impressive capabilities, likely stemming
from an ability to identify and manipulate abstract concepts underlying their training data. However, fundamental questions remain: what determines the concepts a
model learns, the order in which it learns them, and its ability to manipulate those
concepts? To address these questions, we propose analyzing a model’s learning
dynamics via a framework we call the concept space, where each axis represents
an independent concept underlying the data generating process. By characterizing
learning dynamics in this space, we identify how the speed at which a concept is
learned, and hence the order of concept learning, is controlled by properties of
the data we term concept signal. Further, we observe moments of sudden turns
in the direction of a model’s learning dynamics in concept space. Surprisingly,
these points precisely correspond to the emergence of hidden capabilities, i.e.,
where latent interventions show the model possesses the capability to manipulate
a concept, but these capabilities cannot yet be elicited via naive input prompting.
While our results focus on synthetically defined toy datasets, we hypothesize a
general claim on emergence of hidden capabilities may hold: generative models
possess latent capabilities that emerge suddenly and consistently during training,
though a model might not exhibit these capabilities under naive input prompting.

1

Introduction

Modern generative models, such as text-conditioned diffusion models, show unprecedented capabilities [1–8]. These abilities have led to use of such models in applications as valuable as training control
policies for robotics [9–11] and models for weather forecasting [12], to as drastic as campaigning in
democratic elections [13, 14]. Similar claims can be made for generative models of other modalities,
e.g., large language models (LLMs) [15–18], speech and audio models [14, 19], or even systems
designed for enabling scientific applications such as drug discovery [20, 21]. Arguably, acquiring such
general capabilities requires for models to internalize the data-generating process and disentangle the
concepts (aka latent variables or factors of variation) underlying it [22, 23]. Flexibly manipulating
these concepts can then enable generation of novel samples that are entirely out-of-distribution (OOD)
with respect to the ones used for training [24–28].
As shown in prior work, modern generative models do exhibit signs of disentangling concepts
underlying the data generating process and learning of corresponding capabilities to manipulate said
* equal contribution, † equal advising (see detailed list). Email: corefranciscopark@g.harvard.edu,
ajyl@umich.edu, {mayaokawa, ekdeeplubana, hidenori_tanaka}@fas.harvard.edu
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

