Non-Stationary Learning of Neural Networks
with Automatic Soft Parameter Reset
Alexandre Galashov∗
Gatsby Unit, UCL
Google DeepMind
agalashov@google.com
Clare Lyle
Google DeepMind
clarelyle@google.com

Michalis K. Titsias
Google DeepMind
mtitsias@google.com

András György
Google DeepMind
agyorgy@google.com

Razvan Pascanu
Google DeepMind
razp@google.com

Yee Whye Teh
Google DeepMind
University of Oxford
ywteh@google.com

Maneesh Sahani
Gatsby Unit, UCL
maneesh@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Neural networks are most often trained under the assumption that data come
from a stationary distribution. However, settings in which this assumption is
violated are of increasing importance; examples include supervised learning with
distributional shifts, reinforcement learning, continual learning and non-stationary
contextual bandits. Here, we introduce a novel learning approach that automatically
models and adapts to non-stationarity by linking parameters through an OrnsteinUhlenbeck process with an adaptive drift parameter. The adaptive drift draws
the parameters towards the distribution used at initialisation, so the approach can
be understood as a form of soft parameter reset. We show empirically that our
approach performs well in non-stationary supervised, and off-policy reinforcement
learning settings.

1

Introduction

Neural networks (NNs) are typically trained using algorithms such as stochastic gradient descent
(SGD), which implicitly assume that the data come from a stationary distribution. This assumption is
incorrect for scenarios such as continual learning, reinforcement learning, non-stationary contextual
bandits, and supervised learning with distribution shifts [20, 53]. Although the parameters can be
updated online as new data are encountered, this approach often leads to a loss of plasticity [12, 2, 13],
manifesting either as a failure to generalise to new data despite reduced training loss [4, 2], or as an
inability to reduce training error as the data distribution changes [13, 37, 1, 42, 34].
In [38], the authors argue for two factors that lead to loss of plasticity: shifts in the distribution of
preactivations, leading to dead or dormant neurons [47], and growth in the parameter norm, causing
training instabilities. These problems are often addressed using hard resets based on heuristics such
as detecting dormant units [47], assessing unit utility [13, 12], or simply after a fixed number of steps
has elapsed[43]. Although effective at increasing plasticity, hard resets can be inefficient as they can
discard valuable knowledge captured by the parameters.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

