DACO: Towards Application-Driven and
Comprehensive Data Analysis via Code Generation

Xueqing Wu1 , Rui Zheng2 , Jingzhen Sha1 , Te-Lin Wu1 , Hanyu Zhou1 , Mohan Tang1 ,
Kai-Wei Chang1 , Nanyun Peng1 , Haoran Huang3
1
University of California, Los Angeles 2 Fudan University 3 ByteDance

Abstract
Data analysis is a crucial analytical process essential for deriving insights from realworld databases. As shown in Figure 1, the need for data analysis typically arises
from specific application scenarios, and requires diverse reasoning skills including
mathematical reasoning, logical reasoning, and strategic reasoning. Existing work
often focus on simple factual retrieval or arithmetic resolutions and thus are insufficient for addressing complex real-world queries. This work aims to propose new
resources and benchmarks on this crucial yet challenging and under-explored task.
Due to the prohibitively high cost of collecting expert annotations, we use large
language models (LLMs) enhanced by code generation to automatically generate
high-quality data analysis, which will later be refined by human annotators. We
construct the DACO dataset, containing (1) 440 databases (of tabular data) collected from real-world scenarios, (2) ∼ 2k automatically generated query-answer
pairs that can serve as weak supervision for model training, and (3) a concentrated
but high-quality test set with human refined annotations that serves as our main
evaluation benchmark. Experiments show that while LLMs like GPT-4 exhibit
promising data analysis capabilities, they are still evaluated as less helpful than
human-written analysis on 58.1% cases. Leveraging our weak supervision data,
we experiment with various fine-tuning methods, including supervised fine-tuning
(SFT) and reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). Our trained
model outperforms existing baselines for table question answering, and RLHF
further boosts the helpfulness of generated analysis on 58.5% cases. Data and code
are released at https://github.com/shirley-wu/daco.

1

Introduction

Data analysis is the process of systematically applying statistical and logical reasoning to comprehend
data and derive insights. Existing literature on table question answering has investigated answering
queries about information given by structural data (e.g., tables) [7, 26, 24]. However, they either
focus straightforward factual retrieval or short-form arithmetic resolutions over retrieved entities
while real-world data analysis can involve more complex analytical processes.
Take the scenario in Figure 1 as an example: a user is investigating potential age discrimination of a
shop. To effectively answer queries such as this one, a chain of mathematical and logical reasoning
and interacting with the data is required. For instance, finding 1 is inferred from the membership data
(‘member’ table) through mathematical and analytical reasoning, while finding and suggestion 2 are
derived from both ‘member’ and ‘happy_hour_member’ tables through mathematical and strategic
reasoning. These rigorous quantitative analyses eventually conclude the opposite to the user’s
hypothesis. As valuable as the conclusive suggestions such comprehensive analysis can bring, the
extensive labor-efforts, hinted by these examples, can hinder the efficiency of gaining intelligence
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

