Mutual Information Estimation via f -Divergence and
Data Derangements

Nunzio A. Letizia Nicola Novello Andrea M. Tonello
University of Klagenfurt
{nunzio.letizia,nicola.novello,andrea.tonello}@aau.at

Abstract
Estimating mutual information accurately is pivotal across diverse applications,
from machine learning to communications and biology, enabling us to gain insights
into the inner mechanisms of complex systems. Yet, dealing with high-dimensional
data presents a formidable challenge, due to its size and the presence of intricate
relationships. Recently proposed neural methods employing variational lower
bounds on the mutual information have gained prominence. However, these approaches suffer from either high bias or high variance, as the sample size and the
structure of the loss function directly influence the training process. In this paper,
we propose a novel class of discriminative mutual information estimators based
on the variational representation of the f -divergence. We investigate the impact of
the permutation function used to obtain the marginal training samples and present
a novel architectural solution based on derangements. The proposed estimator
is flexible since it exhibits an excellent bias/variance trade-off. The comparison
with state-of-the-art neural estimators, through extensive experimentation within
established reference scenarios, shows that our approach offers higher accuracy
and lower complexity.

1

Introduction

The mutual information (MI) between two multivariate random variables, X and Y , is a fundamental
quantity in statistics, representation learning, information theory, communication engineering and
biology [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. It quantifies the statistical dependence between X and Y by measuring the
amount of information obtained about X via the observation of Y , and it is defined as


pXY (x, y)
.
(1)
I(X; Y ) = E(x,y)∼pXY (x,y) log
pX (x)pY (y)
Unfortunately, computing I(X; Y ) is challenging since the joint probability density function
pXY (x, y) and the marginals pX (x), pY (y) are usually unknown, especially when dealing with
high-dimensional data. Some recent techniques [6, 7] have demonstrated that neural networks can be
leveraged as probability density function estimators and, more in general, are capable of modeling
the data dependence. Discriminative approaches [8, 9] compare samples from both the joint and
marginal distributions to directly compute the density ratio (or the log-density ratio)
R(x, y) =

pXY (x, y)
.
pX (x)pY (y)

(2)

We focus on discriminative MI estimation since it can in principle enjoy some of the properties
of implicit generative models, which are able of directly generating data that belongs to the same
distribution of the input data without any explicit density estimate. In this direction, the most
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

