Dual Critic Reinforcement Learning
under Partial Observability
∗

∗

Jinqiu Li1,2 , Enmin Zhao1,2 , Tong Wei3 , Junliang Xing3 , Shiming Xiang1,2
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
{lijinqiu2021, zhaoenmin2018}@ia.ac.cn, wt22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
jlxing@tsinghua.edu.cn, smxiang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Partial observability in environments poses significant challenges that impede the
formation of effective policies in reinforcement learning. Prior research has shown
that borrowing the complete state information can enhance sample efficiency. This
strategy, however, frequently encounters unstable learning with high variance in
practical applications due to the over-reliance on complete information. This paper
introduces DCRL, a Dual Critic Reinforcement Learning framework designed
to adaptively harness full-state information during training to reduce variance
for optimized online performance. In particular, DCRL incorporates two distinct
critics: an oracle critic with access to complete state information and a standard
critic functioning within the partially observable context. It innovates a synergistic
strategy to meld the strengths of the oracle critic for efficiency improvement
and the standard critic for variance reduction, featuring a novel mechanism for
seamless transition and weighting between them. We theoretically prove that
DCRL mitigates the learning variance while maintaining unbiasedness. Extensive
experimental analyses across the Box2D and Box3D environments have verified
DCRL’s superior performance.

1

Introduction

Real-world issues commonly involve a degree of partial
State
Observation
observability, where agents lack access to the full system state and must base decisions on partial observations.
These problems are typically defined as partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs) [1]. Despite
the progress in reinforcement learning (RL) for addressing complex tasks [2–6], learning effective strategies in
scenarios with partial observations remains challenging.
Traditional RL methods in POMDP contexts often en- Figure 1: The WallGap environment, a
counter impractical computations in processing the com- procedurally generated navigation task
plete history, leading to suboptimal performance. Luckily, in MiniWorld. The agent’s goal (red trifull states are accessible during training in many training angle) is to reach the target (red box)
scenarios. For example, in applications like autonomous within as few steps as possible under pardriving[7] or robot control tasks [8], where computational tial observability.
and time limitations exist, only low-cost RGB images are
available for deployment. At the same time, high-precision sensors can record more accurate and
* Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

