Order-Independence Without Fine Tuning
Reid McIlroy-Young∗
Department of Computer Science
Harvard University

Katrina Brown
Department of Computer Science
Harvard University

Conlan Olson
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University

Linjun Zhang
Department of Statistics
Rutgers University

Cynthia Dwork
Department of Computer Science
Harvard University

Abstract
The development of generative language models that can create long and
coherent textual outputs via autoregression has lead to a proliferation of
uses and a corresponding sweep of analyses as researches work to determine
the limitations of this new paradigm. Unlike humans, these ‘Large Language
Models’ (LLMs) are highly sensitive to small changes in their inputs, leading
to unwanted inconsistency in their behavior. One problematic inconsistency
when LLMs are used to answer multiple-choice questions or analyze multiple inputs is order dependency: the output of an LLM can (and often
does) change significantly when sub-sequences are swapped, despite both
orderings being semantically identical. In this paper we present Set-Based
Prompting, a technique that guarantees the output of an LLM will not
have order dependence on a specified set of sub-sequences. We show that this
method provably eliminates order dependency, and that it can be applied to
any transformer-based LLM to enable text generation that is unaffected by
re-orderings. Delving into the implications of our method, we show that,
despite our inputs being out of distribution, the impact on expected accuracy
is small, where the expectation is over the order of uniformly chosen shuffling
of the candidate responses, and usually significantly less in practice. Thus,
Set-Based Prompting can be used as a ‘dropped-in’ method on fully trained
models. Finally, we discuss how our method’s success suggests that other
strong guarantees can be obtained on LLM performance via modifying the
input representations.
Code is available at github.com/reidmcy/set-based-prompting.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in machine learning have led to a paradigm shift, as new training methods,
which rely on massive scale datasets to create general purpose ‘base models’, outperform
specialized single purpose models (Achiam et al., 2023; Radford et al., 2019). A particularly
notable development is in natural language processing, where self-supervised learning has
led to a cornucopia of transformer based models that can string together multiple next
∗

Corresponding author reidmcy@seas.harvard.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

