Evaluate then Cooperate: Shapley-based View
Cooperation Enhancement for Multi-view Clustering

Fangdi Wang1 , Jiaqi Jin1 , Jingtao Hu2 ,
Suyuan Liu1 , Xihong Yang1 , Siwei Wang2, ∗,
Xinwang Liu1, ∗ , En Zhu1, ∗
1
National University of Defence Technology
2
Academy of Military Science
{wangfangdi19, wangsiwei13, xinwangliu, enzhu}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
The fundamental goal of deep multi-view clustering is to achieve preferable task
performance through inter-view cooperation. Although numerous DMVC approaches have been proposed, the collaboration role of individual views have not
been well investigated in existing literature. Moreover, how to further enhance
view cooperation for better fusion still needs to be explored. In this paper, we
firstly consider DMVC as an unsupervised cooperative game where each view can
be regarded as a participant. Then, we introduce the Shapley value and propose a
novel MVC framework termed Shapley-based Cooperation Enhancing Multi-view
Clustering (SCE-MVC), which evaluates view cooperation with game theory. Specially, we employ the optimal transport distance between fused cluster distributions
and single view component as the utility function for computing shapley values.
Afterwards, we apply shapley values to assess the contribution of each view and
utilize these contributions to promote view cooperation. Comprehensive experimental results well support the effectiveness of our framework adopting to existing
DMVC frameworks, demonstrating the importance and necessity of enhancing the
cooperation among views.

1

Introduction

Recently, multi-view clustering has become one of the most prominent problems in unsupervised
learning[1, 2, 3, 4]. It leverages data from different views, combining them to provide richer
information for clustering tasks. Generally speaking, multi-view clustering can be broadly categorized
into traditional methods [5, 6, 7, 8] and deep multi-view clustering (DMVC) [5, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 17, 18, 19] methods. Compared to the limited feature extraction capabilities of traditional
methods, deep multi-view clustering methods better preserve information from different views
through flexible deep neural networks. For most DMVC methods, the key challenge is how to
enhance cooperation among views to accomplish better clustering performance[20].
Numerous DMVC algorithms have already achieved significant results in downstream clustering
tasks. However, there has been little research on investigating the the contribution of each view in
the fusion stage. Once evaluating the view contribution, we may observe the phenomenon: One
view dominates the fusion process, suppressing the collaborative contribution of other views, leading
to suboptimal clustering results. We attribute this phenomenon to insufficient cooperation between
views, and thus propose a fundamental assumption: More balanced contributions and more extensive
cooperation among multiple views can lead to better clustering results, as shown in Fig. 1.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

