Distributional Successor Features Enable
Zero-Shot Policy Optimization

Chuning Zhu
University of Washington
zchuning@cs.washington.edu

Xinqi Wang
University of Washington
wxqkaxdd@cs.washington.edu

Tyler Han
University of Washington
than123@cs.washington.edu
Simon Shaolei Du
University of Washington
ssdu@cs.washington.edu

Abhishek Gupta
University of Washington
abhgupta@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Intelligent agents must be generalists, capable of quickly adapting to various tasks.
In reinforcement learning (RL), model-based RL learns a dynamics model of the
world, in principle enabling transfer to arbitrary reward functions through planning.
However, autoregressive model rollouts suffer from compounding error, making
model-based RL ineffective for long-horizon problems. Successor features offer
an alternative by modeling a policy’s long-term state occupancy, reducing policy
evaluation under new rewards to linear regression. Yet, policy optimization with
successor features can be challenging. This work proposes a novel class of models,
i.e., Distributional Successor Features for Zero-Shot Policy Optimization (DiSPOs),
that learn a distribution of successor features of a stationary dataset’s behavior
policy, along with a policy that acts to realize different successor features within
the dataset. By directly modeling long-term outcomes in the dataset, DiSPOs avoid
compounding error while enabling a simple scheme for zero-shot policy optimization across reward functions. We present a practical instantiation of DiSPOs using
diffusion models and show their efficacy as a new class of transferable models, both
theoretically and empirically across various simulated robotics problems. Videos
and code are available at https://weirdlabuw.github.io/dispo/.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) agents are ubiquitous in a wide array of applications, from language
modeling [8] to robotics [22, 28]. Traditionally, RL has focused on the single-task setting, learning
behaviors that maximize a specific reward function. However, for practical deployment, RL agents
must be able to generalize across different reward functions within an environment. For example, a
robot deployed in a household setting should not be confined to a single task such as object relocation
but should handle various tasks, objects, initial and target locations, and path preferences.
This work addresses the challenge of developing RL agents that can broadly generalize to any task in
an environment specified by a reward function. To achieve this type of generalization, we consider
the paradigm of pretraining on an offline dataset of transitions and inferring optimal policies for
downstream tasks from observing task-specific rewards. Since the target task is not revealed during
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

