Dynamic Subgroup Identification in
Covariate-adjusted Response-adaptive Randomization
Experiments

Yanping Li
School of Statistics and Data Science
Nankai University
yanpingli@mail.nankai.edu.cn

Jingshen Wang
Division of Biostatistics
University of California, Berkeley
jingshenwang@berkeley.edu

Waverly Wei ∗
Department of Data Sciences and Operations
University of Southern California
waverly@marshall.usc.edu

Abstract
Identifying subgroups with differential responses to treatment is pivotal in randomized clinical trials, as tailoring treatments to specific subgroups can advance
personalized medicine. Upon trial completion, identifying best-performing subgroups–those with the most beneficial treatment effects–is crucial for optimizing
resource allocation or mitigating adverse treatment effects. However, traditional
clinical trials are not customized for the goal of identifying best-performing subgroups because they typically pre-define subgroups at the beginning of the trial
and adhere to a fixed subgroup treatment allocation rule, leading to inefficient
use of experimental efforts. While some adaptive experimental strategies exist
for the identification of the single best subgroup, they commonly do not enable
the identification of the best set of subgroups. To address these challenges, we
propose a dynamic subgroup identification covariate-adjusted response-adaptive
randomization (CARA) design strategy with the following key features: (i) Our
approach is an adaptive experimental strategy that allows the dynamic identification
of the best subgroups and the revision of treatment allocation towards the goal
of correctly identifying the best subgroups based on collected experimental data.
(ii) Our design handles ties between subgroups effectively, merging those with
similar treatment effects to maximize experimental efficiency. In the theoretical
investigations, we demonstrate that our design has a higher probability of correctly
identifying the best set of subgroups compared to conventional designs. Additionally, we prove the statistical validity of our estimator for the best subgroup
treatment effect, demonstrating its asymptotic normality and semiparametric efficiency. Finally, we validate our design using synthetic data from a clinical trial on
cirrhosis.

1

Introduction

Most clinical trial designs adopt “one-size-fits-all" rules for treatment assignment and evaluation
based on models that ignore patient heterogeneity. This approach is disconnected from medical
practice in recent years, where physicians use each patient’s diagnosis and prognostic variables to
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

