Provable Benefits of Complex Parameterizations
for Structured State Space Models

Yuval Ran-MiloI
Raja GiryesI

Eden LumbrosoI Edo Cohen-KarlikI
Amir GlobersonI II Nadav CohenI

Abstract
Structured state space models (SSMs), the core engine behind prominent neural
networks such as S4 and Mamba, are linear dynamical systems adhering to a
specified structure, most notably diagonal. In contrast to typical neural network
modules, whose parameterizations are real, SSMs often use complex parameterizations. Theoretically explaining the benefits of complex parameterizations for
SSMs is an open problem. The current paper takes a step towards its resolution,
by establishing formal gaps between real and complex diagonal SSMs. Firstly,
we prove that while a moderate dimension suffices in order for a complex SSM
to express all mappings of a real SSM, a much higher dimension is needed for a
real SSM to express mappings of a complex SSM. Secondly, we prove that even if
the dimension of a real SSM is high enough to express a given mapping, typically,
doing so requires the parameters of the real SSM to hold exponentially large values,
which cannot be learned in practice. In contrast, a complex SSM can express
any given mapping with moderate parameter values. Experiments corroborate our
theory, and suggest a potential extension of the theory that accounts for selectivity,
a new architectural feature yielding state of the art performance.1

1

Introduction

Structured state space models (SSMs) are the core engine behind prominent neural network architectures such as S4 [21], Mamba [20], LRU [41], Mega [37], S5 [50] and more [23, 31, 38, 34]. In their
typical form, SSMs can be thought of as single-input single-output linear dynamical systems, wherein
the state transition matrix has a specified structure, most notably diagonal [22, 23, 41, 50, 37, 20]. A
salient characteristic of SSMs is that their parameterizations are often complex (take values in C), in
contrast to typical neural network modules whose parameterizations are conventionally real (take
values in R).
There has been mixed evidence regarding benefits of complex parameterizations over real parameterizations for SSMs. Some prior works have demonstrated that complex parameterizations are
essential for strong performance [22, 41], whereas others have shown that in various settings real
parameterizations lead to comparable (and in some cases better) performance [37, 20]. It was conjectured [20] that in the context of diagonal SSMs (namely, SSMs with diagonal state transition matrix),
complex parameterizations are preferable for continuous data modalities (e.g., audio, video), whereas
for discrete data modalities (e.g., text, DNA) real parameterizations suffice. Unfortunately, to date,
formal support for this conjecture is lacking. The extent to which complex parameterizations benefit
diagonal SSMs remains to be an open question.
In this paper, we take a step towards theoretically addressing the foregoing question. Specifically, we
provide two theoretical contributions establishing provable benefits of complex parameterizations
I

Tel Aviv University II Google. Correspondence to: Yuval Milo <yuvalmilo@mail.tau.ac.il>
Due to lack of space, a portion of the paper is deferred to the appendices. We refer the reader to [44] for a
self-contained version of the text.
1

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

