SeeClear: Semantic Distillation Enhances Pixel
Condensation for Video Super-Resolution

Qi Tang1,2 , Yao Zhao1,2 , Meiqin Liu1,2∗, Chao Yao3∗
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
Visual Intelligence + X International Cooperation Joint Laboratory of MOE,
Beijing Jiaotong University
3
School of Computer and Communication Engineering,
University of Science and Technology Beijing
{qitang, yzhao, mqliu}@bjtu.edu.cn, yaochao@ustb.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Diffusion-based Video Super-Resolution (VSR) is renowned for generating perceptually realistic videos, yet it grapples with maintaining detail consistency across
frames due to stochastic fluctuations. The traditional approach of pixel-level alignment is ineffective for diffusion-processed frames because of iterative disruptions.
To overcome this, we introduce SeeClear–a novel VSR framework leveraging
conditional video generation, orchestrated by instance-centric and channel-wise
semantic controls. This framework integrates a Semantic Distiller and a Pixel Condenser, which synergize to extract and upscale semantic details from low-resolution
frames. The Instance-Centric Alignment Module (InCAM) utilizes video-clip-wise
tokens to dynamically relate pixels within and across frames, enhancing coherency.
Additionally, the Channel-wise Texture Aggregation Memory (CaTeGory) infuses
extrinsic knowledge, capitalizing on long-standing semantic textures. Our method
also innovates the blurring diffusion process with the ResShift mechanism, finely
balancing between sharpness and diffusion effects. Comprehensive experiments
confirm our framework’s advantage over state-of-the-art diffusion-based VSR techniques. The code is available: https://github.com/Tang1705/SeeClear-NeurIPS24.

1

Introduction

Video super-resolution (VSR) is a challenging low-level vision task that involves improving the
resolution and visual quality of the given low-resolution (LR) observations and maintaining the
temporal coherence of high-resolution (HR) components. Various deep-learning-based VSR approaches [1, 3, 30, 17, 13, 20, 21] explore effective inter-frame alignment to reconstruct satisfactory
sequences. Despite establishing one new pole after another in the quantitative results, they struggle to
generate photo-realistic textures.
With the explosion of diffusion model (DM) in visual generation [10, 31, 26], super-resolution (SR)
from the generative perspective also garners the broad attention [28, 29, 45, 5]. DM breaks the
generation process into sequential sub-processes and iteratively samples semantic-specific images
from Gaussian noise, equipped with a paired forward diffusion process and reverse denoising process.
The former progressively injects varied intensity noise into the image along a Markov chain to
simulate diverse image distributions. The latter leverages a denoising network to generate an image
based on the given noise and conditions. Early efforts directly apply the generation paradigm to
super-resolution, overlooking its characteristic while generating pleasing content, thus trapping in
huge sampling overhead.
∗

Corresponding Authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

