DenseFusion-1M: Merging Vision Experts for
Comprehensive Multimodal Perception

Xiaotong Li1,2∗, Fan Zhang2* , Haiwen Diao3,2* , Yueze Wang2 , Xinlong Wang2† , Ling-Yu Duan1†
1
Peking University 2 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI)
3
Dalian University of Technology
Dataset: https://huggingface.co/datasets/BAAI/DenseFusion-1M

Abstract
Existing Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) increasingly emphasize
complex understanding of various visual elements, including multiple objects,
text information, and spatial relations. Their development for comprehensive
visual perception hinges on the availability of high-quality image-text datasets
that offer diverse visual elements and throughout image descriptions. However,
the scarcity of such hyper-detailed datasets currently hinders progress within the
MLLM community. The bottleneck stems from the limited perceptual capabilities
of current caption engines, which fall short in providing complete and accurate
annotations. To facilitate the cutting-edge research of MLLMs on comprehensive vision perception, we thereby propose Perceptual Fusion, using a low-budget
but highly effective caption engine for complete and accurate image descriptions.
Specifically, Perceptual Fusion integrates diverse perception experts as image priors to provide explicit information on visual elements and adopts an efficient
MLLM as a centric pivot to mimic advanced MLLMs’ perception abilities. We
carefully select 1M highly representative images from uncurated LAION dataset
and generate dense descriptions using our engine, dubbed DenseFusion-1M. Extensive experiments validate that our engine outperforms its counterparts, where
the resulting dataset significantly improves the perception and cognition abilities
of existing MLLMs across diverse vision-language benchmarks, especially with
high-resolution images as inputs. The dataset and code are publicly available at
https://github.com/baaivision/DenseFusion.

1

Introduction

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [32, 12, 37, 3, 2, 39, 62, 9, 21, 44] have made remarkable strides in multi-modal understanding and reasoning by aligning the Large Vision Models (LVMs)
[57, 46, 10] and Large Language Models (LLMs) [25, 54, 68]. To fully harness the capabilities of
MLLMs in comprehensive visual perception, there is a critical demand for high-quality image-text
datasets that provide dense and thorough descriptions across a wide range of visual elements. Such
hyper-detailed datasets are essential for training MLLMs to accurately interpret and interact with
diverse visual information. However, the scarcity of such rich datasets currently hampers the progress
of the MLLM community. Given these challenges, it is crucial to pioneer a practical and efficient
route to craft highly detailed image descriptions for comprehensive perception.
As the saying goes, "an image is worth a thousand words". Images contain various visual elements
of different granularities that are essential yet challenging to harness. Employing human labor
[43, 17] or advanced GPT-4V [43, 18, 8, 7] is one feasible option to generate accurate, reliable, and
∗

Equal contribution. † Correspondence to lingyu@pku.edu.cn, wangxinlong@baai.ac.cn.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

