The Power of Resets in Online Reinforcement Learning

Zakaria Mhammedi
Google Research

Dylan J. Foster
Microsoft Research

Alexander Rakhlin
MIT

mhammedi@google.com

dylanfoster@microsoft.com

rakhlin@mit.edu

Abstract
Simulators are a pervasive tool in reinforcement learning, but most existing algorithms cannot efficiently exploit simulator access—particularly in high-dimensional
domains that require general function approximation. We explore the power of
simulators through online reinforcement learning with local simulator access (or,
local planning), an RL protocol where the agent is allowed to reset to previously
observed states and follow their dynamics during training. We use local simulator
access to unlock new statistical guarantees that were previously out of reach:
1. We show that MDPs with low coverability [63]—a general structural condition that subsumes Block MDPs and Low-Rank MDPs—can be learned
in a sample-efficient fashion with only Q⋆ -realizability (realizability of
the optimal state-value function); existing online RL algorithms require
significantly stronger representation conditions.
2. As a consequence, we show that the notorious Exogenous Block MDP
problem [22] is tractable under local simulator access.
The results above are achieved through a computationally-inefficient algorithm.
We complement them with a more computationally efficient algorithm, RVFS
(Recursive Value Function Search), which achieves provable sample complexity
guarantees under strengthened statistical assumption known as pushforward
coverability. RVFS can be viewed as a principled, provable counterpart to a
successful empirical paradigm that combines recursive search (e.g., MCTS) with
value function approximation.

1

Introduction

Simulators are a widely used tool in reinforcement learning. Many of the most well-known benchmarks for reinforcement learning research make use of simulators (Atari [9], MuJoCo [55], OpenAI
Gym [11], DeepMind Control Suite [53]), and high-quality simulators are available for a wide range of
real-world control tasks, including robotic control [45, 2], autonomous vehicles [10, 6], and game playing [51, 52]. Simulators also provide a useful abstraction for planning with a known or learned model,
an important building block for many RL techniques [48]. Yet, in spite of the ubiquity of simulators,
almost all existing research into algorithm design—empirical and theoretical—has focused on the
online reinforcement learning (where only trajectory-based feedback is available), and does not take
advantage of the extra information available through the simulator. Relatively little is known about the
full power of RL with simulator access, either in terms of algorithmic principles or fundamental limits.
We explore the power of simulators through online reinforcement learning with local simulator access
(RLLS for short), also known as local planning [57, 40, 3, 59, 65, 66]. Here, the agent learns by
repeatedly executing policies and observing the resulting trajectories (as in online RL), but is allowed
to reset to previously observed states and follow their dynamics during training.
Empirically, algorithms based on local simulators have received limited investigation, but with
promising results. Notably, the Go-Explore algorithm [19, 20] uses local simulator access to achieve
state-of-the-art performance for Montezuma’s Revenge (a difficult Atari game that requires systematic
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

