Only Strict Saddles in the Energy Landscape of
Predictive Coding Networks?

Francesco Innocenti
School of Engineering and Informatics
University of Sussex
F.Innocenti@sussex.ac.uk

El Mehdi Achour
RWTH Aachen University
Aachen, Germany
achour@mathc.rwth-aachen.de

Ryan Singh
School of Engineering and Informatics
University of Sussex
rs773@sussex.ac.uk

Christopher L. Buckley
School of Engineering and Informatics
University of Sussex
VERSES
c.l.buckley@sussex.ac.uk

Abstract
Predictive coding (PC) is an energy-based learning algorithm that performs iterative
inference over network activities before updating weights. Recent work suggests
that PC can converge in fewer learning steps than backpropagation thanks to its
inference procedure. However, these advantages are not always observed, and
the impact of PC inference on learning is not theoretically well understood. To
address this gap, we study the geometry of the PC weight landscape at the inference
equilibrium of the network activities. For deep linear networks, we first show that
the equilibrated PC energy is equal to a rescaled mean squared error loss with a
weight-dependent rescaling. We then prove that many highly degenerate (non-strict)
saddles of the loss including the origin become much easier to escape (strict) in the
equilibrated energy. Experiments on both linear and non-linear networks strongly
validate our theory and further suggest that all the saddles of the equilibrated energy
are strict. Overall, this work shows that PC inference makes the loss landscape of
feedforward networks more benign and robust to vanishing gradients, while also
highlighting the fundamental challenge of scaling PC to very deep models.

1

Introduction

Originating as a general principle of brain function, predictive coding (PC) has in recent years been
developed into a local learning algorithm that could provide a biologically plausible alternative to
backpropagation (BP) [32, 31, 43]. Deep neural networks (DNNs) trained with PC have shown
comparable performance to BP on standard small-to-medium machine learning tasks, including
classification, generation and memory association [31, 43, 41]. PC networks (PCNs) are also highly
versatile, allowing for arbitrary computational graphs [45, 10], hybrid and causal inference [44, 59],
and temporal prediction [35].
In contrast to BP, and similar to other energy-based algorithms [e.g. 49, 38], PC performs iterative
(approximately Bayesian) inference over network activities before weight updates. This has been
recently described as a fundamentally different principle of credit assignment for learning in the brain
called “prospective configuration” [54], where weights follow activities (rather than the other way
around). While the inference process key to PC incurs an additional computational cost, it has been
suggested to provide many benefits for learning including faster convergence [54, 3, 18]. However,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

