Learning to Handle Complex Constraints
for Vehicle Routing Problems

Jieyi Bi1 , Yining Ma1,† , Jianan Zhou1 ,
Wen Song2 , Zhiguang Cao3 , Yaoxin Wu4 , Jie Zhang1
1

Nanyang Technological University
2
Shandong University
3
Singapore Management University
4
Eindhoven University of Technology
jieyi001@e.ntu.edu.sg, yiningma@u.nus.edu,
jianan004@e.ntu.edu.sg, wensong@email.sdu.edu.cn,
zgcao@smu.edu.sg, y.wu2@tue.nl, zhangj@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Vehicle Routing Problems (VRPs) can model many real-world scenarios and often
involve complex constraints. While recent neural methods excel in constructing
solutions based on feasibility masking, they struggle with handling complex constraints, especially when obtaining the masking itself is NP-hard. In this paper, we
propose a novel Proactive Infeasibility Prevention (PIP) framework to advance the
capabilities of neural methods towards more complex VRPs. Our PIP integrates the
Lagrangian multiplier as a basis to enhance constraint awareness and introduces
preventative infeasibility masking to proactively steer the solution construction
process. Moreover, we present PIP-D, which employs an auxiliary decoder and two
adaptive strategies to learn and predict these tailored masks, potentially enhancing
performance while significantly reducing computational costs during training. To
verify our PIP designs, we conduct extensive experiments on the highly challenging
Traveling Salesman Problem with Time Window (TSPTW), and TSP with Draft
Limit (TSPDL) variants under different constraint hardness levels. Notably, our PIP
is generic to boost many neural methods, and exhibits both a significant reduction
in infeasible rate and a substantial improvement in solution quality.

1

Introduction

Vehicle routing problems (VRPs) are NP-hard combinatorial optimization problems with complex
constraints that model real-world scenarios, such as logistics [1] and supply chains [2]. For decades,
traditional solvers relied on hand-crafted rules for VRP optimization and constraint handling. Recently,
the learning-to-optimize community [3] has successfully trained deep neural networks to automatically
construct VRP solutions in an end-to-end manner [4–6]. These data-driven neural methods offer
greater efficiency and high parallelism for batch optimization, making them favorable alternatives.
In general, neural methods construct VRP solutions by autoregressively sampling a node from its
predicted distribution while masking out nodes that would violate constraints to ensure the solution’s
feasibility. Despite successes (e.g., on TSP and CVRP), this masking mechanism assumes that 1) the
feasibility of the entire solution can be properly decomposed into the feasibility of each node selection
†

Yining Ma is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

