Hamiltonian Monte Carlo Inference of Marginalized
Linear Mixed-Effects Models
Jinlin Lai, Justin Domke, Daniel Sheldon
Manning College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
{jinlinlai,domke,sheldon}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Bayesian reasoning in linear mixed-effects models (LMMs) is challenging and often
requires advanced sampling techniques like Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC).
A common approach is to write the model in a probabilistic programming language
and then sample via Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC). However, there are many
ways a user can transform a model that make inference more or less efficient.
In particular, marginalizing some variables can greatly improve inference but is
difficult for users to do manually. We develop an algorithm to easily marginalize
random effects in LMMs. A naive approach introduces cubic time operations within
an inference algorithm like HMC, but we reduce the running time to linear using
fast linear algebra techniques. We show that marginalization is always beneficial
when applicable and highlight improvements in various models, especially ones
from cognitive sciences1 .

1

Introduction

Bayesian hierarchical models account for complicated relationships in data by introducing hierarchical
structures [23]. Among hierarchical models, linear mixed effects models (LMMs) are widely used in
various scientific disciplines, including ecology [31], medicine [7], psychology [41], neuroscience
[77] and cognitive science [47]. Solving LMMs involves inferring latent variables, such as fixed
and random effects, based on the observed data. Fixed effects are shared by all observations, while
random effects vary across different groups within the data. LMMs are often implemented using
probabilistic programming languages (PPLs), which isolate inference from modeling: users write a
program representing the model and the PPL automatically executes a suitable inference algorithm.
Variants of Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) [15] are dominant in many PPLs today and are widely
used for LMMs. For example, BRMS [8] is an influential R package that allows users to write
regression-style formulas that are automatically translated to Stan programs [9] representing an LMM,
and then Stan’s HMC implementation is called to generate posterior samples.
We develop techniques that allow users to easily transform their models to analytically marginalize
random effect variables from LMMs to improve the efficiency of HMC. Marginalization has several
benefits. First, there are often pathologies in LMMs that hinder efficient HMC sampling. A notable
one is the “funnel” shape created by correlation between variance parameters and parameters for
fixed or random effects [45]. Marginalization [35] and other program transformations [26] have been
shown to be useful in addressing such pathologies. Second, marginalization reduces the number H of
latent variables for HMC. The complexity of HMC is about O(H 5/4 ) [11, 46], so it is desirable to
run HMC on a subset of variables if marginalization can be done efficiently. Our methods enable
marginalization of random effects in LMMs with a linear Gaussian structure, which includes models
with normal and log-normal likelihoods as well as other likelihoods for continuous data based on
1

The code is available at https://github.com/lll6924/hamiltonian_lme.git.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

