SE(3) Equivariant Ray Embeddings for
Implicit Multi-View Depth Estimation

Yinshuang Xu
University of Pennsylvania
xuyin@seas.upenn.edu

Dian Chen
Toyota Research Institute
dian.chen@tri.global

Sergey Zakharov
Toyota Research Institute
sergey.zakharov@tri.global
Kostas Daniilidis
University of Pennsylvania
kostas@cis.upenn.edu

Katherine Liu
Toyota Research Institute
katherine.liu@tri.global

Rares Ambrus
Toyota Research Institute
rares.ambrus@tri.global
Vitor Guizilini
Toyota Research Institute
vitor.guizilini@tri.global

Abstract
Incorporating inductive bias by embedding geometric entities (such as rays) as input
has proven successful in multi-view learning. However, the methods adopting this
technique typically lack equivariance, which is crucial for effective 3D learning.
Equivariance serves as a valuable inductive prior, aiding in the generation of
robust multi-view features for 3D scene understanding. In this paper, we explore
the application of equivariant multi-view learning to depth estimation, not only
recognizing its significance for computer vision and robotics but also addressing
the limitations of previous research. Most prior studies have either overlooked
equivariance in this setting or achieved only approximate equivariance through
data augmentation, which often leads to inconsistencies across different reference
frames. To address this issue, we propose to embed SE(3) equivariance into
the Perceiver IO architecture. We employ Spherical Harmonics for positional
encoding to ensure 3D rotation equivariance, and develop a specialized equivariant
encoder and decoder within the Perceiver IO architecture. To validate our model,
we applied it to the task of stereo depth estimation, achieving state of the art results
on real-world datasets without explicit geometric constraints or extensive data
augmentation.

1

Introduction

Equivariance is a valuable property in computer vision, leveraging various symmetries to reduce
sample and model complexity while boosting generalization. It has seen broad application in fields
such as 3D shape analysis [48, 52, 13], panoramic image prediction [10, 54, 19], and robotics
[46, 25, 42, 2]. In particular, there is an increasing interest in equivariant scene representation from
multiple viewpoints [43, 55], as the multi-view setting is a fundamental challenge in the field and
equivariant representations are desirable for their robustness and efficiency.
Meanwhile, multi-view depth estimation has always been a core topic in computer vision. Previous
works [27, 31, 26] leverage the explicit geometric constraint to construct the feature cost-volume
for depth prediction. Recently, the paradigm of combining implicit representations with generalist
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

