Equivariant Machine Learning on Graphs with
Nonlinear Spectral Filters

Ya-Wei Eileen Lin†
†

Ronen Talmon†

Ron Levie‡

Viterbi Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion
‡
Faculty of Mathematics, Technion

Abstract
Equivariant machine learning is an approach for designing deep learning models that respect the symmetries of the problem, with the aim of reducing model
complexity and improving generalization. In this paper, we focus on an extension
of shift equivariance, which is the basis of convolution networks on images, to
general graphs. Unlike images, graphs do not have a natural notion of domain
translation. Therefore, we consider the graph functional shifts as the symmetry
group: the unitary operators that commute with the graph shift operator. Notably,
such symmetries operate in the signal space rather than directly in the spatial space.
We remark that each linear filter layer of a standard spectral graph neural network
(GNN) commutes with graph functional shifts, but the activation function breaks
this symmetry. Instead, we propose nonlinear spectral filters (NLSFs) that are fully
equivariant to graph functional shifts and show that they have universal approximation properties. The proposed NLSFs are based on a new form of spectral domain
that is transferable between graphs. We demonstrate the superior performance of
NLSFs over existing spectral GNNs in node and graph classification benchmarks.

1

Introduction

In many fields, such as chemistry [37], biology [36, 3], social science [9], and computer graphics
[97], data can be described by graphs. In recent years, there has been a tremendous interest in the
development of machine learning models for graph-structured data [98, 13]. This young field, often
called graph machine learning (graph-ML) or graph representation learning, has made significant
contributions to the applied sciences, e.g., in protein folding, molecular design, and drug discovery
[45, 2, 70, 89], and has impacted the industry with applications in social media, recommendation
systems, traffic prediction, computer graphics, and natural language processing, among others.
Geometric Deep Learning (GDL) [13] is a design philosophy for machine learning models where
the model is constructed to inherently respect symmetries present in the data, aiming to reduce
model complexity and enhance generalization. By incorporating knowledge of these symmetries
into the model, it avoids the need to expend parameters and data to learn them. This inherent
respect for symmetries is automatically generalized to test data, thereby improving generalization
[6, 76, 25]. For instance, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) respect the translation symmetries
of 2D images, with weight sharing due to these symmetries contributing significantly to their success
[54]. Respecting node re-indexing in a scalable manner revolutionized machine learning on graphs
[13, 12] and has placed GNNs as a main general-purpose tool for processing graph-structured data.
Moreover, within GNNs, respecting the 3D Euclidean symmetries of the laws of physics (rotations,
reflections, and translations) led to state-of-the-art performance in molecule processing [24].
Our Contribution. In this paper, we focus on GDL for graph-ML. We consider extensions of shift
symmetries from images to general graphs. Since graphs do not have a natural notion of domain
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

