Accurate and Steady Inertial Pose Estimation through
Sequence Structure Learning and Modulation
Yinghao Wu1

Chaoran Wang1
Lu Yin1
Shihui Guo1*†
Yipeng Qin2
1
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
2
School of Computer Science & Informatics, Cardiff University, UK

Abstract
Transformer models excel at capturing long-range dependencies in sequential data,
but lack explicit mechanisms to leverage structural patterns inherent in fixed-length
input sequences. In this paper, we propose a novel sequence structure learning and
modulation approach that endows Transformers with the ability to model and utilize
such fixed-sequence structural properties for improved performance on inertial
pose estimation tasks. Specifically, our method introduces a Sequence Structure
Module (SSM) that utilizes structural information of fixed-length inertial sensor
readings to adjust the input features of transformers. Such structural information
can either be acquired by learning or specified based on users’ prior knowledge.
To justify the prospect of our approach, we show that i) injecting spatial structural
information of IMUs/joints learned from data improves accuracy, while ii) injecting
temporal structural information based on smooth priors reduces jitter (i.e., improves
steadiness), in a spatial-temporal transformer solution for inertial pose estimation.
Extensive experiments across multiple benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of our approach against state-of-the-art methods and has the potential to
advance the design of the transformer architecture for fixed-length sequences.

1

Introduction

Estimating human pose is a long-standing and prominent task that underlies many computer vision
and graphics applications, e.g., animation production, virtual reality. As an alternative to vision-based
solutions, wearable device-based methods are gaining increasing interest as they are environmentfree, occlusion-unaware, privacy-friendly. For ensuring high accuracy and maintaining portability
and usability, most prior works [18, 55, 56, 20, 60] abandon densely placed configurations, instead
leveraging a sparse set of Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs) to reconstruct human motion. Since
IMUs can provide continuous measurements of rotation and acceleration, we define pose estimation
with sparse inertial sensors as a sequence learning task.
Recently, Transformer-based architectures have achieved tremendous success in various sequence
learning tasks, and applying them to sparse inertial motion capture is a natural idea. However,
empirically, we find that, directly using the native transformer to model IMU sequences results in
unacceptable jitter and inaccurate postures. Through our analysis, we attribute this to the native
Transformer architecture, whose self-attention mechanism was originally designed to flexibly handle
variable-length sequence inputs, thus lacks inductive bias for modeling fixed-length sequences that
have clear structures. For instance, for an IMUs reading sequence, the length is usually fixed (e.g.,
the number of observed past frames in a time window or the number of IMUs) and each token in the
sequence has a specific meaning (e.g., each temporal token denotes a frame and each spatial token
*Corresponding author (guoshihui@xmu.edu.cn) †Also with Key Laboratory of Digital Protection and
Intelligent Processing of Intangible Cultural Heritage of Fujian and Taiwan, Ministry of Culture and Tourism.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

