HEALNet: Multimodal Fusion for
Heterogeneous Biomedical Data

Konstantin Hemker
Department of Computer Science & Technology
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, United Kingdom
konstantin.hemker@cl.cam.ac.uk

Nikola Simidjievski
PBCI, Department of Oncology
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, United Kingdom
ns779@cam.ac.uk

Mateja Jamnik
Department of Computer Science & Technology
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, United Kingdom
mateja.jamnik@cl.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Technological advances in medical data collection, such as high-throughput genomic sequencing and digital high-resolution histopathology, have contributed
to the rising requirement for multimodal biomedical modelling, specifically for
image, tabular and graph data. Most multimodal deep learning approaches use
modality-specific architectures that are often trained separately and cannot capture the crucial cross-modal information that motivates the integration of different
data sources. This paper presents the Hybrid Early-fusion Attention Learning
Network (HEALNet) – a flexible multimodal fusion architecture, which: a) preserves modality-specific structural information, b) captures the cross-modal interactions and structural information in a shared latent space, c) can effectively
handle missing modalities during training and inference, and d) enables intuitive
model inspection by learning on the raw data input instead of opaque embeddings.
We conduct multimodal survival analysis on Whole Slide Images and Multi-omic
data on four cancer datasets from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). HEALNet
achieves state-of-the-art performance compared to other end-to-end trained fusion models, substantially improving over unimodal and multimodal baselines
whilst being robust in scenarios with missing modalities. The code is available
at https://github.com/konst-int-i/healnet.

1

Introduction

A key challenge in Multimodal Machine Learning is multimodal fusion, which is the integration of
structurally heterogeneous data into a common representation that reduces the dimensionality of
the data whilst preserving salient biological signals [Steyaert et al., 2023]. Fusion approaches are
well-studied in areas where there is a clearly defined shared semantic space, such as audio, visual,
and text tasks like visual question answering [Goyal et al., 2016], image captioning [Yu et al., 2020],
or multimodal dialogue [Liang et al., 2023]. However, healthcare data commonly consists of 2D or
3D images (histopathology and radiology), graphs (molecular data), and tabular data (multi-omics,
electronic health records), where cross-modal relationships are typically more opaque and complex,
the modalities often do not share semantics, and common representations are less explored. The
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

