Is Your HD Map Constructor Reliable
under Sensor Corruptions?

Xiaoshuai Hao1 Mengchuan Wei1 Yifan Yang1 Haimei Zhao2
Hui Zhang1 Yi Zhou1 Qiang Wang1 Weiming Li1
Lingdong Kong3,Q Jing Zhang2,Q
1

Samsung R&D Institute China–Beijing
The University of Sydney 3 National University of Singapore
{xshuai.hao,mc.wei,yifan.yang,hui123.zhang,yi0813.zhou}@samsung.com
{qiang.w,weiming.li}@samsung.com hzha7798@uni.sydney.edu.au
lingdong@comp.nus.edu.sg jing.zhang1@sydney.edu.au
2

https://mapbench.github.io

Abstract
Driving systems often rely on high-definition (HD) maps for precise environmental
information, which is crucial for planning and navigation. While current HD map
constructors perform well under ideal conditions, their resilience to real-world
challenges, e.g., adverse weather and sensor failures, is not well understood, raising safety concerns. This work introduces MapBench, the first comprehensive
benchmark designed to evaluate the robustness of HD map construction methods
against various sensor corruptions. Our benchmark encompasses a total of 29 types
of corruptions that occur from cameras and LiDAR sensors. Extensive evaluations
across 31 HD map constructors reveal significant performance degradation of existing methods under adverse weather conditions and sensor failures, underscoring
critical safety concerns. We identify effective strategies for enhancing robustness,
including innovative approaches that leverage multi-modal fusion, advanced data
augmentation, and architectural techniques. These insights provide a pathway for
developing more reliable HD map construction methods, which are essential for
the advancement of autonomous driving technology. The benchmark toolkit and
affiliated code and model checkpoints have been made publicly accessible.

1

Introduction

HD maps are fundamental components in autonomous driving systems, providing centimeter-level
details of traffic rules, vectorized topology, and navigation information [35, 43]. These maps enable
the ego-vehicle to accurately locate itself on the road and anticipate upcoming features [41, 74, 11, 50].
HD map constructors formulate this task as predicting a collection of vectorized static map elements
in bird’s eye view (BEV), e.g., pedestrian crossings, lane dividers, road boundaries, etc. [42, 73, 77].
Existing HD map construction methods can be categorized based on the input sensor modality:
camera-only [35, 43, 41, 74, 50] LiDAR-only [35, 43, 41, 42], and camera-LiDAR fusion [35, 43, 41]
models. Each sensor poses distinct functionalities: cameras capture semantic-rich information from
images, while LiDAR provides explicit geometric information from point clouds [42, 48, 26, 29].
Generally, camera-based methods outperform LiDAR-only methods, and fusion-based methods yield
the most satisfactory results [31, 77]. However, current model designs and performance evaluations
are based on ideal driving conditions, e.g., clear daytime weather and fully functional sensors [3, 34].
Q Lingdong Kong and Jing Zhang are the corresponding authors of this work.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

