Peri-midFormer: Periodic Pyramid Transformer for
Time Series Analysis

Qiang Wu Gechang Yao Zhixi Feng† Shuyuan Yang
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding of
Ministry of Education, School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, China
{wu_qiang, yao_gechang}@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {zxfeng, syyang}@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Time series analysis finds wide applications in fields such as weather forecasting,
anomaly detection, and behavior recognition. Previous methods attempted to
model temporal variations directly using 1D time series. However, this has been
quite challenging due to the discrete nature of data points in time series and the
complexity of periodic variation. In terms of periodicity, taking weather and traffic
data as an example, there are multi-periodic variations such as yearly, monthly,
weekly, and daily, etc. In order to break through the limitations of the previous
methods, we decouple the implied complex periodic variations into inclusion and
overlap relationships among different level periodic components based on the
observation of the multi-periodicity therein and its inclusion relationships. This
explicitly represents the naturally occurring pyramid-like properties in time series,
where the top level is the original time series and lower levels consist of periodic
components with gradually shorter periods, which we call the periodic pyramid. To
further extract complex temporal variations, we introduce self-attention mechanism
into the periodic pyramid, capturing complex periodic relationships by computing
attention between periodic components based on their inclusion, overlap, and
adjacency relationships. Our proposed Peri-midFormer demonstrates outstanding
performance in five mainstream time series analysis tasks, including short- and
long-term forecasting, imputation, classification, and anomaly detection. The code
is available at https://github.com/WuQiangXDU/Peri-midFormer.

1

Introduction

Time series analysis stands as a foundational challenge pivotal across diverse real-world scenarios [1],
such as weather forecasting [2], imputation of missing data within offshore wind speed time series [3],
anomaly detection for industrial maintenance [4], and classification [5]. Due to its substantial practical
utility, time series analysis has garnered considerable interest, leading to the development of a large
number of deep learning-based methods for it.
Different from other forms of sequential data, like language or video, time series data is continuously
recorded, capturing scalar values at each time point. Furthermore, real-world time series variations
often entail complex temporal patterns, where multiple fluctuations (e.g., ascents, descents, fluctuations, etc.) intermingle and intertwine, particularly salient is the presence of various overlapping
periodic components in it, rendering the modeling of temporal variations exceptionally challenging.
Deep learning models, known for their powerful non-linear capabilities, capture intricate temporal
variations in real-world time series. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) leverage sequential data,
allowing past information to influence future predictions [6; 7]. However, they face challenges with
long-term dependencies and computational inefficiency due to their sequential nature. Temporal
convolutional neural networks (TCNs) [8; 9] extract variation information but struggle with capturing
long-term dependencies. Transformers with attention mechanisms have gained popularity for sequen38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

