Transformers need glasses! |
Information over-squashing in language tasks

Federico Barbero˚
University of Oxford
federico.barbero@cs.ox.ac.uk
Steven Kapturowski
Google DeepMind
skapturowski@google.com
Alex Vitvitskyi
Google DeepMind
avlife@google.com

Andrea Banino
Google DeepMind
abanino@google.com

Dharshan Kumaran
Google DeepMind
dkumaran@google.com
Razvan Pascanu
Google DeepMind
razp@google.com

João G.M. Araújo
Google DeepMind
joaogui@google.com
Petar Veličković
Google DeepMind
petarv@google.com

Abstract
We study how information propagates in decoder-only Transformers, which
are the architectural backbone of most existing frontier large language models
(LLMs). We rely on a theoretical signal propagation analysis—specifically,
we analyse the representations of the last token in the final layer of the
Transformer, as this is the representation used for next-token prediction.
Our analysis reveals a representational collapse phenomenon: we prove that
certain distinct sequences of inputs to the Transformer can yield arbitrarily
close representations in the final token. This effect is exacerbated by the
low-precision floating-point formats frequently used in modern LLMs. As a
result, the model is provably unable to respond to these sequences in different
ways—leading to errors in, e.g., tasks involving counting or copying. Further,
we show that decoder-only Transformer language models can lose sensitivity
to specific tokens in the input, which relates to the well-known phenomenon
of over-squashing in graph neural networks. We provide empirical evidence
supporting our claims on contemporary LLMs. Our theory also points to
simple solutions towards ameliorating these issues.

1

Introduction

In recent years the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP) has been revolutionised
through the introduction of Transformer-based architectures [30]. Large Transformers trained
on some version of next-token prediction, known as Large Language Models (LLMs), have
demonstrated impressive performance across different tasks, including conversational agents
[10, 19], understanding multi-modal inputs [1], and code completion [16]. Most contemporary
LLMs specifically focus on the decoder part of the original Transformer architecture, and
are commonly referred to as decoder-only Transformers. Consequently, we focus primarily
on such models in this paper.
However, despite the impressive performance of Transformers, recent works have uncovered
surprising failures that may point to fundamental issues in their architecture. For instance,
˚

Work performed while at Google DeepMind.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

