CausalChaos! Dataset for Comprehensive Causal
Action Question Answering Over Longer Causal
Chains Grounded in Dynamic Visual Scenes

Paritosh Parmar1,2 , Eric Peh1,2 , Ruirui Chen1 , Ting En Lam3 ,
Yuhan Chen4 , Elston Tan5 , Basura Fernando1,2
1

Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
2
Centre for Frontier AI Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
3
Nanyang Technological University, 4 National University of Singapore, 5 Singapore Polytechnic
https://github.com/LUNAProject22/CausalChaos

Abstract
Causal video question answering (QA) has garnered increasing interest, yet existing
datasets often lack depth in causal reasoning. To address this gap, we capitalize on
the unique properties of cartoons and construct CausalChaos!, a novel, challenging
causal Why-QA dataset built upon the iconic “Tom and Jerry" cartoon series.
Cartoons use the principles of animation that allow animators to create expressive,
unambiguous causal relationships between events to form a coherent storyline.
Utilizing these properties, along with thought-provoking questions and multilevel answers (answer and detailed causal explanation), our questions involve
causal chains that interconnect multiple dynamic interactions between characters
and visual scenes. These factors demand models to solve more challenging, yet
well-defined causal relationships. We also introduce hard incorrect answer mining,
including a causally confusing version that is even more challenging. While models
perform well, there is much room for improvement, especially, on open-ended
answers. We identify more advanced/explicit causal relationship modeling & joint
modeling of vision and language as the immediate areas for future efforts to focus
upon. Along with the other complementary datasets, our new challenging dataset
will pave the way for these developments in the field.

1

Introduction

Understanding the intricate motivations behind human actions is paramount in developing sophisticated systems capable of nuanced behavior analysis. In real-world scenarios, actions are shaped
by a multitude of factors, including personal experiences, emotions, social contexts, and cultural
backgrounds. This complexity necessitates a comprehensive approach to unraveling the “why" behind
actions, fostering empathy, effective communication, and robust decision-making. Causal video question answering aims to decipher the answers behind characters’ actions. Despite the growing interest
in causal video QA, existing datasets often fall short, requiring only: 1) surface-level understanding;
or 2) involve more of simple word substitution in the QA pairs, rather than causal reasoning (e.g.,
“Q. Why are the cars on the street not moving? A. Parked."). Recognizing this gap, we embark on
the development of a rigorous and challenging causal Video-QA dataset. Our goal is to provide a
high-quality resource that rigorously evaluates and advances causal video QA models.
Drawing on the established benefits of cartoons with cognitive processes among children [40, 41, 31,
55, 42], we leverage the renowned series
to create a novel and demanding causal Why-QA
dataset called CausalChaos!. The key characteristics of CausalChaos! are as follows:
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

