LoD-Loc: Aerial Visual Localization using LoD 3D
Map with Neural Wireframe Alignment

Juelin Zhu1∗
zhujuelin@nudt.edu.cn

Shen Yan1∗
yanshen12@nudt.edu.cn

Shengyue Zhang1
zhangshengyue23@nudt.edu.cn
1

Long Wang2
wanglongzju@gmail.com

Yu Liu1
jasonyuliu@nudt.edu.cn

National University of Defense Technology

2

Maojun Zhang1†
mjzhang@nudt.edu.cn

SenseTime Research

Abstract
We propose a new method named LoD-Loc for visual localization in the air. Unlike
existing localization algorithms, LoD-Loc does not rely on complex 3D representations and can estimate the pose of an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) using a
Level-of-Detail (LoD) 3D map. LoD-Loc mainly achieves this goal by aligning
the wireframe derived from the LoD projected model with that predicted by the
neural network. Specifically, given a coarse pose provided by the UAV sensor,
LoD-Loc hierarchically builds a cost volume for uniformly sampled pose hypotheses to describe pose probability distribution and select a pose with maximum
probability. Each cost within this volume measures the degree of line alignment
between projected and predicted wireframes. LoD-Loc also devises a 6-DoF pose
optimization algorithm to refine the previous result with a differentiable GaussianNewton method. As no public dataset exists for the studied problem, we collect two
datasets with map levels of LoD3.0 and LoD2.0, along with real RGB queries and
ground-truth pose annotations. We benchmark our method and demonstrate that
LoD-Loc achieves excellent performance, even surpassing current state-of-the-art
methods that use textured 3D models for localization. The code and dataset are
available at https://victorzoo.github.io/LoD-Loc.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Aerial visual localization is the process of determining the global position and orientation for a UAV
camera relative to a known map. This process benefits many important applications, ranging from
cargo transport [69], surveillance [19, 72], to search and rescue [15, 63].
Following localization algorithms on the ground [18, 30, 42, 53, 54, 57, 67, 68, 70, 77], current
aerial visual localization approaches [22, 72] typically involve matching pixels in a query image
with points in a pre-built high-quality 3D map, which is often derived from 3D texture models [43,
76, 72]. Subsequently, a Perspective-n-Point (PnP) RANSAC [32, 37, 14, 23, 27, 24] technique
is commonly used to calculate the camera pose. However, building high-quality 3D maps using
photogrammetry [12, 28, 64, 58, 33] is expensive on a global scale and requires frequent updates to
account for temporal changes in visual appearance. Besides, these 3D maps are costly to store, which
poses significant challenges for terminal deployment on drones. Furthermore, high-resolution 3D
maps disclose detailed information about the localization area, raising critical concerns regarding
homeland security and privacy preservation.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

