Scaling Laws with Vocabulary:
Larger Models Deserve Larger Vocabularies

Chaofan Tao1,2 Qian Liu2† Longxu Dou2† Niklas Muennighoff 3,4
Zhongwei Wan5 Ping Luo1 Min Lin2 Ngai Wong1†
1

The University of Hong Kong 2 Sea AI Lab 3 Contextual AI
4
Stanford University 5 The Ohio State University

Abstract
Research on scaling large language models (LLMs) has primarily focused on
model parameters and training data size, overlooking the role of vocabulary
size. We investigate how vocabulary size impacts LLM scaling laws by training
models ranging from 33M to 3B parameters on up to 500B characters with various
vocabulary configurations. We propose three complementary approaches for
predicting the compute-optimal vocabulary size: IsoFLOPs analysis, derivative
estimation, and parametric fit of the loss function. Our approaches converge on the
conclusion that the optimal vocabulary size depends on the compute budget, with
larger models requiring larger vocabularies. Most LLMs, however, use insufficient
vocabulary sizes. For example, we predict that the optimal vocabulary size of
Llama2-70B should have been at least 216K, 7 times larger than its vocabulary
of 32K. We validate our predictions empirically by training models with 3B
parameters across different FLOPs budgets. Adopting our predicted optimal
vocabulary size consistently improves downstream performance over commonly
used vocabulary sizes. By increasing the vocabulary size from the conventional
32K to 43K, we improve performance on ARC-Challenge from 29.1 to 32.0 with
the same 2.3e21 FLOPs. Our work highlights the importance of jointly considering
tokenization and model scaling for efficient pre-training. The code and demo
are available at https://github.com/sail-sg/scaling-with-vocab and
https://hf.co/spaces/sail/scaling-with-vocab-demo.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) achieve remarkable performance by pre-training on vast text
corpora using massive computational resources [47]. Extensive prior work on LLMs has focused on
deriving so-called scaling laws: a set of empirical formulas to predict how model performance scales,
mainly as computing floating-point operations (FLOPs), model parameters, and quantity of training
data change [30, 26, 66, 2, 44, 58]. These works show that power-law fits can effectively predict
language modeling loss and by extension downstream performance [23, 55]. However, these scaling
laws usually disregard the impact of the vocabulary size. For example, in Kaplan et al. [30] only
non-vocabulary parameters are considered in their predictive formula. This negligence has resulted
in substantial variability in the vocabulary size of current LLMs. For instance, Llama2-7B employs
a vocabulary size of 32K [70], while Gemma-7B [67] adopts a much larger vocabulary size of 256K
despite both having a similar number of total parameters. This variability in vocabulary sizes across
LLMs raises the research question: What is the compute-optimal vocabulary size for a LLM?
†

Corresponding authors. The project was done during Chaofan Tao’s internship at Sea AI Lab. For more
information, please contact cftao@connect.hku.hk and liuqian.sea@gmail.com.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

