Generative Modeling of
Molecular Dynamics Trajectories

Bowen Jing∗ 1

Hannes Stärk∗ 1 Tommi Jaakkola1 Bonnie Berger1 2
CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2
Dept. of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{bjing, hstark}@mit.edu, tommi@csail.mit.edu, bab@mit.edu
1

Abstract
Molecular dynamics (MD) is a powerful technique for studying microscopic phenomena, but its computational cost has driven significant interest in the development
of deep learning-based surrogate models. We introduce generative modeling of
molecular trajectories as a paradigm for learning flexible multi-task surrogate
models of MD from data. By conditioning on appropriately chosen frames of the
trajectory, we show such generative models can be adapted to diverse tasks such
as forward simulation, transition path sampling, and trajectory upsampling. By
alternatively conditioning on part of the molecular system and inpainting the rest,
we also demonstrate the first steps towards dynamics-conditioned molecular design.
We validate the full set of these capabilities on tetrapeptide simulations and show
preliminary results on scaling to protein monomers. Altogether, our work illustrates how generative modeling can unlock value from MD data towards diverse
downstream tasks that are not straightforward to address with existing methods or
even MD itself. Code is available at https://github.com/bjing2016/mdgen.

1

Introduction

Numerical integration of Newton’s equations of motion at atomic scales, known as molecular
dynamics (MD), is a widely-used technique for studying diverse molecular phenomena in chemistry,
biology, and other molecular sciences (Alder and Wainwright, 1959; Rahman, 1964; Verlet, 1967;
McCammon et al., 1977). While general and versatile, MD is computationally demanding due to the
large separation in timescales between integration steps and relevant molecular phenomena. Thus, a
vast body of literature spanning several decades aims to accelerate or enhance the sampling efficiency
of MD simulation algorithms (Ryckaert et al., 1977; Darden et al., 1993; Sugita and Okamoto,
1999; Laio and Parrinello, 2002; Anderson et al., 2008; Shaw et al., 2009). More recently, learning
surrogate models of MD has become an active area of research in deep generative modeling (Noé
et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2023; Klein et al., 2024; Schreiner et al., 2024; Jing et al., 2024). However,
existing training paradigms fail to fully leverage the rich dynamical information in MD training data,
restricting their applicability to a limited set of downstream problems.
In this work, we propose MDG EN, a novel paradigm for fast, general-purpose surrogate modeling of
MD based on direct generative modeling of simulated trajectories. Different from previous works,
which learn the autoregressive transition density or equilibrium distribution of MD, we formulate
end-to-end generative modeling of full trajectories viewed as time-series of 3D molecular structures.
Akin to how image generative models were extended to videos (Ho et al., 2022), our framing of the
problem augments single-structure generative models with an additional time dimension, opening
the door to a larger set of forward and inverse problems to which our model can be applied. When
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

