Statistical Efficiency of Distributional Temporal
Difference Learning

Yang Peng∗

Liangyu Zhang†

Zhihua Zhang‡

Abstract
Distributional reinforcement learning (DRL) has achieved empirical success in
various domains. One core task in the field of DRL is distributional policy evaluation, which involves estimating the return distribution η π for a given policy π. The
distributional temporal difference learning has been accordingly proposed, which
is an extension of the temporal difference learning (TD) in the classic RL area.
In the tabular case, Rowland et al. [2018] and Rowland et al. [2024a] proved the
asymptotic convergence of two instances of distributional TD, namely categorical temporal difference learning (CTD) and quantile temporal difference learning
(QTD), respectively. In this paper, we go a step further and analyze the finitesample performance of distributional TD. To facilitate theoretical analysis, we
propose non-parametric distributional temporal difference learning (NTD). For a
γ-discounted infinite-horizon
tabular
Markov decision process, we show that for


1
e
NTD we need O ε2p (1−γ)2p+1 iterations to achieve an ε-optimal estimator with
high probability, when the estimation error is measured by the p-Wasserstein distance. This sample complexity bound is minimax optimal up to logarithmic factors in the case of the 1-Wasserstein distance. To achieve this, we establish a novel
Freedman’s inequality in Hilbert spaces, which would be of independent interest.
In addition, we revisit CTD, showing that the same non-asymptotic convergence
bounds hold for CTD in the case of the p-Wasserstein distance for p ≥ 1.

1

Introduction

In high-stake applications of reinforcement learning (RL), such as healthcare [Lavori and Dawson,
2004, Böck et al., 2022] and finance[Ghysels et al., 2005], only considering the mean of returns is
insufficient. It is necessary to take risk and uncertainties into consideration. Distributional reinforcement learning (DRL) Morimura et al. [2010], Bellemare et al. [2017, 2023] addresses such issues by
modeling the complete distribution of returns instead of their expectations.
In the field of DRL, one of the most fundamental tasks is to estimate the return distribution η π for
a given policy π, which is referred to as distributional policy evaluation. Distributional temporal
difference learning (TD) is probably the most widely-used approach for solving the distributional
policy evaluation problem. A key aspect of implementing a distributional TD algorithm is how
to represent the return distribution, an infinite-dimensional object, via a computationally feasible
finite-dimensional parametrization. This has led to the development of two special instances of distributional TD: categorical temporal difference learning (CTD) [Bellemare et al., 2017] and quantile
temporal difference learning (QTD) [Dabney et al., 2018]. These algorithms provide computationally tractable parametrizations and updating schemes of the return distribution.
∗

School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University; email: pengyang@pku.edu.cn.
School of Statistics and Management, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics; email:
zhangliangyu@sufe.edu.cn.
‡
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University; email: zhzhang@math.pku.edu.cn.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

