SMART: Scalable Multi-agent Real-time Simulation
via Next-token Prediction
Wei Wu∗
Tsinghua University
SenseTime Research
wuwei@senseauto.com

Xiaoxin Feng∗
SenseTime Research
fengxiaoxin@senseauto.com

Ziyan Gao∗
SenseTime Research
gaoziyan@senseauto.com

Yuheng Kan
SenseTime Research
kanyuheng@senseauto.com

Abstract
Data-driven autonomous driving motion generation tasks are frequently impacted
by the limitations of dataset size and the domain gap between datasets, which
precludes their extensive application in real-world scenarios. To address this issue,
we introduce SMART, a novel autonomous driving motion generation paradigm
that models vectorized map and agent trajectory data into discrete sequence tokens.
These tokens are then processed through a decoder-only transformer architecture
to train for the next token prediction task across spatial-temporal series. This
GPT-style method allows the model to learn the motion distribution in real driving
scenarios. SMART achieves state-of-the-art performance across most of the metrics
on the generative Sim Agents challenge, ranking 1st on the leaderboards of Waymo
Open Motion Dataset (WOMD), demonstrating remarkable inference speed. Moreover, SMART represents the generative model in the autonomous driving motion
domain, exhibiting zero-shot generalization capabilities: Using only the NuPlan
dataset for training and WOMD for validation, SMART achieved a competitive
score of 0.72 on the Sim Agents challenge. Lastly, we have collected over 1 billion
motion tokens from multiple datasets, validating the model’s scalability. These
results suggest that SMART has initially emulated two important properties: scalability and zero-shot generalization, and preliminarily meets the needs of large-scale
real-time simulation applications. We have released all the code to promote the
exploration of models for motion generation in the autonomous driving field. The
source code is available at https://github.com/rainmaker22/SMART.

1

Introduction

In the context of autonomous driving, leveraging vectorized maps and vehicle trajectory data facilitates
various motion generation tasks, including motion planning [17, 6, 19, 18, 7], motion prediction
[47, 11, 38], and Sim Agents [14]. Previous research [9, 5, 27] has predominantly employed encoder
networks to represent driving scenes and decoder networks to generate multi-modal motions. These
generated motions are then directly regressed to continuous trajectory distributions using Gaussian
[4] or Laplace [53] mixture loss functions. While this framework demonstrates strong performance in
prediction tasks that prioritize regression accuracy, it often underperforms in motion generative tasks
that emphasize the safety and reasonableness of driving behavior, such as planning [3] or Sim Agents
[26]. The primary reasons for this underperformance are as follows: First, the framework does not
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

