Towards the Dynamics of a DNN Learning Symbolic
Interactions
Qihan Ren1∗, Junpeng Zhang1,2∗, Yang Xu3 , Yue Xin1 , Dongrui Liu1,4 , Quanshi Zhang1†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence
3
Zhejiang University 4 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{renqihan, zhangjp63, zqs1022}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
This study proves the two-phase dynamics of a deep neural network (DNN) learning
interactions. Despite the long disappointing view of the faithfulness of post-hoc
explanation of a DNN, a series of theorems have been proven [27] in recent years
to show that for a given input sample, a small set of interactions between input
variables can be considered as primitive inference patterns that faithfully represent
a DNN’s detailed inference logic on that sample. Particularly, Zhang et al. [41] have
observed that various DNNs all learn interactions of different complexities in two
distinct phases, and this two-phase dynamics well explains how a DNN changes
from under-fitting to over-fitting. Therefore, in this study, we mathematically
prove the two-phase dynamics of interactions, providing a theoretical mechanism
for how the generalization power of a DNN changes during the training process.
Experiments show that our theory well predicts the real dynamics of interactions
on different DNNs trained for various tasks.

1

Introduction

Background: mathematically guaranteeing that the inference score of a DNN can be faithfully
explained as symbolic interactions. Explaining the detailed inference logic hidden behind the
output score of a DNN is considered one of the core issues for the post-hoc explanation of a DNN.
However, after a comprehensive survey of various explanation methods, many studies [28, 1, 12] have
unanimously and empirically arrived at a disappointing view of the faithfulness of almost all post-hoc
explanation methods. Fortunately, the recent progress [27] has mathematically proven that given
a specific input sample x = [x1 , · · · , xn ]⊤ , a DNN3 for a classification task usually only encodes a
small set of interactions between input variables in the sample. It is proven that these interactions act
like primitive inference patterns and can accurately predict all network outputs, no matter how we
randomly mask the input sample4 . An interaction refers to a non-linear relationship encoded by the
DNN between a set of input variables in S . For example, as Figure 1 shows, a DNN may encode
a non-linear relationship between the three image patches in S = {x1 , x2 , x3 } to form a dog-snout
pattern, which makes a numerical effect I(S) on the network output. The complexity (or order) of an
def
interaction is defined as the number of input variables in the set S, i.e., order(S) = |S|.
Our task. Since Zhou et al. [44] found that high-order (complex) interactions usually have a much
higher risk of over-fitting than low-order (simple) interactions, in this study, we hope to further track
∗

Equal contribution.
Quanshi Zhang is the corresponding author. He is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
the John Hopcroft Center, at the Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. zqs1022@sjtu.edu.cn.
3
The proof in [27] requires the DNN to generate relatively stable inference outputs on masked samples, which
is formulated by three mathematical conditions (see Appendix B). It is found that DNNs for image classification,
3D point cloud classification, tabular data classification, and text generation
4
It is proven that no matter how we randomly mask variables of the input sample, we can always use
numerical effects of a few interactions to accurately regress the network outputs on all masked samples.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

