LiteVAE: Lightweight and Efficient Variational
Autoencoders for Latent Diffusion Models
Seyedmorteza Sadat1 , Jakob Buhmann2 , Derek Bradley2 , Otmar Hilliges1 , Romann M. Weber2
1
ETH Zürich, 2 DisneyResearch|Studios
{seyedmorteza.sadat,otmar.hilliges}@inf.ethz.ch
{jakob.buhmann,derek.bradley,romann.weber}@disneyresearch.com

Abstract
Advances in latent diffusion models (LDMs) have revolutionized high-resolution
image generation, but the design space of the autoencoder that is central to these
systems remains underexplored. In this paper, we introduce LiteVAE, a new autoencoder design for LDMs, which leverages the 2D discrete wavelet transform
to enhance scalability and computational efficiency over standard variational autoencoders (VAEs) with no sacrifice in output quality. We investigate the training
methodologies and the decoder architecture of LiteVAE and propose several enhancements that improve the training dynamics and reconstruction quality. Our
base LiteVAE model matches the quality of the established VAEs in current LDMs
with a six-fold reduction in encoder parameters, leading to faster training and lower
GPU memory requirements, while our larger model outperforms VAEs of comparable complexity across all evaluated metrics (rFID, LPIPS, PSNR, and SSIM).

Figure 1: An overview of LiteVAE. The input image is first decomposed into multi-level wavelet
coefficients, and each wavelet sub-band is separately processed via a feature-extraction network.
The features are then combined via a feature-aggregation module to compute the final latent code,
which is then transformed back into the image space by the decoder. We use a lightweight UNet
architecture (top right) without spatial down/upsampling for feature extraction and aggregation. The
decoder is a fully convolutional network similar to that in the Stable Diffusion VAE [55]. LiteVAE’s
design allows it to be significantly more efficient than standard VAEs in LDMs while maintaining
high reconstruction quality.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

