Generating Compositional Scenes via Text-to-image
RGBA Instance Generation
Alessandro Fontanella∗
University of Edinburgh

Petru-Daniel Tudosiu
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Yongxin Yang
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Sarah Parisot∗
Microsoft Research

Shifeng Zhang
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion generative models can generate high quality images at the
cost of tedious prompt engineering. Controllability can be improved by introducing
layout conditioning, however existing methods lack layout editing ability and finegrained control over object attributes. The concept of multi-layer generation holds
great potential to address these limitations, however generating image instances
concurrently to scene composition limits control over fine-grained object attributes,
relative positioning in 3D space and scene manipulation abilities. In this work, we
propose a novel multi-stage generation paradigm that is designed for fine-grained
control, flexibility and interactivity. To ensure control over instance attributes, we
devise a novel training paradigm to adapt a diffusion model to generate isolated
scene components as RGBA images with transparency information. To build
complex images, we employ these pre-generated instances and introduce a multilayer composite generation process that smoothly assembles components in realistic
scenes. Our experiments show that our RGBA diffusion model is capable of
generating diverse and high quality instances with precise control over object
attributes. Through multi-layer composition, we demonstrate that our approach
allows to build and manipulate images from highly complex prompts with finegrained control over object appearance and location, granting a higher degree of
control than competing methods.

1

Introduction

The development of text-to-image generative diffusion models has allowed the generation of highquality synthetic images guided by textual prompts. However, achieving desired image quality and
properties inherently requires tedious and meticulous prompt engineering [35]. As image content
is solely described using a textual description, prompt content has to be carefully crafted, notably
taking into account the models’ struggles to understand subtleties of language (e.g. counting, object
attributes, negation or spatial relationships) [16]. Additionally, minor prompt modifications can
lead to substantial modifications of generated image content, further increasing prompt crafting
tediousness.
An intuitive way of improving controllability of generated content is by providing alternative image
descriptors, e.g. using image layouts which describe the location of specific objects in an image
as bounding boxes. Several approaches have been proposed to inject layout information in the
generative process. Training based methods [24, 54] adapt or introduce new model weights to
introduce object coordinates as conditioning, while [8, 51] leverage cross-attention manipulation
∗

Work done while at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

