Optimal Flow Matching:
Learning Straight Trajectories in Just One Step

Nikita Kornilov
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
R.Center for AI, Innopolis University
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology
kornilov.nm@phystech.edu

Petr Mokrov
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
petr.mokrov@skoltech.ru

Alexander Gasnikov
Innopolis University
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology
Steklov Mathematical Institute of RAS∗
gasnikov@yandex.ru

Alexander Korotin
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute
a.korotin@skoltech.ru

Abstract
Over the several recent years, there has been a boom in development of Flow
Matching (FM) methods for generative modeling. One intriguing property pursued
by the community is the ability to learn flows with straight trajectories which
realize the Optimal Transport (OT) displacements. Straightness is crucial for the
fast integration (inference) of the learned flow’s paths. Unfortunately, most existing
flow straightening methods are based on non-trivial iterative FM procedures which
accumulate the error during training or exploit heuristics based on minibatch OT. To
address these issues, we develop and theoretically justify the novel Optimal Flow
Matching (OFM) approach which allows recovering the straight OT displacement
for the quadratic transport in just one FM step. The main idea of our approach is the
employment of vector field for FM which are parameterized by convex functions.
The code of our OFM implementation and the conducted experiments is available
at https://github.com/Jhomanik/Optimal-Flow-Matching.

1

Introduction

Recent success in generative modeling [41, 17, 9] is mostly driven by Flow Matching (FM) [38]
models. These models move a known distribution to a target one via ordinary differential equations
(ODE) describing the mass movement. However, such processes usually have curved trajectories,
resulting in time-consuming ODE integration for sampling. To overcome this issue, researches
developed several improvements of the FM [39, 40, 48], which aim to recover more straight paths.
Rectified Flow (RF) method [39, 40] iteratively solves FM and gradually rectifies trajectories.
Unfortunately, in each FM iteration, it accumulates the error, see [40, §2.2] and [39, §6]. This
may spoil the performance of the method. The other popular branch of approaches to straighten
trajectories is based on the connection between straight paths and Optimal Transport (OT) [60]. The
main goal of OT is to find the way to move one probability distribution to another with the minimal
effort. Such OT maps are usually described by ODEs with straight trajectories. In OT Conditional
Flow Matching (OT-CFM) [48, 55], the authors propose to apply FM on top of OT solution between
batches from considered distributions. Unfortunately, such a heuristic does not guarantee straight
paths because of minibatch OT biases, see, e.g., [55, Figure 1, right] for the practical illustration.
∗

Russian Academy of Sciences

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

