MLLM-C OMP B ENCH: A Comparative Reasoning
Benchmark for Multimodal LLMs
Jihyung Kil∗ Zheda Mai∗ Justin Lee Arpita Chowdhury Zihe Wang
Kerrie Cheng Lemeng Wang Ye Liu Wei-Lun Chao
The Ohio State University
https://compbench.github.io

Abstract
The ability to compare objects, scenes, or situations is crucial for effective decisionmaking and problem-solving in everyday life. For instance, comparing the freshness of apples enables better choices during grocery shopping, while comparing
sofa designs helps optimize the aesthetics of our living space. Despite its significance, the comparative capability is largely unexplored in artificial general
intelligence (AGI). In this paper, we introduce MLLM-C OMP B ENCH, a benchmark designed to evaluate the comparative reasoning capability of multimodal
large language models (MLLMs). MLLM-C OMP B ENCH mines and pairs images
through visually oriented questions covering eight dimensions of relative comparison: visual attribute, existence, state, emotion, temporality, spatiality, quantity, and
quality. We curate a collection of around 40K image pairs using metadata from
diverse vision datasets and CLIP similarity scores. These image pairs span a broad
array of visual domains, including animals, fashion, sports, and both outdoor and
indoor scenes. The questions are carefully crafted to discern relative characteristics between two images and are labeled by human annotators for accuracy and
relevance. We use MLLM-C OMP B ENCH to evaluate recent MLLMs, including
GPT-4V(ision), Gemini-Pro, and LLaVA-1.6. Our results reveal notable shortcomings in their comparative abilities. We believe MLLM-C OMP B ENCH not only
sheds light on these limitations but also establishes a solid foundation for future
enhancements in the comparative capability of MLLMs.

1

Introduction

The concept of “relativity” is integral in our daily lives. For example, relative freshness affects our
decision to purchase fruits; relative spaciousness affects our decision to choose living or working
space; relative crowdedness indicates which paths to select; (relative) change between two scenes
reveals what happened to the environment. In short, the ability to compare objects, scenes, or
situations and reason about their relativity is vital for us to make informed decisions, solve problems
effectively, and acquire knowledge efficiently, enabling us to make sense of the surrounding world.
The recent advance of multimodal large language models (MLLMs), a.k.a. large multimodal models
(LMMs), [1, 3, 58, 33, 32, 14, 6] has demonstrated promising progress toward artificial general
intelligence (AGI) [65, 36] and achieved unprecedented results in a variety of vision and language
(V&L) tasks, ranging from free-formed visual recognition [15, 10, 13] and visual captioning [10, 2]
to visual question answering [21, 22, 53]. Yet, much less attention has been paid to tasks that involve
relativity and comparison between multiple visual inputs, e.g., two images. In essence, most of the
existing datasets for visual recognition [15, 10, 13] and V&L tasks [21, 2, 40, 31, 16, 65] comprise
∗

Equal contribution. {kil.5, mai.145}@osu.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

