Strategic Linear Contextual Bandits

Thomas Kleine Buening
The Alan Turing Institute

Aadirupa Saha
Apple ML Research

Christos Dimitrakakis
University of Neuchatel

Haifeng Xu
University of Chicago

Abstract
Motivated by the phenomenon of strategic agents gaming a recommender system to
maximize the number of times they are recommended to users, we study a strategic
variant of the linear contextual bandit problem, where the arms can strategically
misreport privately observed contexts to the learner. We treat the algorithm design
problem as one of mechanism design under uncertainty and propose the Optimistic
Grim Trigger Mechanism (OptGTM) that incentivizes the agents (i.e., arms) to
report their contexts truthfully while simultaneously minimizing regret. We also
show that failing to account for the strategic nature of the agents results in linear
regret. However, a trade-off between mechanism design and regret minimization
appears to be unavoidable. More broadly, this work aims to provide insight into
the intersection of online learning and mechanism design.

1

Introduction

Recommendation algorithms that select the most relevant item for sequentially arriving users or
queries have become vital for navigating the internet and its many online platforms. However,
recommender systems are susceptible to manipulation by strategic agents seeking to artificially
increase their frequency of recommendation [31, 33, 38]. These agents, ranging from sellers on
platforms like Amazon to websites aiming for higher visibility in search results, employ tactics such
as altering product attributes or engage in aggressive search engine optimization [29, 32]. By gaming
the algorithms, agents attempt to appear more relevant than they actually are, often compromising the
integrity and intended functionality of the recommender system. Here, the key issue lies in the agents’
incentive to manipulate the learning algorithm to maximize their utility (i.e., profit). To address this
challenge, we study and design algorithms in a strategic variant of the linear contextual bandit, where
the agents (i.e., arms) have the ability to misreport privately observed contexts to the learner. Our
main contribution is connecting online learning with approximate mechanism design to minimize
regret while, at the same time, discouraging the arms from gaming our learning algorithm.
The contextual bandit [2, 24] is a generalization of the multi-armed bandit problem to the case where
the learner observes relevant contextual information before pulling an arm. It has found application
in various domains including healthcare [37] and online recommendation [25]. We here focus on the
linearly realizable setting [1, 6], where each arm’s reward is a linear function of the arm’s context
in the given round. In the standard linear contextual bandit, at the beginning of round t, the learner
observes the context x∗t,i ∈ Rd of every arm i ∈ [K], selects an arm it , and receives a reward drawn
from a distribution with mean ⟨θ∗ , x∗t,it ⟩ where θ∗ ∈ Rd is an unknown parameter. In the strategic
linear contextual bandit, we assume that each arm is a self-interested agent that wants to maximize
the number of times it gets pulled by manipulating its contexts.
More precisely, we consider the situation where each arm i privately observes its true context x∗t,i
every round, e.g., its relevance to the user arriving in round t, but reports a potentially gamed context
vector xt,i to the learner. The learner does not observe the true contexts, but only the reported contexts
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

