Scaling Proprioceptive-Visual Learning with
Heterogeneous Pre-trained Transformers

Lirui Wang1

Xinlei Chen2 Jialiang Zhao1
1
MIT CSAIL 2 Meta, FAIR

Kaiming He1

https://liruiw.github.io/hpt

Abstract
One of the roadblocks for training generalist robotic models today is heterogeneity. Previous robot learning methods often collect data to train with one specific
embodiment for one task, which is expensive and prone to overfitting. This work
studies the problem of learning policy representations through heterogeneous pretraining on robot data across different embodiments and tasks at scale. We propose
Heterogeneous Pre-trained Transformers (HPT), which pre-train a large, shareable
trunk of a policy neural network to learn a task and embodiment agnostic shared
representation. This general architecture aligns the specific proprioception and
vision inputs from distinct embodiments to a short sequence of tokens and then
processes such tokens to map to control robots for different tasks. Leveraging
the recent large-scale multi-embodiment real-world robotic datasets as well as
simulation, deployed robots, and human video datasets, we investigate pre-training
policies across heterogeneity. We conduct experiments to investigate the scaling
behaviors of training objectives, to the extent of 52 datasets. HPTs outperform
several baselines and enhance the fine-tuned policy performance by over 20% on
unseen tasks in multiple simulator benchmarks and real-world settings.

1

Introduction

Building robotic policies today is hard: it often requires collecting specific data for each robot,
task, and environment, and the learned policies do not generalize beyond these specific settings.
A historical lesson that has revolutionized machine learning is that pre-training [34, 27, 29] on
large-scale, high-quality, and diverse data can bring general models that usually outperform specific
models. Recent progress in open-source large-scale data collection [14, 76] has made this path
possible, but the heterogeneity (such as varying robot hardware and different environments) present
in large-scale robotic data has posed a significant challenge. A central question for the field now is
how to leverage the heterogeneous robot data to pre-train robotic foundation models [3].
Foundation models from natural language processing [60, 58] and computer vision [37] have shown a
paradigm to achieve general-purpose task-agnostic models through pre-training on massive amounts
and diversity of data. In addition to the benefits from more data, training with diverse tasks also
enforces the representation to be more generalized. These foundation models can achieve high task
success rates for various tasks, are more robust to outliers, and are flexible for adapting to new
tasks. These approaches map input signals from distinct domains and tasks into a high-dimensional
representation space, and exhibit consistent scaling behaviors [34, 29]. After that, minimal fine-tuning
is required to transfer the representation for downstream tasks to achieve good performance.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

