ODRL: A Benchmark for Off-Dynamics
Reinforcement Learning

Jiafei Lyu1∗ Kang Xu2 Jiacheng Xu3 Mengbei Yan1 Jingwen Yang2
Zongzhang Zhang3 Chenjia Bai4† Zongqing Lu5† Xiu Li1†
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Tencent
3
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
4
Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom
5
School of Computer Science, Peking University
lvjf20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, li.xiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We consider off-dynamics reinforcement learning (RL) where one needs to transfer
policies across different domains with dynamics mismatch. Despite the focus on
developing dynamics-aware algorithms, this field is hindered due to the lack of a
standard benchmark. To bridge this gap, we introduce ODRL, the first benchmark
tailored for evaluating off-dynamics RL methods. ODRL contains four experimental settings where the source and target domains can be either online or offline,
and provides diverse tasks and a broad spectrum of dynamics shifts, making it a
reliable platform to comprehensively evaluate the agent’s adaptation ability to the
target domain. Furthermore, ODRL includes recent off-dynamics RL algorithms in
a unified framework and introduces some extra baselines for different settings, all
implemented in a single-file manner. To unpack the true adaptation capability of
existing methods, we conduct extensive benchmarking experiments, which show
that no method has universal advantages across varied dynamics shifts. We hope
this benchmark can serve as a cornerstone for future research endeavors. Our code
is publicly available at https://github.com/OffDynamicsRL/off-dynamics-rl.

1

Introduction

Human beings are able to transfer the policies swiftly to a structurally similar task. This ability is
also expected in decision-making agents, especially embodied AI [62, 13, 53]. For instance, we may
train the robot in a simulated environment (i.e., source domain) and deploy the learned policy in
real-world tasks (i.e., target domain), where the dynamics gap may pertain between the simulation
and reality. It is anticipated that the robot is able to adapt itself to real-world dynamics quickly.
How to generalize policies across different domains with dynamics discrepancies efficiently remains
an open problem in reinforcement learning (RL). Such a problem setup is referred to as off-dynamics
RL in [16], but it is restricted in demanding the online source domain and target domain. We extend
its scope and formally define a general off-dynamics RL setting (Definition 1), where the source
domain and the target domain only differ in their transition dynamics. Existing researches realize
policy adaptation under dynamics mismatch via system identification [82, 10], domain randomization
[63, 66, 55], learning domain classifiers [16, 41], etc. However, we argue that this field lacks a
standard and unified benchmark. Upon checking the latest off-dynamics RL methods [16, 76, 41],
we found that they often manually construct their customized environments with dynamics shifts and
∗

Work done while working as an intern at Tencent IEG. † Corresponding Authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

