Double-Ended Synthesis Planning with
Goal-Constrained Bidirectional Search
Kevin Yu
MIT
kyu3@mit.edu

Jihye Roh
MIT
jroh99@mit.edu

Ziang Li
Georgia Tech
ziang@gatech.edu

Runzhong Wang
MIT
runzhong@mit.edu

Wenhao Gao
MIT
whgao@mit.edu

Connor W. Coley
MIT
ccoley@mit.edu

Abstract
Computer-aided synthesis planning (CASP) algorithms have demonstrated expertlevel abilities in planning retrosynthetic routes to molecules of low to moderate
complexity. However, current search methods assume the sufficiency of reaching
arbitrary building blocks, failing to address the common real-world constraint
where using specific molecules is desired. To this end, we present a formulation
of synthesis planning with starting material constraints. Under this formulation,
we propose Double-Ended Synthesis Planning (DESP), a novel CASP algorithm
under a bidirectional graph search scheme that interleaves expansions from the
target and from the goal starting materials to ensure constraint satisfiability. The
search algorithm is guided by a goal-conditioned cost network learned offline
from a partially observed hypergraph of valid chemical reactions. We demonstrate
the utility of DESP in improving solve rates and reducing the number of search
expansions by biasing synthesis planning towards expert goals on multiple new
benchmarks. DESP can make use of existing one-step retrosynthesis models, and
we anticipate its performance to scale as these one-step model capabilities improve.

1

Introduction

Synthesis planning—proposing a series of chemical reactions starting from purchasable building
blocks to synthesize one or more target molecules—is a fundamental task in chemistry. For decades,
chemists have approached the challenge of synthesis planning with retrosynthetic analysis [1, 2], the
strategy by which a target molecule is recursively broken down into simple precursors with reversed
reactions. In recent years, advances in machine learning have enabled a multitude of computer-aided
synthesis planning (CASP) algorithms [3–6] that navigate a combinatorially large space of reactions
to propose chemically sensible routes to a variety of drug-like molecules within seconds to minutes.
However, fully data-driven algorithms still underperform when generalizing to realistic use cases such
as planning for more complex targets or in constrained solution spaces. In practice, expert chemists
may plan syntheses with specific starting materials in mind, called “structure-goals" [1], that constrain
the solution space. For instance, efficient syntheses of highly complex drugs are often most practical
when synthesized from naturally-occurring starting materials that share complex features with the
target, a practice known as “semi-synthesis" [7, 8]. There is also immense interest in identifying
pathways from waste or sustainable feedstocks to useful chemicals [9–11], but existing methods have
thus far relied on heuristics and brute-force enumeration of reactions.
Though algorithms for planning synthetic routes from expert-specified starting materials have been
proposed [12, 13], the vast majority of CASP algorithms today cannot address starting material38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

