Improved learning rates in multi-unit uniform price
auctions
Marius Potfer∗ 1,2

Dorian Baudry3

Hugo Richard1

Vianney Perchet1

Cheng Wan2
1

Joint team Fairplay, ENSAE, and Criteo AI LAB
EDF R&D
3
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford
2

Abstract
Motivated by the strategic participation of electricity producers in electricity dayahead market, we study the problem of online learning in repeated multi-unit uniform price auctions focusing on the adversarial opposing bid setting. The main
contribution of this paper is the introduction of a new modeling of the bid space.
Indeed, we prove that a learning algorithm leveraging the structure of this problem achieves a regret of Õ(K 4/3 T 2/3 ) under bandit feedback, improving over the
bound of Õ(K 7/4 T 3/4 ) previously obtained in the literature. This improved regret rate is tight up to logarithmic terms. Inspired by electricity reserve markets,
we further introduce a different feedback model under which all winning bids are
revealed. This feedback interpolates between the full-information and bandit scenarios depending on the auctions’ results. We prove√that, under this feedback, the
algorithm that we propose achieves regret Õ(K 5/2 T ).

1

Introduction

The short-term electricity market, based on a wholesale market, is organized as an auction that determines the quantity each electricity producer needs to produce and the price at which electricity is
sold. They participate, in this market by submitting prices for each kilowatt-hour they can produce.
They have the opportunity to participate strategically, submitting prices that can deviate from their
actual production cost. While several regulatory and practical constraints apply, this market is essentially a multi-unit auction of identical items (Willems & Yu, 2022). These auctions are extensively
studied and utilized for resource allocation. Several pricing rules can be applied, the most common
being discriminatory pricing, uniform pricing (Ausubel et al., 2014), and Vickrey–Clarke–Groves
(VCG) auctions (Sessa et al., 2017). Although the VCG auction is known for its truthful bidding
property, it is seldom implemented due to its complexity. Instead, uniform or discriminatory pricing
are often preferred, particularly in treasury auctions (Khezr & Cumpston, 2022) and their procurement variations in electricity reserve markets (Viehmann et al., 2021).
The wholesale electricity market is held every day and, structurally, the electricity producers who
participate in the mechanism remain the same for multiple years. This represents an opportunity to
study how producers can be strategic in the way they adapt to other’s bidding strategies. We therefore focus on the problem of online bidding in a repeated multi-unit auction. This setting allows
us to model how an agent participating multiple times to an auction with the same other participants can leverage the information he has obtained during past auctions. This family of settings,
of which a review is available in (Nedelec et al., 2022), was first investigated for learning from
the point of view of the auctioneer and was then applied to bidders learning how to bid optimally.
∗

marius.potfer@ensae.fr

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

