Can Learned Optimization Make Reinforcement
Learning Less Difficult?

Alexander D. Goldie∗12 Chris Lu1 Matthew T. Jackson12
Shimon Whiteson†2 Jakob N. Foerster†1
1
FLAIR, University of Oxford 2 WhiRL, University of Oxford

Abstract
While reinforcement learning (RL) holds great potential for decision making in the
real world, it suffers from a number of unique difficulties which often need specific
consideration. In particular: it is highly non-stationary; suffers from high degrees
of plasticity loss; and requires exploration to prevent premature convergence to
local optima and maximize return. In this paper, we consider whether learned optimization can help overcome these problems. Our method, Learned Optimization
for Plasticity, Exploration and Non-stationarity (O PEN1 ), meta-learns an update
rule whose input features and output structure are informed by previously proposed
solutions to these difficulties. We show that our parameterization is flexible enough
to enable meta-learning in diverse learning contexts, including the ability to use
stochasticity for exploration. Our experiments demonstrate that when meta-trained
on single and small sets of environments, O PEN outperforms or equals traditionally
used optimizers. Furthermore, O PEN shows strong generalization characteristics
across a range of environments and agent architectures.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning [1, RL] has undergone significant advances in recent years, scaling from
solving complex games [2, 3] towards approaching real world applications [4–7]. However, RL is
limited by a number of difficulties which are not present in other machine learning domains, requiring
the development of numerous hand-crafted workarounds to maximize its performance.
Here, we take inspiration from three difficulties of RL: non-stationarity due to continuously changing
input and output distributions [8]; high degrees of plasticity loss limiting model capacities [9, 10];
and exploration, which is needed to ensure an agent does not converge to local optima prematurely
[1, 11]. Overcoming these challenges could enable drastic improvements in the performance of
RL, potentially reducing the barriers to applications of RL in the real-world. Thus far, approaches
to tackle these problems have relied on human intuition to find hand-crafted solutions. However,
this is fundamentally limited by human understanding. Meta-RL [12] offers an alternative in which
RL algorithms themselves are learned from data rather than designed by hand. Meta-learned RL
algorithms have previously demonstrated improved performance over hand-crafted ones [13–15].
On a related note, learned optimization has proven successful in supervised and unsupervised learning
(e.g., VeLO [16]). Learned optimizers are generally parameterized update rules trained to outperform
handcrafted algorithms like gradient descent. However, current learned optimizers perform poorly in
RL [16, 17]. While some may argue that RL is simply an out-of-distribution task [16], the lack of
∗

Correspondence to goldie@robots.ox.ac.uk.
Equal supervision.
1
Open-source code is available here.

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

