Analysis of Corrected Graph Convolutions

Robert Wang∗

Aseem Baranwal †

Kimon Fontoulakis‡

Abstract
Machine learning for node classification on graphs is a prominent area driven
by applications such as recommendation systems. State-of-the-art models often
use multiple graph convolutions on the data, as empirical evidence suggests they
can enhance performance. However, it has been shown empirically and theoretically, that too many graph convolutions can degrade performance significantly,
a phenomenon known as oversmoothing. In this paper, we provide a rigorous
theoretical analysis, based on the two-class contextual stochastic block model
(CSBM), of the performance of vanilla graph convolution from which we remove
the principal eigenvector to avoid oversmoothing. We perform a spectral analysis
for k rounds of corrected graph convolutions, and we provide results for partial
and exact classification. For partial classification, we show that each round of
convolution can reduce the misclassification error exponentially up to a saturation
level, after which performance does not worsen. We also extend this analysis to the
multi-class setting with features distributed according to a Gaussian mixture model.
For exact classification, we show that the separability threshold can be improved
exponentially up to O(log n/log log n) corrected convolutions.

1

Introduction

Graphs naturally represent complex relational information found in a plethora of applications such
as social analysis [Backstrom and Leskovec, 2011], recommendation systems [Ying et al., 2018,
Borisyuk et al., 2024], computer vision [Monti et al., 2017], materials science and chemistry [Reiser
et al., 2022], statistical physics [Battaglia et al., 2016, Bapst et al., 2020], financial forensics [Zhang
et al., 2017, Weber et al., 2019] and traffic prediction in Google Maps [Derrow-Pinion et al., 2021].
The abundance of relational information in combination with features of the corresponding entities
has led to improved performance of machine learning models for classification and regression tasks.
Central to the field of machine learning on graphs is the graph convolution operation. It has been
shown empirically [Defferrard et al., 2016, Kipf and Welling, 2017, Gasteiger et al., 2019, Rossi
et al., 2020] that using graph convolutions to the feature data enhances the prediction performance of
a model, but too many graph convolutions can have the opposite effect [Oono and Suzuki, 2020, Chen
et al., 2020, Keriven, 2022, Wu et al., 2023], an issue known as oversmoothing. Several solutions
have been proposed for this problem, we refer the reader to the survey of Rusch et al. [2023].
In this paper we provide a rigorous spectral analysis, based on the contextual stochastic block
model [Deshpande et al., 2018], to show that the oversmoothing phenomenon can be alleviated by
excluding the principal eigenvector’s component from the graph convolution matrix. This is similar
to the state-of-the-art normalization approach used in Zhao and Akoglu [2020], Rusch et al. [2023]
(PairNorm). However, our method explicitly uses the principal eigenvector. We provide below some
intuition about why excluding the principal eigenvector helps to alleviate over-smoothing.
∗

Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo
Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo
‡
Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

