Stealth edits to large language models

Oliver J. Sutton∗
King’s College London
oliver.sutton@kcl.ac.uk
Desmond J. Higham
University of Edinburgh
d.j.higham@ed.ac.uk

Qinghua Zhou∗
King’s College London
qinghua.zhou@kcl.ac.uk

Alexander N. Gorban
University of Leicester
a.n.gorban@le.ac.uk

Wei Wang
University of Leicester
ww152@le.ac.uk

Alexander Bastounis
King’s College London
alexander.bastounis@kcl.ac.uk

Ivan Y. Tyukin
King’s College London
ivan.tyukin@kcl.ac.uk

Abstract
We reveal the theoretical foundations of techniques for editing large language
models, and present new methods which can do so without requiring retraining. Our
theoretical insights show that a single metric (a measure of the intrinsic dimension
of the model’s features) can be used to assess a model’s editability and reveals its
previously unrecognised susceptibility to malicious stealth attacks. This metric
is fundamental to predicting the success of a variety of editing approaches, and
reveals new bridges between disparate families of editing methods. We collectively
refer to these as stealth editing methods, because they directly update a model’s
weights to specify its response to specific known hallucinating prompts without
affecting other model behaviour. By carefully applying our theoretical insights,
we are able to introduce a new jet-pack network block which is optimised for
highly selective model editing, uses only standard network operations, and can
be inserted into existing networks. We also reveal the vulnerability of language
models to stealth attacks: a small change to a model’s weights which fixes its
response to a single attacker-chosen prompt. Stealth attacks are computationally
simple, do not require access to or knowledge of the model’s training data, and
therefore represent a potent yet previously unrecognised threat to redistributed
foundation models. Extensive experimental results illustrate and support our
methods and their theoretical underpinnings. Demos and source code are available
at https://github.com/qinghua-zhou/stealth-edits.

1

Introduction

The latest meteoric rise of artificial intelligence has been driven by the maturing of large language
models. These models, predominantly based on the transformer architecture [39], have demonstrated
remarkable abilities in natural language communication and comprehension, which are only beginning to transform the world as we know it today. Scaling has proved to be key in enabling these
breakthroughs: the GPT-4 family of models, for instance, has on the order of 1012 trained parameters,
a figure which would have been inconceivable only a few years ago. The raw computational power
and vast quantities of quality data required to train models such as these make developing them
prohibitively expensive for all but a handful of the world’s wealthiest technology companies [31].
∗

These authors contributed equally to the paper and are listed alphabetically.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

