Model LEGO: Creating Models Like
Disassembling and Assembling Building Blocks

Jiacong Hu1,5 , Jing Gao2 , Jingwen Ye3 ,
Yang Gao , Xingen Wang1,7 , Zunlei Feng4,5,6 * , Mingli Song1,5,6
7

1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University,
Robotics Institute, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University,
3
Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore
4
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University,
5
State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University,
6
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security,
7
Bangsheng Technology Co., Ltd.
2

jiaconghu@zju.edu.cn,jinggao2@andrew.cmu.edu,jingweny@nus.edu.sg,
{roygao,newroot,zunleifeng,brooksong}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
With the rapid development of deep learning, the increasing complexity and scale
of parameters make training a new model increasingly resource-intensive. In this
paper, we start from the classic convolutional neural network (CNN) and explore a
paradigm that does not require training to obtain new models. Similar to the birth
of CNN inspired by receptive fields in the biological visual system, we draw inspiration from the information subsystem pathways in the biological visual system and
propose Model Disassembling and Assembling (MDA). During model disassembling, we introduce the concept of relative contribution and propose a component
locating technique to extract task-aware components from trained CNN classifiers.
For model assembling, we present the alignment padding strategy and parameter
scaling strategy to construct a new model tailored for a specific task, utilizing the
disassembled task-aware components. The entire process is akin to playing with
LEGO bricks, enabling arbitrary assembly of new models, and providing a novel
perspective for model creation and reuse. Extensive experiments showcase that
task-aware components disassembled from CNN classifiers or new models assembled using these components closely match or even surpass the performance of the
baseline, demonstrating its promising results for model reuse. Furthermore, MDA
exhibits diverse potential applications, with comprehensive experiments exploring
model decision route analysis, model compression, knowledge distillation, and
more. For more information, please visit https://model-lego.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), as the predominant architecture in deep learning, play
a crucial role in image, video, and audio processing [1, 2, 3]. CNNs were originally inspired by
the concept of receptive fields in the biological visual system [4], and our focus is to explore and
leverage similar characteristics within CNNs. Various studies [5, 6, 7] have delved into unraveling
the intricacies of biological visual information processing systems. Notably, Livingstone et al. [6]
substantiated that the intermediate visual cortex comprises relatively independent subdivisions.
* Corresponding author.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

