HaloScope: Harnessing Unlabeled LLM Generations
for Hallucination Detection

1

Xuefeng Du1 Chaowei Xiao2 Yixuan Li1
Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison
2
Information School, University of Wisconsin-Madison
{xfdu,sharonli}@cs.wisc.edu, cxiao34@wisc.edu

Abstract
The surge in applications of large language models (LLMs) has prompted concerns about the generation of misleading or fabricated information, known as hallucinations. Therefore, detecting hallucinations has become critical to maintaining
trust in LLM-generated content. A primary challenge in learning a truthfulness
classifier is the lack of a large amount of labeled truthful and hallucinated data. To
address the challenge, we introduce HaloScope, a novel learning framework that
leverages the unlabeled LLM generations in the wild for hallucination detection.
Such unlabeled data arises freely upon deploying LLMs in the open world, and
consists of both truthful and hallucinated information. To harness the unlabeled
data, we present an automated membership estimation score for distinguishing between truthful and untruthful generations within unlabeled mixture data, thereby
enabling the training of a binary truthfulness classifier on top. Importantly, our
framework does not require extra data collection and human annotations, offering
strong flexibility and practicality for real-world applications. Extensive experiments show that HaloScope can achieve superior hallucination detection performance, outperforming the competitive rivals by a significant margin. Code is
available at https://github.com/deeplearning-wisc/haloscope.

1

Introduction

In today’s rapidly evolving landscape of machine learning, large language models (LLMs) have
emerged as transformative forces shaping various applications [35, 45]. Despite the immense capabilities, they bring forth challenges to the model’s reliability upon deployment in the open world.
For example, the model can generate information that is seemingly informative but untruthful during interaction with humans, placing critical decision-making at risk [19, 53]. Therefore, a reliable
LLM should not only accurately generate texts that are coherent with the prompts but also possess
the ability to identify hallucinations. This gives rise to the importance of hallucination detection
problem, which determines whether a generation is truthful or not [32, 6, 25].
A primary challenge in learning a truthfulness classifier is the scarcity of labeled datasets containing truthful and hallucinated generations. In practice, generating a reliable ground truth dataset for
hallucination detection requires human annotators to assess the authenticity of a large number of
generated samples. However, collecting such labeled data can be labor-intensive, especially considering the vast landscape of generative models and the diverse range of content they produce.
Moreover, maintaining the quality and consistency of labeled data amidst the evolving capabilities
and outputs of generative models requires ongoing annotation efforts and stringent quality control
measures. These formidable obstacles underscore the need for exploring unlabeled data for hallucination detection.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

