Improved Sample Complexity Bounds for Diffusion
Model Training

Shivam Gupta
UT Austin
shivamgupta@utexas.edu

Aditya Parulekar
UT Austin
adityaup@cs.utexas.edu

Eric Price
UT Austin
ecprice@cs.utexas.edu

Zhiyang Xun
UT Austin
zxun@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Diffusion models have become the most popular approach to deep generative
modeling of images, largely due to their empirical performance and reliability.
From a theoretical standpoint, a number of recent works [CCL+ 23b, CCSW22,
BBDD24] have studied the iteration complexity of sampling, assuming access
to an accurate diffusion model. In this work, we focus on understanding the
sample complexity of training such a model; how many samples are needed to
learn an accurate diffusion model using a sufficiently expressive neural network?
Prior work [BMR20] showed bounds polynomial in the dimension, desired Total
Variation error, and Wasserstein error. We show an exponential improvement in the
dependence on Wasserstein error and depth, along with improved dependencies on
other relevant parameters.

1

Introduction

Score-based diffusion models are currently the most successful methods for image generation, serving
as the backbone for popular text-to-image models such as stable diffusion [RBL+ 22], Midjourney,
and DALL·E [RDN+ 22] as well as achieving state-of-the-art performance on other audio and image
generation tasks [SDWMG15, HJA20, JAD+ 21, SSXE22, DN21].
The goal of score-based diffusion is to produce a generative model for a possibly complicated
distribution q0 . This involves two components: training a neural network using true samples from q0
to learn estimates of its (smoothed) score functions, and sampling using the trained estimates. To this
end, consider the following stochastic differential equation, often referred to as the forward SDE:
√
(1)
dxt = −xt dt + 2 dBt , x0 ∼ q0
where Bt represents Brownian motion. Here, x0 is a sample from the original distribution q0 over
Rd , while the distribution of xt can be computed to be
xt ∼ e−t x0 + N (0, σt2 Id )

for σt2 = 1 − e−2t . Note that this distribution approaches N (0, Id ), the stationary distribution of (1),
exponentially fast.
Let qt be the distribution of xt , and let st (y) := ∇ log qt (y) be the associated score function. We
refer to qt as the σt -smoothed version of q0 . Then, starting from a sample xT ∼ qT , there is a reverse
Authors listed in alphabetical order.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

