Retrospective for the Dynamic Sensorium
Competition for predicting large-scale mouse primary
visual cortex activity from videos

Polina Turishcheva*,1,) , Paul G. Fahey*,2–5,) , Michaela Vystrčilová1 , Laura Hansel1 ,
Rachel Froebe2–5 , Kayla Ponder2 , Yongrong Qiu1,3–5 , Konstantin F. Willeke1,6,7 ,
Mohammad Bashiri1,6,7 Ruslan Baikulov8 , Yu Zhu9,10 , Lei Ma10 , Shan Yu9 , Tiejun Huang10 ,
Bryan M. Li11, 12 , Wolf De Wulf12 , Nina Kudryashova12 , Matthias H. Hennig12 ,
Nathalie L. Rochefort13,14 , Arno Onken12 , Eric Wang2 , Zhiwei Ding2 ,
Andreas S. Tolias2–5,15 , Fabian H. Sinz1,2,6,7 , Alexander S. Ecker1,16,)
1

Institute of Computer Science and Campus Institute Data Science, University of Göttingen, Germany,
Department of Neuroscience & Center for Neuroscience and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA, 3 Department of Ophthalmology, Byers Eye Institute, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, US, 4 Stanford Bio-X, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, US, 5 Wu Tsai
Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, US, 6 International Max Planck Research School for
Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 7 Institute for Bioinformatics and Medical Informatics, Tübingen University, Germany, 8 lRomul, Russia, 9 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China 10 Beijing
Academy of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, China 11 The Alan Turing Institute, UK 12 School of Informatics, University
of Edinburgh, UK 13 Centre for Discovery Brain Sciences, University of Edinburgh, UK 14 Simons Initiative
for the Developing Brain, University of Edinburgh, UK 15 Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, US, 16 Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization, Göttingen, Germany.
*
Equal contribution. ) turishcheva@cs.uni-goettingen.de, pgfahey@stanford.edu, ecker@cs.uni-goettingen.de
2

Abstract
Understanding how biological visual systems process information is challenging
because of the nonlinear relationship between visual input and neuronal responses.
Artiﬁcial neural networks allow computational neuroscientists to create predictive
models that connect biological and machine vision. Machine learning has beneﬁted tremendously from benchmarks that compare different models on the same
task under standardized conditions. However, there was no standardized benchmark to identify state-of-the-art dynamic models of the mouse visual system. To
address this gap, we established the SENSORIUM 2023 Benchmark Competition
with dynamic input, featuring a new large-scale dataset from the primary visual
cortex of ten mice. This dataset includes responses from 78,853 neurons to 2 hours
of dynamic stimuli per neuron, together with behavioral measurements such as
running speed, pupil dilation, and eye movements. The competition ranked models in two tracks based on predictive performance for neuronal responses on a
held-out test set: one focusing on predicting in-domain natural stimuli and another on out-of-distribution (OOD) stimuli to assess model generalization. As
part of the NeurIPS 2023 Competition Track, we received more than 160 model
submissions from 22 teams. Several new architectures for predictive models were
proposed, and the winning teams improved the previous state-of-the-art model by
50%. Access to the dataset as well as the benchmarking infrastructure will remain
online at www.sensorium-competition.net.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

