ZipCache: Accurate and Efficient KV Cache
Quantization with Salient Token Identification

Yefei He1

Luoming Zhang1 Weijia Wu2 Jing Liu3
Hong Zhou1∗ Bohan Zhuang1,3∗
1

2

Zhejiang University, China
National University of Singapore, Singapore
3
ZIP Lab, Monash University, Australia

Abstract
KV cache stores key and value states from previous tokens to avoid re-computation,
yet it demands substantial storage space, especially for long sequences. Adaptive
KV cache compression seeks to discern the saliency of tokens, preserving vital
information while aggressively compressing those of less importance. However,
previous methods of this approach exhibit significant performance degradation
at high compression ratios due to inaccuracies in identifying salient tokens. Additionally, the compression process introduces excessive overhead, substantially
increasing memory burdens and the generation latency. In this paper, we present
ZipCache, an accurate and efficient KV cache quantization method for large language models (LLMs). First, we construct a strong baseline for quantizing KV
cache. Through the proposed channel-separable tokenwise quantization scheme,
the memory overhead of quantization parameters are substantially reduced compared to fine-grained groupwise quantization. To enhance the compression ratio,
we propose normalized attention score as an effective metric for identifying salient
tokens by considering the lower triangle characteristics of the attention matrix. The
quantization bit-width for each token is then adaptively assigned based on their
saliency. Moreover, we develop an efficient approximation method that decouples
the saliency metric from full attention scores, enabling compatibility with fast
attention implementations like FlashAttention. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that ZipCache achieves superior compression ratios, fast generation speed and minimal performance losses compared with previous KV cache compression methods.
For instance, when evaluating Mistral-7B model on GSM8k dataset, ZipCache
is capable of compressing the KV cache by 4.98×, with only a 0.38% drop in
accuracy. In terms of efficiency, ZipCache also showcases a 37.3% reduction in
prefill-phase latency, a 56.9% reduction in decoding-phase latency, and a 19.8%
reduction in GPU memory usage when evaluating LLaMA3-8B model with a input
length of 4096. Code is available at https://github.com/ThisisBillhe/ZipCache/.

1

Introduction

LLMs with the next-token-prediction scheme have achieved remarkable advancements in various
text-related tasks, such as language understanding [13, 34, 10], content creation [1, 5, 36], coding [3,
29, 42] and mathematics [33, 23, 35]. In this generation scheme, the forthcoming token interacts with
all previous tokens via the attention mechanism [38], where the query, key and value states will be
∗

Corresponding author. Email: zhouhong_zju@zju.edu.cn, bohan.zhuang@gmail.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

