Iteration Head:
A Mechanistic Study of Chain-of-Thought

Vivien Cabannes
FAIR, Meta AI
Francois Charton
FAIR, Meta AI

Charles Arnal
Datashape, INRIA

Wassim Bouaziz
FAIR, Meta AI

Alice Yang
FAIR, Meta AI

Julia Kempe
Courant University and Center for Data Science, NYU & FAIR, Meta AI

Abstract
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning is known to improve Large Language Models
both empirically and in terms of theoretical approximation power. However, our understanding of the inner workings and conditions of apparition of CoT capabilities
remains limited. This paper helps fill this gap by demonstrating how CoT reasoning
emerges in transformers in a controlled and interpretable setting. In particular, we
observe the appearance of a specialized attention mechanism dedicated to iterative
reasoning, which we coined "iteration heads". We track both the emergence and the
precise working of these iteration heads down to the attention level, and measure
the transferability of the CoT skills to which they give rise between tasks.

1

Introduction

In the rapidly evolving field of artificial intelligence, Large Language Models (LLMs) have emerged
as a pivotal component [45]. Their ability to understand, generate, and manipulate human language
has opened up new avenues towards advanced machine intelligence. Interestingly, despite being
primarily trained on next-token prediction tasks, LLMs are able to produce much more sophisticated
answers when asked to generate steps of reasoning [30, 58]. This phenomenon, often referred to as
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning, and illustrated on Table 1, appears paradoxical: on the one hand,
LLMs are not explicitly programmed to reason; on the other hand, they are capable of following
logical chains of thoughts to produce relatively complex answers.
Table 1: Chain-of-Thought consists in eliciting reasoning steps before answering (A) a question (Q).

[Q] What is 8 × 8 × 3?
[Q] What is 8 × 8 × 3? Take it step by step.

:
:

[A] 210.
[A] 8 × 8 = 64, 64 × 3 = 192. It is 192.

Recent studies have shown that the class of problems a transformer can solve with single-token
prediction, i.e. by outputting a single token meant to be the correct answer, is rather limited
[24, 54, 15]. In contrast, when transformers are allowed to freely generate tokens before providing a
final answer, they can use those generated tokens as a tape to emulate a form of Turing machine [48].
This enables them to solve a larger class of problems [38, 18, 39, 35]. However, our understanding
of why and how transformers gain CoT abilities when trained with next-token predictions remains
limited. We aim to provide insights on the matter.
Summary of Contributions. We adopt a “mechanistic interpretability” approach [see 17]: we
work with simple, controlled problems and architectures that capture the key aspects of the problem
and allow us to observe and analyze, down to the network’s weights and attention, the emergence of
CoT in our models. In practice:
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

