T IME -FFM: Towards LM-Empowered Federated
Foundation Model for Time Series Forecasting

Qingxiang Liu1,2

Xu Liu3

Chenghao Liu4

Qingsong Wen5

Yuxuan Liang1∗

1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
Institute of Computing Technology Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
National University of Singapore 4 Salesforce AI Research 5 Squirrel AI
qingxiangliu737@gmail.com, liuxu@comp.nus.edu.sg
chenghao.liu@salesforce.com, qingsongedu@gmail.com, yuxliang@outlook.com
2

Abstract
Unlike natural language processing and computer vision, the development of Foundation Models (FMs) for time series forecasting is blocked due to data scarcity.
While recent efforts are focused on building such FMs by unlocking the potential of
language models (LMs) for time series analysis, dedicated parameters for various
downstream forecasting tasks need training, which hinders the common knowledge
sharing across domains. Moreover, data owners may hesitate to share the access to
local data due to privacy concerns and copyright protection, which makes it impossible to simply construct a FM on cross-domain training instances. To address these
issues, we propose T IME -FFM, a Federated Foundation Model for T IME series
forecasting by leveraging pretrained LMs. Specifically, we begin by transforming
time series into the modality of text tokens. To bootstrap LMs for time series
reasoning, we propose a prompt adaption module to determine domain-customized
prompts dynamically instead of artificially. Given the data heterogeneity across
domains, we design a personalized federated training strategy by learning global
encoders and local prediction heads. Our comprehensive experiments indicate
that T IME -FFM outperforms state-of-the-arts and promises effective few-shot
and zero-shot forecaster. The code is available at https://github.com/CityMindLab/NeurIPS24-Time-FFM/tree/main.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting plays an important role in many real-world application domains [1], such as
energy consumption prediction, weather forecasting, and disease transmission. Recently, a multitude
of deep learning models have been designed for time series forecasting based on Convolutional Neural
Networks [2, 3, 4], Recurrent Neural Networks [5, 6], and Transformers [7, 8, 9, 10]. Inspired by
the prominent performance gained by Foundation Models (FMs) in the realms of Natural Language
Processing (NLP) [11, 12, 13, 14] and Computer Vision (CV) [15, 16], great research interests have
been triggered to build pretrained FMs for time series community [17, 18, 19, 20, 21]. Nonetheless,
due to significant time series data scarcity, these FMs are of poor capability to cultivate general
representations, failing to promise remarkable fine-tuning or zero-shot performance for diverse
downstream forecasting tasks [22, 23]. As a result, a collection of methods have been proposed to
borrow the pretrained language FMs to time series community by cross-modality adaption [24, 22, 23],
thus unlocking the tapped potential of language models (LMs) for time series modeling.
∗

Y. Liang is the corresponding author. This work was done when Q. Liu was an intern at HKUST(GZ).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

