Cooperate or Collapse: Emergence of Sustainable
Cooperation in a Society of LLM Agents

Giorgio Piatti1,∗ Zhijing Jin1,2,3,∗ Max Kleiman-Weiner4,∗
Bernhard Schölkopf2 Mrinmaya Sachan1 Rada Mihalcea5
1
ETH Zürich 2 MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
3
University of Toronto 4 University of Washington 5 University of Michigan
piattigi@ethz.ch zjin@cs.toronto.edu maxkw@uw.edu

Abstract
As AI systems pervade human life, ensuring that large language models (LLMs)
make safe decisions remains a significant challenge. We introduce the G OVernance
of the Commons S IMulation (G OV S IM), a generative simulation platform designed
to study strategic interactions and cooperative decision-making in LLMs. In
G OV S IM, a society of AI agents must collectively balance exploiting a common resource with sustaining it for future use. This environment enables the study of how
ethical considerations, strategic planning, and negotiation skills impact cooperative
outcomes. We develop an LLM-based agent architecture and test it with the leading
open and closed LLMs. We find that all but the most powerful LLM agents fail to
achieve a sustainable equilibrium in G OV S IM, with the highest survival rate below
54%. Ablations reveal that successful multi-agent communication between agents
is critical for achieving cooperation in these cases. Furthermore, our analyses show
that the failure to achieve sustainable cooperation in most LLMs stems from their
inability to formulate and analyze hypotheses about the long-term effects of their
actions on the equilibrium of the group. Finally, we show that agents that leverage
“Universalization”-based reasoning, a theory of moral thinking, are able to achieve
significantly better sustainability. Taken together, G OV S IM enables us to study the
mechanisms that underlie sustainable self-government with specificity and scale.
We open source the full suite of our research results, including the simulation
environment, agent prompts, and a comprehensive web interface.1

1

Introduction

Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive abilities across many
tasks [1, 7, 8, 68], and LLMs are being integrated into complex agents [12, 21]. As LLMs become
a central component of these systems, they often inherit critical decision-making responsibilities.
Therefore, an analysis of their ability to operate safely and reliably, especially in contexts where
cooperation is necessary. Multi-agent interaction is a fundamental feature across many scales of
human life. When cooperation between agents (and humans) is possible, better outcomes for all
through joint effort are possible [27, 39, 40, 62]. If AI agents take on complex decision-making roles
in multi-agent contexts, they are likely to face cooperation challenges that are similar to those faced
by people. Thus, we need robust and safe AI that cooperates with us as well as (or better than) we
can cooperate with each other [16].
Despite significant advances in the scale and ability of LLMs, researchers still have only a limited
understanding of their cooperative behavior. Prior multi-agent research has focused on highly
∗
1

Equal contribution.
Our code is available at https://github.com/giorgiopiatti/GovSim.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

