Minimum Entropy Coupling with Bottleneck

M.Reza Ebrahimi
University of Toronto

Jun Chen
McMaster University

Ashish Khisti
University of Toronto

mr.ebrahimi@mail.utoronto.ca

chenjun@mcmaster.ca

akhisti@ece.utoronto.ca

Abstract
This paper investigates a novel lossy compression framework operating under logarithmic loss, designed to handle situations where the reconstruction distribution
diverges from the source distribution. This framework is especially relevant for
applications that require joint compression and retrieval, and in scenarios involving
distributional shifts due to processing. We show that the proposed formulation
extends the classical minimum entropy coupling framework by integrating a bottleneck, allowing for a controlled degree of stochasticity in the coupling. We
explore the decomposition of the Minimum Entropy Coupling with Bottleneck
(MEC-B) into two distinct optimization problems: Entropy-Bounded Information
Maximization (EBIM) for the encoder, and Minimum Entropy Coupling (MEC)
for the decoder. Through extensive analysis, we provide a greedy algorithm for
EBIM with guaranteed performance, and characterize the optimal solution near
functional mappings, yielding significant theoretical insights into the structural
complexity of this problem. Furthermore, we illustrate the practical application
of MEC-B through experiments in Markov Coding Games (MCGs) under rate
limits. These games simulate a communication scenario within a Markov Decision
Process, where an agent must transmit a compressed message from a sender to
a receiver through its actions. Our experiments highlight the trade-offs between
MDP rewards and receiver accuracy across various compression rates, showcasing
the efficacy of our method compared to conventional compression baseline.

1

Introduction

Consider the following Markov Chain modeling a general lossy compression framework
pT |X
qY |T
X −−−→ T −−−→ Y , where the input X with a marginal distribution pX , is encoded by the probabilistic encoder p to generate the code T . Subsequently, the probabilistic decoder q reconstructs Y
from T . The objective is to identify the encoder and decoder that minimize the distortion between X
and Y , subject to an upper bound constraint on the expected code length H(T ) ≤ R.

It is common to measure the sample-wise distortion via direct comparison of (x, y) pairs through a
distortion function d(·, ·), and consider the expectation E [d(X, Y )] as a measure of average distortion.
Instead, we propose using the logarithmic loss (log-loss) H(X|Y ), or equivalently I(X; Y ), as an
alternative metric to enforce the distortion constraint. The log-loss distortion measure, commonly
employed in learning theory, was first explored within rate-distortion theory by Courtade and Wesel
[1] and Courtade and Weissman [2]. This measure is particularly suitable in scenarios where
reconstructions can be soft, meaning that the decoder produces a distribution rather than a distorted

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

