Unveiling User Satisfaction and Creator Productivity
Trade-Offs in Recommendation Platforms
Fan Yao∗
University of Virginia
fy4bc@virginia.edu
Shaoliang Nie
Meta
snie@meta.com

Yiming Liao
Meta
yimingliao@meta.com

Qifan Wang
Meta
wqfcr@meta.com

Jingzhou Liu
Meta
jingzhol@meta.com

Haifeng Xu
University of Chicago
haifengxu@uchicago.edu

Hongning Wang
University of Virginia
hw5x@virginia.edu

Abstract
On User-Generated Content (UGC) platforms, recommendation algorithms significantly impact creators’ motivation to produce content as they compete for
algorithmically allocated user traffic. This phenomenon subtly shapes the volume
and diversity of the content pool, which is crucial for the platform’s sustainability.
In this work, we demonstrate, both theoretically and empirically, that a purely
relevance-driven policy with low exploration strength boosts short-term user satisfaction but undermines the long-term richness of the content pool. In contrast,
a more aggressive exploration policy may slightly compromise user satisfaction
but promote higher content creation volume. Our findings reveal a fundamental
trade-off between immediate user satisfaction and overall content production on
UGC platforms. Building on this finding, we propose an efficient optimization
method to identify the optimal exploration strength, balancing user and creator
engagement. Our model can serve as a pre-deployment audit tool for recommendation algorithms on UGC platforms, helping to align their immediate objectives
with sustainable, long-term goals.

1

Introduction

User-generated content (UGC) platforms have become an indispensable component of our daily lives
[5, 45]. Those platforms, including various social media (e.g., Facebook, Instagram), streaming
services (e.g., YouTube, TikTok) and many more, count on algorithmic recommendation algorithms
[36, 5] to help content consumers (i.e., users) navigate the vast ocean of content generated by creators.
Unlike other content recommendation platforms such as Netflix and Spotify, user experience on UGC
platforms critically relies on the active participation of creators [58], as the goal of enhancing user
engagement is inherently linked to the abundancy and diversity of the content pool.
Recent studies have begun to explore how a platform’s algorithmic decisions, such as their employed
recommendation algorithms and revenue sharing agreements, might influence the behavior of content
creators and subsequently affect user welfare [52, 54, 55, 34, 30, 33, 32, 43]. A common technique
used in these works is to model the competition among creators who strive to establish their brand and
comparative advantages by selecting topics that maximize the traffic or rewards from the platform.
While these competition models offer valuable insights into how platforms’ interventions could
lead to suboptimal outcomes in terms of content diversity and issues related to popularity bias, they
ignore the dimension of content creation volume — an equally critical aspect of such competition
∗

Research conducted during an internship at Meta. Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

