CODA: A Correlation-Oriented Disentanglement and
Augmentation Modeling Scheme for Better Resisting
Subpopulation Shifts

Ziquan OU
Department of Data Science
City University of Hong Kong
ziquanou2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk

Zijun ZHANG∗
Department of Data Science
City University of Hong Kong
zijzhang@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Data-driven models learned often struggle to generalize due to widespread subpopulation shifts, especially the presence of both spurious correlations and group imbalance (SC-GI). To learn models more powerful for defending against SC-GI, we propose a Correlation-Oriented Disentanglement and Augmentation (CODA) modeling scheme, which includes two unique developments: (1) correlation-oriented
disentanglement and (2) strategic sample augmentation with reweighted consistency (RWC) loss. In (1), a bi-branch encoding process is developed to enable the
disentangling of variant and invariant correlations by coordinating with a decoy
classifier and the decoder reconstruction. In (2), a strategic sample augmentation
based on disentangled latent features with RWC loss is designed to reinforce the
training of a more generalizable model. The effectiveness of CODA is verified by
benchmarking against a set of SOTA models in terms of worst-group accuracy and
maximum group accuracy gap based on two famous datasets, ColoredMNIST and
CelebA.

1

Introduction

One grand challenge that impedes the generalization of machine learning models is ’Subpopulation
shifts’, the alterations in the relative proportions of subpopulations between training and testing
datasets [19]. In reality, one frequently encountered scenario is that specific groups in data are
underrepresented, which we tag as the group imbalance (GI), contributed by class imbalance (CI),
attribute imbalance (AI), or their combination [29, 15]. Due to GI, models trained to minimize
average loss tend to favor the majority groups and thus fail to generalize across minority groups [25].
Another widely discussed issue in subpopulation shifts is the spurious correlations (SC), the incidental
correlations between non-causal features and labels during training time that do not hold in the real
world. SC can significantly compromise the efficacy of a model [1] and has been observed in various
applications, such as speech recognition [10], medical imaging [27], object recognition [25, 8], image
captioning [7], etc. For instance, object recognition models that classify animal species have been
shown to generalize poorly to new environments since their classifications mistakenly favor image
backgrounds over biological characteristics of animals [2, 28]. Learning such correlations can result
in degraded performance on data breaking these spurious patterns, e.g., when animals are moved
indoors or to an uncommon context, such as cows on a beach instead of in a pasture.
Prior research has extensively explored the developments of robust models performing uniformly well
across subpopulations. Reported studies have varied from attempts of developing models without
∗

Correspondence Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

