The motion planning neural circuit in goal-directed
navigation as Lie group operator search

Junfeng Zuo1,3
zuojunfeng@pku.edu.cn
Si Wu1
siwu@pku.edu.cn

Ying Nian Wu2
ywu@stat.ucla.edu
Wen-Hao Zhang3,4∗
wenhao.zhang@utsouthwestern.edu

1

Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies,
School of Psychology and Cognitive Sciences, IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research,
Center of Quantitative Biology, Peking University.
2
Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles.
3
Lyda Hill Department of Bioinformatics, UT Southwestern Medical Center.
4
O’Donnell Brain Institute, UT Southwestern Medical Center.

Abstract
The information processing in the brain and embodied agents form a sensory-action
loop to interact with the world. An important step in the loop is motion planning
which selects motor actions based on the current world state and task need. In
goal-directed navigation, the brain chooses and generates motor actions to bring
the current state into the goal state. It is unclear about the neural circuit mechanism
of motor action selection, nor its underlying theory. The present study formulates
the motion planning as a Lie group operator search problem, and uses the 1D
rotation group as an example to provide insight into general operator search in
neural circuits. We found the abstract group operator search can be implemented
by a two-layer feedforward circuit utilizing circuit motifs of connection phase shift,
nonlinear activation function, and pooling, similar to Drosophila’s goal-directed
navigation neural circuits. And the computational complexity of the feedforward
circuit can be even lower than common signal processing algorithms in certain
conditions. We also provide geometric interpretations of circuit computation in
the group representation space. The feedforward motion planning circuit is further
combined with sensory and motor circuit modules into a full circuit of the sensoryaction loop implementing goal-directed navigation. Our work for the first time
links the abstract operator search with biological neural circuits.

1

Introduction

The information processing in the brain forms a sensory-action loop to interact with the external world
(Fig. 1A) [1–3]. The sensory-action loop consists of three modules: the sensory neural circuit module
forms a neural representation of the world state, the motor circuit module produces motor actions to
change the world states, and in between there is an essential sensorimotor transformation module that
plans motor actions based on the sensory input and tasks goals [4, 5]. For example, in goal-directed
navigation tasks, the sensorimotor transformation module plans a sequence of motor actions to bring
the current sensory state towards a goal state. Extensive neuroscience studies have investigated the
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

