MKGL: Mastery of a Three-Word Language
Lingbing Guo1,2 , Zhongpu Bo3 , Zhuo Chen1,2 , Yichi Zhang1,2 , Jiaoyan Chen4 ,
Yarong Lan1,2 , Mengshu Sun3 , Zhiqiang Zhang3 , Yangyifei Luo5 , Qian Li6 ,
Qiang Zhang1,2 , Wen Zhang7,2∗ and Huajun Chen1,2∗
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
ZJU-Ant Group Joint Lab of Knowledge Graph
3
Ant Group
4
Department of Computer Science, The University of Manchester
5
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
6
School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
7
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have significantly advanced performance across
a spectrum of natural language processing (NLP) tasks. Yet, their application to
knowledge graphs (KGs), which describe facts in the form of triplets and allow
minimal hallucinations, remains an underexplored frontier. In this paper, we
investigate the integration of LLMs with KGs by introducing a specialized KG
Language (KGL), where a sentence precisely consists of an entity noun, a relation
verb, and ends with another entity noun. Despite KGL’s unfamiliar vocabulary to
the LLM, we facilitate its learning through a tailored dictionary and illustrative
sentences, and enhance context understanding via real-time KG context retrieval
and KGL token embedding augmentation. Our results reveal that LLMs can
achieve fluency in KGL, drastically reducing errors compared to conventional KG
embedding methods on KG completion. Furthermore, our enhanced LLM shows
exceptional competence in generating accurate three-word sentences from an initial
entity and interpreting new unseen terms out of KGs.

1

Introduction

Knowledge graphs (KGs) are important resources for many data-driven applications, offering structured repositories of factual information that empower a variety of intelligent tasks [1, 2]. Yet, the
strides made through the rapid advancement of large language models (LLMs) have challenged the
conventional reliance on KGs. Nonetheless, LLMs are often critiqued for their susceptibility to
generating factually incorrect or nonsensical outputs–a phenomenon known as the “hallucination
problem” [3, 4]. Many recent studies propose to resort KGs to mitigate this problem [5–8].
In this paper, we investigate the capacity of LLMs to assimilate and generate knowledge graph facts
proficiently. For example, the natural language sentence, “Wendee Lee is an actor in Mighty Morphin
Power Rangers,” translates into a KG triplet format as (Wendee Lee, actor of, Mighty Morphin Power
Rangers). It is worth noting that, English names such as Wendee Lee and Mighty Morphin Power
Rangers, while can serve as identifiers for entities, are perceived as atomic elements within the KG
framework. They are indivisible and distinct from their constituent words or characters.
When the LLMs interpret these text identifiers as mere sequences of tokens, they risk producing
output that misrepresents entities or relations, therefore compromising the integrity of KG-based
tasks. Consequently, existing research that integrates LLMs with KGs tends to limit its scope to
relatively straightforward tasks. Examples of these limitations include validating the correctness of
∗

Correspondence to: {zhang.wen, huajunsir}@zju.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

