Regularized Conditional Diffusion Model for
Multi-Task Preference Alignment

Xudong Yu
Harbin Institute of Technology
hit20byu@gmail.com

Chenjia Bai∗
Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom
baicj@chinatelecom.cn

Haoran He
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
haoran.he@connect.ust.hk

Changhong Wang
Harbin Institute of Technology
cwang@hit.edu.cn

Xuelong Li
Institue of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI), China Telecom
xuelong_li@ieee.org

Abstract
Sequential decision-making can be formulated as a conditional generation process,
with targets for alignment with human intents and versatility across various tasks.
Previous return-conditioned diffusion models manifest comparable performance
but rely on well-defined reward functions, which requires amounts of human efforts
and faces challenges in multi-task settings. Preferences serve as an alternative
but recent work rarely considers preference learning given multiple tasks. To
facilitate the alignment and versatility in multi-task preference learning, we adopt
multi-task preferences as a unified framework. In this work, we propose to learn
preference representations aligned with preference labels, which are then used as
conditions to guide the conditional generation process of diffusion models. The traditional classifier-free guidance paradigm suffers from the inconsistency between
the conditions and generated trajectories. We thus introduce an auxiliary regularization objective to maximize the mutual information between conditions and
corresponding generated trajectories, improving their alignment with preferences.
Experiments in D4RL and Meta-World demonstrate the effectiveness and favorable
performance of our method in single- and multi-task scenarios.

1

Introduction

In sequential decision-making, agents are trained to accomplish fixed or varied human-designed
goals by interacting with the environment or learning from offline data. Two key objectives emerge
during training: alignment, wherein agents are expected to take actions conforming to human intents
expressed as crafted rewards or preferences, and versatility, denoting the capacity to tackle multiple
tasks and generalize to unseen tasks. A promising avenue involves framing sequential decisionmaking as a sequence modeling problem via transformer [1] or diffusion models [2, 3]. This paradigm
uses expressive models to capture the trajectory distributions and prevents unstable value estimation
in conventional offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods [4]. Particularly, utilizing returnconditioned or value-guided diffusion models to perform planning or trajectory generation achieves
favorable performance in offline RL [5, 6] and the multi-task variant [7, 8].
∗

Correspondence to: Chenjia Bai (baicj@chinatelecom.cn).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

