Disentangled Unsupervised Skill Discovery
for Efficient Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning

Jiaheng Hu
University of Texas at Austin
jiahengh@utexas.edu

Zizhao Wang
University of Texas at Austin
zizhao.wang@utexas.edu

Peter Stone†
University of Texas at Austin, Sony AI
pstone@cs.utexas.edu

Roberto Martín-Martín†
University of Texas at Austin
robertomm@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
A hallmark of intelligent agents is the ability to learn reusable skills purely from
unsupervised interaction with the environment. However, existing unsupervised
skill discovery methods often learn entangled skills where one skill variable simultaneously influences many entities in the environment, making downstream
skill chaining extremely challenging. We propose Disentangled Unsupervised
Skill Discovery (DUSDi), a method for learning disentangled skills that can be
efficiently reused to solve downstream tasks. DUSDi decomposes skills into disentangled components, where each skill component only affects one factor of the
state space. Importantly, these skill components can be concurrently composed
to generate low-level actions, and efficiently chained to tackle downstream tasks
through hierarchical Reinforcement Learning. DUSDi defines a novel mutualinformation-based objective to enforce disentanglement between the influences of
different skill components, and utilizes value factorization to optimize this objective
efficiently. Evaluated in a set of challenging environments, DUSDi successfully
learns disentangled skills, and significantly outperforms previous skill discovery
methods when it comes to applying the learned skills to solve downstream tasks.
Code and skills visualization at jiahenghu.github.io/DUSDi-site/.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have achieved many successes in challenging tasks, including
magnetic plasma control [11], automobile racing [54], and robotics [47]. However, applying existing
RL algorithms to every new task in a tabula rasa manner often results in low sample efficiency that
limits RL’s broader applicability [18]. Unsupervised skill discovery holds the promise of improving
the sample efficiency of Reinforcement Learning, by learning a set of reusable skills through rewardfree interaction with the environment that can be later recombined to tackle multiple downstream tasks
more efficiently. In practice, prior unsupervised RL skills are represented as a policy that conditions
on a skill variable to generate diverse behaviors, and have led to successful and efficient learning of
downstream tasks when combined with skill fine-tuning or hierarchical RL skill selection [13, 24, 58].
Despite prior successes, a common limitation of the skills learned by existing unsupervised RL
methods is that they are entangled: any change in the skill variable causes the agent to induce changes
in multiple dimensions of the state space simultaneously. Learning to use and recombine these
entangled skills can be extremely hard for an agent trying to solve downstream tasks, especially in
†

Equal supervision.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

