Not Just Object, But State: Compositional
Incremental Learning without Forgetting

1

Yanyi Zhang 1 , Binglin Qiu 1 , Qi Jia 1 , Yu Liu ∗1 , Ran He 2
International School of Information Science & Engineering, Dalian University of Technology
2
MAIS&CRIPAC, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
yanyi.zhang@mail.dlut.edu.cn, m1andy@mail.dlut.edu.cn
jiaqi@dlut.edu.cn, liuyu8824@dlut.edu.cn, rhe@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Most incremental learners excessively prioritize coarse classes of objects while
neglecting various kinds of states (e.g. color and material) attached to the objects.
As a result, they are limited in the ability to reason fine-grained compositionality
of state-object pairs. To remedy this limitation, we propose a novel task called
Compositional Incremental Learning (composition-IL), enabling the model to
recognize state-object compositions as a whole in an incremental learning fashion. Since the lack of suitable benchmarks, we re-organize two existing datasets
and make them tailored for composition-IL. Then, we propose a prompt-based
Composition Incremental Learner (CompILer), to overcome the ambiguous composition boundary problem which challenges composition-IL largely. Specifically,
we exploit multi-pool prompt learning, which is regularized by inter-pool prompt
discrepancy and intra-pool prompt diversity. Besides, we devise object-injected
state prompting by using object prompts to guide the selection of state prompts.
Furthermore, we fuse the selected prompts by a generalized-mean strategy, to
eliminate irrelevant information learned in the prompts. Extensive experiments on
two datasets exhibit state-of-the-art performance achieved by CompILer. Code and
datasets are available at: https://github.com/Yanyi-Zhang/CompILer.

1

Introduction

Class Incremental Learning (class-IL) [37, 22, 16, 10] gathers increasing attention due to its ability
to make the models learn new tasks rapidly, without forgetting previously acquired knowledge. Yet,
traditional class-IL sets a strict limit on the old classes such that they should not recur in newly
incoming tasks. To break such a strict limitation, recent studies develop a new setting mostly called
Blurry Incremental Learning (blur-IL) [24, 11], where the incremental sessions allow the recurrence
of previous classes, resulting in a more realistic and flexible scenario. Despite such empirical
progresses on incremental learning, they aim to improve object classification only, while overlooking
fine-grained states attached to the objects. For instance, analyzing how the clothing styles (akin to
states) have changed over time is important for forecasting the future trends that will emerge.
To simultaneously model objects and their states, some efforts are dedicated to Compositional
Learning whose aim is how to equip the models with compositionality [4, 31, 45]. The core of
compositional learning lies in the structure of class labels, which conceptualizes a state-object pair
(e.g. “Brown Pants” and “Yellow Dress”) as a whole, rather than a lonely object label. In this way, the
model can dissect and reassemble learned knowledge, achieving a more fine-grained understanding
about the objects. However, existing works are mainly focused on zero-shot generalization from seen
∗

corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

