ROIDICE: Offline Return on Investment
Maximization for Efficient Decision Making
Woosung Kim1∗

Hayeong Lee1∗

Jongmin Lee2†

Byung-Jun Lee1,3†

1
Korea University 2 UC Berkeley 3 Gauss Labs Inc.
{wsk208,hayeong_lee,byungjunlee}@korea.ac.kr
jongmin.lee@berkeley.edu
∗
Equal contribution † Corresponding authors

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel policy optimization framework that maximizes
Return on Investment (ROI) of a policy using a fixed dataset within a Markov
Decision Process (MDP) equipped with a cost function. ROI, defined as the ratio
between the return and the accumulated cost of a policy, serves as a measure of
the efficiency of the policy. Despite the importance of maximizing ROI in various
applications, it remains a challenging problem due to its nature as a ratio of two
long-term values: return and accumulated cost. To address this, we formulate the
ROI maximizing reinforcement learning problem as linear fractional programming.
We then incorporate the stationary distribution correction (DICE) framework to
develop a practical offline ROI maximization algorithm. Our proposed algorithm,
ROIDICE, yields an efficient policy that offers a superior trade-off between return
and accumulated cost compared to policies trained using existing frameworks.

1

Introduction

In economics, Return on Investment (ROI) is a financial metric used to evaluate the profitability
of an investment relative to its cost. The concept of ROI originates from the work of [5] and is
widely regarded as a valuable metric by the majority of marketing managers [4]. ROI is calculated
by dividing the profit generated from the investment by the cost of the investment, and it is a key
indicator for evaluating the efficiency and effectiveness of various economic decisions and strategies
[17]. Maximizing ROI is crucial as a decision with a high ROI yields a higher return at a relatively
lower cost.
While ROI is a compelling metric for optimization, ROI maximization for decision making has not
been actively explored within the field of machine learning. Previous studies on ROI maximization [3]
have focused on multi-armed bandit scenarios, where reward and cost are immediately accessible
following a decision. When it comes to sequential decision-making setups like the Markov Decision
Process (MDP) that additionally considers a cost function, optimizing a sequence of decisions or a
policy to maximize the ratio between return and accumulated cost becomes far more challenging
and remains mostly unexplored. This optimization contains two major difficulties: the fractional
relationship between the return and accumulated cost of a policy, and the fact that both are longterm quantities collected after a sequence of decisions or actions of the agent. The issues make
ROI maximization via existing policy optimization techniques not straightforward, as it includes
computing the gradient of the ratio between the two expected values.
For effective optimization of ROI, we refer to the dual formulation of V-LP [16], which represents
policy optimization in reinforcement learning (RL) as linear programming in terms of the stationary
distribution. The stationary distribution of a policy is the discounted sum of probabilities of the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

