Robust Mixture Learning when
Outliers Overwhelm Small Groups
Daniil Dmitriev1∗

Rares-Darius Buhai1∗

Gleb Novikov3
3

Amartya Sanyal4

Stefan Tiegel1

Alexander Wolters2

David Steurer1

Fanny Yang1

1
ETH Zurich 2 TU Munich
Lucerne School of Computer Science and Information Technology
∗
Equal contribution

4

University of Copenhagen

Abstract
We study the problem of estimating the means of well-separated mixtures when
an adversary may add arbitrary outliers. While strong guarantees are available
when the outlier fraction is significantly smaller than the minimum mixing weight,
much less is known when outliers may crowd out low-weight clusters – a setting
we refer to as list-decodable mixture learning (LD-ML). In this case, adversarial
outliers can simulate additional spurious mixture components. Hence, if all means
of the mixture must be recovered up to a small error in the output list, the list size
needs to be larger than the number of (true) components. We propose an algorithm
that obtains order-optimal error guarantees for each mixture mean with a minimal
list-size overhead, significantly improving upon list-decodable mean estimation,
the only existing method that is applicable for LD-ML. Although improvements
are observed even when the mixture is non-separated, our algorithm achieves
particularly strong guarantees when the mixture is separated: it can leverage the
mixture structure to partially cluster the samples before carefully iterating a base
learner for list-decodable mean estimation at different scales.

1

Introduction

Estimating the mean of a distribution from empirical data is one of the most fundamental problems in
statistics. The mean often serves as the primary summary statistic of the dataset or is the ultimate
quantity of interest that is often not precisely measurable. In practical applications, data frequently
originates from a mixture of multiple groups (also called subpopulations) and a natural goal is to
estimate the distinct means of each group separately. For example, we might like to use representative
individuals to study how a complex decision or procedure would impact different subpopulations. In
other applications, such as genetics [1] or astronomy [2] research, finding the means themselves can
be a crucial first step towards scientific discovery. In both scenarios, the algorithm should output a
list of estimates that are close to the unobservable true means.
However, in practice, the data may also contain outliers, for example due to measurement errors or
abnormal events. We would like to find good mean estimates for all inlier groups even when the
proportion of such additive adversarial contaminations is larger than some smaller groups that we
want to properly represent. The central open question that motivates our work is thus:
What is the cost of efficiently recovering small groups that may be outnumbered by outliers?
More specifically, consider a scenario where the practitioner would like to recover the means of
small but significant enough inlier groups which constitute at least wlow ∈ (0, 1) proportion of the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

