A hierarchical decomposition for explaining ML
performance discrepancies

Harvineet Singh1

Fan Xia1

Adarsh Subbaswamy2

Alexej Gossmann2

Jean Feng1∗

1

2

University of California, San Francisco
U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Center for Devices and Radiological Health

Abstract
Machine learning (ML) algorithms can often differ in performance across domains.
Understanding why their performance differs is crucial for determining what types
of interventions (e.g., algorithmic or operational) are most effective at closing
the performance gaps. Aggregate decompositions express the total performance
gap as the gap due to a shift in the feature distribution p(X) plus the gap due
to a shift in the outcome’s conditional distribution p(Y |X). While this coarse
explanation is helpful for guiding root cause analyses, it provides limited details
and can only suggest coarse fixes involving all variables in an ML system. Detailed decompositions quantify the importance of each variable to each term in the
aggregate decomposition, which can provide a deeper understanding and suggest
more targeted interventions. Although parametric methods exist for conducting a
full hierarchical decomposition of an algorithm’s performance gap at the aggregate
and detailed levels, current nonparametric methods only cover parts of the hierarchy; many also require knowledge of the entire causal graph. We introduce a
nonparametric hierarchical framework for explaining why the performance of an
ML algorithm differs across domains, without requiring causal knowledge. Furthermore, we derive debiased, computationally-efficient estimators and statistical
inference procedures to construct confidence intervals for the explanations.

1

Introduction

The performance of an ML algorithm can differ across domains due to shifts in the data distribution.
Understanding what contributed to this performance gap can help teams choose the most effective
corrective action(s), ranging from algorithmic modifications (e.g. model retraining) to operational
fixes (e.g. updating data pipelines). Prior works have focused primarily on aggregate decompositions,
which decompose the performance gap into that due to a shift in the marginal distribution of the
input features p(X) (covariate shift [37]) and that due to a shift in the conditional distribution of the
outcome p(Y |X) (concept shift or conditional outcome shift) [5, 50, 30, 36, 16]. However, coarse
decompositions can only suggest coarse corrective actions, such as investigating data pipelines for
all features. The goal of this work is to provide a hierarchical nonparametric framework that first
decomposes a performance gap into aggregate terms and then each aggregate term into detailed terms.
This helps narrow down the features to investigate and understand how they affect the gap.
If one is willing to make the strong assumption that the expected loss of a model is a linear function
of some feature set X, the problem of obtaining aggregate and detailed decompositions drastically
simplifies. This is the key assumption underlying the Oaxaca-Blinder (OB) decomposition, one of the
most widely used frameworks in the (income and health) disparities literature [32, 3]. Given an ML
∗

Corresponding author: jean.feng@ucsf.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

