CryoBench: Diverse and challenging datasets for the
heterogeneity problem in cryo-EM
Minkyu Jeon1 , Rishwanth Raghu1 , Miro Astore2,3 , Geoffrey Woollard2,3,4 , Ryan Feathers1 ,
Alkin Kaz1 , Sonya M. Hanson2,3 , Pilar Cossio2,3 , and Ellen D. Zhong1
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA
Center for Computational Biology,3 Center for Computational Mathematics, Flatiron Institute, New
York, NY, USA
4
Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada

Abstract
Cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) is a powerful technique for determining
high-resolution 3D biomolecular structures from imaging data. Its unique ability to
capture structural variability has spurred the development of heterogeneous reconstruction algorithms that can infer distributions of 3D structures from noisy, unlabeled imaging data. Despite the growing number of advanced methods, progress
in the field is hindered by the lack of standardized benchmarks with ground truth
information and reliable validation metrics. Here, we introduce CryoBench, a suite
of datasets, metrics, and benchmarks for heterogeneous reconstruction in cryo-EM.
CryoBench includes five datasets representing different sources of heterogeneity
and degrees of difficulty. These include conformational heterogeneity generated
from designed motions of antibody complexes or sampled from a molecular dynamics simulation, as well as compositional heterogeneity from mixtures of ribosome
assembly states or 100 common complexes present in cells. We then analyze stateof-the-art heterogeneous reconstruction tools, including neural and non-neural
methods, assess their sensitivity to noise, and propose new metrics for quantitative
evaluation. We hope that CryoBench will be a foundational resource for accelerating algorithmic development and evaluation in the cryo-EM and machine learning
communities. Project page: https://cryobench.cs.princeton.edu.

1

Introduction

Single particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) is a widely used imaging technique for visualizing biomolecular complexes at near-atomic resolution. A major challenge in cryo-EM structure
determination is the task of reconstructing 3D density maps from an experimentally-derived dataset
of 2D images [1]. These images characteristically exhibit extremely low signal-to-noise ratios (SNR),
with unknown poses (3D orientations and 2D translations) of individual images, and there is often heterogeneity in both conformational and compositional aspects of the target protein complex (Fig. 1a).
Despite these challenges, cryo-EM holds significant promise due to its ability to capture structural
heterogeneity of intrinsic biological interest, which is typically inaccessible to structure prediction
tools such as AlphaFold [2, 3]. Consequently, numerous heterogeneous reconstruction methods have
been proposed in recent years to address these challenges [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10].
Several state-of-the-art heterogeneous reconstruction methods leverage deep learning to capture
the structural heterogeneity through a continuous latent variable, allowing structural changes to be
represented as trajectories on a manifold [11, 12]. However, current research on heterogeneous
reconstruction methods has two main limitations: 1) the absence of common benchmarks comparable
to MNIST [13] or ImageNet [14] in computer vision that drove tremendous progress for the field and
2) the lack of metrics suitable for evaluation and comparison of methods.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

