UNIT: Unifying Image and Text Recognition in One
Vision Encoder
Yi Zhu1 , Yanpeng Zhou1 , Chunwei Wang1 , Yang Cao2 , Jianhua Han1 , Lu Hou1 , Hang Xu1
1

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
https://github.com/yeezhu/UNIT.

Abstract
Currently, vision encoder models like Vision Transformers (ViTs) typically excel
at image recognition tasks but cannot simultaneously support text recognition like
human visual recognition. To address this limitation, we propose UNIT, a novel
training framework aimed at UNifying Image and Text recognition within a single
model. Starting with a vision encoder pre-trained with image recognition tasks,
UNIT introduces a lightweight language decoder for predicting text outputs and a
lightweight vision decoder to prevent catastrophic forgetting of the original image
encoding capabilities. The training process comprises two stages: intra-scale
pretraining and inter-scale finetuning. During intra-scale pretraining, UNIT learns
unified representations from multi-scale inputs, where images and documents are
at their commonly used resolution, to enable fundamental recognition capability.
In the inter-scale finetuning stage, the model introduces scale-exchanged data,
featuring images and documents at resolutions different from the most commonly
used ones, to enhance its scale robustness. Notably, UNIT retains the original vision
encoder architecture, making it cost-free in terms of inference and deployment.
Experiments across multiple benchmarks confirm that our method significantly
outperforms existing methods on document-related tasks (e.g., OCR and DocQA)
while maintaining the performances on natural images, demonstrating its ability
to substantially enhance text recognition without compromising its core image
recognition capabilities.

1

Introduction

Vision encoder models [6, 43, 44, 53, 41, 24] are crucial for extracting high-level visual features,
thereby enhancing performance across a range of downstream tasks [9, 38, 8, 14, 57]. They play a
vital role in integrating visual information into intelligent applications, driving advancements in both
computer vision and artificial intelligence. In recent years, Vision Transformers (ViTs)based encoder
models [16, 66, 27, 58, 71] have revolutionized the field of computer vision. ViT models pretrained
on image classification tasks are extensively used as backbones for a wide array of image recognition
tasks and achieves state-of-the-art performances. Another line of remarkable ViT models are trained
via image-text cross-modal contrastive learning [43, 64, 52, 67]. These models are often used as
plug-in vision encoders in Large-scale Vision-Language Models (LVLMs), which have emerged as
versatile tools with the potential to revolutionize various domains, including healthcare diagnostics,
autonomous driving, digital assistants, and advanced content analysis in media and entertainment.
Despite these advancements, existing vision encoder models, exhibit a significant limitation: they
have not yet demonstrated the capability to simultaneously support both image and text recognition
like humans do. Such ability is essential for document analysis applications, for instance, a model
must accurately recognize and interpret textual information embedded within complex layouts, such
as tables, graphs, and mixed media.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

