BAM! Just Like That: Simple and Efficient Parameter
Upcycling for Mixture of Experts

Qizhen Zhang1† Nikolas Gritsch2,3 Dwaraknath Gnaneshwar2 Simon Guo4†
David Cairuz2 Bharat Venkitesh2 Jakob Foerster1 Phil Blunsom1,2
Sebastian Ruder2 Ahmet Üstün3∗ Acyr Locatelli2∗
1
University of Oxford 2 Cohere 3 Cohere For AI 4 Stanford University

Abstract
The Mixture of Experts (MoE) framework has become a popular architecture
for large language models due to its superior performance over dense models.
However, training MoEs from scratch in a large-scale regime is prohibitively
expensive. Existing methods mitigate this by pre-training multiple dense expert
models independently and using them to initialize an MoE. This is done by using
experts’ feed-forward network (FFN) to initialize the MoE’s experts while merging
other parameters. However, this method limits the reuse of dense model parameters
to only the FFN layers, thereby constraining the advantages when "upcycling" these
models into MoEs. We propose BAM (Branch-Attend-Mix), a simple yet effective
method that addresses this shortcoming. BAM makes full use of specialized dense
models by not only using their FFN to initialize the MoE layers but also leveraging
experts’ attention parameters fully by initializing them into a soft-variant of Mixture
of Attention (MoA) layers. We explore two methods for upcycling attention
parameters: 1) initializing separate attention experts from dense models including
all attention parameters for the best model performance; and 2) sharing key and
value parameters across all experts to facilitate for better inference efficiency. To
further improve efficiency, we adopt a parallel attention transformer architecture
to MoEs, which allows the attention experts and FFN experts to be computed
concurrently. Our experiments on seed models ranging from 590 million to 2
billion parameters demonstrate that BAM surpasses baselines in both perplexity and
downstream task performance, within the same computational and data constraints.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance across a wide range of
tasks [2–4]. Often, LLMs use a dense architecture, where models apply all parameters to every input
during training and inference [2, 3]. Consequently, increasing model capacity results in increased
computational cost. An empirical finding in the scaling laws of LLMs [5] indicates that model
performance scales with model capacity. However, naively increasing model size to achieve predicted
improvements is challenging due to 1) increased hardware requirements and associated costs; and 2)
greater training instabilities such as gradient spikes during large-scale training runs [6]. Mixture of
Experts [MoEs; 7–9] have emerged as a popular solution to these issues [10–12]. During training and
inference, each input activates only a subset of the model parameters (often referred to as experts),
thereby decoupling computation cost from the total parameter count, allowing the total number of
*
†

Equal Mentorship
Work done at Cohere
Corresponding authors: qizhen.zhang@eng.ox.ac.uk, {ahmet, acyr}@cohere.ai

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

