Nonparametric Instrumental Variable Regression
through Stochastic Approximate Gradients

Yuri R. Fonseca∗
Decision, Risk and Operations
Columbia University
New York, NY
yfonseca23@gsb.columbia.edu

Caio F. L. Peixoto∗
School of Applied Mathematics
Getulio Vargas Foundation
Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil
caio.peixoto@fgv.br

Yuri F. Saporito∗
School of Applied Mathematics
Getulio Vargas Foundation
Rio de Janeiro, RJ
yuri.saporito@fgv.br

Abstract
Instrumental variables (IVs) provide a powerful strategy for identifying causal
effects in the presence of unobservable confounders. Within the nonparametric
setting (NPIV), recent methods have been based on nonlinear generalizations of
Two-Stage Least Squares and on minimax formulations derived from moment
conditions or duality. In a novel direction, we show how to formulate a functional
stochastic gradient descent algorithm to tackle NPIV regression by directly minimizing the populational risk. We provide theoretical support in the form of bounds
on the excess risk, and conduct numerical experiments showcasing our method’s
superior stability and competitive performance relative to current state-of-the-art
alternatives. This algorithm enables flexible estimator choices, such as neural
networks or kernel based methods, as well as non-quadratic loss functions, which
may be suitable for structural equations beyond the setting of continuous outcomes
and additive noise. Finally, we demonstrate this flexibility of our framework by
presenting how it naturally addresses the important case of binary outcomes, which
has received far less attention by recent developments in the NPIV literature.

1

Introduction

Causal inference from observational data presents unique challenges, primarily due to the potential for
confounding variables that can affect both outcomes and variables of interest. The unconfoundedness
assumption, crucial in this context, posits that all confounding variables are observed and properly
accounted for, allowing for an unbiased estimation of causal effects. However, in many real-world
scenarios, this assumption is difficult to satisfy. When this is the case, approaches that rely on
instrumental variables (IVs) — quantities that are correlated with the variable of interest (relevance
condition), do not affect the outcome in any other way (exclusion condition) and are independent
of the unobservable confounders — offer a way to identify causal effects even when unobserved
confounders exist. As a concrete example, suppose we want to estimate the impact of years of
education on earnings. Most likely, there are unobservable factors, such as omitted ability, affecting
both the decision to study and income. In this case, changes in compulsory schooling laws could be
used as an instrument [2].
∗

Alphabetical order.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

