Improving robustness to corruptions with
multiplicative weight perturbations

Trung Trinh1
Markus Heinonen1
Luigi Acerbi2
Samuel Kaski1,3
1
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki, Finland
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester, United Kingdom
{trung.trinh, markus.o.heinonen, samuel.kaski}@aalto.fi,
luigi.acerbi@helsinki.fi

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) excel on clean images but struggle with corrupted
ones. Incorporating specific corruptions into the data augmentation pipeline can improve robustness to those corruptions but may harm performance on clean images
and other types of distortion. In this paper, we introduce an alternative approach that
improves the robustness of DNNs to a wide range of corruptions without compromising accuracy on clean images. We first demonstrate that input perturbations can
be mimicked by multiplicative perturbations in the weight space. Leveraging this,
we propose Data Augmentation via Multiplicative Perturbation (DAMP), a training
method that optimizes DNNs under random multiplicative weight perturbations.
We also examine the recently proposed Adaptive Sharpness-Aware Minimization
(ASAM) and show that it optimizes DNNs under adversarial multiplicative weight
perturbations. Experiments on image classification datasets (CIFAR-10/100, TinyImageNet and ImageNet) and neural network architectures (ResNet50, ViT-S/16,
ViT-B/16) show that DAMP enhances model generalization performance in the
presence of corruptions across different settings. Notably, DAMP is able to train a
ViT-S/16 on ImageNet from scratch, reaching the top-1 error of 23.7% which is
comparable to ResNet50 without extensive data augmentations.1

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) demonstrate impressive accuracy in computer vision tasks when
evaluated on carefully curated and clean datasets. However, their performance significantly declines
when test images are affected by natural distortions such as camera noise, changes in lighting and
weather conditions, or image compression algorithms (Hendrycks and Dietterich, 2019). This drop in
performance is problematic in production settings, where models inevitably encounter such perturbed
inputs. Therefore, it is crucial to develop methods that produce reliable DNNs robust to common
image corruptions, particularly for deployment in safety-critical systems (Amodei et al., 2016).
To enhance robustness against a specific corruption, one could simply include it in the data augmentation pipeline during training. However, this approach can diminish performance on clean
images and reduce robustness to other types of corruptions (Geirhos et al., 2018). More advanced
data augmentation techniques (Cubuk et al., 2018; Hendrycks et al., 2019; Lopes et al., 2019) have
been developed which effectively enhance corruption robustness without compromising accuracy
on clean images. Nonetheless, a recent study by Mintun et al. (2021) has identified a new set of
image corruptions to which models trained with these techniques remain vulnerable. Besides data
1

Our code is available at https://github.com/trungtrinh44/DAMP

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

