Relational Verification Leaps Forward with RABBit

Tarun Suresh1∗ Debangshu Banerjee1∗ Gagandeep Singh1,2
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 2 VMware Research
{tsuresh3, db21, ggnds}@illinois.edu

1

Abstract
We propose RABBit, a Branch-and-Bound-based verifier for verifying relational
properties defined over Deep Neural Networks, such as robustness against universal
adversarial perturbations (UAP). Existing SOTA complete L∞ -robustness verifiers
can not reason about dependencies between multiple executions and, as a result, are
imprecise for relational verification. In contrast, existing SOTA relational verifiers
only apply a single bounding step and do not utilize any branching strategies
to refine the obtained bounds, thus producing imprecise results. We develop
the first scalable Branch-and-Bound-based relational verifier, RABBit, which
efficiently combines branching over multiple executions with cross-executional
bound refinement to utilize relational constraints, gaining substantial precision over
SOTA baselines on a wide range of datasets and networks. Code is at this URL.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are now widely used in safety-critical fields like autonomous driving
and medical diagnosis [Amato et al., 2013], where their decisions can have serious consequences.
However, understanding and ensuring their reliability is difficult due to their complex and opaque
nature. Despite efforts to find and address vulnerabilities, such as adversarial attacks [Goodfellow
et al., 2014, Madry et al., 2018, Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2017] and adversarial training techniques
[Madry et al., 2018], ensuring safety remains a challenge. As a result, extensive research is focused
on formally verifying the safety of DNNs. However, most of the existing L∞ robustness verification
techniques can not handle relational properties common in practical situations. While significant
efforts have been invested in verifying the absence of input-specific adversarial examples within the
local neighborhood of test inputs, recent studies [Li et al., 2019a] emphasize that input-specific attacks
are impractical regardless. Conversely, practical attack scenarios [Liu et al., 2023, Li et al., 2019b,a]
involve the creation of universal adversarial perturbations (UAPs) [Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2017],
which are crafted to impact a substantial portion of inputs from the training distribution. RaVeN
[Banerjee et al., 2024b] and subsequently RACoon [Banerjee and Singh, 2024] showed that since
the same adversarial perturbation is applied to multiple inputs, the executions on different perturbed
inputs are related, exploiting the relationship between different executions significantly improves
the precision of the verifier. Despite RaVeN and RACoon’s ability to leverage cross-executional
dependencies, both of them remain imprecise as they only apply a single bounding step and lack
refinement using branching strategies used in SOTA complete non-relational verifiers.
Key challenges: For precise relational verification, we need efficient algorithms that can effectively
combine branching strategies over multiple executions with bounding techniques that can leverage
cross-executional dependencies. Theoretically, MILP (Mixed Integer Linear Programming) can
exactly encode DNN executions with piecewise linear activation functions like ReLU over any input
regions specified by linear inequalities. However, the associated MILP optimization problem is
computationally expensive. For instance, encoding k executions of a DNN with nr ReLU activations
∗

Equal contribution. Primary Correspondence: tsuresh3@illinois.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

