Mining and Transferring Feature-Geometry
Coherence for Unsupervised Point Cloud Registration

Kezheng Xiongab , Haoen Xiangab , Qingshan Xuc , Chenglu Wenab∗, Siqi Shenab ,
Jonathan Lid , Cheng Wangab
a
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities,
Xiamen University, China.
b
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China.
c
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
d
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada
{xiongkezheng,haoenxiang}@stu.xmu.edu.cn
{clwen,siqishen,cwang}@xmu.edu.cn
qingshan.xu@ntu.edu.sg, junli@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
Point cloud registration, a fundamental task in 3D vision, has achieved remarkable success with learning-based methods in outdoor environments. Unsupervised
outdoor point cloud registration methods have recently emerged to circumvent the
need for costly pose annotations. However, they fail to establish reliable optimization objectives for unsupervised training, either relying on overly strong geometric
assumptions, or suffering from poor-quality pseudo-labels due to inadequate integration of low-level geometric and high-level contextual information. We have
observed that in the feature space, latent new inlier correspondences tend to cluster
around respective positive anchors that summarize features of existing inliers. Motivated by this observation, we propose a novel unsupervised registration method
termed INTEGER to incorporate high-level contextual information for reliable
pseudo-label mining. Specifically, we propose the Feature-Geometry Coherence
Mining module to dynamically adapt the teacher for each mini-batch of data during training and discover reliable pseudo-labels by considering both high-level
feature representations and low-level geometric cues. Furthermore, we propose
Anchor-Based Contrastive Learning to facilitate contrastive learning with anchors
for a robust feature space. Lastly, we introduce a Mixed-Density Student to learn
density-invariant features, addressing challenges related to density variation and
low overlap in the outdoor scenario. Extensive experiments on KITTI and nuScenes
datasets demonstrate that our INTEGER achieves competitive performance in terms
of accuracy and generalizability. [Code Release]

1

Introduction

Point cloud registration is a fundamental task in autonomous driving and robotics. It aims to align two
partially overlapping point clouds with a rigid transformation. Learning-based methods have achieved
remarkable success in outdoor point cloud registration[1–5]. PCAM[1] pioneered the integration
of low-level geometric and high-level contextual information, inspiring subsequent works[2–5].
However, these supervised methods suffer from poor generalizability and reliance on costly pose
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

