What do Graph Neural Networks learn?
Insights from Tropical Geometry

Tuan Anh Pham
School of Mathematics
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, United Kingdom
tuan.pham@ed.ac.uk

Vikas Garg
YaiYai Ltd and Aalto University
vgarg@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been analyzed from multiple perspectives,
including the WL-hierarchy, which exposes limits on their expressivity to distinguish graphs. However, characterizing the class of functions that they learn has
remained unresolved. We address this fundamental question for message passing
GNNs under ReLU activations, i.e., the de-facto choice for most GNNs.
We first show that such GNNs learn tropical rational signomial maps or continuous
piecewise linear functions, establishing an equivalence with feedforward networks
(FNNs). We then elucidate the role of the choice of aggregation and update
functions, and derive the first general upper and lower bounds on the geometric
complexity (i.e., the number of linear regions), establishing new results for popular
architectures such as GraphSAGE and GIN. We also introduce and theoretically
analyze several new architectures to illuminate the relative merits of the feedforward
and the message passing layers, and the tradeoffs involving depth and number of
trainable parameters. Finally, we also characterize the decision boundary for node
and graph classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Message passing has been a cornerstone of machine learning, from inference in graphical models
[1, 2] to embedding of graphs [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Message passing neural networks (MPNNs) are easy to
implement, and can handle large scale, heterogeneous, and dynamic real world data effectively; so
continue to be an active area of research [8, 9, 10]. Indeed, several popular GNNs are usually cast
and implemented as MPNNs, see e.g., [11, 12, 13, 14, 15].
Unsurprisingly, GNNs as MPNNs have been analyzed from multiple theoretical perspectives. A
major theme is inspired by connections to the so-called 1-WL (Weisfeiler-Leman) test for group
isomorphism and its higher order extensions, where nodes in a (hyper-)graph repeatedly refine
their colors based on the messages from their neighbors [16]. MPNNs are known to be bounded
in power according to the WL-hierarchy [15, 17, 18], implying their inability to distinguish some
non-isomorphic graphs. Unlike WL that strives to expose what GNNs cannot do, here we seek to
unravel what they can.
Notably, the WL formalism implicitly relies on injective hash functions; in contrast, most successful
GNNs typically use ReLU activations that violate injectivity. Bounding the expressivity of such
GNNs via their injective surrogates is theoretically valid; however, it does not illuminate what they
learn. Indeed, several fundamental questions remain elusive for these practical models; e.g., (a) what
class of functions can they represent, (b) how does their expressivity vary with the choice of message
aggregation and update functions, (c) what complexity tradeoffs (e.g., in terms of the number of
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

