Brain Treebank: Large-scale intracranial recordings
from naturalistic language stimuli
Christopher Wang∗1, 2 , Adam Yaari∗1, 2 , Aaditya K Singh1, 5 ,
Vighnesh Subramaniam1, 2 , Dana Rosenfarb1, 2 , Jan DeWitt1 , Pranav Misra2, 3, 4 ,
Joseph R Madsen4 , Scellig Stone4 ,
Gabriel Kreiman2, 3, 4 , Boris Katz1, 2 , Ignacio Cases1, 2 , and Andrei Barbu1, 2
1 Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT
2 Center for Brains, Minds and Machines, MIT
3 Center for Brain Science, Harvard University
4 Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School
5 Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College London

Abstract
We present the Brain Treebank, a large-scale dataset of electrophysiological neural
responses, recorded from intracranial probes while 10 subjects watched one or
more Hollywood movies. Subjects watched on average 2.6 Hollywood movies, for
an average viewing time of 4.3 hours, and a total of 43 hours. The audio track for
each movie was transcribed with manual corrections. Word onsets were manually
annotated on spectrograms of the audio track for each movie. Each transcript was
automatically parsed and manually corrected into the universal dependencies (UD)
formalism, assigning a part of speech to every word and a dependency parse to
every sentence. In total, subjects heard over 38,000 sentences (223,000 words),
while they had on average 168 electrodes implanted. This is the largest dataset of
intracranial recordings featuring grounded naturalistic language, one of the largest
English UD treebanks in general, and one of only a few UD treebanks aligned to
multimodal features. We hope that this dataset serves as a bridge between linguistic
concepts, perception, and their neural representations. To that end, we present an
analysis of which electrodes are sensitive to language features while also mapping
out a rough time course of language processing across these electrodes. The Brain
Treebank is available at https://BrainTreebank.dev/

1

Introduction

A single theory of language understanding that encompasses how our brains process language,
how linguists understand language, and how machines process language is still beyond our reach.
Despite numerous attempts to understand how the brain processes language through investigations of
compositionality [1–4], semantic categories [5–7], and surprisal [8–12], a mechanistic understanding
is still lacking. Our hypothesis is that this is in part because studies often focus on small data regimes,
since gathering large-scale neural recordings is extremely laborious. Yet NLP and ML research in
general has shown that scale matters. In particular, even probing experiments on artificial networks
require a fairly large scale to produce reliable results, certainly larger than a few hundred sentences
[13, 14]. NLP would not have progressed without large-scale resources, so to enable the same kind
of progress, we collect a new large-scale neuroscience dataset, which has naturalistic stimuli, is
* Equal contribution. Correspondence to CW at czw@mit.edu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

