Motion Forecasting in Continuous Driving

Nan Song1
1

Bozhou Zhang1

Xiatian Zhu2

Li Zhang1∗

2
School of Data Science, Fudan University
University of Surrey
https://github.com/fudan-zvg/RealMotion

Abstract
Motion forecasting for agents in autonomous driving is highly challenging due
to the numerous possibilities for each agent’s next action and their complex interactions in space and time. In real applications, motion forecasting takes place
repeatedly and continuously as the self-driving car moves. However, existing
forecasting methods typically process each driving scene within a certain range
independently, totally ignoring the situational and contextual relationships between
successive driving scenes. This significantly simplifies the forecasting task, making the solutions suboptimal and inefficient to use in practice. To address this
fundamental limitation, we propose a novel motion forecasting framework for
continuous driving, named RealMotion. It comprises two integral streams both
at the scene level: (1) The scene context stream progressively accumulates historical scene information until the present moment, capturing temporal interactive
relationships among scene elements. (2) The agent trajectory stream optimizes
current forecasting by sequentially relaying past predictions. Besides, a data reorganization strategy is introduced to narrow the gap between existing benchmarks
and real-world applications, consistent with our network. These approaches enable
exploiting more broadly the situational and progressive insights of dynamic motion
across space and time. Extensive experiments on Argoverse series with different
settings demonstrate that our RealMotion achieves state-of-the-art performance,
along with the advantage of efficient real-world inference.

1

Introduction

Motion forecasting is a crucial element in contemporary autonomous driving systems, enabling
self-driving vehicles to predict the movement patterns of surrounding agents [43, 17]. This prediction
is vital for ensuring the safety and reliability of driving. However, numerous complex factors,
including stochastic road conditions and the diverse motion modes of traffic participants, make
resolving this task challenging. Recent developments have focused on the study of representation and
modeling [10, 52, 51], in tandem with a growing emphasis on precise trajectory predictions [6, 32,
49, 15, 50, 35]. Furthermore, the field has witnessed an increased focus on multi-agent forecasting,
a more challenging yet valuable subtask [26, 1, 14, 31]. These advancements have collectively
contributed to substantial progress in motion forecasting in recent years.
However, we realize that existing methods tackle motion forecasting tasks in an isolated manner,
i.e., they treat every individual driving scene within a limited range independently, overlooking
that in reality motion forecasting is inherently temporally interrelated while any ego-car drives on.
That means previous methods ignore the driving context across successive scenes, as well as the
corresponding potentially useful information from previous driving periods (Fig. 1).
∗

Li Zhang (lizhangfd@fudan.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

