Energy-Based Modelling for Discrete and Mixed Data
via Heat Equations on Structured Spaces

Tobias Schröder ∗†
Imperial College London

Zijing Ou∗‡
Imperial College London

Yingzhen Li
Imperial College London

Andrew Duncan
Imperial College London
The Alan Turing Institute

Abstract
Energy-based models (EBMs) offer a flexible framework for probabilistic modelling across various data domains. However, training EBMs on data in discrete
or mixed state spaces poses significant challenges due to the lack of robust and
fast sampling methods. In this work, we propose to train discrete EBMs with
Energy Discrepancy, a loss function which only requires the evaluation of the
energy function at data points and their perturbed counterparts, thus eliminating
the need for Markov chain Monte Carlo. We introduce perturbations of the data
distribution by simulating a diffusion process on the discrete state space endowed
with a graph structure. This allows us to inform the choice of perturbation from the
structure of the modelled discrete variable, while the continuous time parameter
enables fine-grained control of the perturbation. Empirically, we demonstrate the
efficacy of the proposed approaches in a wide range of applications, including the
estimation of discrete densities with non-binary vocabulary and binary image modelling. Finally, we train EBMs on tabular data sets with applications in synthetic
data generation and calibrated classification.

1

Introduction

Discrete structures are intrinsic to most types of data such as text, graphs, and images. Estimating the
data generating distribution pdata of discrete data sets with a probabilistic model can contribute greatly
to downstream inference and generation tasks, and plays a key role in synthetic data generation of
tabular, textual or network data (Raghunathan, 2021). Energy-based models (EBMs) are probabilistic
generative models of the form pebm ∝ exp(−U ), where the flexible choice of the energy function U
allows great control in the modelling of different data structures. However, energy-based models are,
by definition, unnormalised models and notoriously difficult to train due to the intractability of their
normalisation, especially in discrete spaces.
Energy-based models are typically trained with the contrastive divergence (CD) algorithm (Hinton,
2002) which performs approximate maximum likelihood estimation by approximating the gradient of
the log-likelihood with Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques. This method motivated
rich research results on sampling from discrete distributions to enable fast and accurate estimation of
energy-based models (Zanella, 2020; Grathwohl et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022b; Sun et al., 2022b,a,
2023a). However, the training of energy-based models with CD remains challenging as it relies on
∗

Equal contributions
Correspondence to: t.schroeder21@imperial.ac.uk and z.ou22@imperial.ac.uk
‡
Code: https://github.com/J-zin/discrete-energy-discrepancy

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

