ContactField: Implicit Field Representation
for Multi-Person Interaction Geometry

Hansol Lee
hansollee@kist.re.kr

Tackgeun You
tackgeun.you@kist.re.kr

Woohyeon Shim
20211362@sungshin.ac.kr

Hansoo Park
hansupark@kist.re.kr

Sanghyeon Kim
sangkim98@hanwha.com

Hwasup Lim
hslim@kist.re.kr

Center for Artificial Intelligence Research
Korea Institute of Science and Technology
Seoul, South Korea

Abstract
We introduce a novel implicit field representation tailored for multi-person interaction geometry in 3D spaces, capable of simultaneously reconstructing occupancy,
instance identification (ID) tags, and contact fields. Volumetric representation of
interacting human bodies presents significant challenges, including inaccurately
captured geometries, varying degrees of occlusion, and data scarcity. Existing
multi-view methods, which either reconstruct each subject in isolation or merge
nearby 3D surfaces into a single unified mesh, often fail to capture the intricate
geometry between interacting bodies and exploit on datasets with many views
and a small group of people for training. Our approach utilizes an implicit representation for interaction geometry contextualized by a multi-view local-global
feature module. This module adeptly aggregates both local and global information
from individual views and interacting groups, enabling precise modeling of close
physical interactions through dense point retrieval in small areas, supported by the
implicit fields. Furthermore, we develop a synthetic dataset encompassing diverse
multi-person interaction scenarios to enhance the robustness of our geometry estimation. The experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our method to
accurately reconstruct human geometries and ID tags within three-dimensional
spaces, outperforming conventional multi-view techniques. Notably, our method
facilitates unsupervised estimation of contact points without the need for specific
training data on contact supervision.

1

Introduction

Accurate 3D representations of multi-person interactions have critical applications in virtual reality,
augmented reality, robotics, and surveillance, as human subjects are central to a variety of content
and tasks. In particular, modeling interactions involving multiple individuals in close proximity has
gathered attention as the modeling of individual humans and simple group activities has matured.
However, the precise estimation and reconstruction of 3D human body poses and shapes in close
interaction scenarios present significant challenges, mainly due to occlusion, which complicates
accurate reconstruction.
The Skinned Multi-Person Linear (SMPL) model [2], one of the most well-known explicit models,
has been extensively utilized not only for individual human models [37, 20, 6] but also in multi38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

