Implicit Regularization of Decentralized Gradient
Descent for Decentralized Sparse Regression

Tongle Wu
The Pennsylvania State University
tfw5381@psu.edu

Ying Sun
The Pennsylvania State University
ybs5190@psu.edu

Abstract
We consider learning a sparse model from linear measurements taken by a network of agents. Different from existing decentralized methods designed based
on the LASSO regression with explicit ℓ1 norm regularization, we exploit the
implicit regularization of the decentralized optimization method applied to an overparameterized nonconvex least squares formulation without sparse penalization.
Our first result shows that despite nonconvexity, if the network connectivity is good,
the well-known decentralized gradient descent algorithm (DGD) with small initialization and early stopping can compute the statistically optimal solution. Sufficient
conditions on the initialization scale, choice of step size, network connectivity, and
stopping time are further provided to achieve convergence. Our result recovers the
convergence rate of gradient descent in the centralized setting, showing its tightness. Based on the analysis of DGD, we further propose a communication-efficient
version, termed T-DGD, by truncating the iterates before transmission. In the high
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) regime, we show that T-DGD achieves comparable
statistical accuracy to DGD, while the communication cost is logarithmic in the
number of parameters. Numerical results are provided to validate the effectiveness
of DGD and T-DGD for sparse learning through implicit regularization.

1

Introduction

Modern deep learning is generally in the over-parameterized regime where the models have significantly more parameters than available training examples [6, 41]. Although deep learning models
exhibit remarkable performance in multiple domains, the theoretical understanding of optimization
and generalization for deep learning is still limited. Recent studies show that despite being overparameterized, gradient-based methods applied to minimize the emperical loss exhibit the implicit
regularization phenomenon. For example, a line of works [3, 5, 11, 16] shows that with certain
initialization, networks trained with gradient descent (GD) land in the “kernel regime” and share
similar behaviors to the kernel method. However, the literature [2, 9, 24] suggests that kernel regime
analyses fall short in explaining the success of deep learning because neural networks analyzed in the
kernel regime are almost linearized, thus hindering feature learning from data. Further, many works
[35, 38, 40] start investigating the “rich regime”, showing that GD with small initialization induces
structures on the solution, such as sparsity and low-rankness, that better explains the generalization
capability of NNs. However, all aforementioned results are limited to the centralized setting, where
data are stored on a single machine. Practical constraints such as limited computing and storage
resources, data privacy and security, and regulation rules make the centralized learning framework
increasingly inadequate for contemporary applications. Although a variety of decentralized learning
algorithms can be applied to NN training, the questions of which solution they can converge, along
with its generalization performance, are largely unclear.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

