MDAgents: An Adaptive Collaboration of LLMs for
Medical Decision-Making

Yubin Kim1 Chanwoo Park1 Hyewon Jeong1♮ Yik Siu Chan1
Xuhai Xu1 Daniel McDuff2 Hyeonhoon Lee3
Marzyeh Ghassemi1 Cynthia Breazeal1 Hae Won Park1
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2
Google Research
3
Seoul National University Hospital
{ybkim95,cpark97,hyewonj,yiksiuc,xoxu,mghassem,cynthiab,haewon}@mit.edu
dmcduff@google.com
hhoon@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Foundation models are becoming valuable tools in medicine. Yet despite their
promise, the best way to leverage Large Language Models (LLMs) in complex
medical tasks remains an open question. We introduce a novel multi-agent framework, named Medical Decision-making Agents (MDAgents) that helps to address
this gap by automatically assigning a collaboration structure to a team of LLMs.
The assigned solo or group collaboration structure is tailored to the medical task at
hand, a simple emulation inspired by the way real-world medical decision-making
processes are adapted to tasks of different complexities. We evaluate our framework and baseline methods using state-of-the-art LLMs across a suite of real-world
medical knowledge and medical diagnosis benchmarks, including a comparison of
LLMs’ medical complexity classification against human physicians2 . MDAgents
achieved the best performance in seven out of ten benchmarks on tasks requiring
an understanding of medical knowledge and multi-modal reasoning, showing a significant improvement of up to 4.2% (p < 0.05) compared to previous methods’ best
performances. Ablation studies reveal that MDAgents effectively determines medical complexity to optimize for efficiency and accuracy across diverse medical tasks.
Notably, the combination of moderator review and external medical knowledge in
group collaboration resulted in an average accuracy improvement of 11.8%. Our
code can be found at https://github.com/mitmedialab/MDAgents.

1

Introduction

Medical Decision-Making (MDM) is a multifaceted and intricate process in which clinicians collaboratively navigate diverse sources of information to reach a precise and specific conclusion [97]. For
instance, a primary care physician (PCP) may refer a patient to a specialist when faced with a complex
case, or a patient visiting the emergency department or urgent care might be triaged and then directed
to a specialist for further evaluation [5, 54]. MDM involves interpreting complex and multi-modal
data, such as imaging, electronic health records (EHR), physiological signals, and genetic information, while rapidly integrating new medical research into clinical practice [68, 78]. Recently, Large
Language Models (LLMs) have shown potential for AI support in MDM [22, 37, 48, 64, 72, 90]. It
is known that they are able to process and synthesize large volumes of medical literature [74] and
clinical information [1], as well as support probabilistic [94] and causal [39] reasoning, makes LLMs
promising tools. However, there is no silver bullet in medical applications that require careful design.
♮
2

Hyewon Jeong received her MD degree from Yonsei University College of Medicine, South Korea.
Appendix F contains a detailed comparison results between human physicians and LLMs.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

