AgentDojo: A Dynamic Environment to Evaluate
Prompt Injection Attacks and Defenses
for LLM Agents

Edoardo Debenedetti1∗ Jie Zhang1 Mislav Balunovic1,2
Luca Beurer-Kellner1,2 Marc Fischer1,2 Florian Tramèr1
1

ETH Zurich

2

Invariant Labs

Abstract
AI agents aim to solve complex tasks by combining text-based reasoning with
external tool calls. Unfortunately, AI agents are vulnerable to prompt injection
attacks where data returned by external tools hijacks the agent to execute malicious
tasks. To measure the adversarial robustness of AI agents, we introduce AgentDojo,
an evaluation framework for agents that execute tools over untrusted data. To
capture the evolving nature of attacks and defenses, AgentDojo is not a static test
suite, but rather an extensible environment for designing and evaluating new agent
tasks, defenses, and adaptive attacks. We populate the environment with 97 realistic
tasks (e.g., managing an email client, navigating an e-banking website, or making
travel bookings), 629 security test cases, and various attack and defense paradigms
from the literature. We find that AgentDojo poses a challenge for both attacks and
defenses: state-of-the-art LLMs fail at many tasks (even in the absence of attacks),
and existing prompt injection attacks break some security properties but not all.
We hope that AgentDojo can foster research on new design principles for AI agents
that solve common tasks in a reliable and robust manner.
https://agentdojo.spylab.ai

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have the ability to understand tasks described in natural language
and generate plans to solve them [20, 27, 49, 60]. A promising design paradigm for AI agents [65] is
to combine an LLM with tools that interact with a broader environment [14, 35, 40, 47, 51, 53, 55,
69]. AI agents could be used for various roles, such as digital assistants with access to emails and
calendars, or smart “operating systems” with access to coding environments and scripts [24, 25].
However, a key security challenge is that LLMs operate directly on text, lacking a formal way to
distinguish instructions from data [44, 74]. Prompt injection attacks exploit this vulnerability by
inserting new malicious instructions in third-party data processed by the agent’s tools [17, 44, 62]. A
successful attack can allow an external attacker to take actions (and call tools) on behalf of the user.
Potential consequences include exfiltrating user data, executing arbitrary code, and more [18, 23, 33,
42].
To measure the ability of AI agents to safely solve tasks in adversarial settings when prompt injections
are in place, we introduce AgentDojo, a dynamic benchmarking framework which we populate–as a
first version–with 97 realistic tasks and 629 security test cases. As illustrated in Figure 1, AgentDojo
∗

Correspondence to edoardo.debenedetti@inf.ethz.ch

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

