fMRI predictors based on language models of
increasing complexity recover brain left lateralization

Laurent Bonnasse-Gahot
Centre d’Analyse et de Mathématique Sociales
CNRS, EHESS
75006 Paris, France
lbg@ehess.fr

Christophe Pallier
Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit
CNRS, INSERM, CEA, Neurospin center
91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
christophe@pallier.org

Abstract
Over the past decade, studies of naturalistic language processing where participants are scanned while listening to continuous text have flourished. Using word
embeddings at first, then large language models, researchers have created encoding
models to analyze the brain signals. Presenting these models with the same text as
the participants allows to identify brain areas where there is a significant correlation
between the functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) time series and the
ones predicted by the models’ artificial neurons. One intriguing finding from these
studies is that they have revealed highly symmetric bilateral activation patterns,
somewhat at odds with the well-known left lateralization of language processing.
Here, we report analyses of an fMRI dataset where we manipulate the complexity
of large language models, testing 28 pretrained models from 8 different families,
ranging from 124M to 14.2B parameters. First, we observe that the performance
of models in predicting brain responses follows a scaling law, where the fit with
brain activity increases linearly with the logarithm of the number of parameters
of the model (and its performance on natural language processing tasks). Second,
although this effect is present in both hemispheres, it is stronger in the left than
in the right hemisphere. Specifically, the left-right difference in brain correlation
follows a scaling law with the number of parameters. This finding reconciles
computational analyses of brain activity using large language models with the
classic observation from aphasic patients showing left hemisphere dominance for
language.

1

Introduction

Since the seminal discovery that language disorders are most often associated with lesions to the
brain’s left hemisphere (Dax, 1865; Manning and Thomas-Antérion, 2011; Broca, 1865; Wernicke,
1874), the existence of a left-right asymmetry in the cortical processing of language has been
amply documented through different approaches, e.g., studies of split-brain patients (Gazzaniga
and Sperry, 1967), intracarotid amobarbital injections (Wada and Rasmussen, 1960), electrocortical
stimulation (Penfield and Roberts, 1959), functional brain imaging (Binder et al., 1996; Just et al.,
1996; Stromswold et al., 1996; Malik-Moraleda et al., 2022), and behavioral measurements such as
reaction times to words presented in the left or right visual fields (Hausmann et al., 2019). All in
all, even if there is clear evidence that the right hemisphere is implicated in speech and language
processing (Bookheimer, 2002; Jung-Beeman, 2005; Lerner et al., 2011; Vigneau et al., 2011;
Bradshaw et al., 2017), it is estimated that left hemispheric dominance for language occurs in
approximately 90% of healthy individuals (Josse and Tzourio-Mazoyer, 2004; Tzourio-Mazoyer
et al., 2017).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

