LoTLIP: Improving Language-Image Pre-training for
Long Text Understanding

Wei Wu1

4

Kecheng Zheng2,3† Shuailei Ma4 Fan Lu1 Yuxin Guo5 Yifei Zhang6
Wei Chen3 Qingpei Guo2 Yujun Shen2 Zheng-Jun Zha1†

1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Ant Group 3 Zhejiang University
Northeastern University, China 5 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
6
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Understanding long text is of great demands in practice but beyond the reach of
most language-image pre-training (LIP) models. In this work, we empirically
confirm that the key reason causing such an issue is that the training images are
usually paired with short captions, leaving certain tokens easily overshadowed by
salient tokens. Towards this problem, our initial attempt is to relabel the data with
long captions, however, directly learning with which may lead to performance
degradation in understanding short text (e.g., in the image classification task). Then,
after incorporating corner tokens to aggregate diverse textual information, we
manage to help the model catch up to its original level of short text understanding
yet greatly enhance its capability of long text understanding. We further look into
whether the model can continuously benefit from longer captions and notice a
clear trade-off between the performance and the efficiency. Finally, we validate
the effectiveness of our approach using a self-constructed large-scale dataset,
which consists of 100M long caption oriented text-image pairs. Our method
achieves superior performance in long-text-image retrieval tasks. The project page
is available here.

1

Introduction

Understanding long texts plays a key role in Natural Language Processing (NLP), e.g., Long
Document Analysis [23, 28, 33], in which books, academic papers, and many other types of long
texts can be the target of such analysis. Inspired by these works, in the multi-modality field, some
text-to-image generation works (e.g., DALLE-3 [1] and Pixel-art [4, 5]) employ pre-trained captioners
(e.g., LLaVA [21]) to generate more accurate and detailed captions (in other words, long captions)
for images. These long captions describe an image in detail which can help text-to-image models
easily transfer long text to an image, improving the quality of text-image alignment. However, these
text-to-image models use pure NLP encoders (e.g., T5) to model long captions rather than CLIP.
Because, in the language-image pretraining task, little work has been conducted on modeling long
texts in a way that effectively aligns with image representations. Despite the lack of exploration,
this is a critical problem with practical demands that require a nuanced understanding of textual
descriptions corresponding to images.
Two primary challenges hinder the effective integration of long-text understanding in language-image
pre-training. The first one is the lack of large-scale long-caption image-text paired datasets. Most
†

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

