Bias Amplification in Language Model Evolution:
An Iterated Learning Perspective

Yi Ren
UBC
renyi.joshua@gmail.com

Shangmin Guo
University of Edinburgh
s.guo@ed.ac.uk

Bailin Wang
MIT
bailin.wang28@gmail.com

Linlu Qiu
MIT
linluqiu@mit.edu

Danica J. Sutherland
UBC & Amii
dsuth@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
With the widespread adoption of Large Language Models (LLMs), the prevalence
of iterative interactions among these models is anticipated to increase. Notably,
recent advancements in multi-round on-policy self-improving methods allow LLMs
to generate new examples for training subsequent models. At the same time, multiagent LLM systems, involving automated interactions among agents, are also
increasing in prominence. Thus, in both short and long terms, LLMs may actively
engage in an evolutionary process. We draw parallels between the behavior of
LLMs and the evolution of human culture, as the latter has been extensively
studied by cognitive scientists for decades. Our approach involves leveraging
Iterated Learning (IL), a Bayesian framework that elucidates how subtle biases are
magnified during human cultural evolution, to explain some behaviors of LLMs.
This paper outlines key characteristics of agents’ behavior in the Bayesian-IL
framework, including predictions that are supported by experimental verification
with various LLMs. This theoretical framework could help to more effectively
predict and guide the evolution of LLMs in desired directions. The code for
experiments is available at https://github.com/Joshua-Ren/iICL.

1

Introduction

Recent large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable instruction-following ability and an
increasing number of applications; it is thus reasonable to expect they are likely to become more
widespread. Moreover, interactions between LLMs (either multiple models, or different generations
of the same model) may also become very commonplace in the near future. In fact, many recent
works consider iterative on-policy self-data-augmentation solutions to break through the bottleneck
of human-generated supervisions, e.g., self-instruct (Y. Wang et al. 2022), self-refine (Madaan et al.
2023), hypothesis refinement (Qiu et al. 2024), self-distill (C. Xu et al. 2023), self-instruct (Y. Wang
et al. 2022), self-reward (Weizhe et al. 2024), self-feedback (W. Xu et al. 2024), RAFT (Dong et al.
2023), ReST (Gulcehre et al. 2023), iterated DPO (Xiong, Dong, Ye, Zhong, et al. 2023), OAIF (Guo
et al. 2024), SPIN (Z. Chen et al. 2024), and many more. Whether the model’s knowledge is updated
through in-weight or in-context mechanisms, these methods involve an LLM learning from a corpus
(comprising data examples or evaluations) generated by another LLM (or itself), and subsequently
transferring this acquired knowledge to others. Looking towards the long term, the future Internet
may (for better or worse) contain substantial portions of LLM-generated text, which will, in turn, be
employed for training the subsequent generation of models. It thus seems important to begin studying
what this process will mean for future models.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

