Octopus: A Multi-modal LLM with Parallel
Recognition and Sequential Understanding

Chuyang Zhao1∗
Gang Zhang1

Yuxin Song1∗ Junru Chen1 Kang Rong1 Haocheng Feng1
Shufan Ji2 Jingdong Wang1 Errui Ding1 Yifan Sun1Q
1

Baidu VIS 2 Beihang University
Q
Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author
{zhaochuyang,songyuxin02,sunyifan01}@baidu.com
∗

Abstract
A mainstream of Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have two essential functions, i.e., visual recognition (e.g., grounding) and understanding (e.g.,
visual question answering). Presently, all these MLLMs integrate visual recognition
and understanding in a same sequential manner in the LLM head, i.e., generating
the response token-by-token for both recognition and understanding. We think unifying them in the same sequential manner is not optimal for two reasons: 1) parallel
recognition is more efficient than sequential recognition and is actually prevailing
in deep visual recognition, and 2) the recognition results can be integrated to help
high-level cognition (while the current manner does not). Such motivated, this paper proposes a novel “parallel recognition → sequential understanding” framework
for MLLMs. The bottom LLM layers are utilized for parallel recognition and the
recognition results are relayed into the top LLM layers for sequential understanding.
Specifically, parallel recognition in the bottom LLM layers is implemented via
object queries, a popular mechanism in DEtection TRansformer, which we find to
harmonize well with the LLM layers. Empirical studies show our MLLM named
Octopus improves accuracy on popular MLLM tasks and is up to 5× faster on
visual grounding tasks.

1

Introduction

Visual recognition and understanding are two essential abilities for Multi-modal Large Language
Models (MLLMs). While earlier MLLMs [1, 2, 3, 4] focused on the high-level visual understanding
ability (e.g., visual question answering), recent literature finds that visual recognition ability (i.e.,
identifying and locating the objects) are no less important. The importance lies in two aspects: 1)
Many newly-merged MLLM usages are directly related to visual recognition, e.g., visual grounding
[5, 6] and referential dialog [6]. 2) More generally, visual recognition is potential to benefit all
understanding tasks as recognition results are important compositions for understanding. In this
paper, we are interested in better harmonizing these two essentials for MLLM.
Presently, MLLMs unify visual recognition and understanding in a sequential paradigm. In this paper,
the terms “sequential” and “parallel” refer specifically to the inference of LLM head, rather than the
visual encoder. Typically, an MLLM consists of a visual encoder and an LLM head. During inference,
the LLM head sequentially generates the response token-by-token, regardless of whether the task
is more aligned with visual recognition (e.g., grounding) or understanding (e.g., visual question
answering), as in Fig. 1 (left). Sequentially referring the recognition results, particularly textualized
coordinates, is relatively slow. This sequential manner is a legacy of the LLM structure and, more
fundamentally, stems from the inherently sequential nature of language.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

