SearchLVLMs: A Plug-and-Play Framework for
Augmenting Large Vision-Language Models by
Searching Up-to-Date Internet Knowledge

Chuanhao Li2,1,3† , Zhen Li2 , Chenchen Jing4 , Shuo Liu1 , Wenqi Shao1
Yuwei Wu2,3 , Ping Luo5,1 , Yu Qiao1 , Kaipeng Zhang1
1 OpenGVLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 Beijing Institute of Technology
3 Shenzhen MSU-BIT University 4 Zhejiang University 5 The University of Hong Kong

https://nevermorelch.github.io/SearchLVLMs.github.io/

Abstract
Large vision-language models (LVLMs) are ignorant of the up-to-date knowledge,
such as LLaVA series, because they cannot be updated frequently due to the large
amount of resources required, and therefore fail in many cases. For example,
if a LVLM was released on January 2024, and it wouldn’t know the singer of
the theme song for the new Detective Conan movie, which wasn’t released until
April 2024. To solve the problem, a promising solution motivated by retrievalaugmented generation (RAG) is to provide LVLMs with up-to-date knowledge via
internet search during inference, i.e., internet-augmented generation (IAG), which
is already integrated in some closed-source commercial LVLMs such as GPT-4V.
However, the specific mechanics underpinning them remain a mystery. In this
paper, we propose a plug-and-play framework, for augmenting existing LVLMs in
handling visual question answering (VQA) about up-to-date knowledge, dubbed
SearchLVLMs. A hierarchical filtering model is trained to effectively and efficiently
find the most helpful content from the websites returned by a search engine to
prompt LVLMs with up-to-date knowledge. To train the model and evaluate our
framework’s performance, we propose a pipeline to automatically generate newsrelated VQA samples to construct a dataset, dubbed UDK-VQA. A multi-model
voting mechanism is introduced to label the usefulness of website/content for
VQA samples to construct the training set. Experimental results demonstrate the
effectiveness of our framework, outperforming GPT-4o by ∼30% in accuracy.

1

Introduction

Large vision-language models (LVLMs, e.g., GPT-4V [19], Gemini Series [20], and Grok [21]) have
received much attention for their impressive generative capabilities. They require a large resource for
data collection, cleaning, and training, restricting them from frequently updating models. However,
new information and knowledge are created every time, making LVLMs ineffective in many scenarios.
For example, if we talk with LLaVA-1.6 [23] (released on January 30, 2024) about the new Detective
Conan movie (realeased on April, 2024), such as “the singer of the theme song”, it performs very
badly. It is promising to augment LVLMs by retrieving up-to-date knowledge via internet search
during inference, i.e., internet-augmented generation (IAG). Although commercial LVLMs such as
† This work was done during the internship at Shanghai AI Laboratory.

Corresponding Authors: wuyuwei@bit.edu.cn; kp_zhang@foxmail.com
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

