Directional Smoothness and Gradient Methods:
Convergence and Adaptivity

Aaron Mishkin∗
Stanford University
amishkin@cs.stanford.edu
Yuanhao Wang
Princeton University
yuanhaoa@princeton.edu

Ahmed Khaled∗
Princeton University
ahmed.khaled@princeton.edu

Aaron Defazio
FAIR, Meta AI
adefazio@meta.com

Robert M. Gower
CCM, Flatiron Institute
gowerrobert@gmail.com

Abstract
We develop new sub-optimality bounds for gradient descent (GD) that depend on
the conditioning of the objective along the path of optimization rather than on global,
worst-case constants. Key to our proofs is directional smoothness, a measure of
gradient variation that we use to develop upper-bounds on the objective. Minimizing
these upper-bounds requires solving implicit equations to obtain a sequence of
strongly adapted step-sizes; we show that these equations are straightforward to
solve for convex quadratics and lead to new guarantees for two classical step-sizes.
For general functions, we prove that the Polyak step-size and normalized GD
obtain fast, path-dependent rates despite using no knowledge of the directional
smoothness. Experiments on logistic regression show our convergence guarantees
are tighter than the classical theory based on L-smoothness.

1

Introduction

Gradient methods for differentiable functions are typically analyzed under the assumption that f is
L-smooth, meaning ∇f is L-Lipschitz continuous. This condition implies f is upper-bounded by a
quadratic and guarantees that gradient descent (GD) with step-size η < 2/L decreases the optimality
gap at each iteration (Bertsekas, 1997). However, experience shows that GD can still decrease the
objective when f is not L-smooth, particularly for deep neural networks (Bengio, 2012; Z. Li et al.,
2020; J. Cohen et al., 2021). Even for functions verifying smoothness, convergence rates are often
pessimistic and fail to predict optimization speed in practice (Paquette et al., 2023).
One alternative to global smoothness is local Lipschitz continuity of the gradient (“local smoothness”).
Local smoothness assumes different Lipschitz constants hold for different neighbourhoods, which
avoids global assumptions and improves rates. However, such analyses typically rely on boundedness
of the iterates and then use local smoothness to obtain L-smoothness over a compact set (Malitsky
and Mishchenko, 2020). Boundedness is guaranteed in several ways: Junyu Zhang and Hong (2020)
break optimization into stages, Patel and Berahas (2022) use stopping-times, and Lu and S. Mei
(2023) employ a line-search. Unfortunately, these approaches modify the underlying optimization
algorithm, require local smoothness oracles (Park et al., 2021), or rely on highly complex arguments.
In contrast, we prove simple rates for GD without global smoothness by deriving bounds of the form,
f (xk+1 ) ≤ f (xk ) + ⟨∇f (xk ), xk+1 − xk ⟩ +
∗

M (xk+1 , xk )
∥xk+1 − xk ∥22 ,
2

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

(1)

