Diffusing Differentiable Representations

Yash Savani
Carnegie Mellon University
ysavani@andrew.cmu.edu

Marc Finzi
Carnegie Mellon University
mfinzi@andrew.cmu.edu

J. Zico Kolter
Carnegie Mellon University
zkolter@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
We introduce a novel, training-free method for sampling differentiable representations (diffreps) using pretrained diffusion models. Rather than merely modeseeking, our method achieves sampling by “pulling back” the dynamics of the
reverse-time process—from the image space to the diffrep parameter space—and
updating the parameters according to this pulled-back process. We identify an
implicit constraint on the samples induced by the diffrep and demonstrate that
addressing this constraint significantly improves the consistency and detail of the
generated objects. Our method yields diffreps with substantially improved quality
and diversity for images, panoramas, and 3D NeRFs compared to existing techniques. Our approach is a general-purpose method for sampling diffreps, expanding
the scope of problems that diffusion models can tackle.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have emerged as a powerful tool for generative modeling [Ho et al., 2020, Song
et al., 2022, 2021, Karras et al., 2022, Rombach et al., 2022], and subsequent work has extended
these models to generate complex objects—such as 3D assets, tiled images, and more. Although
such approaches typically require training or at least fine-tuning of the diffusion models for these
new modalities [Wang et al., 2023, Luo et al., 2023], two notable exceptions, Wang et al. [2022]
and Poole et al. [2022], have developed methods for training-free production of 3D objects by
directly using an image-based diffusion model. Both methods work by optimizing a differentiable
representation (diffrep)—in this case, a Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [Mildenhall et al., 2020]—to
produce rendered views consistent with the output of the image-based diffusion model. Unfortunately,
the nature of both these methods is that they optimize the diffrep to produce the “most likely”
representation consistent with the images; that is, they perform mode-seeking rather than actually
sampling from the diffusion model. This results in overly smoothed outputs that lack detail and do
not reflect the underlying distribution of the diffusion model.
In this paper, we present a novel method for sampling directly in the diffrep space using pretrained
diffusion models. The method is training-free, can handle arbitrary diffreps, and performs true
sampling according to the underlying diffusion model rather than merely mode-seeking. The key idea
of our approach is to rewrite the reverse diffusion process itself in the diffrep parameter space. This
is achieved by “pulling back” the dynamics of the reverse time process—from the image space to the
parameter space—and solving a (small) optimization problem, implied by the pulled-back dynamics,
over the parameters for each diffusion step. To further encourage solver convergence, we identify
constraints that the diffrep induces on the samples and use these constraints to guide the reverse
process to generate samples from the high-density regions of the diffusion model while satisfying the
constraints along the sampling trajectory.
Our experiments use a pretrained image-based diffusion model (Stable Diffusion 1.5 [Rombach
et al., 2022]) to generate samples from various classes of diffreps. For example, by sampling SIREN
representations [Vincent, 2011] with wrap-around boundary constraints, we can sample total 360degree panorama scenes, and by sampling NeRF representations [Mildenhall et al., 2020], we can
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

