Multi-Head Mixture-of-Experts

Xun Wu, Shaohan Huang , Wenhui Wang, Shuming Ma, Li Dong, Furu Wei
Microsoft Research Asia
xunwu@microsoft.com, shaohanh@microsoft.com, fuwei@microsoft.com

https://aka.ms/GeneralAI

Abstract
Sparse Mixtures of Experts (SMoE) scales model capacity without significant
increases in computational costs. However, it exhibits the low expert activation
issue, i.e., only a small subset of experts are activated for optimization, leading to
suboptimal performance and limiting its effectiveness in learning a larger number of
experts in complex tasks. In this paper, we propose Multi-Head Mixture-of-Experts
(MH-MoE). MH-MoE split each input token into multiple sub-tokens, then these
sub-tokens are assigned to and processed by a diverse set of experts in parallel,
and seamlessly reintegrated into the original token form. The above operations
enables MH-MoE to significantly enhance expert activation while collectively
attend to information from various representation spaces within different experts
to deepen context understanding. Besides, it’s worth noting that our MH-MoE is
straightforward to implement and decouples from other SMoE frameworks, making
it easy to integrate with these frameworks for enhanced performance. Extensive
experimental results across different parameter scales (300M to 7B) and three
pre-training tasks—English-focused language modeling, multi-lingual language
modeling and masked multi-modality modeling—along with multiple downstream
validation tasks, demonstrate the effectiveness of MH-MoE.

1

Introduction

Large capacity models, such as Large Language Models (LLMs) [39, 28, 6, 25] and Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) [37, 27], have demonstrated their efficacy across various domains and tasks.
To further enhance performance, a reliable approach involves scaling up these models by augmenting
the parameter count [13]. But for most of these densely-activated large-capacity models (referred to
as Dense models), which utilize all their parameters to process all inputs, the extremely large size of
these models significantly reduces inference speed, further limiting their practicality.
A promising alternative, facilitating model scalability while mitigating the burdensome computational
costs, resides in Sparse Mixtures of Experts (SMoE) [31, 12, 5, 7]. In contrast to Dense model, SMoE
contains parallel feed-forward neural networks (referred to as experts) within each building block,
and strategically activates distinct experts for specific input tokens via a router, thereby yielding
noteworthy efficiency enhancements. For instance, GShard [21] scales a Dense model from 2B
to 600B parameters with lower training costs than a 100B Dense model. And recently, Mixtral
8×7B [16], a SMoE model containing 8 experts is shown to outperform or matches LLaMA-2
70B [34] and GPT-3.5.
Despite its success, SMoE exhibits the low experts activation issue, which means that only a small
subset of experts are activated during optimization and inference, e.g., 8.33% activation ratio1 shown
in Figure 1 (a), while the majority of them are not used at all (see the dark area). As a result, SMoE
1
Experts activation ratio shown in Figre 1 (a) is the ratio of each expert’s selection frequency in each MoE
layer to the total number of tokens, where those exceeding a threshold (<1) are considered activated.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

