Learning Disentangled Representations for
Perceptual Point Cloud Quality Assessment via
Mutual Information Minimization
Ziyu Shan∗ , Yujie Zhang∗ , Yipeng Liu, Yiling Xu†
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{shanziyu, yujie19981026, liuyipeng, yl.xu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
No-Reference Point Cloud Quality Assessment (NR-PCQA) aims to objectively
assess the human perceptual quality of point clouds without relying on pristinequality point clouds for reference. It is becoming increasingly significant with
the rapid advancement of immersive media applications such as virtual reality
(VR) and augmented reality (AR). However, current NR-PCQA models attempt to
indiscriminately learn point cloud content and distortion representations within a
single network, overlooking their distinct contributions to quality information. To
address this issue, we propose DisPA, a novel disentangled representation learning
framework for NR-PCQA. The framework trains a dual-branch disentanglement
network to minimize mutual information (MI) between representations of point
cloud content and distortion. Specifically, to fully disentangle representations, the
two branches adopt different philosophies: the content-aware encoder is pretrained
by a masked auto-encoding strategy, which can allow the encoder to capture
semantic information from rendered images of distorted point clouds; the distortionaware encoder takes a mini-patch map as input, which forces the encoder to focus
on low-level distortion patterns. Furthermore, we utilize an MI estimator to estimate
the tight upper bound of the actual MI and further minimize it to achieve explicit
representation disentanglement. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that
DisPA outperforms state-of-the-art methods on multiple PCQA datasets.

1

Introduction

With recent advances in 3D capture devices, point clouds have become a prominent media format
to represent 3D visual content in various immersive applications, such as autonomous driving and
virtual reality [4, 43]. These extensive applications stem from the rich information provided by
point clouds (e.g., geometric coordinates, color). Nevertheless, before reaching the user-client, point
clouds inevitably undergo various distortions at multiple stages, including acquisition, compression,
transmission and rendering, leading to undesired perceptual quality degradation. Accordingly, it
is necessary to develop an effective metric that introduces human perception into the research of
point cloud quality assessment (PCQA), especially in the common no-reference (NR) situation where
pristine reference point clouds are unavailable.
In recent years, many deep learning-based NR-PCQA methods [21, 47, 51, 32, 3] have shown
remarkable performance on multiple benchmarks, which can be applied directly to 3D point cloud data
or 2D rendered images. Most of these methods [47, 22, 51, 3] tend to learn a unified representation
for quality prediction, ignoring the fact that perceptual quality is determined by both point cloud
∗
†

Ziyu Shan and Yujie Zhang contribute equally to this work.
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

