Do Counterfactually Fair Image Classifiers Satisfy
Group Fairness? – A Theoretical and Empirical Study
Sangwon Jung1⇤ Sumin Yu1⇤ Sanghyuk Chun2† Taesup Moon1,3†
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
2
NAVER AI Lab 3 ASRI/INMC/IPAI/AIIS, Seoul National University

Abstract
The notion of algorithmic fairness has been actively explored from various aspects
of fairness, such as counterfactual fairness (CF) and group fairness (GF). However,
the exact relationship between CF and GF remains to be unclear, especially in
image classification tasks; the reason is because we often cannot collect counterfactual samples regarding a sensitive attribute, essential for evaluating CF, from the
existing images (e.g., a photo of the same person but with different secondary sex
characteristics). In this paper, we construct new image datasets for evaluating CF
by using a high-quality image editing method and carefully labeling with human
annotators. Our datasets, CelebA-CF and LFW-CF, build upon the popular image
GF benchmarks; hence, we can evaluate CF and GF simultaneously. We empirically observe that CF does not imply GF in image classification, whereas previous
studies on tabular datasets observed the opposite. We theoretically show that it
could be due to the existence of a latent attribute G that is correlated with, but
not caused by, the sensitive attribute (e.g., secondary sex characteristics are highly
correlated with hair length). From this observation, we propose a simple baseline,
Counterfactual Knowledge Distillation (CKD), to mitigate such correlation with
the sensitive attributes. Extensive experimental results on CelebA-CF and LFW-CF
demonstrate that CF-achieving models satisfy GF if we successfully reduce the
reliance on G (e.g., using CKD).

1

Introduction

As machine learning algorithms are deployed in societal computer vision applications such as facial
recognition [39] and job interview [29], concerns have grown regarding their potential to discriminate
against certain individuals and groups. For instance, a face recognition system might exhibit disparate
accuracies across different demographic groups [3], while a job interview algorithm could be biased
based on protective attributes even for the same interviewee [11]. Consequently, algorithmic fairness
in image classifiers has gained significant attention in academic and industrial research communities.
While conceptually apparent, determining a concrete notion of fairness is challenging, leading to
the proposal of several different fairness notions. One prevalent notion is counterfactual fairness
(CF) [23] which seeks consistent predictions when only a sensitive attribute is intervened. Another
important notion is group fairness (GF) [43] that aims to treat different demographic groups equally
to prevent one group unfairly disadvantaged compared to another. Many researchers have focused on
developing separate algorithms to achieve each notion, while understanding the exact relationship
between CF and GF is yet under-explored; e.g., some recent work [1, 35] showed that a model
achieving CF can meet several GF notions only under specific conditions of Structural Causal Models.
⇤
†

Equal contribution.
Co-corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

