Higher-Rank Irreducible Cartesian Tensors for
Equivariant Message Passing
Viktor Zaverkin1,∗
Francesco Alesiani1,†
Takashi Maruyama1,†
Federico Errica2
1
1
1
Henrik Christiansen
Makoto Takamoto
Nicolas Weber
Mathias Niepert1,3
1
NEC Laboratories Europe 2 NEC Italy 3 University of Stuttgart

Abstract
The ability to perform fast and accurate atomistic simulations is crucial for advancing the chemical sciences. By learning from high-quality data, machine-learned
interatomic potentials achieve accuracy on par with ab initio and first-principles
methods at a fraction of their computational cost. The success of machine-learned
interatomic potentials arises from integrating inductive biases such as equivariance
to group actions on an atomic system, e.g., equivariance to rotations and reflections.
In particular, the field has notably advanced with the emergence of equivariant
message passing. Most of these models represent an atomic system using spherical
tensors, tensor products of which require complicated numerical coefficients and
can be computationally demanding. Cartesian tensors offer a promising alternative,
though state-of-the-art methods lack flexibility in message-passing mechanisms,
restricting their architectures and expressive power. This work explores higher-rank
irreducible Cartesian tensors to address these limitations. We integrate irreducible
Cartesian tensor products into message-passing neural networks and prove the
equivariance and traceless property of the resulting layers. Through empirical
evaluations on various benchmark data sets, we consistently observe on-par or
better performance than that of state-of-the-art spherical and Cartesian models.

1

Introduction

The ability to perform sufficiently fast and accurate atomistic simulations for large molecular and material systems holds the potential to revolutionize molecular and materials science [1–8]. Conventionally,
computational chemistry and materials science rely on ab initio or first-principles approaches—e.g.,
coupled cluster [9–11] or density functional theory (DFT) [12, 13], respectively—that are accurate but
computationally demanding, thus limiting the accessible simulation time and system sizes. However,
the ability to generate high-quality, first-principles-based data sets has prompted the development of
machine-learned interatomic potentials (MLIPs). These potentials enable atomistic simulations with
accuracy that is on par with the reference first-principles method but at a fraction of the computational
cost. Message-passing neural networks (MPNNs) [14–21] have been employed in chemical and
materials sciences, including the development of MLIPs, due to their efficient processing of the graph
representation of the atomic system [22–26]. Achieving the desired MLIPs’ performance, however,
requires the inclusion of inductive biases, like the invariance of total energy to translations, reflections,
and rotations in the three-dimensional space, and an effective encoding of the atomic system into a
learnable representation [27]. Designing equivariant MPNNs [25, 26, 28–36], which preserve the
directional information of the local atomic environment, has been one of the most active research
directions of the last years. Previous work often achieves equivariance by representing an atomic
* Corresponding author: viktor.zaverkin@neclab.eu
†

These authors contributed equally.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

