IntraMix: Intra-Class Mixup Generation for Accurate
Labels and Neighbors

Shenghe Zheng, Hongzhi Wang∗, Xianglong Liu
Massive Data Computing Lab, Harbin Institute of Technology
shenghez.zheng@gmail.com wangzh@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown great performance in various tasks,
with the core idea of learning from data labels and aggregating messages within the
neighborhood of nodes. However, the common challenges in graphs are twofold:
insufficient accurate (high-quality) labels and limited neighbors for nodes, resulting
in weak GNNs. Existing graph augmentation methods typically address only one
of these challenges, often adding training costs or relying on oversimplified or
knowledge-intensive strategies, limiting their generalization. To simultaneously
address both challenges faced by graphs in a generalized way, we propose an
elegant method called IntraMix. Considering the incompatibility of vanilla Mixup
with the complex topology of graphs, IntraMix innovatively employs Mixup among
inaccurate labeled data of the same class, generating high-quality labeled data at
minimal cost. Additionally, it finds data with high confidence of being clustered into
the same group as the generated data to serve as their neighbors, thereby enriching
the neighborhoods of graphs. IntraMix efficiently tackles both issues faced by
graphs and challenges the prior notion of the limited effectiveness of Mixup in
node classification. IntraMix is a theoretically grounded plug-in-play method
that can be readily applied to all GNNs. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of IntraMix across various GNNs and datasets. Our code is available
at: https://github.com/Zhengsh123/IntraMix.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have demonstrated great potential in various tasks [52]. However, most graph datasets lack high-quality labeled data and node neighbors, underscoring two key
challenges for GNNs: the dual demands for accurate labels and rich neighborhoods [5].
Data augmentation is one way to address these two issues, but research on graph data augmentation is
insufficient. Additionally, it is challenging to apply widely studied data augmentation ways designed
for Euclidean data such as images to graphs due to their non-Euclidean nature [15]. Therefore,
unique graph augmentation methods are needed. While graph augmentation aims to generate highquality labeled data and enrich node neighbors, most methods either focus on one aspect and often
suffer from poor generalization ability. For example, some require generators, incurring additional
training costs [51, 24]. Others rely on overly simplistic ways such as random drop, yielding little
improvements [7]. Still, some depend on excessive prior knowledge, weakening generalization
abilities [48]. Therefore, there is an urgent need for an effective and generalized augmentation
method that can produce high-quality labeled nodes and adequately enrich node neighbors.
Reviewing existing methods, we find that they overlook the potential of low-quality labeled data,
which can be obtained at a low cost. Extracting information from such data could enrich data diversity.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

