Model Collapse Demystified: The Case of Regression

Elvis Dohmatob§ ∗ Yunzhen Feng† Julia Kempe§ † ‡
§
FAIR, Meta
†
Center for Data Science, New York University
‡
Courant Institue of Mathematical Sciences, New York University
∗
Correspondence to dohmatob@meta.com

Abstract
The era of proliferation of large language and image generation models begs the
question of what happens if models are trained on the synthesized outputs of other
models. The phenomenon of "model collapse" refers to the situation whereby
as a model is trained recursively on data generated from previous generations of
itself over time, its performance degrades until the model eventually becomes
completely useless, i.e. the model collapses. In this work, we investigate this
phenomenon within the context of high-dimensional regression with Gaussian data,
considering both low- and high-dimensional asymptotics. We derive analytical
formulas that quantitatively describe this phenomenon in both under-parameterized
and over-parameterized regimes. We show how test error increases linearly in the
number of model iterations in terms of all problem hyperparameters (covariance
spectrum, regularization, label noise level, dataset size) and further isolate how
model collapse affects both bias and variance terms in our setup. We show that
even in the noise-free case, catastrophic (exponentially fast) model-collapse can
happen in the over-parametrized regime. In the special case of polynomial decaying
spectral and source conditions, we obtain modified scaling laws which exhibit new
crossover phenomena from fast to slow rates. We also propose a simple strategy
based on adaptive regularization to mitigate model collapse. Our theoretical results
are validated with experiments.

1

Introduction

Model collapse describes the situation where the performance of large language models (LLMs)
or large image generators degrade as more and more AI-generated data becomes present in their
training dataset [44]. Indeed, in the early stages of the generative AI evolution (e.g the ChatGPT-xyz
series of models), there is emerging evidence suggesting that retraining a generative AI model on its
own outputs can lead to various anomalies in the model’s later outputs. This phenomenon has been
particularly observed in LLMs, where retraining on their generated content introduces irreparable
defects, resulting in what is known as “model collapse", the production of nonsensical or gibberish
output [44, 8]. Though several recent works demonstrate facets of this phenomenon empirically in
various settings [23, 32, 33, 8, 9, 21], a theoretical understanding is still missing.
In this work, we initiate a theoretical study of model collapse in the setting of high-dimensional
supervised-learning with linear regression. This is equivalent to kernel regression1 , which serves
as an effective proxy for neural networks in various regimes, for instance in the infinite-width limit
[37, 49, 25, 28] or in the lazy regime of training [12]. [11] characterize the power-law generalization
error of regularized least-squares kernel algorithms, assuming a power-decay spectrum of the kernel
(capacity) and of the coefficients of the target function (source). Source and capacity power decay
1

we present the linear regression setting for ease, the extension to the kernel setting is straightforward.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

