Self-Calibrating Conformal Prediction

Lars van der Laan
University of Washington
lvdlaan@uw.edu

Ahmed M. Alaa
UC Berkeley and UCSF
amalaa@berkeley.edu

Abstract
In machine learning, model calibration and predictive inference are essential for
producing reliable predictions and quantifying uncertainty to support decisionmaking. Recognizing the complementary roles of point and interval predictions,
we introduce Self-Calibrating Conformal Prediction, a method that combines VennAbers calibration and conformal prediction to deliver calibrated point predictions
alongside prediction intervals with finite-sample validity conditional on these predictions. To achieve this, we extend the original Venn-Abers procedure from binary
classification to regression. Our theoretical framework supports analyzing conformal prediction methods that involve calibrating model predictions and subsequently
constructing conditionally valid prediction intervals on the same data, where the
conditioning set or conformity scores may depend on the calibrated predictions.
Real-data experiments show that our method improves interval efficiency through
model calibration and offers a practical alternative to feature-conditional validity.

1

Introduction

Particularly in safety-critical sectors, such as healthcare, it is important to ensure decisions inferred
from machine learning models are reliable, under minimal assumptions [38, 57, 11, 46, 56]. As a
response, there is growing interest in predictive inference methods that quantify uncertainty in model
predictions via prediction intervals [44, 28]. Conformal prediction (CP) is a popular, model-agnostic,
and distribution-free framework for predictive inference, which can be applied post-hoc to any
prediction pipeline [59, 49, 3, 34]. Given a prediction issued by a black-box model, CP outputs a
prediction interval that is guaranteed to contain the unseen outcome with a user-specified probability
[34]. However, a limitation of CP is that this prediction interval only provides valid coverage
marginally, when averaged across all possible contexts – with ‘context’ referring to the information
available for decision-making. Constructing informative prediction intervals that offer contextconditional coverage is generally unattainable without making additional distributional assumptions
[58, 35, 4]. Consequently, there has been an upsurge in research developing CP methods that offer
weaker, yet practically useful, notions of conditional validity; see, e.g., [43, 31, 47, 32, 23, 21].
In prediction settings, model calibration is a desirable property of machine learning predictors that
ensures that the predicted outcomes accurately reflect the true outcomes [39, 65, 66, 22]. Specifically,
a predictor is calibrated for the outcome if the average outcome among individuals with identical
predictions is close to their shared prediction value [25]. Such a predictor is more robust against the
over-or-under estimation of the outcome in extremes of predicted values. It also has the property that
the best prediction of the outcome conditional on the model’s prediction is the prediction itself, which
facilitates transparent decision-making [51]. There is a rich literature studying post-hoc calibration of
prediction algorithms using techniques such as Platt’s scaling [45, 14], histogram binning [65, 25, 26],
isotonic calibration [66, 40, 51], and Venn-Abers calibration [60].
Given the roles of both point and interval predictions in decision-making, we introduce a dual
calibration objective that aims to construct (i) calibrated point predictions and (ii) associated prediction
intervals with valid coverage conditional on these point predictions. Marrying model calibration and
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

