VisMin: Visual Minimal-Change Understanding

Rabiul Awal∗ Saba Ahmadi∗ Le Zhang∗ Aishwarya Agrawal
Mila - Quebec AI Institute
Université de Montréal
{rabiul.awal,le.zhang,aishwarya.agrawal}@mila.quebec

Abstract
Fine-grained understanding of objects, attributes, and relationships between objects
is crucial for visual-language models (VLMs). To evaluate VLMs’ fine-grained understanding, existing benchmarks primarily focus on evaluating VLMs’ capability
to distinguish between two very similar captions given an image. In this paper, our
focus is on evaluating VLMs’ capability to distinguish between two very similar
images give a caption. To this end, we introduce a new, challenging benchmark
termed Visual Minimal-Change Understanding (VisMin), which requires models
to predict the correct image-caption match given two images and two captions.
Importantly, the image pair (as well as the caption pair) contains minimal-changes,
i.e., between the two images (as well as between the two captions), only one aspect
changes at a time from among the following possible types of changes: object,
attribute, count, and spatial relation. These four types of minimal-changes are
specifically designed to test the models’ understanding of objects, attributes of
objects (such as color, material, shape), counts of objects and spatial relationship
between objects. To curate our benchmark, we built an automatic framework using
large language models and diffusion models, followed by a rigorous 4-step verification process by human annotators. Empirical experiments reveal that current VLMs
exhibit notable deficiencies in understanding spatial relationships and counting
abilities. Furthermore, leveraging the automated nature of our data creation process,
we generate a large-scale training dataset, which we use to finetune CLIP (a foundational VLM) and Idefics2 (a multimodal large language model). Our findings show
that both these models benefit significantly from fine-tuning on this data, as evident
by marked improvements in fine-grained understanding across a wide range of
benchmarks. Additionally, such fine-tuning improves CLIP’s general image-text
alignment capabilities too. We release all resources including the benchmark, the
training data and the finetuned model checkpoints at https://vismin.net/.

1

Introduction

Fine-grained understanding of objects, attributes, and their relationships is critical for VisualLanguage Models (VLMs) to generalize effectively to new, unseen scenes and compositions. Previous
studies such as ARO [43] and Sugarcrepe [8], highlighting the deficiencies of VLMs in this domain
predominantly focus on understanding fine-grained differences between two very similar captions
– a human-written caption and an automatically generated hard-negative2 caption, where the hardnegative caption differs from the original caption only with respect to an object, or an attribute or
a relationship between two objects. While such hard-negative examples for captions can be synthesized using rule-based approaches, synthesizing such hard-negative examples for images is very
∗

denotes equal contribution
In the context of contrastive learning, a hard-negative is a specific type of negative example that is particularly
challenging to distinguish from the positive example.
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

