An engine not a camera:
Measuring performative power of online search

Celestine Mendler-Dünner∗,§

Gabriele Carovano‡

Moritz Hardt§

∗

§

ELLIS Institute Tübingen
Max-Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen and Tübingen AI Center
‡
Italian Competition Authority

Abstract
The power of digital platforms is at the center of major ongoing policy and regulatory efforts. To advance existing debates, we designed and executed an experiment
to measure the performative power of online search providers. Instantiated in
our setting, performative power quantifies the ability of a search engine to steer
web traffic by rearranging results. To operationalize this definition we developed
a browser extension that performs unassuming randomized experiments in the
background. These randomized experiments emulate updates to the search algorithm and identify the causal effect of different content arrangements on clicks.
Analyzing tens of thousands of clicks, we discuss what our robust quantitative
findings say about the power of online search engines, using the Google Shopping
antitrust investigation as a case study. More broadly, we envision our work to serve
as a blueprint for how the recent definition of performative power can help integrate
quantitative insights from online experiments with future investigations into the
economic power of digital platforms.

1

Introduction

At the heart of one of Europe’s most prominent antitrust case is a seemingly mundane question:
How much can a search engine redirect traffic through content positioning? In 2017, the European
Commission alleged that Google favored its own comparison shopping service by steering clicks away
from search results towards Google’s own product comparison service. The technical centerpiece
of the case was an ad-hoc data analysis about the position and display biases of Google search
results. Google appealed the European Commission’s charges, pointing to, among other arguments,
methodological errors.1
The case is emblematic of a broader problem. Although urgently needed, there is currently no
accepted technical framework for answering basic questions about the economic power of digital
platforms. Lawyers, economists, and policy makers agree that traditional antitrust tools struggle with
multi-sided platforms [1, 2]. Against this backdrop, a recently developed concept from the machine
learning literature, called performative power [3], suggests a way to augment existing antitrust
enforcement tools and mitigate some of their limitations. Performative power measures how much
a platform can causally influence platform users through its algorithmic actions. By directly relating
power to a causal effect, it sidesteps the complexities underlying conventional market definitions
and offers a promising framework to integrate data and experimental methods with digital market
investigations. Although the definition of performative power enjoys appealing theoretical properties,
a proof of its practical applicability was still missing.
1

Case C-48/22 P, Google and Alphabet v Commission (Google Shopping), ECLI:EU:C:2024:14.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

