OAM-TCD: A globally diverse dataset of
high-resolution tree cover maps

Josh Veitch-Michaelis1,2,6∗ Andrew Cottam2 Daniella Schweizer2,3 Eben N. Broadbent4
David Dao2,5 Ce Zhang1,6 Angelica Almeyda Zambrano4 Simeon Max2,5
1
ETH Zurich 2 Restor 3 WSL 4 University of Florida 5 Gainforest 6 University of Chicago
{josh,andrew}@restor.eco daniella.schweizer@wsl.ch
{eben,aalmeyda}@ufl.edu {david,simeon}@gainforest.net cez@uchicago.edu

Abstract
Accurately quantifying tree cover is an important metric for ecosystem monitoring and for assessing progress in restored sites. Recent works have shown that
deep learning-based segmentation algorithms are capable of accurately mapping
trees at country and continental scales using high-resolution aerial and satellite
imagery. Mapping at high (ideally sub-meter) resolution is necessary to identify
individual trees, however there are few open-access datasets containing instance
level annotations and those that exist are small or not geographically diverse. We
present a novel open-access dataset for individual tree crown delineation (TCD) in
high-resolution aerial imagery sourced from OpenAerialMap (OAM). Our dataset,
OAM-TCD, comprises 5072 2048x2048 px images at 10 cm/px resolution with
associated human-labeled instance masks for over 280k individual and 56k groups
of trees. By sampling imagery from around the world, we are able to better
capture the diversity and morphology of trees in different terrestrial biomes and
in both urban and natural environments. Using our dataset, we train reference
instance and semantic segmentation models that compare favorably to existing
state-of-the-art models. We assess performance through k-fold cross-validation
and comparison with existing datasets; additionally we demonstrate compelling
results on independent aerial imagery captured over Switzerland and compare to
municipal tree inventories and LIDAR-derived canopy maps in the city of Zurich.
Our dataset, models and training/benchmark code are publicly released under
permissive open-source licenses: Creative Commons (majority CC BY 4.0), and
Apache 2.0 respectively.

Figure 1: Annotation examples from the OAM-TCD dataset. Source images are 2048x2048 px tiles
at 10 cm/px resolution. Individual instances are labelled with different colors. Annotators were
instructed to label individual trees if possible, and otherwise label regions as groups. Image credit:
contributors to Open Imagery Network, CC BY 4.0.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

