Harmonizing Stochasticity and Determinism:
Scene-responsive Diverse Human Motion Prediction

Zhenyu Lou1
Qiongjie Cui2∗
2
Tuo Wang
Zhenbo Song
Luoming Zhang1
Cheng Cheng5
Haofan Wang3
Xu Tang3
Huaxia Li3
Hong Zhou1
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Nanjing University of Science and Technology, 3 Xiaohongshu Inc,
4
University of Texas at Austin, 5 Concordia University,
4

11915044@zju.edu.cn

cuiqiongjie@126.com

Figure 1: Comparison of our DiMoP3D with the SoTA baseline [5]. Purple meshes represent observations, and yellow meshes denote predictions. DiMoP3D produces high-ﬁdelity, diverse sequences
tailored to real-world 3D scenes, while BeLFusion’s inadequate scene context integration leads to
issues such as object penetration, motion incoherence, and scene inconsistency.

Abstract
Diverse human motion prediction (HMP) is a fundamental application in computer
vision that has recently attracted considerable interest. Prior methods primarily
focus on the stochastic nature of human motion, while neglecting the speciﬁc
impact of the external environment, leading to the pronounced artifacts in prediction when applied to real-world scenarios. To ﬁll this gap, this work introduces
a novel task: predicting diverse human motion within real-world 3D scenes. In
contrast to prior works, it requires harmonizing the deterministic constraints imposed by the surrounding 3D scenes with the stochastic aspect of human motion.
For this purpose, we propose DiMoP3D, a diverse motion prediction framework
with 3D scene awareness, which leverages the 3D point cloud and observed sequence to generate diverse and high-ﬁdelity predictions. DiMoP3D can comprehend the 3D scene and determine the probable target objects and their desired
interactive pose based on the historical motion. Then, it plans the obstacle-free
trajectories toward these interested objects and generates diverse and physically
consistent future motions. On top of that, DiMoP3D identiﬁes deterministic factors in the scene and integrates them into stochastic modeling, making the diverse HMP in realistic scenes become a controllable stochastic generation process. On two real-captured benchmarks, DiMoP3D has demonstrated signiﬁcant
improvements over state-of-the-art methods, showcasing its effectiveness in generating diverse and physically consistent motion predictions within real-world 3D
environments. More details and the video demo are available at the webpage
https://sites.google.com/view/dimop3d.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

