GaussianCube: A Structured and Explicit
Radiance Representation for 3D Generative Modeling

1

Bowen Zhang1∗

Yiji Cheng2∗

Jiaolong Yang3†

Chunyu Wang3†

Feng Zhao1‡

Yansong Tang2

Dong Chen3‡

Baining Guo3

University of Science and Technology of China

2

Tsinghua University

3

Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract
We introduce a radiance representation that is both structured and fully explicit and
thus greatly facilitates 3D generative modeling. Existing radiance representations
either require an implicit feature decoder, which significantly degrades the modeling
power of the representation, or are spatially unstructured, making them difficult
to integrate with mainstream 3D diffusion methods. We derive GaussianCube
by first using a novel densification-constrained Gaussian fitting algorithm, which
yields high-accuracy fitting using a fixed number of free Gaussians, and then
rearranging these Gaussians into a predefined voxel grid via Optimal Transport.
Since GaussianCube is a structured grid representation, it allows us to use standard
3D U-Net as our backbone in diffusion modeling without elaborate designs. More
importantly, the high-accuracy fitting of the Gaussians allows us to achieve a highquality representation with orders of magnitude fewer parameters than previous
structured representations for comparable quality, ranging from one to two orders
of magnitude. The compactness of GaussianCube greatly eases the difficulty of 3D
generative modeling. Extensive experiments conducted on unconditional and classconditioned object generation, digital avatar creation, and text-to-3D synthesis all
show that our model achieves state-of-the-art generation results both qualitatively
and quantitatively, underscoring the potential of GaussianCube as a highly accurate
and versatile radiance representation for 3D generative modeling. Project page:
https://gaussiancube.github.io/.

1

Introduction

The field of 3D generation [59, 39, 5, 57, 49, 8, 19, 11, 61, 76] has witnessed remarkable growth,
driven by advancements in generative modeling [25, 20, 41, 17, 72, 29]. Most of the prior works in
this domain leverage variants of Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [38, 8, 57, 40] as their underlying
3D representations, which typically consist of an explicit structured proxy representation and an
implicit feature decoder. However, such hybrid NeRF variants exhibit degraded representation power,
particularly when used for generative modeling where a single implicit feature decoder is shared
across all objects. Additionally, the high computational complexity of volumetric rendering leads to
both slow rendering speed and extensive memory costs.
Recently, the emergence of 3D Gaussian Splatting (GS) [30] has enabled improved reconstruction
quality and real-time rendering capabilities [69, 36, 63, 35]. The fully explicit nature of 3DGS
eliminates the need for a shared implicit decoder, providing another key advantage over NeRFs.
Although 3DGS has been widely studied in scene reconstruction tasks, its spatially unstructured
nature presents a significant challenge when applied to mainstream generative modeling frameworks.
* Interns at Microsoft Research Asia. † Equal advising. ‡ Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

