DEL: Discrete Element Learner for Learning 3D
Particle Dynamics with Neural Rendering

Jiaxu Wang1 Jingkai Sun1,2 Junhao He1 Ziyi Zhang1
Qiang Zhang1,2 Mingyuan Sun3 Renjing Xu1
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Guangzhou, China
2
Beijing Innovation Center of Humanoid Robotics Co. Ltd, Beijing, China
3
Northeastern University, Shenyang, China
{jwang457, qzhang749, jsun444}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn
mingyuansun@stumail.neu.edu.cn
{junhaohe, ziyizhang, renjingxu}@.hkust-gz.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning-based simulators show great potential for simulating particle dynamics when 3D groundtruth is available, but per-particle correspondences are not
always accessible. The development of neural rendering presents a new solution to
this field to learn 3D dynamics from 2D images by inverse rendering. However,
existing approaches still suffer from ill-posed natures resulting from the 2D to
3D uncertainty, for example, specific 2D images can correspond with various 3D
particle distributions. To mitigate such uncertainty, we consider a conventional,
mechanically interpretable framework as the physical priors and extend it to a
learning-based version. In brief, we incorporate the learnable graph kernels into
the classic Discrete Element Analysis (DEA) framework to implement a novel
mechanics-integrated learning system. In this case, the graph network kernels
are only used for approximating some specific mechanical operators in the DEA
framework rather than the whole dynamics mapping. By integrating the strong
physics priors, our methods can effectively learn the dynamics of various materials
from the partial 2D observations in a unified manner. Experiments show that our
approach outperforms other learned simulators by a large margin in this context and
is robust to different renderers, fewer training samples, and fewer camera views.

1

Introduction

Simulating complex physical dynamics and interactions of different materials is crucial in areas
including graphics, robotics, and mechanical analysis. While conventional numerical tools offer
plausible predictions, they are computationally expensive and need extra user inputs like material
specifications. In contrast, learning-based simulators have recently garnered significant attention as
they offer more efficient solutions. Previous works primarily simulate object dynamics in 2D. They
either treat pixels as grids [1] or map the images into low latent space [2, 3] and predict future latent
states. However, these 2D-centric approaches possess limitations. The world is inherently 3D, and 2D
methods struggle to reason about physical processes because they rely on view-dependent features,
and are hard to understand real object geometries. To address these, researchers have incorporated
multi-view 3D perceptions into simulations such as Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [4] which is
an implicit 3D-aware representation. Some studies extract view-invariant representations and 3D
structured priors by NeRFs to learn 3D-aware dynamics [5, 6]. They either represent the whole scene
as a single vector or learn compositional object features by foreground masks. However, they require
heavy computational demands and struggle with objects with high degrees of freedom.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

