How to Continually Adapt Text-to-Image Diffusion
Models for Flexible Customization?
Jiahua Dong1∗ , Wenqi Liang2∗ , Hongliu Li3† , Duzhen Zhang1† , Meng Cao1 ,
Henghui Ding4 , Salman Khan1, 5 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan1, 6
1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
2
Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 4 Institute of Big Data, Fudan University
5
Australian National University 6 Linköping University
{dongjiahua1995, liangwenqi0123, hongliuli1994, henghui.ding}@gmail.com
{duzhen.zhang, meng.cao, salman.khan, fahad.khan}@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
Custom diffusion models (CDMs) have attracted widespread attention due to their
astonishing generative ability for personalized concepts. However, most existing
CDMs unreasonably assume that personalized concepts are fixed and cannot change
over time. Moreover, they heavily suffer from catastrophic forgetting and concept
neglect on old personalized concepts when continually learning a series of new
concepts. To address these challenges, we propose a novel Concept-Incremental
text-to-image Diffusion Model (CIDM), which can resolve catastrophic forgetting
and concept neglect to learn new customization tasks in a concept-incremental
manner. Specifically, to surmount the catastrophic forgetting of old concepts, we
develop a concept consolidation loss and an elastic weight aggregation module.
They can explore task-specific and task-shared knowledge during training, and
aggregate all low-rank weights of old concepts based on their contributions during
inference. Moreover, in order to address concept neglect, we devise a contextcontrollable synthesis strategy that leverages expressive region features and noise
estimation to control the contexts of generated images according to user conditions.
Experiments validate that our CIDM surpasses existing custom diffusion models.
The source codes are available at https://github.com/JiahuaDong/CIFC.

1

Introduction

Latent diffusion models (LDMs) [38, 33, 66, 19] have demonstrated unprecedented capabilities
in generating high-fidelity images by incorporating large-scale collections of image-text pairs in
the latent feature space. Until now, LDMs [4, 30] have achieved remarkable progress in various
application fields, including image editing [29, 26], art creation [8, 54], and reconstruction of fMRI
brain scans [48]. In order to synthesize some personalized concepts according to user preferences,
custom diffusion models (CDMs) [40, 60, 11] rely on low-rank adaptation (LoRA) [14] to finetune the
large-scale LDMs for multi-concept customization [22]. They extend the vision-language dictionary
of pretrained LDMs to bind personalized concepts with specific subjects users need to synthesize.
Generally, most existing CDMs [60, 68, 3] assume that users’ personalized concepts are fixed and
cannot incrementally increase over time. However, this assumption is unrealistic in real-world
applications, where users want to continually synthesize a series of new personalized concepts from
their own lives. To address this setting, CDMs [3, 57, 2] typically require storing all image-text
∗

Equal contributions (ordered alphabetically).

†

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

