Hybrid Reinforcement Learning Breaks Sample Size
Barriers in Linear MDPs
Kevin Tan, Wei Fan, Yuting Wei
Department of Statistics and Data Science
The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania

Abstract
Hybrid Reinforcement Learning (RL), where an agent learns from both an offline
dataset and online explorations in an unknown environment, has garnered significant recent interest. A crucial question posed by Xie et al. (2022b) is whether
hybrid RL can improve upon the existing lower bounds established for purely offline or online RL without requiring that the behavior policy visit every state and
action the optimal policy does. While Li et al. (2023b) provided an affirmative
answer for tabular PAC RL, the question remains unsettled for both the regretminimizing and non-tabular cases. In this work, building upon recent advancements in offline RL and reward-agnostic exploration, we develop computationally
efficient algorithms for both PAC and regret-minimizing RL with linear function
approximation, without requiring concentrability on the entire state-action space.
We demonstrate that these algorithms achieve sharper error or regret bounds that
are no worse than, and can improve on, the optimal sample complexity in offline
RL (the first algorithm, for PAC RL) and online RL (the second algorithm, for
regret-minimizing RL) in linear Markov decision processes (MDPs), regardless
of the quality of the behavior policy. To our knowledge, this work establishes the
tightest theoretical guarantees currently available for hybrid RL in linear MDPs.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) holds great promise in attaining reliable decision-making in adaptive
environments for a broad range of modern applications. Typical RL algorithms often require an enormous number of training samples, motivating a line of recent efforts to study the sample efficiency
of RL algorithms. There are two mainstream paradigms of RL, distinguished by how samples are
collected: online RL and offline RL. In online RL, an agent learns in a real-time manner, exploring
the environment to maximize her cumulative rewards by executing a sequence of adaptively chosen
policies (e.g. Azar et al. (2017); Jin et al. (2018); Sutton and Barto (2018); Zhang et al. (2023)).
Whereas, in offline RL, an agent has only access to a pre-collected dataset, and tries to figure out
how to perform well in a different environment without ever experiencing it (e.g. Jin et al. (2021b);
Lange et al. (2012); Levine et al. (2020); Li et al. (2024)). Online methods are often sample-hungry,
but offline methods often impose stringent requirements on the quality of the pre-collected data.
To address the limitations of both, the setting of hybrid RL (Song et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2022b) has
recently received considerable attention from both theoretical and practical perspectives (Amortila
et al., 2024; Ball et al., 2023; Kausik et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023b; Nair et al., 2020; Nakamoto et al.,
2023; Song et al., 2023; Tan and Xu, 2024; Vecerik et al., 2017; Wagenmaker and Pacchiano, 2023;
Zhou et al., 2023). In hybrid RL, an agent learns from a combination of both offline and online data,
extracting information from offline data to enhance online exploration. Theoretical guarantees for
hybrid RL algorithms can be categorized on: (1) the type of function approximation considered, (2)
the level of coverage required by the behavior policy, (3) whether it improves on the minimax lower
bounds for online-only and offline-only learning, and (4) whether they minimize regret or obtain a
PAC guarantee. We elaborate below, and summarize the prior art in Table 1.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

