I NQUIRE: A Natural World
Text-to-Image Retrieval Benchmark
Edward Vendrow⇤ 1 , Omiros Pantazis⇤ 2 , Alexander Shepard3 , Gabriel Brostow2 ,
Kate E. Jones2 , Oisin Mac Aodha† 4 , Sara Beery† 1 , Grant Van Horn† 5
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 University College London 3 iNaturalist
4
University of Edinburgh 5 University of Massachusetts Amherst

A tamandua pup being
carried on its mother’s back

Everted osmeterium

A hermit crab using plastic
waste as its shell

A humpback whale fluke with
identifiable markings

Melanistic leopard

A satin bowerbird’s
ornamented nest

Kahili ginger plant with open
fruit capsule showing seeds

A reef with manmade
structures and debris

Strawberry poison-dart frog
with the “la gruta” morph

California condor tagged with
a green “26”

Figure 1: I NQUIRE is a text-to-image retrieval benchmark of 250 expert-level queries comprehensively
labeled over a new five million image dataset. The queries span a range of ecological and biodiversity
concepts, requiring reasoning, image understanding, and domain expertise.

Abstract
We introduce I NQUIRE, a text-to-image retrieval benchmark designed to challenge
multimodal vision-language models on expert-level queries. I NQUIRE includes
iNaturalist 2024 (iNat24), a new dataset of five million natural world images,
along with 250 expert-level retrieval queries. These queries are paired with all
relevant images comprehensively labeled within iNat24, comprising 33,000 total
matches. Queries span categories such as species identification, context, behavior,
and appearance, emphasizing tasks that require nuanced image understanding
and domain expertise. Our benchmark evaluates two core retrieval tasks: (1)
I NQUIRE -F ULLRANK, a full dataset ranking task, and (2) I NQUIRE -R ERANK, a
reranking task for refining top-100 retrievals. Detailed evaluation of a range of
recent multimodal models demonstrates that I NQUIRE poses a significant challenge,
with the best models failing to achieve an mAP@50 above 50%. In addition, we
show that reranking with more powerful multimodal models can enhance retrieval
performance, yet there remains a significant margin for improvement. By focusing
on scientifically-motivated ecological challenges, I NQUIRE aims to bridge the gap
between AI capabilities and the needs of real-world scientific inquiry, encouraging
the development of retrieval systems that can assist with accelerating ecological
and biodiversity research.
⇤

Equal contribution. †Equal supervision, order randomized.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

