Local Linearity: the Key for No-regret Reinforcement
Learning in Continuous MDPs

Davide Maran
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
davide.maran@polimi.it

Alberto Maria Metelli
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
albertomaria.metelli@polimi.it

Matteo Papini
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
matteo.papini@polimi.it

Marcello Restelli
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
marcello.restelli@polimi.it

Abstract
Achieving the no-regret property for Reinforcement Learning (RL) problems in
continuous state and action-space environments is one of the major open problems
in the field. Existing solutions either work under very specific assumptions or
achieve bounds that are vacuous in some regimes. Furthermore, many structural
assumptions are known to suffer from a provably unavoidable exponential dependence on the time horizon H in the regret, which makes any possible solution
unfeasible in practice. In this paper, we identify local linearity as the feature that
makes Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) both learnable (sublinear regret) and
feasible (regret that is polynomial in H). We define a novel MDP representation class, namely Locally Linearizable MDPs, generalizing other representation
classes like Linear MDPs and MDPS with low inherent Belmman error. Then, i)
we introduce C INDERELLA, a no-regret algorithm for this general representation
class, and ii) we show that all known learnable and feasible MDP families are
representable in this class. We first show that all known feasible MDPs belong to a
family that we call Mildly Smooth MDPs. Then, we show how any mildly smooth
MDP can be represented as a Locally Linearizable MDP by an appropriate choice
of representation. This way, C INDERELLA is shown to achieve state-of-the-art
regret bounds for all previously known (and some new) continuous MDPs for
which RL is learnable and feasible.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [35] is a paradigm of artificial intelligence in which an agent interacts
with an environment, which is typically assumed to be a Markov Decision Process (MDP) [30], to
maximize a reward signal in the long term. By interacting with the environment, an RL algorithm
tries to make the agent play actions leading to the highest possible expected reward; RL theory is
the field that designs algorithms to be provably efficient, i.e., to work with probability close to one.
This idea is formalized in a performance metric called the (cumulative) regret, which measures the
cumulative difference between actions played by the algorithm and the optimal ones in terms of
expected reward.
For the case of episodic tabular MDPs, when both the state and the action space
p are finite, an optimal
e
result was first proved by [4], who showed a bound on the regret of order O( H 3 |S||A|K), where
S is the state space, A is the action space, K is the number of episodes of interaction, and H the
time horizon of every episode. This regret is minimax-optimal in the sense that no algorithm can
achieve smaller regret for every arbitrary tabular MDP. This result is not useful in many real-world
scenarios, where S and A are huge, or even continuous [20, 19, 15]. In fact, all applications of RL
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

