A Unifying Post-Processing Framework for
Multi-Objective Learn-to-Defer Problems

Mohammad-Amin Charusaie
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tuebingen, Germany
mcharusaie@tuebingen.mpg.de

Samira Samadi
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tuebingen, Germany
samira.samadi@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
Learn-to-Defer is a paradigm that enables learning algorithms to work not in isolation but as a team with human experts. In this paradigm, we permit the system
to defer a subset of its tasks to the expert. Although there are currently systems
that follow this paradigm and are designed to optimize the accuracy of the final
human-AI team, the general methodology for developing such systems under a
set of constraints (e.g., algorithmic fairness, expert intervention budget, defer of
anomaly, etc.) remains largely unexplored. In this paper, using a d-dimensional
generalization to the fundamental lemma of Neyman and Pearson (d-GNP), we
obtain the Bayes optimal solution for learn-to-defer systems under various constraints. Furthermore, we design a generalizable algorithm to estimate that solution
and apply this algorithm to the COMPAS, Hatespeech, and ACSIncome datasets.
Our algorithm shows improvements in terms of constraint violation over a set of
learn-to-defer baselines and can control multiple constraint violations at once. The
use of d-GNP is beyond learn-to-defer applications and can potentially obtain a solution to decision-making problems with a set of controlled expected performance
measures.

1

Introduction

Machine learning algorithms are increasingly used in diverse fields, including critical applications,
such as medical diagnostics [72] and predicting optimal prognostics [63]. To address the sensitivity of
such tasks, existing approaches suggest keeping the human expert in the loop and using the machine
learning prediction as advice [35], or playing a supportive role by taking over the tasks on which
machine learning is uncertain [39, 60, 4]. The abstention of the classifier in making decisions, and
letting the human expert do so, is where the paradigm of learn-to-defer (L2D) started to exist.
The development of L2D algorithms has mainly revolved around optimizing the accuracy of the final
system under such paradigm [60, 50]. Although they achieve better accuracy than either the machine
learning algorithm or the human expert in isolation, these works provide inherently single-objective
solutions to the L2D problem. In the critical tasks that are mentioned earlier, more often than not,
we face a challenging multi-objective problem of ensuring the safety, algorithmic fairness, and
practicality of the final solution. In such settings, we seek to limit the cost of incorrect decisions
[46], algorithmic biases [13], or human expert intervention [57], while optimizing the accuracy of
the system. Although the seminal paper that introduced the first L2D algorithm targeted an instance
of such multi-objective problem [44], a general solution to such class of problems, besides specific
examples [26, 57, 51, 52], has remained unknown to date. Multi-objective machine learning extends
beyond the realm of L2D problems. A prime example that is extensively studied in various settings is
ensuring algorithmic fairness [18] while optimizing accuracy. Recent advances in the algorithmic
fairness literature have suggested the superiority of post-processing methodology for tackling this
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

