Optimal Aggregation of Prediction Intervals under
Unsupervised Domain Shift

Jiawei Ge∗
Operations Research & Financial Engineering
Princeton University
jg5300@princeton.edu

Debarghya Mukherjee∗
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Boston University
mdeb@bu.edu

Jianqing Fan
Operations Research & Financial Engineering
Princeton University
jqfan@princeton.edu

Abstract
As machine learning models are increasingly deployed in dynamic environments,
it becomes paramount to assess and quantify uncertainties associated with distribution shifts. A distribution shift occurs when the underlying data-generating
process changes, leading to a deviation in the model’s performance. The prediction interval, which captures the range of likely outcomes for a given prediction,
serves as a crucial tool for characterizing uncertainties induced by their underlying
distribution. In this paper, we propose methodologies for aggregating prediction
intervals to obtain one with minimal width and adequate coverage on the target
domain under unsupervised domain shift, under which we have labeled samples
from a related source domain and unlabeled covariates from the target domain.
Our analysis encompasses scenarios where the source and the target domain are
related via i) a bounded density ratio, and ii) a measure-preserving transformation.
Our proposed methodologies are computationally efficient and easy to implement.
Beyond illustrating the performance of our method through real-world datasets,
we also delve into the theoretical details. This includes establishing rigorous theoretical guarantees, coupled with finite sample bounds, regarding the coverage
and width of our prediction intervals. Our approach excels in practical applications and is underpinned by a solid theoretical framework, ensuring its reliability
and effectiveness across diverse contexts.

1

Introduction

In the modern era of big data and complex machine learning models, extensive data collected from
diverse sources are often used to build a predictive model. However, the assumption of independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data is frequently violated in practical scenarios. Take algorithmic fairness as an example: historical data often exhibit sampling biases towards certain groups,
like females being underrepresented in credit card data. Over time, the differences in group proportions have diminished, leading to distribution shifts. Consequently, models trained on historical data
may face shifted distributions during testing, and proper adjustments are needed. Distribution shift
has garnered significant attention from statistical and machine learning communities under various
names, i.e., transfer learning [PY09, WKW16], domain adaptation [FVRA21], domain generalization [ZLQ+ 22, WLL+ 22], continual learning [DLAM+ 21, MLJ+ 22], multitask learning [ZY21]
∗

equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

