ReNO: Enhancing One-step Text-to-Image Models
through Reward-based Noise Optimization

Luca Eyring1,2,3,∗ Shyamgopal Karthik1,2,3,4∗ Karsten Roth2,3,4
Alexey Dosovitskiy5 Zeynep Akata1,2,3
1

3

Technical University of Munich 2 Munich Center of Machine Learning
Helmholtz Munich 4 University of Tübingen & Tübingen AI Center 5 Inceptive
luca.eyring@tum.de shyamgopal.karthik@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
Text-to-Image (T2I) models have made significant advancements in recent years,
but they still struggle to accurately capture intricate details specified in complex
compositional prompts. While fine-tuning T2I models with reward objectives has
shown promise, it suffers from "reward hacking" and may not generalize well
to unseen prompt distributions. In this work, we propose Reward-based Noise
Optimization (ReNO), a novel approach that enhances T2I models at inference
by optimizing the initial noise based on the signal from one or multiple human
preference reward models. Remarkably, solving this optimization problem with
gradient ascent for 50 iterations yields impressive results on four different onestep models across two competitive benchmarks, T2I-CompBench and GenEval.
Within a computational budget of 20-50 seconds, ReNO-enhanced one-step models
consistently surpass the performance of all current open-source Text-to-Image
models. Extensive user studies demonstrate that our model is preferred nearly
twice as often compared to the popular SDXL model and is on par with the
proprietary Stable Diffusion 3 with 8B parameters. Moreover, given the same
computational resources, a ReNO-optimized one-step model outperforms widelyused open-source models such as SDXL and PixArt-α, highlighting the efficiency
and effectiveness of ReNO in enhancing T2I model performance at inference time.
Code is available at https://github.com/ExplainableML/ReNO.

1

Introduction

Advancements in Text-to-Image (T2I) models have been achieved in recent years, largely due to the
availability of massive image-text datasets [26, 82, 83] and the development of denoising diffusion
models [19, 36, 76, 84]. Despite these improvements, T2I models often struggle to accurately capture
the intricate details specified in complex compositional prompts [3, 37]. Common challenges include
incorrect text rendering, difficulties with attribute binding, generation of unlikely object combinations,
and color leakage. While recent models have begun to address these issues by employing enhanced
language encoders, larger diffusion models, and better data curation [6, 12, 13, 22], these approaches
typically involve training larger models from scratch, making them inapplicable to existing models.
As a more efficient alternative, fine-tuning T2I models has gained significant attention. This approach
can be tailored either toward specific preferences [32, 78, 105] or general human preferences. Inspired
by the success of Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) [16, 29] in Large Language
∗

equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

