KOALA: Empirical Lessons Toward Memory-Efficient
and Fast Diffusion Models for Text-to-Image Synthesis

Youngwan Lee1,2 Kwanyong Park1 Yoorhim Cho3 Yong-Ju Lee1 Sung Ju Hwang2,4
1

Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI), South Korea
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), South Korea
3
Sungkyunkwan University, South Korea
4
DeepAuto.ai, South Korea

2

project page: https://youngwanlee.github.io/KOALA/

Abstract
As text-to-image (T2I) synthesis models increase in size, they demand higher
inference costs due to the need for more expensive GPUs with larger memory,
which makes it challenging to reproduce these models in addition to the restricted
access to training datasets. Our study aims to reduce these inference costs and
explores how far the generative capabilities of T2I models can be extended using
only publicly available datasets and open-source models. To this end, by using the
de facto standard text-to-image model, Stable Diffusion XL (SDXL), we present
three key practices in building an efficient T2I model: (1) Knowledge distillation:
we explore how to effectively distill the generation capability of SDXL into an
efficient U-Net and find that self-attention is the most crucial part. (2) Data: despite
fewer samples, high-resolution images with rich captions are more crucial than a
larger number of low-resolution images with short captions. (3) Teacher: Stepdistilled Teacher allows T2I models to reduce the noising steps. Based on these
findings, we build two types of efficient text-to-image models, called KOALATurbo &-Lightning, with two compact U-Nets (1B & 700M), reducing the model
size up to 54% and 69% of the SDXL U-Net. In particular, the KOALA-Lightning700M is 4× faster than SDXL while still maintaining satisfactory generation
quality. Moreover, unlike SDXL, our KOALA models can generate 1024px highresolution images on consumer-grade GPUs with 8GB of VRAMs (3060Ti). We
believe that our KOALA models will have a significant practical impact, serving as
cost-effective alternatives to SDXL for academic researchers and general users in
resource-constrained environments.

1

Introduction

Since Stable Diffusion XL [31] (SDXL) has become the de facto standard model for text-toimage (T2I) synthesis due to its ability to generate high-resolution images and its open-source
nature, many models for specific downstream tasks [7; 47; 3; 58; 56] now leverage SDXL as their
backbone. However, the model’s massive computational demands and large size necessitate expensive
hardware, thus incurring significant costs in terms of training and inference. Moreover, recent T2I
works [5; 6; 39; 1] do not release their training datasets, making it challenging for the open-source
community to reproduce their performance due to internal or commercial restrictions.
To alleviate the computation burden, previous works have resorted to quantization [45], hardwareaware optimization [8], denoising step reduction [38; 29; 39; 23], and architectural model optimization [21]. In particular, the denoising step reduction (i.e., step-distillation) and architectural model
compression methods adopt the knowledge distillation (KD) scheme [14; 11] by allowing the model
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

