D IFF N ORM: Self-Supervised Normalization for
Non-autoregressive Speech-to-speech Translation

Weiting Tan

Jingyu Zhang Lingfeng Shen Daniel Khashabi Philipp Koehn
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
{wtan12, jzhan237, lshen30, danielk, phi}@jhu.edu

Abstract
Non-autoregressive Transformers (NATs) are recently applied in direct speech-tospeech translation systems, which convert speech across different languages without
intermediate text data. Although NATs generate high-quality outputs and offer faster
inference than autoregressive models, they tend to produce incoherent and repetitive
results due to complex data distribution (e.g., acoustic and linguistic variations in
speech). In this work, we introduce D IFF N ORM, a diffusion-based normalization
strategy that simplifies data distributions for training NAT models. After training
with a self-supervised noise estimation objective, D IFF N ORM constructs normalized
target data by denoising synthetically corrupted speech features. Additionally,
we propose to regularize NATs with classifier-free guidance, improving model
robustness and translation quality by randomly dropping out source information
during training. Our strategies result in a notable improvement of about +7 ASRBLEU for English-Spanish (En-Es) and +2 ASR-BLEU for English-French (En-Fr)
translations on the CVSS benchmark, while attaining over 14× speedup for En-Es
and 5× speedup for En-Fr translations compared to autoregressive baselines.1

1

Introduction

Speech-to-speech translation (S2ST) systems are essential to bridge communication gaps and have
wide application potential. We focus on non-autoregressive modeling for direct speech-to-speech
translation, converting source speech to the target without intermediate text data. Such direct S2ST
systems [25, 23, 22, 32, 31, 21, 20] can preserve non-linguistic information, avoid error propagation
from cascaded systems [29, 34] (e.g., a combination of speech recognition and machine translation
systems), and achieve faster inference speed.
Non-autoregressive Transformers (NAT) [21, 20] has played a central role in current S2ST work [31,
32, 21]. NAT translates source waveforms into target speech units via parallel decoding, achieving
performance comparable to or better than autoregressive models while greatly reducing inference time.
This process is often referred to as speech-to-unit (S2UT) translation [31]. The predicted speech units
are then converted to target waveforms via a unit vocoder in the unit-to-speech synthesis stage [32, 38].
However, NATs suffer from incoherent and repetitive generations, referred to as the multi-modality
problem [12]. This issue stems from NAT’s assumption of conditional independence during parallel
decoding, worsened by the complex and multi-modal nature of training data distribution.
In this work, we propose D IFF N ORM, a self-supervised speech normalization strategy that alleviates
the multi-modality problem of NAT models by simplifying the target distribution. Instead of distilling
training data from an autoregressive model [10] or utilizing perturbed speech to train a normalizer
[32, 21], we rely on the denoising objective of Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models [15, DDPM]
to normalize target speech units. D IFF N ORM inject synthetic noise to speech features and use diffusion
1

Code available at: https://github.com/steventan0110/DiffNorm.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

