Hardness of Learning Neural Networks under the
Manifold Hypothesis

Bobak T. Kiani∗

Jason Wang†

Melanie Weber‡

Abstract
The manifold hypothesis presumes that high-dimensional data lies on or near a
low-dimensional manifold. While the utility of encoding geometric structure has
been demonstrated empirically, rigorous analysis of its impact on the learnability of neural networks is largely missing. Several recent results have established
hardness results for learning feedforward and equivariant neural networks under
i.i.d. Gaussian or uniform Boolean data distributions. In this paper, we investigate
the hardness of learning under the manifold hypothesis. We ask which minimal
assumptions on the curvature and regularity of the manifold, if any, render the
learning problem efficiently learnable. We prove that learning is hard under input manifolds of bounded curvature by extending proofs of hardness in the SQ
and cryptographic settings for Boolean data inputs to the geometric setting. On
the other hand, we show that additional assumptions on the volume of the data
manifold alleviate these fundamental limitations and guarantee learnability via a
simple interpolation argument. Notable instances of this regime are manifolds
which can be reliably reconstructed via manifold learning. Looking forward, we
comment on and empirically explore intermediate regimes of manifolds, which
have heterogeneous features commonly found in real world data.4

1

Introduction

High-dimensional data is often thought to have low-dimensional structure, which may stem, for
instance, from symmetries in the underlying system. This observation has given rise to the manifold
hypothesis, which presumes that high-dimensional data lies on or near a low-dimensional manifold.
Empirical studies have confirmed this hypothesis across domains [20, 77, 37, 65]. A plethora of
algorithms for geometric data analysis [44, 8, 80, 21] and, more recently, machine learning [30,
15, 23] seek to leverage such structure. While these methods have shown empirical promise, few
formal results on the benefits of encoding geometric structure have been established. Here, we
study the impact of the manifold hypothesis on the computational complexity of learning algorithms
for neural networks. Specifically, we investigate, under which geometric assumptions feedforward
neural networks are efficiently learnable.
The computational hardness of learning shallow, fully-connected neural networks under i.i.d. Gaussian data distributions has been established by [36, 26, 48, 32], who show that the complexity of
learning even single hidden layer neural networks grows at least exponentially with the input size.
Some of this analysis utilizes the correlational statistical query (CSQ) framework, of which learnability via gradient decent is a notable instance. Recently, [57] have shown similar hardness results
∗

John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University; e-mail:
bkiani@g.harvard.edu.
†
Harvard College, Harvard University; e-mail: jasonwang1@college.harvard.edu.
‡
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University; e-mail:
mweber@g.harvard.edu
4
Code is made public at https://github.com/Weber-GeoML/manifold-learning-complexity
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

