Preventing Model Collapse in Deep Canonical
Correlation Analysis by Noise Regularization

Junlin He
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hong Kong SAR, China
junlinspeed.he@connect.polyu.hk

Jinxiao Du
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hong Kong SAR, China
jinxiao.du@connect.polyu.hk

Susu Xu
Johns Hopkins University
Maryland, USA
sxu83@jhu.edu

Wei Ma∗
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hong Kong SAR, China
wei.w.ma@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Multi-View Representation Learning (MVRL) aims to learn a unified representation of an object from multi-view data. Deep Canonical Correlation Analysis
(DCCA) and its variants share simple formulations and demonstrate state-of-theart performance. However, with extensive experiments, we observe the issue of
model collapse, i.e., the performance of DCCA-based methods will drop drastically when training proceeds. The model collapse issue could significantly hinder
the wide adoption of DCCA-based methods because it is challenging to decide
when to early stop. To this end, we develop NR-DCCA, which is equipped with a
novel noise regularization approach to prevent model collapse. Theoretical analysis shows that the Correlation Invariant Property is the key to preventing model
collapse, and our noise regularization forces the neural network to possess such
a property. A framework to construct synthetic data with different common and
complementary information is also developed to compare MVRL methods comprehensively. The developed NR-DCCA outperforms baselines stably and consistently in both synthetic and real-world datasets, and the proposed noise regularization approach can also be generalized to other DCCA-based methods such
as DGCCA. Our code will be released at https://github.com/Umaruchain/NRDCCA.git.

1

Introduction

In recent years, multi-view representation learning (MVRL) has emerged as a core technology
for learning from multi-source data and providing readily useful representations to downstream
tasks (Sun et al. 2023, Yan et al. 2021), and it has achieved tremendous success in various applications, such as video surveillance (Guo et al. 2015, Feichtenhofer et al. 2016, Deepak, K. et al.
2021), medical diagnosis (Wei et al. 2019, Xu et al. 2020) and social media (Srivastava & Salakhutdinov 2012, Karpathy & Fei-Fei 2015, Mao et al. 2014, Fan et al. 2020). Specifically, multi-source
data can be collected from the same object, and each data source can be regarded as one view of
the object. For instance, an object can be described simultaneously through texts, videos, and audio, which contain both common and complementary information of the object (Yan et al. 2021,
Zhang, Liu & Fu 2019, Hwang et al. 2021, Geng et al. 2021), and the MVRL aims to learn a unified
representation of the object from the multi-view data.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

