Latent Intrinsics Emerge from Training to Relight

Xiao Zhang1

William Gao1 Seemandhar Jain2 Michael Maire1
D.A. Forsyth2 Anand Bhattad3
1
University of Chicago 2 University of Illinois Urbana Champaign
3
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
zhang7@uchicago.edu
bhattad@ttic.edu
https://latent-intrinsics.github.io/

Input

Reference

Input

Relight

Albedo

(Zoom in to chrome ball)
Input
Reference Relight

Input

Albedo

Input

Input

Relight

Reference

Albedo

Figure 1: We describe a purely data-driven image relighting model. Our model recovers latent
variables representing scene intrinsic properties from one image, latent variables representing lighting
from another, then applies the lighting to the intrinsics to produce a relighted scene (top row). There
is no physical model of intrinsics, extrinsics or their interaction. Our model relights images of real
scenes with SOTA accuracy and is more accurate than current supervised methods. Note how, for
the chrome ball detail in top center, the specular reflections on the chrome ball (which give an
approximate environment map) change when the extrinsics are changed. Note how our model ascribes
lighting to visible luminaires when it can (top right), despite the absence of any physical model. A
physical model accounts only for effects in that model, and most physical models of surfaces are
approximate; in contrast, a latent intrinsic model accounts for whatever produces substantial effects
in training data. Latent intrinsics yield albedo in a natural fashion (light the scene with an appropriate
illuminant). Bottom row shows SOTA albedo estimates recovered from our latent intrinsics.

Abstract
Image relighting is the task of showing what a scene from a source image would
look like if illuminated differently. Inverse graphics schemes recover an explicit
representation of geometry and a set of chosen intrinsics, then relight with some
form of renderer. However error control for inverse graphics is difficult, and inverse
graphics methods can represent only the effects of the chosen intrinsics. This paper
describes a relighting method that is entirely data-driven, where intrinsics and
lighting are each represented as latent variables. Our approach produces SOTA
relightings of real scenes, as measured by standard metrics. We show that albedo
can be recovered from our latent intrinsics without using any example albedos, and
that the albedos recovered are competitive with SOTA methods.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

