MR-Ben: A Meta-Reasoning Benchmark for
Evaluating System-2 Thinking in LLMs
Zhongshen Zeng1 Yinhong Liu2 Yingjia Wan2
Jingyao Li1 Pengguang Chen1 Jianbo Dai3 Yuxuan Yao4
Rongwu Xu5 Zehan Qi5 Wanru Zhao2 Linling Shen6
Jianqiao Lu7 Haochen Tan4 Yukang Chen1 Hao Zhang8
†
†
Zhan Shi6 Bailin Wang9 Zhijiang Guo2
Jiaya Jia1
1

Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 University of Cambridge 3 University of Edinburgh
4
City University of Hong Kong 5 Tsinghua University 6 University of Texas at Austin
7
University of Hong Kong 8 Nanyang Technological University
9
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have shown increasing capability in problemsolving and decision-making, largely based on the step-by-step chain-of-thought
reasoning processes. However, evaluating these reasoning abilities has become
increasingly challenging. Existing outcome-based benchmarks are beginning to
saturate, becoming less effective in tracking meaningful progress. To address this,
we present a process-based benchmark MR-Ben that demands a meta-reasoning
skill, where LMs are asked to locate and analyse potential errors in automatically generated reasoning steps. Our meta-reasoning paradigm is especially suited
for system-2 slow thinking, mirroring the human cognitive process of carefully
examining assumptions, conditions, calculations, and logic to identify mistakes.
MR-Ben comprises 5,975 questions curated by human experts across a wide range
of subjects, including physics, chemistry, logic, coding, and more. Through our
designed metrics for assessing meta-reasoning on this benchmark, we identify interesting limitations and weaknesses of current LLMs (open-source and closed-source
models). For example, with models like the o1 series from OpenAI demonstrating strong performance by effectively scrutinizing the solution space, many other
state-of-the-art models fall significantly behind on MR-Ben, exposing potential
shortcomings in their training strategies and inference methodologies1 .

1

Introduction

Reasoning, the cognitive process of using evidence, arguments, and logic to reach conclusions,
is crucial for problem-solving, decision-making, and critical thinking [65, 19]. With the rapid
advancement of Large Language Models (LLMs), there is an increasing interest in exploring their
reasoning capabilities [30, 57]. Consequently, evaluating reasoning in LLMs reliably becomes
paramount. Current evaluation methodologies primarily focus on the final result [16, 28, 22, 60],
disregarding the intricacies of the reasoning process. While effective to some extent, such evaluation
practices may conceal underlying issues like logical errors or unnecessary steps that compromise the
accuracy and efficiency of reasoning [68, 41].
†

1

Correspondence to: Zhijiang Guo (zg283@cam.ac.uk) and Jiaya Jia (leojia@cse.cuhk.edu.hk).
Our dataset and codes are available on https://randolph-zeng.github.io/Mr-Ben.github.io.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

