Contextual Multinomial Logit Bandits
with General Value Functions
Mengxiao Zhang
University of Iowa
mengxiao-zhang@uiowa.edu

Haipeng Luo
University of Southern California
haipengl@usc.edu

Abstract
Contextual multinomial logit (MNL) bandits capture many real-world assortment
recommendation problems such as online retailing/advertising. However, prior
work has only considered (generalized) linear value functions, which greatly limits its applicability. Motivated by this fact, in this work, we consider contextual
MNL bandits with a general value function class that contains the ground truth,
borrowing ideas from a recent trend of studies on contextual bandits. Speciﬁcally,
we consider both the stochastic and the adversarial settings, and propose a suite of
algorithms, each with different computation-regret trade-off. When applied to the
linear case, our results not only are the ﬁrst ones with no dependence on a certain
problem-dependent constant that can be exponentially large, but also enjoy other
advantages such as computational efﬁciency, dimension-free regret bounds, or the
ability to handle completely adversarial contexts and rewards.

1

Introduction

As assortment recommendation becomes ubiquitous in real-world applications such as online retailing and advertising, the multinomial (MNL) bandit model has attracted great interest in the past
decade since it was proposed by Rusmevichientong et al. [24]. It involves a learner and a customer
interacting for T rounds. At each round, knowing the reward/proﬁt for each of the N available items,
the learner selects a subset/assortment of size at most K and recommend it to the customer, who then
purchases one of these K items or none of them according to a multinomial logit model speciﬁed by
the customer’s valuation over the items. The goal of the learner is to learn these unknown valuations
over time and select the assortments with high reward.
To better capture practical applications where there is rich contextual information about the items and
customers, a sequence of recent works study a contextual MNL bandit model where the customer’s
valuation is determined by the context via an unknown (generalized) linear function [8, 21, 7, 19, 20,
23, 2]. However, there are no studies on general value functions, despite many recent breakthroughs
for classic contextual multi-armed bandits using a general value function class with much stronger
representation power that enables fruitful results in both theory and practice [1, 10, 27, 11, 25].
Contributions. Motivated by this gap, we propose a contextual MNL bandit model with a general
value function class that contains the ground truth (a standard realizability assumption), and develop
a suite of algorithms for different settings and with different computation-regret trade-off.
More speciﬁcally, in Section 3, we ﬁrst consider a stochastic setting where the context-reward pairs
are i.i.d. samples of an unknown distribution. Following the work by Simchi-Levi and Xu [25] for
contextual bandits, we reduce the problem to an easier ofﬂine log loss regression problem and propose two strategies using an ofﬂine regression oracle: one with simple and efﬁcient uniform exploration, and another with more adaptive exploration (and hence improved regret) induced by a novel
log-barrier regularized strategy. Our results rely on several new technical ﬁndings, including a fast
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

