A RCHITECT: Generating Vivid and Interactive
3D Scenes with Hierarchical 2D Inpainting

Yian Wang∗
Umass Amherst
yianwang@umass.edu

Xiaowen Qiu∗
Umass Amherst
xiaowenqiu@umass.edu

Jiageng Liu∗
Umass Amherst
jiagengliu@umass.edu

Zhehuan Chen
Umass Amherst
zhehuanchen@umass.edu

Jiting Cai
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
caijiting@sjtu.edu.cn

Yufei Wang
Carnegie Mellon University
yufeiw2@andrew.cmu.edu

Zhou Xian
Carnegie Mellon University
zhouxian@cmu.edu

Chuang Gan
Umass Amherst
chuanggan@umass.edu

Tsun-Hsuan Wang
MIT
tsunw@mit.edu

Abstract
Creating large-scale interactive 3D environments is essential for the development
of Robotics and Embodied AI research. However, generating diverse embodied
environments with realistic detail and considerable complexity remains a significant challenge. Current methods, including manual design, procedural generation,
diffusion-based scene generation, and large language model (LLM) guided scene
design, are hindered by limitations such as excessive human effort, reliance on
predefined rules or training datasets, and limited 3D spatial reasoning ability. Since
pre-trained 2D image generative models better capture scene and object configuration than LLMs, we address these challenges by introducing A RCHITECT, a
generative framework that creates complex and realistic 3D embodied environments
leveraging diffusion-based 2D image inpainting. In detail, we utilize foundation
visual perception models to obtain each generated object from the image and
leverage pre-trained depth estimation models to lift the generated 2D image to
3D space. While there are still challenges that the camera parameters and scale
of depth are still absent in the generated image, we address those problems by
“controlling” the diffusion model by hierarchical inpainting. Specifically, having
access to ground-truth depth and camera parameters in simulation, we first render
a photo-realistic image of only back-grounds in it. Then, we inpaint the foreground
in this image, passing the geometric cues in the back-ground to the inpainting
model, which informs the camera parameters. This process effectively controls
the camera parameters and depth scale for the generated image, facilitating the
back-projection from 2D image to 3D point clouds. Our pipeline is further extended to a hierarchical and iterative inpainting process to continuously generate
placement of large furniture and small objects to enrich the scene. This iterative
structure brings the flexibility for our method to generate or refine scenes from
various starting points, such as text, floor plans, or pre-arranged environments.
Experimental results demonstrate that A RCHITECT outperforms existing methods
in producing realistic and complex environments, making it highly suitable for
Embodied AI and robotics applications.2
∗
2

Equal Contribution
Project page: https://vis-www.cs.umass.edu/ARCHITECT

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

