Multiview Scene Graph

Juexiao Zhang Gao Zhu Sihang Li Xinhao Liu
Haorui Song Xinran Tang Chen Feng✉
New York University
{juexiao.zhang, cfeng}@nyu.edu

Abstract
A proper scene representation is central to the pursuit of spatial intelligence where
agents can robustly reconstruct and efficiently understand 3D scenes. A scene
representation is either metric, such as landmark maps in 3D reconstruction, 3D
bounding boxes in object detection, or voxel grids in occupancy prediction, or
topological, such as pose graphs with loop closures in SLAM or visibility graphs
in SfM. In this work, we propose to build Multiview Scene Graphs (MSG) from
unposed images, representing a scene topologically with interconnected place and
object nodes. The task of building MSG is challenging for existing representation
learning methods since it needs to jointly address both visual place recognition,
object detection, and object association from images with limited fields of view
and potentially large viewpoint changes. To evaluate any method tackling this task,
we developed an MSG dataset based on a public 3D dataset. We also propose
an evaluation metric based on the intersection-over-union score of MSG edges.
Moreover, we develop a novel baseline method built on mainstream pretrained
vision models, combining visual place recognition and object association into
one Transformer decoder architecture. Experiments demonstrate that our method
has superior performance compared to existing relevant baselines. All codes and
resources are open-source at https://ai4ce.github.io/MSG/.

1

Introduction

The ability to understand 3D space and the spatial relationships among 2D observations plays a
central role in mobile agents interacting with the physical real world. Humans obtain such spatial
intelligence largely from our visual intelligence [26, 45]. When humans are situated in an unseen
environment and try to understand the spatial structure from visual observations, we don’t perceive
and memorize the scene by exact meters and degrees. Instead, we build cognitive maps topologically
based on visual observations and commonsense [27, 48]. Given imagery observations, we are able
to associate the images taken at the same place by finding overlapping visual clues and identifying
the same or different objects from various viewpoints. This ability to establish correspondence from
visual perception constitutes the foundation of our spatial memory and cognitive representation of the
world. Can we equip AI models with similar spatial intelligence?
Motivated by this question, we propose the task of building a Multiview Scene Graph (MSG) to
explicitly evaluate a representation learning model’s capability of understanding spatial correspondences. Specifically, as illustrated in Figure 1, given a set of unposed RGB images taken from the
same scene, this task requires building a place+object graph consisting of images and object nodes,
where images taken at nearby locations are connected, and the appearances of the same object across
different views should be associated together as one object node.
✉ Corresponding author. The work was supported in part through NSF grants 2238968 and 2322242, and
the NYU IT High Performance Computing resources, services, and staff expertise.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

