A Unified Confidence Sequence for Generalized Linear
Models, with Applications to Bandits

Jungyhun Lee, Se-Young Yun
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI
KAIST
Seoul, Republic of Korea
{jh_lee00, yunseyoung}@kaist.ac.kr

Kwang-Sung Jun
Department of Computer Science
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ, USA
kjun@cs.arizona.edu

Abstract
We present a unified likelihood ratio-based confidence sequence (CS) for any (selfconcordant) generalized linear model (GLM) that is guaranteed to be convex and
numerically tight. We show that this is on par or improves upon known CSs for
various GLMs, including Gaussian, Bernoulli, and Poisson. In particular, for the
first time, our CS for Bernoulli has a poly(S)-free radius where S is the norm of
the unknown parameter. Our first technical novelty is its derivation, which utilizes
a time-uniform PAC-Bayesian bound with a uniform prior/posterior, despite the
latter being a rather unpopular choice for deriving CSs. As a direct application of
our new CS, we propose a simple and natural optimistic algorithm called OFUGLB,
applicable to any generalized linear bandits (GLB; Filippi et al. (2010)). Our
analysis shows that the celebrated optimistic approach simultaneously attains stateof-the-art regrets for various self-concordant (not necessarily bounded) GLBs,
and even poly(S)-free for bounded GLBs, including logistic bandits. The regret
analysis, our second technical novelty, follows from combining our new CS with
a new proof technique that completely avoids the previously widely used selfconcordant control lemma (Faury et al., 2020, Lemma 9). Numerically, OFUGLB
outperforms or is at par with prior algorithms for logistic bandits.

1

Introduction

One paramount task in statistics and machine learning is to estimate the uncertainty of the underlying
model from (possibly noisy) observations. For example, in interactive machine learning scenarios
such as bandits (Lattimore and Szepesvári, 2020; Robbins, 1952; Thompson, 1933) and recently
reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF; Christiano et al. (2017); Ouyang et al. (2022)),
at each time step t, the learner chooses an action xt from an available set of actions Xt and observes
reward or outcome rt that is modeled as a distribution whose mean is an unknown function f ∗ of xt ;
i.e., rt ∼ p(·|xt ; f ∗ ). One popular choice of such a model is the generalized linear model (GLM;
McCullagh and Nelder (1989)) that extends exponential family distributions to have a linear structure
in its natural parameter as ⟨x, θ⋆ ⟩, where θ⋆ is an unknown parameter. In other words, the mean
function is f ∗ (x) = µ(⟨x, θ⋆ ⟩) for some inverse link function µ. This encompasses a wide range
of distributions, which in turn makes it ubiquitous in various real-world applications, such as news
recommendations (Bernoulli; Li et al. (2010, 2012)), social network influence maximization (Poisson;
Gisselbrecht et al. (2015); Lage et al. (2013)), and more. In such tasks, the learner must estimate
the uncertainty about θ⋆ at each time step t ≥ 1, given observations {(xs , rs )}t−1
s=1 , to make wise
decisions. One popular and useful way to capture the uncertainty is via a time-uniform confidence
sequence (CS) {Ct (δ)}∞
t=1 , which takes the form of P[∃t ≥ 1 : θ⋆ ̸∈ Ct (δ)] ≤ δ. Recently, CS has
been described as one of the key components for safe anytime-valid inference (SAVI) that can ensure
the validity/safeness of sequentially adaptive statistical inference (Ramdas et al., 2023).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

