Monomial Matrix Group Equivariant
Neural Functional Networks
Thieu N. Vo∗
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
thieuvo@nus.edu.sg

Viet-Hoang Tran∗
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
hoang.tranviet@u.nus.edu
Tho Tran-Huu
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
thotranhuu@u.nus.edu.vn

An T. Nguyen
FPT Software AI Center
annt68@fpt.com

Tan M. Nguyen
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
tanmn@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Neural functional networks (NFNs) have recently gained significant attention due
to their diverse applications, ranging from predicting network generalization and
network editing to classifying implicit neural representation. Previous NFN designs often depend on permutation symmetries in neural networks’ weights, which
traditionally arise from the unordered arrangement of neurons in hidden layers.
However, these designs do not take into account the weight scaling symmetries
of ReLU networks, and the weight sign flipping symmetries of sin or Tanh networks. In this paper, we extend the study of the group action on the network
weights from the group of permutation matrices to the group of monomial matrices
by incorporating scaling/sign-flipping symmetries. Particularly, we encode these
scaling/sign-flipping symmetries by designing our corresponding equivariant and
invariant layers. We name our new family of NFNs the Monomial Matrix Group
Equivariant Neural Functional Networks (Monomial-NFN). Because of the expansion of the symmetries, Monomial-NFN has much fewer independent trainable
parameters compared to the baseline NFNs in the literature, thus enhancing the
model’s efficiency. Moreover, for fully connected and convolutional neural networks, we theoretically prove that all groups that leave these networks invariant
while acting on their weight spaces are some subgroups of the monomial matrix
group. We provide empirical evidences to demonstrate the advantages of our model
over existing baselines, achieving competitive performance and efficiency. The
code is publicly available at https://github.com/MathematicalAI-NUS/MonomialNFN.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have become highly versatile modeling tools, finding applications
across a broad spectrum of fields such as Natural Language Processing [15, 29, 51, 66], Computer
∗

Equal contribution. Please correspond to thieuvo@nus.edu.sg.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

