Diffeomorphic interpolation for efficient
persistence-based topological optimization

Mathieu Carrière
DataShape
Centre Inria d’Université Côte d’Azur
Sophia Antipolis, France
mathieu.carriere@inria.fr

Marc Theveneau∗
Shape Analysis Group
Computer Science department, McGill
Montréal, Quebec, Canada
marc.theveneau@mail.mcgill.ca

Théo Lacombe
Laboratoire d’Informatique Gaspard Monge,
Univ. Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, LIGM, F-77454
Marne-la-Vallée, France
theo.lacombe@univ-eiffel.fr

Abstract
Topological Data Analysis (TDA) provides a pipeline to extract quantitative topological descriptors from structured objects. This enables the definition of topological loss functions, which assert to what extent a given object exhibits some
topological properties. These losses can then be used to perform topological optimization via gradient descent routines. While theoretically sounded, topological
optimization faces an important challenge: gradients tend to be extremely sparse,
in the sense that the loss function typically depends on only very few coordinates
of the input object, yielding dramatically slow optimization schemes in practice.
Focusing on the central case of topological optimization for point clouds, we propose in this work to overcome this limitation using diffeomorphic interpolation,
turning sparse gradients into smooth vector fields defined on the whole space,
with quantifiable Lipschitz constants. In particular, we show that our approach
combines efficiently with subsampling techniques routinely used in TDA, as the
diffeomorphism derived from the gradient computed on a subsample can be used
to update the coordinates of the full input object, allowing us to perform topological optimization on point clouds at an unprecedented scale. Finally, we also
showcase the relevance of our approach for black-box autoencoder (AE) regularization, where we aim at enforcing topological priors on the latent spaces associated to fixed, pre-trained, black-box AE models, and where we show that learning
a diffeomorphic flow can be done once and then re-applied to new data in linear
time (while vanilla topological optimization has to be re-run from scratch). Moreover, reverting the flow allows us to generate data by sampling the topologicallyoptimized latent space directly, yielding better interpretability of the model.

1

Introduction

Persistent homology (PH) is a central tool of Topological Data Analysis (TDA) that enables the
extraction of quantitative topological information (such as, e.g., the number and sizes of loops, connected components, branches, cavities, etc) about structured objects (such as graphs, times series or
∗

Part of this work was done when MT was doing an internship at the Laboratoire d’Informatique Gaspard
Monge and student at Université Paris-Saclay.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

