Segment Anything without Supervision

XuDong Wang

Jingfeng Yang

Trevor Darrell

UC Berkeley
code: https://github.com/frank-xwang/UnSAM

Abstract
The Segmentation Anything Model (SAM) requires labor-intensive data labeling.
We present Unsupervised SAM (UnSAM) for promptable and automatic wholeimage segmentation that does not require human annotations. UnSAM utilizes a
divide-and-conquer strategy to “discover” the hierarchical structure of visual scenes.
We first leverage top-down clustering methods to partition an unlabeled image into
instance/semantic level segments. For all pixels within a segment, a bottom-up
clustering method is employed to iteratively merge them into larger groups, thereby
forming a hierarchical structure. These unsupervised multi-granular masks are
then utilized to supervise model training. Evaluated across seven popular datasets,
UnSAM achieves competitive results with the supervised counterpart SAM, and
surpasses the previous state-of-the-art in unsupervised segmentation by 11% in
terms of AR. Moreover, we show that supervised SAM can also benefit from our
self-supervised labels. By integrating our unsupervised pseudo masks into SA-1B’s
ground-truth masks and training UnSAM with only 1% of SA-1B, a lightly semisupervised UnSAM can often segment entities overlooked by supervised SAM,
exceeding SAM’s AR by over 6.7% and AP by 3.9% on SA-1B.

1

Introduction

Trained on massive unlabeled data using self-supervised learning methods, Large Language Models
(LLMs) [5, 34, 33, 46, 2, 19] in natural language processing have revolutionized our world and
redefined human-computer interactions. In the domain of computer vision, the recent introduction of
the Segment Anything Model (SAM) [21] has dramatically transformed the field with its exceptional
ability to handle diverse image segmentation tasks. However, the need for comprehensive manual
labeling of training data—over 20 minutes per image [21]—limits SAM from following the scaling
laws that benefit LLMs [20]. As a result, despite SA-1B [21] being the most extensive segmentation
dataset available, it contains only about 11 million images. Moreover, human-annotated data often
introduces significant biases based on the annotators’ perceptions of “what constitutes an instance”,
which frequently leads to the oversight of small entities within the images.
This challenge raises a crucial question addressed in this paper: Can we “segment anything” without
supervision? In response, we present UnSAM, an innovative unsupervised learning method capable
of performing both interactive and whole-image segmentation without the need for supervision.
How can we achieve fine-grained and multi-granular segmentation masks comparable to those
in SA-1B [21] without supervision? Insights from neuroscience suggest that the human visual
system exploits the structure of visual scenes by decomposing dynamic scenes into simpler parts
or motions. This perception of hierarchically organized structures implies a powerful “divide-andconquer” strategy for parsing complex scenes [4, 27]. Drawing inspiration from this, we introduce a
divide-and-conquer approach designed to generate hierarchical image segmentation results directly
from raw, unlabeled images. The divide-and-conquer approach is a crucial element of UnSAM,
enabling it to effectively parse and segment images at multiple levels of granularity.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

