A Pairwise Pseudo-likelihood Approach for Matrix
Completion with Informative Missingness

Jiangyuan Li* †
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
jiangyuanli@tamu.edu

Jiayi Wang*
Department of Mathematical Sciences
University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, TX 75080
jiayi.wang2@utdallas.edu

Raymond K. W. Wong
Department of Statistics
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
raywong@tamu.edu

Kwun Chuen Gary Chan
Department of Biostatistics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
kcgchan@uw.edu

Abstract
While several recent matrix completion methods are developed to deal with nonuniform observation probabilities across matrix entries, very few allow the missingness to depend on the mostly unobserved matrix measurements, which is generally
ill-posed. We aim to tackle a subclass of these ill-posed settings, characterized by a
flexible separable observation probability assumption that can depend on the matrix
measurements. We propose a regularized pairwise pseudo-likelihood approach
for matrix completion and prove that the proposed estimator can asymptotically
recover the low-rank parameter matrix up to an identifiable equivalence class of
a constant shift and scaling, at a near-optimal asymptotic convergence rate of the
standard well-posed (non-informative missing) setting, while effectively mitigating
the impact of informative missingness. The efficacy of our method is validated
via numerical experiments, positioning it as a robust tool for matrix completion to
mitigate data bias.

1

Introduction

The goal of matrix completion is to recover a target matrix from its noisy and incomplete measurements. It is a modern high-dimensional missing data problem. Despite various significant advances
made in the last two decades [e.g., 7, 17, 20, 18], many works on matrix completion still focus
on the missing-at-random mechanism. Although such an assumption is doubtful in many real-life
applications, there are very few options available for more general missing data mechanism, especially those with theoretical guarantees. This work aims to provide a principled and theoretically
well-supported alternative method for missing-not-at-random settings, where missingness could
depend on the measurements that are mostly unobserved.
A usual assumption to allow for succeeding matrix completion is that the unknown matrix is lowrank or approximately low-rank. The noiseless setting has been studied in [7] using nuclear norm
minimization. The vast majority of existing theories on matrix completion assume that entries are
revealed with a constant probability with respect to both entry location and measurement value.
*
†

Equal contribution
Now at Google

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

