Fast Rates in Stochastic Online Convex Optimization
by Exploiting the Curvature of Feasible Sets

Taira Tsuchiya
The University of Tokyo and RIKEN
tsuchiya@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Shinji Ito
The University of Tokyo and RIKEN
shinji@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
In this work, we explore online convex optimization (OCO) and introduce a new
condition and analysis that provides fast rates by exploiting the curvature of feasible sets. In online linear optimization, it is known that if the average gradient
of loss functions exceeds a certain threshold, the curvature of feasible sets can be
exploited by the follow-the-leader (FTL) algorithm to achieve a logarithmic regret.
This study reveals that algorithms adaptive to the curvature of loss functions can
also leverage the curvature of feasible sets. In particular, we ﬁrst prove that if an optimal decision is on the boundary of a feasible set and the gradient of an underlying
loss function is non-zero, then the algorithm achieves a regret bound of O(ρ ln T )
in stochastic environments. Here, ρ > 0 is the radius of the smallest sphere that includes the optimal decision and encloses the feasible set. Our approach, unlike existing ones, can work directly with convex loss functions, exploiting the curvature
of loss functions simultaneously, and can achieve the logarithmic regret only √
with
a local property of feasible sets. Additionally, the algorithm achieves an O( T )
regret even in adversarial √
environments, in which FTL suﬀers an Ω(T ) regret, and
achieves an O(ρ ln T + Cρ ln T ) regret in corrupted stochastic environments
with corruption level C. Furthermore,
by extending our analysis, we establish a
 q−2
q
matching regret upper bound of O T 2(q−1) (ln T ) 2(q−1) for q-uniformly convex
feasible sets, where uniformly convex sets include strongly convex sets and ℓp balls for p ∈ [2, ∞). This bound bridges
√ the gap between the O(ln T ) bound for
strongly convex sets (q = 2) and the O( T ) bound for non-curved sets (q → ∞).

1

Introduction

This paper considers online convex optimization (OCO), a framework in which a learner and an
environment interact in a sequential manner. At the beginning, a convex body (or feasible set) K ⊆
Rd is given. At each round t = 1, . . . , T , the learner selects a decision xt ∈ K from the convex
body K using information obtained up to round t − 1. Then, the environment determines a convex
loss function ft : K → R, and the learner suﬀers loss ft (xt ) and observes ∇ft (xt ) ∈ Rd . The
goal of the learner is to minimize the regret, which is the expectation of the diﬀerence between the
cumulative loss of decisions (xt )Tt=1 and that of a single optimal decision x⋆ ﬁxed in hindsight, that
PT


PT
is, RT = E t=1 (ft (xt ) − ft (x⋆ )) for x⋆ = arg minx∈K E t=1 ft (x) . OCO is called online
linear optimization (OLO) when (ft )t are linear functions, i.e., ft (·) = hgt , ·i for some gt ∈ Rd .
√
In OCO and OLO, the well-known online gradient descent (OGD) achieves an O( T ) regret upper
bound for Lipschitz
√ continuous ft [27]. In general, this upper bound cannot be improved and is known
to match the Ω( T ) regret lower bound [8]. However, this lower bound can be circumvented under
certain conditions. The most typical way is to exploit the curvature of loss functions. It is known
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

