Towards Combating Frequency Simplicity-biased
Learning for Domain Generalization

Xilin He1 , Jingyu Hu1 , Qinliang Lin1 , Cheng Luo1 , Weicheng Xie1,2,3†
Siyang Song4 , Muhammad Haris Khan5 , Linlin Shen1,2,3
Computer Vision Institute, School of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Shenzhen University1
Shenzhen Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics for Society2
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing3
University of Exeter4 , Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artiﬁcial Intelligence5
wcxie@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
Domain generalization methods aim to learn transferable knowledge from source
domains that can generalize well to unseen target domains. Recent studies show
that neural networks frequently suffer from a simplicity-biased learning behavior which leads to over-reliance on speciﬁc frequency sets, namely as frequency
shortcuts, instead of semantic information, resulting in poor generalization performance. Despite previous data augmentation techniques successfully enhancing generalization performances, they intend to apply more frequency shortcuts,
thereby causing hallucinations of generalization improvement. In this paper, we
aim to prevent such learning behavior of applying frequency shortcuts from a datadriven perspective. Given the theoretical justiﬁcation of models’ biased learning
behavior on different spatial frequency components, which is based on the dataset
frequency properties, we argue that the learning behavior on various frequency
components could be manipulated by changing the dataset statistical structure in
the Fourier domain. Intuitively, as frequency shortcuts are hidden in the dominant and highly dependent frequencies of dataset structure, dynamically perturbating the over-reliance frequency components could prevent the application of
frequency shortcuts. To this end, we propose two effective data augmentation
modules designed to collaboratively and adaptively adjust the frequency characteristic of the dataset, aiming to dynamically inﬂuence the learning behavior of
the model and ultimately serving as a strategy to mitigate shortcut learning. Code
is available at AdvFrequency.

1

Introduction

Previous studies have shown that the performance of deep neural networks usually degrades when
processing previously unseen data whose distribution differs radically from the training data distribution, which largely constrains the deployment of well-trained deep models [11, 10]. Domain
generalization (DG) aims to learn models with transferable knowledge, utilizing multiple source
domains, that can generalize well to unseen test data to address this problem [19, 8]. In this paper,
we focus on a more challenging scenario where only one source domain is available for training,
namely as single source domain generalization (SDG).
†Corresponding author
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

