A PID Controller Approach for Adaptive
Probability-dependent Gradient Decay in Model
Calibration
Siyuan Zhang
School of Internet of Things Engineering
Jiangnan University
Wuxi, China 214122

Linbo Xie ∗
School of Internet of Things Engineering
Jiangnan University
Wuxi, China 214122

Abstract
Modern deep learning models often exhibit overconfident predictions, inadequately
capturing uncertainty. During model optimization, the expected calibration error
tends to overfit earlier than classification accuracy, indicating distinct optimization objectives for classification error and calibration error. To ensure consistent
optimization of both model accuracy and model calibration, we propose a novel
method incorporating a probability-dependent gradient decay coefficient into loss
function. This coefficient exhibits a strong correlation with the overall confidence
level. To maintain model calibration during optimization, we utilize a proportionalintegral-derivative (PID) controller to dynamically adjust this gradient decay rate,
where the adjustment relies on the proposed relative calibration error feedback
in each epoch, thereby preventing the model from exhibiting over-confidence or
under-confidence. Within the PID control system framework, the proposed relative
calibration error serves as the control system output, providing an indication of the
overall confidence level, while the gradient decay rate functions as the controlled
variable. Moreover, recognizing the impact of gradient amplitude of adaptive decay
rates, we implement an adaptive learning rate mechanism for gradient compensation to prevent inadequate learning of over-small or over-large gradient. Empirical
experiments validate the efficacy of our PID-based adaptive gradient decay rate approach, ensuring consistent optimization of model calibration and model accuracy.
The code of implementation is available in https://github.com/UHIF/PID_AGD.

1

Inroduction

Model calibration aims to refine the uncertainty distribution of model output, ensuring its faithful
reflection of the inherent uncertainty characteristics. Softmax mapping is commonly employed
in the baseline learning to establish the output-probability mapping. Yet, with the escalation in
model parameterizations, the output uncertainty distribution from over-parameterized models tends
to become over-confident [1]. Consequently, the baseline strategy, which exclusively depends on
Softmax mapping without accounting for calibration characteristics as optimization objectives, fails to
achieve perfect model calibration. Particularly in high-risk applications, inadequate model calibration
poses heightened safety risks [2, 3].
There are three primary strategies for calibrating uncertainty in deep learning models: Bayesian
neural networks, post-processing calibration, and training-based model calibration. Bayesian neural
networks (BNNs) integrate Bayesian inference into their framework, distinguishing them from traditional neural networks [4, 5]. In contrast to conventional neural networks, which yield point estimates,
∗

Linbo Xie is the corresponding author. E-mail: xie_linbo@jiangnan.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

