SEL-BALD: Deep Bayesian Active Learning with
Selective Labels
Ruijiang Gao
Naveen Jindal School of Management
University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson, TX 75082
ruijiang.gao@utdallas.edu

Mingzhang Yin
Warrington College of Business
University of Florida
Gainesville, FL 32611
mingzhang.yin@warrington.ufl.edu

Maytal Saar-Tsechansky
Information, Risk, and Operations Management
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
maytal@mail.utexas.edu

Abstract
Machine learning systems are widely used in many high-stakes contexts in which
experimental designs for assigning treatments are infeasible. When evaluating
decisions is costly, such as investigating fraud cases, or evaluating biopsy decisions,
a sample-efficient strategy is needed. However, while existing active learning
methods assume humans will always label the instances selected by the machine
learning model, in many critical applications, humans may decline to label instances
selected by the machine learning model due to reasons such as regulation constraint,
domain knowledge, or algorithmic aversion, thus not sample efficient. In this paper,
we study the Active Learning with Instance Rejection (ALIR) problem, which
considers the human discretion behavior for high-stakes decision making problems.
We propose new active learning algorithms under deep bayesian active learning
for selective labeling (SEL-BALD) to address the ALIR problem. Our algorithms
consider how to acquire information for both the machine learning model and the
human discretion model. We conduct experiments on both synthetic and real-world
datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed algorithms.

1

Introduction

Machine learning is increasingly deployed in high-risk applications, including medical diagnosis,
fraud detection, and criminal justice [Zeng et al., 2017, Cecchini et al., 2010, Savage, 2020]. Given
enough labeled data and the same set of feature input, a machine learning model may achieve better
performance than human experts [Abramoff et al., 2023]. Therefore, there have been growing efforts
to develop machine learning (ML) models to assist humans in improving high-risk decisions.
While modern deep learning algorithms’ strong performance across applications makes them particularly promising for supporting experts, they are often data-hungry and require a large amount
of labeled data to perform well. Yet, in many impactful high-risk applications acquiring a large
number of labeled data is highly costly or can be prohibitive, such as when labeling necessitates
costly human experts’ time and effort. For instance, labeling insurance claims requires human experts’
resources to establish if an insurance claim is fraudulent; similarly, determining medical diagnoses
may require diagnostic procedures that may be time-consuming and possibly risky for patients. Active
learning methods can be a promising path to address this problem, given they aim to select especially
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

