Identiﬁcation and Estimation of the Bi-Directional
MR with Some Invalid Instruments
Feng Xie1 , Zhen Yao1 , Lin Xie1 , Yan Zeng1,∗, Zhi Geng1
1

Beijing Technology and Business University

Abstract
We consider the challenging problem of estimating causal effects from purely observational data in the bi-directional Mendelian randomization (MR), where some
invalid instruments, as well as unmeasured confounding, usually exist. To address
this problem, most existing methods attempt to ﬁnd proper valid instrumental variables (IVs) for the target causal effect by expert knowledge or by assuming that the
causal model is a one-directional MR model. As such, in this paper, we ﬁrst theoretically investigate the identiﬁcation of the bi-directional MR from observational
data. In particular, we provide necessary and sufﬁcient conditions under which
valid IV sets are correctly identiﬁed such that the bi-directional MR model is identiﬁable, including the causal directions of a pair of phenotypes (i.e., the treatment
and outcome). Moreover, based on the identiﬁcation theory, we develop a cluster fusion-like method to discover valid IV sets and estimate the causal effects of
interest. We theoretically demonstrate the correctness of the proposed algorithm.
Experimental results show the effectiveness of our method for estimating causal
effects in both one-directional and bi-directional MR models.

1

Introduction

Mendelian randomization (MR) is a powerful method for estimating the causal effect of a potentially
modiﬁable risk factor (treatment) on disease (outcome) in observational studies, which has been used
across a wide variety of contexts, such as clinic [Mokry et al., 2015, Carreras-Torres et al., 2017],
socioeconomics [Cuellar-Partida et al., 2016, Brumpton et al., 2020], and drug targets [Ference et al.,
2015, Li et al., 2020]. Most existing MR methods assume a one-directional causal relationship.
However, bi-directional relationships are ubiquitous in real-life scenarios, for example, obesity and
vitamin D status [Vimaleswaran et al., 2013], body mass index (BMI) and type 2 diabetes (T2D), etc.
Understanding and analyzing bi-directional relationships can provide deeper insights into complex
systems, leading to more effective interventions and solutions.
Within a causal inference framework, MR can be implemented as a form of instrumental variables
(IVs) analysis in which genetic variants2 serve as IVs for the modiﬁable risk factor. Speciﬁcally, as
shown in Figure 1, suppose obesity (X) and Vitamin D status (Y ) are the treatment and outcome of
interest, respectively, and lifestyle factors (U) are the unmeasured confounders between them. One
can use genetic variants G as IVs to explore the causal effect of X on Y in observational data [Vimaleswaran et al., 2013] if G are valid IVs, i.e., G satisfy the following three assumptions [Wright,
1928, Goldberger, 1972, Bowden and Turkington, 1990, Hernán and Robins, 2006]:
A1. [Relevance] The genetic variants G are associated with the exposure X;
A2. [Exclusion Restriction] The genetic variants G have no direct pathway to the outcome Y ;
∗
2

Corresponding author
The genetic variants that act as IVs in MR studies are Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

