Avoiding Undesired Future with Minimal Cost
in Non-Stationary Environments

Wen-Bo Du, Tian Qin, Tian-Zuo Wang, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{duwb, qint, wangtz, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Machine learning (ML) has achieved remarkable success in prediction tasks. In
many real-world scenarios, rather than solely predicting an outcome using an ML
model, the crucial concern is how to make decisions to prevent the occurrence of
undesired outcomes, known as the avoiding undesired future (AUF) problem. To
this end, a new framework called rehearsal learning has been proposed recently,
which works effectively in stationary environments by leveraging the influence
relations among variables. In real tasks, however, the environments are usually
non-stationary, where the influence relations may be dynamic, leading to the failure
of AUF by the existing method. In this paper, we introduce a novel sequential
methodology that effectively updates the estimates of dynamic influence relations,
which are crucial for rehearsal learning to prevent undesired outcomes in nonstationary environments. Meanwhile, we take the cost of decision actions into
account and provide the formulation of AUF problem with minimal action cost
under non-stationarity. We prove that in linear Gaussian cases, the problem can be
transformed into the well-studied convex quadratically constrained quadratic program (QCQP). In this way, we establish the first polynomial-time rehearsal-based
approach for addressing the AUF problem. Theoretical and experimental results
validate the effectiveness and efficiency of our method under certain circumstances.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) models have found extensive application in prediction tasks [25]. However,
in contrast to a sole emphasis on prediction, it is preferred in many real-world scenarios to further
explore effective decisions if the predicted outcomes are undesired. For instance, imagine that a
factory manager has trained an ML model on features X (e.g., economic indicators) to predict the
outcome Y (e.g., monthly sales). Suppose at the beginning of a month, Y is predicted to be undesired,
i.e., the predicted sales of the month are lower than expected. In this case, the manager usually wants
to take action by altering some intermediate variables Z during the month to avoid this undesired
outcome happening, e.g., modifying the discount to attract more customers. The problem of how to
find effective actions in such situations is known as avoiding undesired future (AUF) [63].
It is worth noting that AUF tasks often involve limited opportunities for interaction with the decision
environment [63]. For instance, in the aforementioned example, the factory manager can only adjust
the selling strategy once per month. Therefore, decision-making algorithms that depend on numerous
interactions, such as conventional reinforcement learning (RL) methods [4], are not well-suited for
the AUF problem [40]. Additionally, fundamentally vital decisions need to be made with human
judgment, and therefore, it is desired to enable human decision-makers to understand why and how
some actions can change the outcome. Due to these challenges, the structural relations among
variables, which contain fine-grained information and are usually interpretable, are worth being
considered to make decisions [36, 40].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

