TSGM: A Flexible Framework for Generative
Modeling of Synthetic Time Series

Alexander Nikitin1
2

Letizia Iannucci1

Samuel Kaski12

1
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University
Department of Computer Science, The University of Manchester
alexander.nikitin@aalto.fi

Abstract
Time series data are essential in a wide range of machine learning (ML) applications.
However, temporal data are often scarce or highly sensitive, limiting data sharing
and the use of data-intensive ML methods. A possible solution to this problem is the
generation of synthetic datasets that resemble real data. In this work, we introduce
Time Series Generative Modeling (TSGM), an open-source framework for the generative modeling and evaluation of synthetic time series datasets. TSGM includes
a broad repertoire of machine learning methods: generative models, probabilistic, simulation-based approaches, and augmentation techniques. The framework
enables users to evaluate the quality of the produced data from different angles:
similarity, downstream effectiveness, predictive consistency, diversity, fairness, and
privacy. TSGM is extensible and user-friendly, which allows researchers to rapidly
implement their own methods and compare them in a shareable environment. The
framework has been tested on open datasets and in production and proved to be
beneficial in both cases. https://github.com/AlexanderVNikitin/tsgm

1

Introduction

Time series data are widely used across many applications in science and technology, including
health informatics [81, 36], dynamical systems [79], weather forecasting [10, 25], and predictive
maintenance [51, 43]. Machine learning methods have proven to be applicable to some of these areas,
largely due to the quality of the models and the availability of datasets and benchmarks. This work
focuses on the latter, developing a framework that extends available datasets with synthetic time
series.
A prime example of the significance of data availability is the deep learning revolution [63] of the
last decade. The creation of large, rich datasets, such as ImageNet [18], CIFAR [37], or IMDB [47]
has led to the development of deep neural networks for images and texts, producing state-of-the-art
results in those domains [73, 32, 21, 55]. Open datasets are now expanding beyond these areas to
include large time series datasets. However, such datasets are applicable to only a small fraction of
the predictive problems involving time series. For many of these problems, open datasets are either
insufficiently large or lacking entirely. Several factors limit data availability, including the nature of
the problem (e.g., epidemiological data across countries) and privacy concerns [7, 83]. In particular,
training foundation time series models requires synthetic data [2, 16]. A viable solution to these
issues is the development of synthetic time series data generators.
To tackle the lack of datasets in the domain of temporal problems, various synthetic time series
generation methods have been proposed, including approaches based on GANs [78, 50, 44] or VAEs
[19, 41, 40]. Despite the development of many methods, the lack of a unified set of metrics for
comparison and the absence of a software framework have hindered the progress and the applicability
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

