FreqBlender: Enhancing DeepFake Detection by
Blending Frequency Knowledge

Hanzhe Li1,∗ Jiaran Zhou1,∗ Yuezun Li1,† Baoyuan Wu2 Bin Li3 Junyu Dong1
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Ocean University of China
2
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China

Wild Fake Face
Distribution

Fake

⨀

Real

⨀

⨁

Pseudo
Fake

Frequency
Domain

Spatial
Domain

Pseudo
Fake

⨁

⨀

or
Fake

Real

⨀

Real

Figure 1: Overview of our method. In contrast to the existing spatial-blending methods (right part), our method
explores face blending in frequency domain (left part). By leveraging the frequency knowledge, our method can
generate pseudo-fake faces that closely resemble the distribution of wild fake faces. Our method can complement
and work in conjunction with existing spatial-blending methods.

Abstract
Generating synthetic fake faces, known as pseudo-fake faces, is an effective way
to improve the generalization of DeepFake detection. Existing methods typically
generate these faces by blending real or fake faces in spatial domain. While
these methods have shown promise, they overlook the simulation of frequency
distribution in pseudo-fake faces, limiting the learning of generic forgery traces
in-depth. To address this, this paper introduces FreqBlender, a new method that
can generate pseudo-fake faces by blending frequency knowledge. Concretely,
we investigate the major frequency components and propose a Frequency Parsing
Network to adaptively partition frequency components related to forgery traces.
Then we blend this frequency knowledge from fake faces into real faces to generate
pseudo-fake faces. Since there is no ground truth for frequency components, we
describe a dedicated training strategy by leveraging the inner correlations among
different frequency knowledge to instruct the learning process. Experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in enhancing DeepFake detection,
making it a potential plug-and-play strategy for other methods.

1

Introduction

DeepFake refers to face forgery techniques that can manipulate facial attributes, such as identity,
expression, and lip movement [1]. The recent advancement of deep generative models [2, 3] has
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponds to Yuezun Li (liyuezun@ouc.edu.cn)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

