Improving the Learning Capability of Small-size
Image Restoration Network by Deep Fourier Shifting

Man Zhou
Aerospace Information Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences
University of Science and Technology of China

Abstract
State-of-the-art image restoration methods currently face challenges in terms of
computational requirements and performance, making them impractical for deployment on edge devices such as phones and resource-limited devices. As a
result, there is a need to develop alternative solutions with efficient designs that can
achieve comparable performance to transformer or large-kernel methods. This motivates our research to explore techniques for improving the capability of small-size
image restoration standing on the success secret of large receptive filed.
Targeting at expanding receptive filed, spatial-shift operator tailored for efficient
spatial communication and has achieved remarkable advances in high-level image
classification tasks, like S 2 -MLP [1] and ShiftVit [2]. However, its potential has
rarely been explored in low-level image restoration tasks. The underlying reason
behind this obstacle is that image restoration is sensitive to the spatial shift that
occurs due to severe region-aware information loss, which exhibits a different
behavior from high-level tasks. To address this challenge and unleash the potential
of spatial shift for image restoration, we propose an information-lossless shifting operator, i.e., Deep Fourier Shifting, that is customized for image restoration.
To develop our proposed operator, we first revisit the principle of shift operator
and apply it to the Fourier domain, where the shift operator can be modeled in
an information-lossless Fourier cycling manner. Inspired by Fourier cycling, we
design two variants of Deep Fourier Shifting, namely the amplitude-phase variant
and the real-imaginary variant. These variants are generic operators that can be
directly plugged into existing image restoration networks as a drop-in replacement
for the standard convolution unit, consuming fewer parameters. Extensive experiments across multiple low-level tasks including image denoising, low-light image
enhancement, guided image super-resolution, and image de-blurring demonstrate
consistent performance gains obtained by our Deep Fourier Shifting while reducing
the computation burden. Additionally, ablation studies verify the robustness of the
shift displacement with stable performance improvement.

1

Introduction

The spatial shift operator [3] is a technique that shifts channels from a pixel to its adjacent pixels. It
is celebrated for its efficient facilitation of spatial information exchange. Due to its parameter-free
nature and computational efficiency, this operator has found widespread application as a substitute
for standard convolution units, particularly in high-level image classification tasks. A representative
work, S 2 -MLP [1], integrates the spatial shift operator into a channel-mixing MLP framework. This
approach serves as an alternative to token-mixing MLPs, effectively mitigating intrinsic overfitting
issues and significantly enhancing recognition accuracy. ShiftVit [2] explores the role of the selfattention mechanism in Vision Transformers (ViTs) for high-level tasks. It proposes a replacement
using a modified spatial shift operation [4] that facilitates the exchange of a subset of channels
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

