Non-asymptotic Global Convergence Analysis of BFGS
with the Armijo-Wolfe Line Search

Qiujiang Jin
ECE, UT Austin
qiujiangjin0@gmail.com

Ruichen Jiang
ECE, UT Austin
rjiang@utexas.edu

Aryan Mokhtari
ECE, UT Austin
mokhtari@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we present the first explicit and non-asymptotic global convergence
rates of the BFGS method when implemented with an inexact line search scheme
satisfying the Armijo-Wolfe conditions. We show that BFGS achieves a global
linear convergence rate of (1− κ1 )t for µ-strongly convex functions with L-Lipschitz
gradients, where κ = L
µ represents the condition number. Additionally, if the
objective function’s Hessian is Lipschitz, BFGS with the Armijo-Wolfe line search
achieves a linear convergence rate that depends solely on the line search parameters,
independent of the condition number. We also establish a global superlinear
convergence rate of O(( 1t )t ). These global bounds are all valid for any starting
point x0 and any symmetric positive definite initial Hessian approximation matrix
B0 , though the choice of B0 impacts the number of iterations needed to achieve
these rates. By synthesizing these results, we outline the first global complexity
characterization of BFGS with the Armijo-Wolfe line search. Additionally, we
clearly define a mechanism for selecting the step size to satisfy the Armijo-Wolfe
conditions and characterize its overall complexity.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we focus on solving the following unconstrained convex minimization problem
min f (x),

x∈Rd

(1)

where f : Rd → R is strongly convex and twice differentiable. Quasi-Newton methods are among the
most popular algorithms for solving this class of problems due to their simplicity and fast convergence.
Like gradient descent-type methods, they require only gradient information for implementation, while
they aim to mimic the behavior of Newton’s method by using gradient information to approximate
the curvature of the objective function. There are several variations of quasi-Newton methods,
primarily distinguished by their update rules for the Hessian approximation matrices. The most
well-known among these include the Davidon-Fletcher-Powell (DFP) method [1, 2], the BroydenFletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno (BFGS) method [3–6], the Symmetric Rank-One (SR1) method [7, 8], and
the Broyden method [9]. Apart from these classical methods, other variants have also been proposed
in the literature, including randomized quasi-Newton methods [10–14], greedy quasi-Newton methods
[13–16], and those based on online learning techniques [17, 18]. In this paper, we mainly focus on the
global analysis of the BFGS method, arguably the most successful quasi-Newton method in practice.
The classic analyses of BFGS, including [19–28], primarily focused on demonstrating local asymptotic superlinear convergence without addressing an explicit global convergence rate when BFGS is
deployed with a line-search scheme. While attempts have been made to establish global convergence
for quasi-Newton methods using line search or trust-region techniques in previous studies [8, 29–33],
these efforts provided only asymptotic convergence guarantees without explicit global convergence
rates, thus not fully characterizing the global convergence rate of classical quasi-Newton methods.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

