IPO: Interpretable Prompt Optimization for
Vision-Language Models

1

Yingjun Du1* , Wenfang Sun2∗, Cees G. M. Snoek1
AIM Lab, University of Amsterdam 2 University of Science and Technology of China

Abstract
Pre-trained vision-language models like CLIP have remarkably adapted to various
downstream tasks. Nonetheless, their performance heavily depends on the specificity of the input text prompts, which requires skillful prompt template engineering.
Instead, current approaches to prompt optimization learn the prompts through gradient descent, where the prompts are treated as adjustable parameters. However,
these methods tend to lead to overfitting of the base classes seen during training
and produce prompts that are no longer understandable by humans. This paper
introduces a simple but interpretable prompt optimizer (IPO), that utilizes large
language models (LLMs) to generate textual prompts dynamically. We introduce
a Prompt Optimization Prompt that not only guides LLMs in creating effective
prompts but also stores past prompts with their performance metrics, providing rich
in-context information. Additionally, we incorporate a large multimodal model
(LMM) to condition on visual content by generating image descriptions, which
enhance the interaction between textual and visual modalities. This allows for
the creation of dataset-specific prompts that improve generalization performance,
while maintaining human comprehension. Extensive testing across 11 datasets
reveals that IPO not only improves the accuracy of existing gradient-descent-based
prompt learning methods but also considerably enhances the interpretability of the
generated prompts. By leveraging the strengths of LLMs, our approach ensures that
the prompts remain human-understandable, thereby facilitating better transparency
and oversight for vision-language models.

1

Introduction

Vision-language models, trained on a diverse array of image-text pairs encapsulating a broad vocabulary of real-world concepts [1, 2, 3], have demonstrated notable adaptability across various
downstream tasks [4, 5, 6, 7]. These models perform zero-shot image classification by filling in
a predefined prompt template (e.g., “a photo of a [CLASS]”) with specific class names for the
text encoder. Despite their effective generalization to new tasks, the performance can be influenced
by minor changes in the wording of prompt templates [8]. Instead of manually creating handcrafted prompts, recent developments in natural language processing [9, 10] and computer vision
[8, 11, 12, 13] have proposed methods to learn a set of soft prompts with minimal labeled data.
Despite the strides made in learning prompts, the current state of the art remains limited by its lack of
interpretability and the overfitting problems on the base classes, which can be prohibitive in diverse
and dynamic application environments. These limitations underscore the need for a more adaptable
and user-friendly approach to prompt optimization in vision-language models.
Drawing from recent advancements in using large language models (LLMs) as optimization tools [14],
our paper, for the first time, incorporates these capabilities into vision-language modeling. Unlike
gradient descent-based methods [8, 11, 13], which often fail to provide explanations for the generated
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

