A Closer Look at the CLS Token for Cross-Domain
Few-Shot Learning

1

Yixiong Zou1
Shuai Yi2
Yuhua Li1
Ruixuan Li1∗
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{yixiongz, yishuai, idcliyuhua, rxli}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Vision Transformer (ViT) has shown great power in learning from large-scale
datasets. However, collecting sufficient data for expert knowledge is always difficult. To handle this problem, Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning (CDFSL) has
been proposed to transfer the source-domain knowledge learned from sufficient
data to target domains where only scarce data is available. In this paper, we find
an intriguing phenomenon neglected by previous works for the CDFSL task based
on ViT: leaving the CLS token to random initialization, instead of loading sourcedomain trained parameters, could consistently improve target-domain performance.
We then delve into this phenomenon for an interpretation. We find the CLS token
naturally absorbs domain information due to the inherent structure of the ViT,
which is represented as the low-frequency component in the Fourier frequency
space of images. Based on this phenomenon and interpretation, we further propose
a method for the CDFSL task to decouple the domain information in the CLS
token during the source-domain training, and adapt the CLS token on the target
domain for efficient few-shot learning. Extensive experiments on four benchmarks
validate our rationale and state-of-the-art performance. Our codes are available at
https://github.com/Zoilsen/CLS_Token_CDFSL.

1

Introduction

Vision Transformer (ViT) has boosted the development of artificial intelligence due to its great capability in learning from large-scale datasets [3, 10, 11, 18, 26, 39], which is now the foundation model
for many deep learning tasks. However, the generalization of ViT on downstream tasks has not been
fully explored yet [27, 32, 41], especially under the cross-domain data-scarce scenarios. To handle
this problem, Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning (CDFSL) [14, 21, 28, 33, 47] has been proposed
to transfer the general knowledge from the data-sufficient source domain (such as ImageNet [8]) to
learn the expert knowledge in the data-scarce target domain (such as medical datasets [38]). Due to
the domain gap and scarce training data, CDFSL still remains a challenging task.
To handle this task, we focus on the basic transfer-learning-based method, i.e., training the ViT model
on the source domain by the all-class classification loss, and loading the model parameters on the
target domain for classification. We find an intriguing phenomenon that is ignored by previous works:
on the target domain dataset, not loading the CLS token parameters (i.e., leaving the CLS token to
random initialization) would consistently lead to higher performance in most cases, although such
operation may harm the source-domain performance, as shown in Fig. 1.
In this paper, we delve into this phenomenon for an interpretation. We first study what information is
encoded by the CLS token during the source-domain training. We find the CLS token naturally
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

