PARD: Permutation-invariant Autoregressive Diffusion
for Graph Generation

Lingxiao Zhao
Carnegie Mellon University
lingxiaozlx@gmail.com

Xueying Ding
Carnegie Mellon University
xding2@andrew.cmu.edu

Leman Akoglu
Carnegie Mellon University
lakoglu@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Graph generation has been dominated by autoregressive models due to their simplicity and effectiveness, despite their sensitivity to node ordering. Diffusion
models, on the other hand, have garnered increasing attention as they offer comparable performance while being permutation-invariant. Current graph diffusion
models generate graphs in a one-shot fashion, however they require extra features
and thousands of denoising steps to achieve optimal performance. We introduce
PARD, a Permutation-invariant AutoRegressive Diffusion model that integrates
diffusion models with autoregressive methods. PARD harnesses the effectiveness and efficiency of the autoregressive model while maintaining permutation
invariance without order sensitivity. Specifically, we show that contrary to sets,
elements in a graph are not entirely unordered and there is a unique partial order for nodes and edges. With this partial order, PARD generates a graph in a
block-by-block, autoregressive fashion, where each block’s probability is conditionally modeled by a shared diffusion model with an equivariant network. To
ensure efficiency while being expressive, we further propose a higher-order graph
transformer, which integrates transformer with PPGN. Like GPT, we extend the
higher-order graph transformer to support parallel training of all blocks. Without
any extra features, PARD achieves state-of-the-art performance on molecular and
non-molecular datasets, and scales to large datasets like MOSES containing 1.9M
molecules. PARD is open-sourced at https://github.com/LingxiaoShawn/Pard

1

Introduction

Graphs provide a powerful abstraction for representing relational information in many domains,
including social networks, biological and molecular structures, recommender systems, and networks
of various infrastructures such as computers, roads, etc. Accordingly, generative models of graphs
that learn the underlying graph distribution from data find applications in network science [7],
drug discovery [26, 42], protein design [1, 43], and various use-cases for Internet of Things [10].
Importantly, they serve as a prerequisite for building a generative foundation model [6] for graphs.
Despite significant progress in generative models for images and language, graph generation is
uniquely challenged by its inherent combinatorial nature. Specifically: 1) Graphs are naturally
high-dimensional and discrete with varying sizes, contrasting with the continuous space and fixedsize advancements that cannot be directly applied here; 2) Being permutation-invariant objects,
graphs require modeling an exchangeable probability distribution, where permutations of nodes
and edges do not alter a graph’s probability; and 3) The rich substructures in graphs necessitate
an expressive model capable of capturing higher-order motifs and interactions. Several graph
generative models have been proposed to address (part of) these challenges, based on various
techniques like autoregression [48, 28], VAEs [37], GANs [11], flow-based methods [36], and
denoising diffusion [32, 44]. Among these, autoregressive models and diffusion models stand out
with superior performance, thus significant popularity. However, current autoregressive models, while
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

