Adam with model exponential moving average is
effective for nonconvex optimization

Kwangjun Ahn
Microsoft Research
Cambridge, MA
kwangjunahn@microsoft.com

Ashok Cutkosky
Boston University
Boston, MA
ashok@cutkosky.com

Abstract
In this work, we offer a theoretical analysis of two modern optimization techniques
for training large and complex models: (i) adaptive optimization algorithms, such
as Adam, and (ii) the model exponential moving average (EMA). Specifically, we
demonstrate that a clipped version of Adam with model EMA achieves the optimal
convergence rates in various nonconvex optimization settings, both smooth and
nonsmooth. Moreover, when the scale varies significantly across different coordinates, we demonstrate that the coordinate-wise adaptivity of Adam is provably
advantageous. Notably, unlike previous analyses of Adam, our analysis crucially
relies on its core elements—momentum and discounting factors—as well as model
EMA, motivating their wide applications in practice.

1

Introduction

In neural network training, the training loss F : Rd → R is often optimized using an iterative
optimization algorithm which starts with the initial iterate x0 and then updates during each iteration
t = 1, 2, . . . as follows:
xt = xt−1 + zt ,
where zt denotes the increment chosen by the algorithm during the t-th iteration. One of the most
popular optimization algorithms is Adam [Kingma and Ba, 2014]. Adam has gained significant
attention due to its effectiveness in training Transformer-based language models [Zhang et al., 2020a,
Kunstner et al., 2023, Jiang et al., 2023, Pan and Li, 2023, Ahn et al., 2024a, Kunstner et al., 2024,
Zhang et al., 2024a].
The model exponential moving average (EMA) [Polyak and Juditsky, 1992, Ruppert, 1988] is
an optimization technique that has gained popularity in conjunction with Adam for various recent
applications. EMA maintains an exponential moving average of the model iterates, xt , which
contributes to the stabilization of these iterates. There has been a resurgence of interest in this
technique due to its effectiveness in training high-quality generative models [Yaz et al., 2018, Karras
et al., 2019, Song et al., 2021b, Dhariwal and Nichol, 2021, Nichol and Dhariwal, 2021, Song et al.,
2021a, Balaji et al., 2022, Karras et al., 2022, Rombach et al., 2022, Kang et al., 2023, Karras et al.,
2023]. Moreover, a recent work by Block et al. [2024] demonstrates the effectiveness of EMA for
both language modeling and imitation learning applications.
In this work, we theoretically study the effectiveness of these two modern optimization techniques.
Our main results can be informally summarized as follows.
Theorem 1 (Informal). CLIPPED -A DAM with the EMA on its iterates achieves the optimal convergence rate for nonconvex optimization both for smooth and nonsmooth settings (Section 5). The
coordinate-wise adaptivity of Adam is particularly effective when the scale varies across different
coordinates (Section 6).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

