ContextGS: Compact 3D Gaussian Splatting with
Anchor Level Context Model
Yufei Wang1

Zhihao Li1 Lanqing Guo1 Wenhan Yang2 Alex C. Kot1 Bihan Wen1
1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
PengCheng Laboratory, China
{yufei001, zhihao.li, lanqing.guo, eackot, bihan.wen}@ntu.edu.sg yangwh@pcl.ac.cn
Homepage: https://github.com/wyf0912/ContextGS

Level 0
Level 2

(b) Anchor division

(PSNR 24.50dB / Size: 248MB)

(c) Cosine similarity

(d) Bit saving

(PSNR 25.08dB / Size: 21.81MB)

10× Compression!

Level 1

Scaffold-GS

(a) Rendered image

ContextGS (Ours)

Figure 1: An illustration of the necessity of using autoregressive model in the anchor level. While
Scaffold-GS [20] greatly reduces the spatial redundancy among adjacent 3D Gaussians by grouping them and introducing a new data structure anchor to capture their common features, spatial
redundancy still exists among anchors. Our method, ContextGS, first proposes to reduce the spatial
redundancy among anchors using an autoregressive model. We divide anchors into levels as shown in
Fig. (b) and the anchors from coarser levels are used to predict anchors in finer levels, i.e., • predicts •
then •• together predict •. Fig. (c) verifies the spatial redundancy by calculating the cosine similarity
between anchors in level 0 and their context anchors in levels 1 and 2. Fig. (d) displays the bit savings
using the proposed anchor-level context model evaluated on our entropy coding based strong baseline
built on Scaffold-GS [20]. Compared with Scaffold-GS, we achieve better rendering qualities, faster
rendering speed, and great size reduction of up to 15 times averaged over all datasets we used.

Abstract
Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has become a promising framework for
novel view synthesis, offering fast rendering speeds and high fidelity. However,
the large number of Gaussians and their associated attributes require effective
compression techniques. Existing methods primarily compress 3D Gaussians
individually and independently, i.e., coding all the 3D Gaussians at the same time,
with little design for their interactions and spatial dependence. Inspired by the
effectiveness of the context model in image compression, we propose the first
autoregressive model at the anchor level for 3DGS compression in this work. We
divide anchors into different levels and the anchors that are not coded yet can be
predicted based on the already coded ones in all the coarser levels, leading to more
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

