SR-CACO-2: A Dataset for Confocal Fluorescence
Microscopy Image Super-Resolution

Soufiane Belharbi1

Mara KM Whitford2,3 Phuong Hoang2 Shakeeb Murtaza1
Luke McCaffrey2,3,4 Eric Granger1
1
LIVIA, ILLS, Dept. of Systems Engineering, ETS Montreal, Canada
2
Goodman Cancer Institute, McGill University, Montreal, Canada
3
Dept. of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Canada
4
Gerald Bronfman Dept. of Oncology, McGill University, Montreal, Canada
{soufiane.belharbi, eric.granger}@etsmtl.ca,
{mara.whitford, phuong.hoang2}@mail.mcgill.ca,
shakeeb.murtaza.1@ens.etsmtl.ca, luke.mccaffrey@mcgill.ca

Abstract
Confocal fluorescence microscopy is one of the most accessible and widely used
imaging techniques for the study of biological processes at the cellular and subcellular levels. Scanning confocal microscopy allows the capture of high-quality images
from thick three-dimensional (3D) samples, yet suffers from well-known limitations such as photobleaching and phototoxicity of specimens caused by intense
light exposure, which limits its use in some applications, especially for living cells.
Cellular damage can be alleviated by changing imaging parameters to reduce light
exposure, often at the expense of image quality. Machine/deep learning methods
for single-image super-resolution (SISR) can be applied to restore image quality by
upscaling lower-resolution (LR) images to produce high-resolution images (HR).
These SISR methods have been successfully applied to photo-realistic images
due partly to the abundance of publicly available datasets. In contrast, the lack
of publicly available data partly limits their application and success in scanning
confocal microscopy. In this paper, we introduce a large scanning confocal microscopy dataset named SR-CACO-2 that is comprised of low- and high-resolution
image pairs marked for three different fluorescent markers. It allows to evaluate
the performance of SISR methods on three different upscaling levels (X2, X4, X8).
SR-CACO-2 contains the human epithelial cell line Caco-2 (ATCC HTB-37), and
it is composed of 2,200 unique images, captured with four resolutions and three
markers, that have been translated in the form of 9,937 patches for experiments with
SISR methods. Given the new SR-CACO-2 dataset, we also provide benchmarking
results for 16 state-of-the-art methods that are representative of the main SISR
families. Results show that these methods have limited success in producing highresolution textures, indicating that SR-CACO-2 represents a challenging problem.
The dataset is released under a Creative Commons license (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0),
and it can be accessed freely. Our dataset, code and pretrained weights for SISR
methods are publicly available: https://github.com/sbelharbi/sr-caco-2.

1

Introduction

Confocal fluorescence microscopy is a standard imaging technique in biological and biomedical
research [32, 33, 76]. It can resolve cell and tissue structures at a maximum lateral resolution
of about 200nm, providing high-quality images at a moderate cost [79]. Point scanning confocal
microscopy and spinning disk confocal microscopy are two advanced imaging techniques used for
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

