PPLNs: Parametric Piecewise Linear Networks for
Event-Based Temporal Modeling and Beyond

Chen Song

Zhenxiao Liang Bo Sun Qixing Huang
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
{song, liangzx, bosun, huangqx}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We present Parametric Piecewise Linear Networks (PPLNs) for temporal vision
inference. Motivated by the neuromorphic principles that regulate biological neural
behaviors, PPLNs are ideal for processing data captured by event cameras, which
are built to simulate neural activities in the human retina. We discuss how to
represent the membrane potential of an artificial neuron by a parametric piecewise
linear function with learnable coefficients. This design echoes the idea of building
deep models from learnable parametric functions recently popularized by Kolmogorov–Arnold Networks (KANs). Experiments demonstrate the state-of-the-art
performance of PPLNs in event-based and image-based vision applications, including steering prediction, human pose estimation, and motion deblurring. The source
code of our implementation is available at https://github.com/chensong1995/PPLN.

1

Introduction

Event cameras are neuromorphic sensors that summarize the evolving world as a stream of events.
Each event describes the pixel coordinates, time, and polarity of an intensity change. Thanks to the
simplicity of this data representation, event cameras enjoy multiple advantages over conventional
cameras, including but not limited to fast data rate and high dynamic range (Gallego et al., 2020).
Over the past, researchers have developed event-based algorithms to solve various computer vision
problems, such as motion deblurring (Pan et al., 2019, 2020; Wang et al., 2020; Song et al., 2022,
2024), human pose estimation (Calabrese et al., 2019), and autonomous driving (Binas et al., 2017;
Hu et al., 2020). A recent survey (Zheng et al., 2023) indicates a rapidly increasing community
interest in event-based research, with motion deblurring being the most popular task. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that by utilizing events as an auxiliary input, algorithms perceive fine motion
details that are absent from conventional image captures, leading to substantial performance gain
over methods that make inferences from conventional images alone.
The success of event cameras demonstrates the power of imitating biological neuromorphic principles.
The event camera comprises a rectangular array of dynamic vision sensors, each of which is analogous
to a visual receptor neuron on the human retina dedicated to perceiving one specific location.
The neuron experiences excitement and produces a spike when the environmental intensity varies
significantly, corresponding to an event generated as a response to brightness changes.
This paper presents Parametric Piecewise Linear Networks (PPLNs) to understand the bio-inspired
event data with a bio-inspired deep learning model. As opposed to a generic network design, we
believe and verify in this paper that it is highly beneficial to build a processing network that caters to
the principles of the data source (event cameras). As illustrated by Figure 1 (Middle), the key idea is
to explicitly approximate the membrane potential of a neuron as a piecewise linear mapping from time
to electric voltage. Figure 1 (Right) presents the sketch of a PPLN node, whose internal mechanism
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

