Faster Neighborhood Attention: Reducing the O(n2)
Cost of Self Attention at the Threadblock Level
Ali Hassani1 , Wen-mei Hwu2,3 , Humphrey Shi1,3
1

SHI Labs @ Georgia Tech, 2 NVIDIA, 3 UIUC

Abstract
Neighborhood attention reduces the cost of self attention by restricting each token’s attention span to its nearest neighbors. This restriction, parameterized by
a window size and dilation factor, draws a spectrum of possible attention patterns between linear projection and self attention. Neighborhood attention, and
more generally sliding window attention patterns, have long been bounded by
infrastructure, particularly in higher-rank spaces (2-D and 3-D), calling for the
development of custom kernels, which have been limited in either functionality,
or performance, if not both. In this work, we aim to massively improve upon
existing infrastructure by providing two new methods for implementing neighborhood attention. We first show that neighborhood attention can be represented as
a batched GEMM problem, similar to standard attention, and implement it for
1-D and 2-D neighborhood attention. These kernels on average provide 895% and
272% improvement in full precision runtime compared to existing naive CUDA
kernels for 1-D and 2-D neighborhood attention respectively. We find that aside
from being heavily bound by memory bandwidth, certain inherent inefficiencies
exist in all unfused implementations of neighborhood attention, which in most
cases undo their theoretical efficiency gain. Motivated by the progress made into
fused dot-product attention kernels, we developed fused neighborhood attention;
an adaptation of fused dot-product attention kernels that allow fine-grained control
over attention across different spatial axes. Known for reducing the quadratic time
complexity of self attention to a linear complexity, neighborhood attention can now
enjoy a reduced and constant memory footprint, and record-breaking half precision
runtime. We observe that our fused implementation successfully circumvents some
of the unavoidable inefficiencies in unfused implementations. While our unfused
GEMM-based kernels only improve half precision performance compared to naive
kernels by an average of 548% and 193% in 1-D and 2-D problems respectively,
our fused kernels improve naive kernels by an average of 1759% and 958% in
1-D and 2-D problems respectively. These improvements translate into up to
104% improvement in inference and 39% improvement in training existing models
based on neighborhood attention, and additionally extend its applicability to image
and video perception, as well as other modalities. Our work is open-sourced at
https://github.com/SHI-Labs/NATTEN/.

1

Introduction

Inarguably among the most highly utilized and influential primitives in modern deep learning,
attention has long been cited for its complexity and memory footprint, especially when the query
and context sets are identical (self attention). For years since its adoption in deep learning [23], the
most common implementation of attention was through two batched GEMM (General Matrix-Matrix
Multiplication) operations, sometimes referred to as “BMM-style” attention. This implementation
stores attention weights to global memory, which can become a bottleneck in both speed and memory
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

