Exact, Tractable Gauss-Newton Optimization in Deep
Reversible Architectures Reveal Poor Generalization
Davide Buffelli∗
MediaTek Research
Wangkun Xu†
Imperial College London

Jamie McGowan∗
MediaTek Research
Alexandru Cioba
MediaTek Research

Guillaume Hennequin
MediaTek Research & University of Cambridge

Da-shan Shiu
MediaTek Research
Alberto Bernacchia
MediaTek Research

Abstract
Second-order optimization has been shown to accelerate the training of deep neural
networks in many applications, often yielding faster progress per iteration on the
training loss compared to first-order optimizers. However, the generalization properties of second-order methods are still being debated. Theoretical investigations
have proved difficult to carry out outside the tractable settings of heavily simplified
model classes – thus, the relevance of existing theories to practical deep learning
applications remains unclear. Similarly, empirical studies in large-scale models and
real datasets are significantly confounded by the necessity to approximate secondorder updates in practice. It is often unclear whether the observed generalization
behaviour arises specifically from the second-order nature of the parameter updates,
or instead reflects the specific structured (e.g. Kronecker) approximations used or
any damping-based interpolation towards first-order updates.
Here, we show for the first time that exact Gauss-Newton (GN) updates take on
a tractable form in a class of deep reversible architectures that are sufficiently
expressive to be meaningfully applied to common benchmark datasets. We exploit
this novel setting to study the training and generalization properties of the GN
optimizer. We find that exact GN generalizes poorly. In the mini-batch training
setting, this manifests as rapidly saturating progress even on the training loss, with
parameter updates found to overfit each mini-batchatch without producing the
features that would support generalization to other mini-batches. We show that our
experiments run in the “lazy” regime, in which the neural tangent kernel (NTK)
changes very little during the course of training. This behaviour is associated with
having no significant changes in neural representations, explaining the lack of
generalization.

1

Introduction

Efficient optimization of overparameterized neural networks is a major challenge for deep learning.
For large models, training remains one of the main computational and time bottlenecks. Much work
has therefore been devoted to the development of neural network optimizers that could accelerate
training, enabling researchers and engineers to iterate faster and at lower cost in their search for better
*
†

Equal Contribution. Correspondence to {davide.buffelli,jamie.mcgowan}@mtkresearch.com
Work done while at MediaTek Research.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

