Online Consistency of the Nearest Neighbor Rule

Sanjoy Dasgupta
Department of Computer Science
UC San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92023
dasgupta@ucsd.edu

Geelon So
Department of Computer Science
UC San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92023
geelon@ucsd.edu

Abstract
In the realizable online setting, a learner is tasked with making predictions for a
stream of instances, where the correct answer is revealed after each prediction.
A learning rule is online consistent if its mistake rate eventually vanishes. The
nearest neighbor rule (Fix and Hodges, 1951) is a fundamental prediction strategy, but it is only known to be consistent under strong statistical or geometric
assumptions—the instances come i.i.d. or the label classes are well-separated. We
prove online consistency for all measurable functions in doubling metric spaces
under the mild assumption that the instances are generated by a process that is
uniformly absolutely continuous with respect to a finite, upper doubling measure.

1

Introduction

In online classification, a learner faces a never-ending stream of prediction tasks. For all times n:
- the learner is presented with an instance Xn ,
- the learner makes a prediction Ŷn ,
- the ground-truth label Yn is revealed.
When the instances come from some underlying metric space, one of the simplest prediction rules
the learner can employ is the nearest neighbor rule (Fix and Hodges, 1951). This learner memorizes
everything it sees, and when it comes time to make a prediction for a new instance Xn , it looks for
the most similar data point in memory, predicting with that nearest neighbor’s label. In this work,
we are interested in simple conditions under which the nearest neighbor rule is in fact a reasonable
strategy, where the rate at which the learner makes mistakes eventually vanishes.
Let (X , ρ, ν) be a metric measure space where ρ is a separable metric and ν is a finite Borel measure.
We study the realizable setting, in which the ground-truth labels Yn = η(Xn ) are given by some
measurable label function η : X → Y. Let X = (Xn )n≥0 be any stochastic process. It induces a
nearest neighbor process X̃ = (X̃)n>0 , which is any process satisfying:
X̃n ∈ arg min ρ(Xn , x).
x∈X<n

The nearest neighbor rule predicts using the label Ŷn = η(X̃n ), and it is online consistent when the
asymptotic mistake rate on the problem instance (X, η) goes to zero:
lim sup
N →∞

N
1 X 
1 η(Xn ) 6= η(X̃n ) = 0
N n=1

a.s.

(1)

There are two representative results for the online consistency of the 1-nearest neighbor rule in
this setting—both impose strong constraints on either X or η. Cover and Hart (1967) assume the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

