HW-GPT-Bench: Hardware-Aware Architecture
Benchmark for Language Models

Rhea Sanjay Sukthanker1 Arber Zela1
Benedikt Staffler3
4
1
Aaron Klein
Lennart Purucker
Jörg K. H. Franke1
Frank Hutter2,1
1
University of Freiburg, 2 ELLIS Institute Tübingen,
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence (BCAI), Germany,
4
ScaDS.AI, Leipzig,
{sukthank, zelaa, frankej, fh}@cs.uni-freiburg.de
benediktsebastian.staffler@de.bosch.com
3

Abstract
The increasing size of language models necessitates a thorough analysis across
multiple dimensions to assess trade-offs among crucial hardware metrics such as
latency, energy consumption, GPU memory usage, and performance. Identifying
optimal model configurations under specific hardware constraints is becoming
essential but remains challenging due to the computational load of exhaustive
training and evaluation on multiple devices. To address this, we introduce HWGPT-Bench, a hardware-aware benchmark that utilizes surrogate predictions to
approximate various hardware metrics across 13 devices of architectures in the GPT2 family, with architectures containing up to 1.55B parameters. Our surrogates,
via calibrated predictions and reliable uncertainty estimates, faithfully model the
heteroscedastic noise inherent in the energy and latency measurements. To estimate
perplexity, we employ weight-sharing techniques from Neural Architecture Search
(NAS), inheriting pretrained weights from the largest GPT-2 model. Finally, we
demonstrate the utility of HW-GPT-Bench by simulating optimization trajectories
of various multi-objective optimization algorithms in just a few seconds.

1

Introduction

Language models (LMs) based on the transformer architectures [73] mark the current state-of-the-art
[52] in most natural language understanding tasks, including text summarization, question-answering
and language generation. This has led to a surge in research, with models [9, 13, 66] and training data
[33, 44] growing in size. Consequently, inference costs have also risen significantly, making it often
challenging to deploy these models in practice. For instance, ChatGPT utilizes over half a million
kilowatt-hours of electricity daily, a consumption sufficient to handle approximately two hundred
million requests. This energy usage is comparable to that of around 180,000 U.S. households, each
consuming approximately twenty-nine kilowatt-hours [27].
There is a natural trade-off (Pareto frontier) between latency and performance of LLMs. While
techniques such as KV-Cache optimization [75] and pruning [79, 86] have been used to improve
inference efficiency, they do not explicitly balance performance and latency. Hence, discovering the
inference-optimal frontier of language models is a multi-objective optimization problem [17], where
we are interested in the Pareto set of architectures, i.e. the set of all dominating architectures that
have a lower loss value on at least one objective and no higher loss value on any other objective.
Neural architecture search (NAS) [21] is a powerful framework to derive Pareto-optimal neural
network architectures in an automated data-driven way. However, as pointed out by Wan et al. [76],
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

