Revisiting K-mer Profile for Effective and Scalable
Genome Representation Learning

Abdulkadir Çelikkanat
Aalborg University
9000 Aalborg, Denmark
abce@cs.aau.dk

Andres R. Masegosa
Aalborg University
9000 Aalborg, Denmark
arma@cs.aau.dk

Thomas D. Nielsen
Aalborg University
9000 Aalborg, Denmark
tdn@cs.aau.dk

Abstract
Obtaining effective representations of DNA sequences is crucial for genome analysis. Metagenomic binning, for instance, relies on genome representations to cluster
complex mixtures of DNA fragments from biological samples with the aim of
determining their microbial compositions. In this paper, we revisit k-mer-based
representations of genomes and provide a theoretical analysis of their use in representation learning. Based on the analysis, we propose a lightweight and scalable
model for performing metagenomic binning at the genome read level, relying only
on the k-mer compositions of the DNA fragments. We compare the model to recent
genome foundation models and demonstrate that while the models are comparable
in performance, the proposed model is significantly more effective in terms of
scalability, a crucial aspect for performing metagenomic binning of real-world
datasets.

1

Introduction

Microbes influence all aspects of our environment, including human health and the natural environment surrounding us. However, understanding the full impact of the microbes through the complex
microbial communities in which they exist, requires insight into the composition and diversity of
these communities [19].
Metagenomics involves the study of microbial communities at the DNA level. However, sequencing
a complex microbial sample using current DNA sequencing technologies [27] rarely produces full
DNA sequences, but rather a mixture of DNA fragments (called reads) of the microbes present in
the sample. In order to recover the full microbial genomes, a subsequent binning/clustering step is
performed, where individual DNA fragments are clustered together according to their genomic origins.
This process is also referred to as metagenomic binning [19, 9]. The fragments being clustered during
the binning process consist of contiguous DNA sequences (contigs) obtained from the reads through
a so-called assembly process [29] (contigs are generally longer and less error-prone than the reads).
Metagenomic binning typically involves comparing and clustering DNA fragments using a distance
metric in a suitable genome representation space. State-of-the-art methods for metagenomic binning
typically rely on representations that include or build on top of the k-mer profiles of the contigs
[17, 12, 18]. These representations have mostly been studied from an empirical perspective [6],
although general theoretical analyses into their representational properties have also been considered
[25]. With k = 4 (i.e., tetra-nucleotides) a 256-dimensional vector is used to describe the genome,
each entry in the vector encoding the frequency of a specific k-mer (e.g., ACTG, ATTT) in the
genome sequence. The k-mer representation of a sequence thus has a fixed size and is independent of
sequence length and downstream analysis tasks, providing a computationally efficient representation.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

