S UGAR C REPE ++ Dataset: Vision-Language Model
Sensitivity to Semantic and Lexical Alterations

Sri Harsha Dumpala∗ Aman Jaiswal∗ Chandramouli Sastry
Evangelos Milios Sageev Oore Hassan Sajjad
Dalhousie University, Canada.

Abstract
Despite their remarkable successes, state-of-the-art large language models (LLMs),
including vision-and-language models (VLMs) and unimodal language models
(ULMs), fail to understand precise semantics. For example, semantically equivalent
sentences expressed using different lexical compositions elicit diverging representations. The degree of this divergence and its impact on encoded semantics is not
very well understood. In this paper, we introduce the S UGAR C REPE ++ dataset
to analyze the sensitivity of VLMs and ULMs to lexical and semantic alterations.
Each sample in S UGAR C REPE ++ dataset consists of an image and a corresponding triplet of captions: a pair of semantically equivalent but lexically different
positive captions and one hard negative caption. This poses a 3-way semantic
(in)equivalence problem to the language models. We comprehensively evaluate
VLMs and ULMs that differ in architecture, pre-training objectives and datasets
to benchmark the performance of S UGAR C REPE ++ dataset. Experimental results
highlight the difficulties of VLMs in distinguishing between lexical and semantic
variations, particularly to object attributes and spatial relations. Although VLMs
with larger pre-training datasets, model sizes, and multiple pre-training objectives
achieve better performance on S UGAR C REPE ++, there is a significant opportunity for improvement. We demonstrate that models excelling on compositionality
datasets may not perform equally well on S UGAR C REPE ++. This indicates that
compositionality alone might not be sufficient to fully understand semantic and
lexical alterations. Given the importance of the property that the S UGAR C REPE ++
dataset targets, it serves as a new challenge to the vision-and-language community.
Data and code is available at https://github.com/Sri-Harsha/scpp.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs), including vision-and-language models and unimodal language
models, have shown tremendous results in solving a majority of vision and natural language processing
(NLP) tasks. Surprisingly, despite such success, LLMs can exhibit different behaviors for semantically
equivalent sentences composed with different syntactic or lexical structures. Previous works have
reported such lack of compositional reasoning in both vision-and-language models (e.g., [83, 97, 100,
69, 87]) and unimodal language models (e.g., [40, 11, 104, 57]). For instance, the performance of
the state-of-the-art (SOTA) LLMs including GPT-4, Gemini and Llama are sensitive to the prompt
formatting [77]. The model editing techniques [11, 57] suffer from misfired edits due to the dominance
of lexical overlap [90, 71]. Similarly, Zou et al. [104] demonstrated that safety aligned models can
be “jailbroken” by simply appending an adversarial suffix causing them to generate objectionable
content bypassing all safeguards.
∗

The authors contribute equally to this work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

