HORSE: Hierarchical Representation for Large-Scale
Neural Subset Selection
Binghui Xie, Yixuan Wang, Yongqiang Chen, Kaiwen Zhou, Yu Li, Wei Meng, James Cheng
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Subset selection tasks, such as anomaly detection and compound selection in
AI-assisted drug discovery, are crucial for a wide range of applications. Learning subset-valued functions with neural networks has achieved great success by
incorporating permutation invariance symmetry into the architecture. However,
existing neural set architectures often struggle to either capture comprehensive
information from the superset or address complex interactions within the input.
Additionally, they often fail to perform in scenarios where superset sizes surpass
available memory capacity. To address these challenges, we introduce the novel
concept of the Identity Property, which requires models to integrate information
from the originating set, resulting in the development of neural networks that excel
at performing effective subset selection from large supersets. Moreover, we present
the Hierarchical Representation of Neural Subset Selection (HORSE), an attentionbased method that learns complex interactions and retains information from both
the input set and the optimal subset supervision signal. Specifically, HORSE
enables the partitioning of the input ground set into manageable chunks that can
be processed independently and then aggregated, ensuring consistent outcomes
across different partitions. Through extensive experimentation, we demonstrate that
HORSE significantly enhances neural subset selection performance by capturing
more complex information and surpasses the state-of-the-art methods in handling
large-scale inputs by a margin of up to 20%.

1

Introduction

Set-valued functions are of great importance to a wide range of real-world applications. For example,
anomaly detection aims to identify a set of outliers from a larger dataset that could be users or
financial transactions [Zhang et al., 2020]. Another example is the recommender system, where the
objective is to identify a set of products that better satisfy customer preferences [Ou et al., 2022]. In
these scenarios, there is a need for implicitly learning a set function [Rezatofighi et al., 2017, Zaheer
et al., 2017] that quantifies the usefulness of a given subset of the inputs. The set function assigns a
utility value to each subset, and the subset with the highest utility corresponds to the most desired
output.
To illustrate the concept, let us consider the task of a recommender system. In this task, we aim
to recommend a subset of items S from a larger item pool V , denoted as S ∈ V , that maximizes
the utility of S with respect to the satisfaction of the customers. The utility can be captured by a
parameterized utility function, denoted as Fθ (S; V ), and our goal is to optimize the following criteria:
S ∗ = arg max Fθ (S; V ).

(1)

S∈2V

One straightforward method [Balcan and Harvey, 2018] involves explicitly modeling the utility by learning the function U = Fθ (S; V ) using supervised data. This data consists of pairs
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

