Graph-based Unsupervised Disentangled
Representation Learning via Multimodal Large
Language Models

Baao Xie1 Qiuyu Chen1,2 Yunnan Wang1,2 Zequn Zhang1,3 Xin Jin1,* Wenjun Zeng1
1
Ningbo Institute of Digital Twin, Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo, China
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
3
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
bxie@idt.eitech.edu.cn jinxin@eitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Disentangled representation learning (DRL) aims to identify and decompose underlying factors behind observations, thus facilitating data perception and generation.
However, current DRL approaches often rely on the unrealistic assumption that
semantic factors are statistically independent. In reality, these factors may exhibit
correlations, which off-the-shelf solutions have yet to properly address. To tackle
this challenge, we introduce a bidirectional weighted graph-based framework, to
learn factorized attributes and their interrelations within complex data. Specifically,
we propose a β-VAE based module to extract factors as the initial nodes of the
graph, and leverage the multimodal large language model (MLLM) to discover and
rank latent correlations, thereby updating the weighted edges. By integrating these
complementary modules, our model successfully achieves fine-grained, practical
and unsupervised disentanglement. Experiments demonstrate our method’s superior performance in disentanglement and reconstruction. Furthermore, the model
inherits enhanced interpretability and generalizability from MLLMs.

1

Introduction

Disentangled representation learning (DRL) is a major goal of artificial intelligence (AI), acclaimed
for its enhancement of model robustness, interpretability, and generalizability. Essentially, DRL
methods imitate the understanding processes of biological intelligence, wherein comprehension of
real-world is achieved by separating observations into distinct factors [1]. In this form, specific
attributes (e.g., object color, shape, and size) exhibit exclusive sensitivity to the changes of specific
factors. Learning of such disentangled representations is of great importance across various domains, e.g., computer vision [2, 3, 4, 5, 6], natural language processing [7, 8, 9], and AI generated
content [10, 11, 12, 13]. In the current phase, unsupervised DRL methods primarily utilize the Variational Autoencoder (VAE) framework [14], a probabilistic model learning representations through
a regularization term. This term involves the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the posterior
distribution of latent factors and a standard multivariate Gaussian prior, thereby encouraging the
factorized representations. To strengthen disentanglement, co-current research [15, 16, 17, 18]
focus on the optimization and refinement of the original VAE regularizers, resulting in the family of
VAE-based DRL approaches.
Despite the advanced results of the simple and synthetic datasets, VAE-based DRL methods still fall
short in interpretability and robustness that are required for effective disentanglement in complex
data [19]. This limitation mainly stems from the unrealistic assumption that underlying factors
* *Xin Jin is the corresponding author. Code is available at here.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

