Hierarchical Visual Feature Aggregation for
OCR-Free Document Understanding

Jaeyoo Park 1

Jin Young Choi2

Jeonghyung Park3

Bohyung Han1,2

1

ECE & 2 IPAI, Seoul National University
3
Samsung SDS
{bellos1203, jychoi999, bhhan}@snu.ac.kr
jeong.h.park@samsung.com

Abstract
We present a novel OCR-free document understanding framework based on pretrained Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs). Our approach employs
multi-scale visual features to effectively handle various font sizes within document
images. To address the increasing costs of considering the multi-scale visual inputs
for MLLMs, we propose the Hierarchical Visual Feature Aggregation (HVFA)
module, designed to reduce the number of input tokens to LLMs. Leveraging a
feature pyramid with cross-attentive pooling, our approach effectively manages the
trade-off between information loss and efficiency without being affected by varying
document image sizes. Furthermore, we introduce a novel instruction tuning task,
which facilitates the model’s text-reading capability by learning to predict the
relative positions of input text, eventually minimizing the risk of truncated text
caused by the limited capacity of LLMs. Comprehensive experiments validate
the effectiveness of our approach, demonstrating superior performance in various
document understanding tasks.

1

Introduction

In recent years, significant progress has been made in the development of Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLMs) trained on large-scale datasets [1–5], demonstrating remarkable performance
in various tasks, such as visual question answering [6, 7], image captioning [8–10], image-text
retrieval [11–13], visual grounding [14, 15] etc. MLLMs also exhibit the emergent capability
achieving robust Optical Character Recognition (OCR) [9] performance by leveraging extensive
pretraining data. Such advancements highlight the potential of MLLMs for practical and challenging
tasks related to document understanding, by reducing reliance on external OCR engines which often
struggle with complex layouts and varied fonts. Additionally, OCR-based models typically require
additional modules to process explicit OCR outputs, adding to system complexity.
Despite their promising abilities, document understanding frameworks without external OCR engines [16–19] face significant challenges, particularly in considering multiple scales of document
images, as text and visual elements often vary in size and style. Complex graphical elements, such
as charts and diagrams, along with non-standard layouts, pose additional difficulties for the model
due to limited receptive fields. This highlights the need for the frameworks to effectively handle the
variability in document scales to achieve accurate and comprehensive understanding.
Our goal is to process visual documents over multiple scales rather than a single fixed scale. However,
augmenting visual features for multiple scales inevitably increases costs, which is particularly critical
for MLLMs, where LLMs have quadratic complexity due to the self-attention mechanism. To tackle
this issue, we propose the Hierarchical Visual Feature Aggregation (HVFA) module to reduce the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

