MiniCache: KV Cache Compression in Depth
Dimension for Large Language Models

Akide Liu1 Jing Liu1 Zizheng Pan1 Yefei He2
Gholamreza Haffari1 Bohan Zhuang1,2†
1

ZIP Lab, Monash University, Australia
2
ZIP Lab, Zhejiang University, China

Abstract
A critical approach for efficiently deploying computationally demanding large language models (LLMs) is Key-Value (KV) caching. The KV cache stores key-value
states of previously generated tokens, significantly reducing the need for repetitive
computations and thereby lowering latency in autoregressive generation. However,
the size of the KV cache grows linearly with sequence length, posing challenges for
applications requiring long context input and extensive sequence generation. In this
paper, we present a simple yet effective approach, called MiniCache, to compress
the KV cache across layers from a novel depth perspective, significantly reducing
the memory footprint for LLM inference. Our approach is based on the observation
that KV cache states exhibit high similarity between the adjacent layers in the
middle-to-deep portion of LLMs. To facilitate merging, we propose disentangling
the states into the magnitude and direction components, interpolating the directions
of the state vectors while preserving their lengths unchanged. Furthermore, we
introduce a token retention strategy to keep highly distinct state pairs unmerged,
thus preserving the information with minimal additional storage overhead. Our
MiniCache is training-free and general, complementing existing KV cache compression strategies, such as quantization and sparsity. We conduct a comprehensive
evaluation of MiniCache utilizing various models including LLaMA-2, LLaMA-3,
Phi-3, Mistral, and Mixtral across multiple benchmarks, demonstrating its exceptional performance in achieving superior compression ratios and high throughput.
On the ShareGPT dataset, LLaMA-2-7B with cross-layer merging achieves a compression ratio of 1.53×. Additionally, since MiniCache is orthogonal to existing
quantization techniques, it can achieve a compression ratio of up to 5.02× when
combined with the 4-bit quantization technique, enhancing inference throughput
by approximately 5× and reducing the memory footprint by 41% compared to the
FP16 full cache baseline, all while maintaining near-lossless performance. Project
is available at https://minicache.vmv.re .

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs), exemplified by the GPT series [1, 2, 3] and the LLaMA series
[4, 5, 6], have emerged as pivotal innovations within the artificial general intelligence, significantly
enhancing the capabilities of natural language processing. However, these models are meticulously
trained using extensive computational resources [7] and massive datasets [8], which enables them to
†

Corresponding author. Email: bohan.zhuang@gmail.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

