Feint Behaviors and Strategies:
Formalization, Implementation and Evaluation

Junyu Liu
Brown University
liu_junyu@brown.edu

Xiangjun Peng
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
xjpeng@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Feint behaviors refer to a set of deceptive behaviors in a nuanced manner, which
enable players to obtain temporal and spatial advantages over opponents in competitive games. Such behaviors are crucial tactics in most competitive multi-player
games (e.g., boxing, fencing, basketball, motor racing, etc.). However, existing literature does not provide a comprehensive (and/or concrete) formalization for Feint
behaviors, and their implications on game strategies. In this work, we introduce
the first comprehensive formalization of Feint behaviors at both action-level and
strategy-level, and provide concrete implementation and quantitative evaluation of
them in multi-player games. The key idea of our work is to (1) allow automatic
generation of Feint behaviors via Palindrome-directed templates, combine them
into meaningful behavior sequences via a Dual-Behavior Model; (2) concertize
the implications from our formalization of Feint on game strategies, in terms of
temporal, spatial and their collective impacts respectively; and (3) provide a unified
implementation scheme of Feint behaviors in existing MARL frameworks. The
experimental results show that our design of Feint behaviors can (1) greatly improve the game reward gains; (2) significantly improve the diversity of Multi-Player
Games; and (3) only incur negligible overheads in terms of time consumption.

1

Introduction

In most real-world Multi-Player Games (e.g., boxing, basketball, motor racing, and etc.), players
exhibit complex behaviors, which imply hard-to-be-quantified interactions. Simulating these games
requires to model the players’ behaviors into action spaces as the elements (i.e., which we denote
such a decision as “action-level"), and explore strategies based on these elements [34, 35]. As one of
the most common behaviors in real-world games, Feint behaviors represent a class of tactic behaviors,
which are used to mislead opponents to obtain temporally-strategic advantages1 . Such behaviors
generally exhibit nuanced differences with normal behaviors, in terms of action movements2 ; but
these behaviors can help the agent to obtain strategic advantages to a considerable extent3 . However,
no existing literature provides a comprehensive formalization (and/or concrete modeling of) Feint
behaviors, at either action level or strategy level, and we justify this claim below.
• To the best of our knowledge, [34] is the first work to mention Feint behaviors, as a proof-ofconcept to construct animations for nuanced behaviors in two-player boxing games, based
on the unpredictability introduced in stochastic and simultaneous decision making.
• A more recent work [35] learn control strategies to animate nuanced agent behaviors like
Feint in gaming environments, from motion clips using Deep Reinforcement Learning.
1

Note that the resulting advantages may be exhibited temporally and/or spatially.
Examples include fake punch in boxing, early-braking in motor racing, and etc.
3
And, clearly, Feint behaviors can also increase the diversity of those games, according to [19, 26].
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

