WISE: Rethinking the Knowledge Memory for
Lifelong Model Editing of Large Language Models

Peng Wang1∗ Zexi Li1∗ Ningyu Zhang1† Ziwen Xu1 Yunzhi Yao1
Yong Jiang2 Pengjun Xie2 Fei Huang2 Huajun Chen1,3†
1
Zhejiang University 2 Alibaba Group
3
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Big Data Intelligent Computing
{peng2001,zexi.li,zhangningyu}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) need knowledge updates to meet the ever-growing
world facts and correct the hallucinated responses, facilitating the methods of
lifelong model editing. Where the updated knowledge resides in memories is
a fundamental question for model editing. In this paper, we find that editing
either long-term memory (direct model parameters) or working memory (nonparametric knowledge of neural network activations/representations by retrieval)
will result in an impossible triangle—reliability, generalization, and locality can not
be realized together in the lifelong editing settings. For long-term memory, directly
editing the parameters will cause conflicts with irrelevant pretrained knowledge or
previous edits (poor reliability and locality). For working memory, retrieval-based
activations can hardly make the model understand the edits and generalize (poor
generalization). Therefore, we propose WISE to bridge the gap between memories.
In WISE, we design a dual parametric memory scheme, which consists of the
main memory for the pretrained knowledge and a side memory for the edited
knowledge. We only edit the knowledge in the side memory and train a router to
decide which memory to go through when given a query. For continual editing,
we devise a knowledge-sharding mechanism where different sets of edits reside in
distinct subspaces of parameters and are subsequently merged into a shared memory
without conflicts. Extensive experiments show that WISE can outperform previous
model editing methods and overcome the impossible triangle under lifelong model
editing of question answering, hallucination, and out-of-distribution settings across
trending LLM architectures, e.g., GPT, LLaMA, and Mistral‡ .

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) show emergent intelligence when scaling the number of parameters
and data [1–4], which reveals the sparks of artificial general intelligence [5]. However, when
deployed, LLMs still make mistakes [6], generating responses with hallucinations [7], bias [8], and
factual decays [9]. On the other hand, the world’s knowledge is ever-growing, so the up-to-date
knowledge is usually different from the one during LLMs’ pretraining [10]. Many such errors and
emerging facts will arise sequentially in deployment, some of which have to be addressed timely and
efficiently without waiting for retraining or finetuning [11, 12]. Also, retraining or finetuning is often
too computationally expensive [13, 10], which is not sustainable for lifelong growing knowledge.
Therefore, lifelong model editing [10] was proposed to remedy the continual knowledge updates and
injections for LLMs in a cheap and timely manner.
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding Author.
‡
Code is available at https://github.com/zjunlp/EasyEdit.

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

