MILP-StuDio: MILP Instance Generation via
Block Structure Decomposition

Haoyang Liu1 , Jie Wang1∗, Wanbo Zhang1 , Zijie Geng1 , Yufei Kuang1 , Xijun Li2, 3 ,
Yongdong Zhang1 , Bin Li1 , Feng Wu1
1
MoE Key Laboratory of Brain-inspired Intelligent Perception and Cognition,
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies
{dgyoung,zhang_wb,ustcgzj,yfkuang}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
lixijun@sjtu.edu.cn,
{jiewangx,zhyd73,binli,fengwu}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Mixed-integer linear programming (MILP) is one of the most popular mathematical
formulations with numerous applications. In practice, improving the performance
of MILP solvers often requires a large amount of high-quality data, which can be
challenging to collect. Researchers thus turn to generation techniques to generate
additional MILP instances. However, existing approaches do not take into account
specific block structures—which are closely related to the problem formulations—
in the constraint coefficient matrices (CCMs) of MILPs. Consequently, they
are prone to generate computationally trivial or infeasible instances due to the
disruptions of block structures and thus problem formulations. To address this
challenge, we propose a novel MILP generation framework, called Block Structure
Decomposition (MILP-StuDio), to generate high-quality instances by preserving
the block structures. Specifically, MILP-StuDio begins by identifying the blocks
in CCMs and decomposing the instances into block units, which serve as the
building blocks of MILP instances. We then design three operators to construct
new instances by removing, substituting, and appending block units in the original
instances, enabling us to generate instances with flexible sizes. An appealing feature
of MILP-StuDio is its strong ability to preserve the feasibility and computational
hardness of the generated instances. Experiments on commonly-used benchmarks
demonstrate that with instances generated by MILP-StuDio, the learning-based
solvers are able to significantly reduce over 10% of the solving time.

1

Introduction

Mixed-integer linear programming (MILP) is a fundamental mathematical optimization problem that
finds extensive applications in the real world, such as scheduling [1], planning [2], and chip design
[3, 4]. In industrial scenarios, the solving efficiency of MILPs is associated with substantial economic
value. To speed up the solving process, a great number of high-quality MILP instances are required
to develop or test the solvers. Here we give the following two examples. First, both traditional solvers
[5, 6] and learning-based solvers [7–10] rely heavily on a lot of MILP instances for hyperparameter
tuning or model training. Second, evaluating the robustness of solvers needs a comprehensive MILP
benchmark consisting of numerous instances. However, acquiring many instances is often difficult
due to high acquisition costs or privacy concerns [11, 12]. As a result, the limited data availability
poses great challenges and acts as a bottleneck for solver performance.
∗

Corresponding author. Email: jiewangx@ustc.edu.cn.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

