InfoRM: Mitigating Reward Hacking in RLHF via
Information-Theoretic Reward Modeling

Yuchun Miao1 , Sen Zhang2 , Liang Ding2 , Rong Bao3 , Lefei Zhang1∗, Dacheng Tao4
1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
2
The University of Sydney 3 Fudan University 4 Nanyang Technological University

Abstract
Despite the success of reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) in
aligning language models with human values, reward hacking, also termed reward
overoptimization, remains a critical challenge. This issue primarily arises from
reward misgeneralization, where reward models (RMs) compute reward using
spurious features that are irrelevant to human preferences. In this work, we tackle
this problem from an information-theoretic perspective and propose a framework
for reward modeling, namely InfoRM, by introducing a variational information
bottleneck objective to filter out irrelevant information. Notably, we further identify
a correlation between overoptimization and outliers in the IB latent space of InfoRM,
establishing it as a promising tool for detecting reward overoptimization. Inspired
by this finding, we propose the Cluster Separation Index (CSI), which quantifies
deviations in the IB latent space, as an indicator of reward overoptimization to
facilitate the development of online mitigation strategies. Extensive experiments on
a wide range of settings and RM scales (70M, 440M, 1.4B, and 7B) demonstrate
the effectiveness of InfoRM. Further analyses reveal that InfoRM’s overoptimization
detection mechanism is not only effective but also robust across a broad range of
datasets, signifying a notable advancement in the field of RLHF. Code is available
at: https://github.com/miaoyuchun/InfoRM.

1

Introduction

With the advent of large language models (LLMs), reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF) has emerged as a pivotal technological paradigm to align models’ behaviors with human
values [57, 33, 4, 25]. One of the core stages of RLHF is reward modeling, where a proxy reward
model (RM) is learned to mimic human preference by training on a preference dataset that contains
sets of responses with human rankings. Then a reinforcement learning (RL) stage follows to align the
LLM with human preferences by optimizing rewards from the learned proxy RM. Despite empirical
success, RLHF has been criticized for its vulnerability and instability [6]. One widely revealed cause
is reward hacking, also known as reward overoptimization, a phenomenon where the policy model’s
optimization, though seemingly effective under the proxy RM, actually diverges from the true human
objectives [57, 41, 16]. This issue can be manifested in various ways, from copying styles without
generating meaningful content to exhibiting excessive caution in responses [10, 51].
One primary cause of reward overoptimization in the reward modeling process is reward misgeneralization [6], where RMs may incorrectly generalize training data, resulting in poor proxies for actual
human preference. This problem arises because the same set of human feedback can be interpreted in
multiple ways by RMs, even when ample training data is available [40]. Consequently, RMs tend to
depend on spurious features—those unexpected or contingent elements that correlate with the ranking
∗

Correspondence to Lefei Zhang <zhanglefei@whu.edu.cn>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

