ChatCam: Empowering Camera Control through
Conversational AI
Xinhang Liu1 Yu-Wing Tai2 Chi-Keung Tang1
1
2
HKUST
Dartmouth College

Abstract
Cinematographers adeptly capture the essence of the world, crafting compelling
visual narratives through intricate camera movements. Witnessing the strides made
by large language models in perceiving and interacting with the 3D world, this study
explores their capability to control cameras with human language guidance. We
introduce ChatCam, a system that navigates camera movements through conversations with users, mimicking a professional cinematographer’s workflow. To achieve
this, we propose CineGPT, a GPT-based autoregressive model for text-conditioned
camera trajectory generation. We also develop an Anchor Determinator to ensure
precise camera trajectory placement. ChatCam understands user requests and
employs our proposed tools to generate trajectories, which can be used to render
high-quality video footage on radiance field representations. Our experiments,
including comparisons to state-of-the-art approaches and user studies, demonstrate
our approach’s ability to interpret and execute complex instructions for camera
operation, showing promising applications in real-world production settings. We
will release the codebase upon paper acceptance.

1

Introduction

Cinematographers skillfully capture the essence of the 3D world by maneuvering their cameras,
creating an array of compelling visual narratives [8]. Achieving aesthetically pleasing results requires
not only a deep understanding of scene elements and their interplay but also meticulous execution of
techniques.
Recent progress of large language models (LLMs) [1] has marked a significant milestone in AI
development, demonstrating their capability to understand and act within the 3D world [29, 30, 87].
Witnessing this evolution, our work explores the feasibility of empowering camera control through
conversational AI, thus enhancing the video production process across diverse domains such as
documentary filmmaking, live event broadcasting, and virtual reality experiences.
Although the community has devoted considerable effort to controlling the trajectories of objects
and cameras in video generation approaches for practical usage [4, 82, 75, 28], or predicting similar
sequences through autoregressive decoding processes [35, 64], generating camera trajectories has
yet to be explored. This task involves multiple elements such as language, images, 3D assets, and,
beyond mere accuracy, necessitates visually pleasing rendered videos as the ultimate goal.
We propose ChatCam, a system that allows users to control camera operations through natural
language interaction. As illustrated in Figure 1, leveraging an LLM agent to orchestrate camera
operations, our method assists users in generating desired camera trajectories, which can be used to
render videos on radiance field representations such as NeRF [52] or 3DGS [36].
At the core of our approach, we introduce CineGPT, a GPT-based autoregressive model that integrates
language understanding with camera trajectory generation. We train this model using a paired
text-trajectory dataset to equip it with the ability for text-conditioned trajectory generation. We also
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

