FIARSE: Model-Heterogeneous Federated Learning
via Importance-Aware Submodel Extraction

Feijie Wu1 , Xingchen Wang1 , Yaqing Wang2 , Tianci Liu1 , Lu Su1 , Jing Gao1
1
Purdue University 2 Google DeepMind
{wu1977, wang2930, liu3351, lusu, jinggao}@purdue.edu
yaqingwang@google.com

Abstract
In federated learning (FL), accommodating clients’ varied computational capacities poses a challenge, often limiting the participation of those with constrained
resources in global model training. To address this issue, the concept of model heterogeneity through submodel extraction has emerged, offering a tailored solution
that aligns the model’s complexity with each client’s computational capacity. In this
work, we propose Federated Importance-Aware Submodel Extraction (FIARSE),
a novel approach that dynamically adjusts submodels based on the importance
of model parameters, thereby overcoming the limitations of previous static and
dynamic submodel extraction methods. Compared to existing works, the proposed
method offers a theoretical foundation for the submodel extraction and eliminates
the need for additional information beyond the model parameters themselves to
determine parameter importance, significantly reducing the overhead on clients.
Extensive experiments are conducted on various datasets to showcase the superior
performance of the proposed FIARSE.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) [36, 52] stands out as a promising distributed training paradigm, in which
the clients enjoy mutual information without jeopardizing data privacy. Specifically, the FL server
requests the clients to train a model with their local data and aggregates the models into a global
one. Such a paradigm, however, may fail in a real-world FL system, where the clients usually have
varying computation capacities [13, 42, 46], likely preventing the clients with insufficient computation
resources from being involved in training a large global model [73].
To tackle the challenge, a practical solution is to enable model heterogeneity, ensuring that the model
deployed on each individual client aligns with its local computation capacity. This can be done by
extracting a submodel for each client from the global model, which encompasses a subset of the
parameters of the global model. During the model training period, the parameters of each submodel
are thereby retrieved from the counterpart of the global model. Importantly, each parameter of the
global model is exclusively averaged among the submodels containing it [13].
Depending on whether the submodels undergo reconstruction during the model training process,
existing works fall into two categories: static submodel extraction [13, 25, 33, 35, 58, 67, 76] and
dynamic submodel extraction [2, 7, 8, 21, 45].
Static submodel extraction creates a submodel for each client prior to the model training process. As
illustrated in Figure 1a, the submodel remains unchanged throughout the training process. However,
static submodel extraction suffers from certain limitations that affect both local clients and global
performance. Locally, the metrics or knowledge used to extract a submodel for each client are likely
to evolve during the training process. Since static submodels do not account for this evolution, they
may fail to achieve optimal performance. Globally, the extractions of submodels from certain parts
may incur client drift during the training, as pointed out by Alam et al. [2] and Liao et al. [45]. This
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

