How Do Large Language Models Acquire
Factual Knowledge During Pretraining?

Hoyeon Chang1

Jinho Park1

Seonghyeon Ye1

Du-Seong Chang3

Sohee Yang2

Youngkyung Seo3

Minjoon Seo1
1

KAIST
{retapurayo, binlepain178, seonghyeon.ye, minjoon}@kaist.ac.kr
2
UCL
sohee.yang.22@ucl.ac.uk

3
KT
{yg.seo, dschang}@kt.com

Abstract
Despite the recent observation that large language models (LLMs) can store substantial factual knowledge, there is a limited understanding of the mechanisms of
how they acquire factual knowledge through pretraining. This work addresses this
gap by studying how LLMs acquire factual knowledge during pretraining. The
findings reveal several important insights into the dynamics of factual knowledge
acquisition during pretraining. First, counterintuitively, we observe that pretraining on more data shows no significant improvement in the model’s capability to
acquire and maintain factual knowledge. Next, there is a power-law relationship
between training steps and forgetting of memorization and generalization of factual
knowledge, and LLMs trained with duplicated training data exhibit faster forgetting.
Third, training LLMs with larger batch sizes can enhance the models’ robustness
to forgetting. Overall, our observations suggest that factual knowledge acquisition
in LLM pretraining occurs by progressively increasing the probability of factual
knowledge presented in the pretraining data at each step. However, this increase is
diluted by subsequent forgetting. Based on this interpretation, we demonstrate that
we can provide plausible explanations for recently observed behaviors of LLMs,
such as the poor performance of LLMs on long-tail knowledge and the benefits of
deduplicating the pretraining corpus.1

1

Introduction

Recent studies on LLMs have shown their ability to capture substantial factual knowledge from the
pretraining data [14, 36, 40]. Unfortunately, little is understood about the mechanisms of how LLMs
acquire factual knowledge during pretraining. In this work, we make an initial attempt to understand
the dynamics of factual knowledge acquisition in LLM pretraining. We study three important yet
unanswered research questions:
RQ1. How is factual knowledge acquired during LLM pretraining and how are LLMs affected by
the training data at each training step?
RQ2. How is the effectivity of factual knowledge acquisition affected by training conditions?
1

Code and data are available at: https://github.com/kaistAI/factual-knowledge-acquisition/

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

