ESPACE: Dimensionality Reduction of Activations for
Model Compression

Charbel Sakr
NVIDIA Research
csakr@nvidia.com

Brucek Khailany
NVIDIA Research
bkhailany@nvidia.com

Abstract
We propose ESPACE1 , an LLM compression technique based on dimensionality reduction of activations. Unlike prior works on weight-centric tensor decomposition,
ESPACE projects activations onto a pre-calibrated set of principal components.
The activation-centrality of the approach enables retraining LLMs with no loss of
expressivity; while at inference, weight decomposition is obtained as a byproduct
of matrix multiplication associativity. Theoretical results on the construction of projection matrices with optimal computational accuracy are provided. Experimentally,
we find ESPACE enables 50% compression of GPT3, Llama2, and Nemotron4
models with small accuracy degradation, as low as a 0.18 perplexity increase on
GPT3-22B. At lower compression rates of 20% to 40%, ESPACE drives GPT3
models to outperforming their baseline, by up to a 0.38 decrease in perplexity
for GPT3-8B. ESPACE also reduces GEMM execution time and prefill inference
latency on existing hardware. Comparison with related works on compressing
Llama2-7B via matrix factorization shows that ESPACE is a first step in advancing
the state-of-the-art in tensor decomposition compression of LLMs.

1

Introduction

Capabilities of large language models (LLMs) have recently soared in natural language understanding
and generative power. It is appreciated that there exists a correlation between model size and
achievable accuracy. Indeed, as LLMs consume trillions of tokens during their training, a large
parameter volume is required to capture intricate linguistic features [1]. This leads to a trade-off in
LLMs: larger parameter counts improve accuracy but come with increased serving cost.
However, it is also appreciated that the computational requirements of inference may be lower than
those of training [2]. To that end, numerous studies have investigated compression of LLMs to reduce
inference cost. The most popular LLM compression techniques are quantization [3] and pruning
[4]. A less explored, but powerful technique is tensor decomposition, and in our work, we propose a
novel, activation-centric way to decompose LLM tensors. Our proposal is to project activations onto
a static set of components optimizing fidelity. The projection reduces activation dimensionality and
leads to weight compression at inference as a byproduct of matrix multiplication associativity.
1.1

Related work and motivation for activation-centric tensor decomposition

Recent research has proposed many quantization and pruning techniques for compressing LLMs.
Examples of advances in LLM quantization include SmoothQuant [3], AWQ [5], and GPTQ [6]; while
notable LLM pruning works include SparseGPT [4], LLM-Pruner [7], and ReLU-based masking [8].
These methods are conceptually orthogonal to our proposal for activation projection which can be
1

We use the french pronunciation "espace", which means "space".

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

