Safe and Efficient: A Primal-Dual Method for Offline
Convex CMDPs under Partial Data Coverage

Haobo Zhang
ShanghaiTech University
zhanghb2023@shanghaitech.edu.cn
Honghao Wei
Washington State University
honghao.wei@wsu.edu

Xiyue Peng
ShanghaiTech University
pengyx2024@shanghaitech.edu.cn
Xin Liu∗
ShanghaiTech University
liuxin7@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Offline safe reinforcement learning (RL) aims to find an optimal policy using a
pre-collected dataset when data collection is impractical or risky. We propose a
novel linear programming (LP) based primal-dual algorithm for convex MDPs that
incorporates “uncertainty” parameters to improve data efficiency while requiring
only partial data coverage assumption.
Our theoretical results achieve a sample
√
complexity of O(1/(1 − γ) n) under general function approximation, improving
the current state-of-the-art by a factor of 1/(1 − γ), where n is the number of
data samples in an offline dataset, and γ is the discount factor. The numerical
experiments validate our theoretical findings, demonstrating the practical efficacy
of our approach in achieving improved safety and learning efficiency in safe offline
settings.

1

Introduction

Safe reinforcement learning (RL) aims to learn a reward-maximizing policy while satisfying multiple
safety constraints, demonstrating its practicality in many real-world applications, such as autonomous
driving [Kiran et al., 2021], robotics [Levine et al., 2016], and healthcare [Yu et al., 2021]. In these
tasks, certain behaviors may potentially harm the agent or its surroundings, which is crucial for
task completion. One way to mathematically characterize safe RL is through Constrained Markov
Decision Processes (CMDPs) [Altman, 2021], where safety constraints are incorporated into the
problem when optimizing the objective.
Offline RL aims to learn a sequence of actions from a pre-collected dataset to address scenarios
where interacting with the environment is risky, expensive, or impractical. Ensuring sample efficiency
in offline RL with function approximation typically requires additional assumptions about both the
function classes and the dataset due to training instability and distribution shift issues [Fujimoto
et al., 2019, Kostrikov et al., 2021, Paine et al., 2020]. Earlier studies [Chen and Jiang, 2019, Liao
et al., 2022, Liu et al., 2019, Wang et al., 2019, Zhang et al., 2020b] in offline RL usually require
that all functions in the function space are Bellman-complete and that the dataset has full coverage,
meaning it covers the state-action distributions induced by all policies. This might be a mild and
accepted assumption in offline RL without considering safety. However, it is highly unacceptable and
impractical in safe offline RL, as it would require the dataset to cover all hazardous state-action pairs
induced by all dangerous policies. To address the full coverage issue, later works [Chen and Jiang,
2022, Rashidinejad et al., 2021, Uehara and Sun, 2021, Xie et al., 2021, Zhan et al., 2022, Zhu et al.,
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

