Efficient and Private Marginal Reconstruction with
Local Non-Negativity

Brett Mullins1

Miguel Fuentes1 Yingtai Xiao2 Daniel Kifer2
Cameron Musco1 Daniel Sheldon1
1
University of Massachusetts, Amherst 2 Penn State University
{bmullins,mmfuentes,cmusco,sheldon}@cs.umass.edu
{yxx5224,duk17}@psu.edu

Abstract
Differential privacy is the dominant standard for formal and quantifiable privacy
and has been used in major deployments that impact millions of people. Many
differentially private algorithms for query release and synthetic data contain steps
that reconstruct answers to queries from answers to other queries that have been
measured privately. Reconstruction is an important subproblem for such mechanisms to economize the privacy budget, minimize error on reconstructed answers,
and allow for scalability to high-dimensional datasets. In this paper, we introduce a
principled and efficient postprocessing method ReM (Residuals-to-Marginals) for
reconstructing answers to marginal queries. Our method builds on recent work on
efficient mechanisms for marginal query release, based on making measurements
using a residual query basis that admits efficient pseudoinversion, which is an
important primitive used in reconstruction. An extension GReM-LNN (Gaussian
Residuals-to-Marginals with Local Non-negativity) reconstructs marginals under
Gaussian noise satisfying consistency and non-negativity, which often reduces error
on reconstructed answers. We demonstrate the utility of ReM and GReM-LNN by
applying them to improve existing private query answering mechanisms.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy is the dominant standard for formal and quantifiable privacy and has been used in
major deployments that impact millions of people such as the 2020 US Decennial Census [1]. One
of the most fundamental problems in differential privacy is answering a workload of linear queries.
Linear queries are used for basic descriptive statistics like counts and sums, and as building blocks
for more complex tasks. Marginal queries, which describe the frequency distribution of subsets
of discrete variables (e.g., income by age and education), are of particular interest as descriptive
statistics and for use in downstream tasks like regression analyses.
A key subproblem in linear query answering is reconstruction. Given a workload of linear queries,
most mechanisms select a different set of queries to measure to make the most efficient use of the
privacy budget, and then use the noisy answers to reconstruct answers to workload queries [2–11].
Effective reconstruction methods can combine information from all noisy measurements to provide
mutually consistent answers to workload queries.
Computational complexity is a key challenge for reconstruction methods. These methods answer
workload queries by—either explicitly or implicitly—reconstructing a data distribution that has size
exponential in the number of variables. To scale to high-dimensional data sets, existing approaches
must represent this distribution compactly through some form of parametric representation [8–12],
which introduces tradeoffs such as a restricted space of data distributions that can be represented [8–
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

