Scalable Optimization in the Modular Norm
Tim Large⋆
Columbia University

Yang Liu
Lawrence Livermore National Lab

Minyoung Huh
MIT CSAIL

Hyojin Bahng
MIT CSAIL

Phillip Isola
MIT CSAIL

Jeremy Bernstein⋆
MIT CSAIL

Abstract
To improve performance in contemporary deep learning, one is interested in scaling
up the neural network in terms of both the number and the size of the layers.
When ramping up the width of a single layer, graceful scaling of training has
been linked to the need to normalize the weights and their updates in the “natural
norm” particular to that layer. In this paper, we significantly generalize this idea
by defining the modular norm, which is the natural norm on the full weight space
of any neural network architecture. The modular norm is defined recursively in
tandem with the network architecture itself. We show that the modular norm
has several promising applications. On the practical side, the modular norm can
be used to normalize the updates of any base optimizer so that the learning rate
becomes transferable across width and depth. This means that the user does not
need to compute optimizer-specific scale factors in order to scale training. On the
theoretical side, we show that for any neural network built from “well-behaved”
atomic modules, the gradient of the network is Lipschitz-continuous in the modular
norm, with the Lipschitz constant admitting a simple recursive formula. This
characterization opens the door to porting standard ideas in optimization theory
over to deep learning. We have created a Python package called Modula that
automatically normalizes weight updates in the modular norm of the architecture.
The package is available via pip install modula with source code here.

1

Introduction

Given the practical impact of deep learning systems trained at the largest scale, there is a need for
training algorithms that scale gracefully: without instability and—if possible—without manual tuning.
However, current best practices for training have developed somewhat organically and do not live on
a bedrock of sound numerical analysis. For example, while the Adam optimizer [1] is ubiquitous
in the field, errors have been found in its proof of convergence [2], and empirically Adam has been
found to scale poorly as either the width [3] or the depth [4] of the network is ramped up.
To remedy this situation, a patchwork of learning rate correction factors have recently been proposed
[3–6]. The general idea is to retrofit a base optimizer such as Adam or SGD with special correction
factors intended to render the optimizer’s optimal learning rate invariant to scale. But this situation is
not ideal: the correction factors are reportedly difficult to use. Lingle [7] suggests that this may be due
to their “higher implementation complexity, many variations, or complex theoretical background”.
What’s more, the correction factors are optimizer-specific, meaning that if one switches to a different
optimizer one must either look up or recalculate a separate set of correction factors.
The goal of this paper is to simplify matters. We show that both Adam and SGD can be made to scale
gracefully with width and depth by simply normalizing their updates in a special norm associated with
⋆ denotes equal contribution. Correspondence to {jbernstein,minhuh}@mit.edu.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

