DisenGCD: A Meta Multigraph-assisted Disentangled
Graph Learning Framework for Cognitive Diagnosis

Shangshang Yang1,2

Mingyang Chen1,3

Panpan Zhang1

Ziwen Wang1

Xiaoshan Yu1

Haiping Ma1,3∗

Xingyi Zhang1,3
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Computing and Signal Processing of Ministry of Education,
Anhui University, Hefei, Anhui 230601, P. R. China
2
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Intelligent Computing and Applications,
3
Department of Information Materials and Intelligent Sensing Laboratory of Anhui Province
{yangshang0308, wzw12sir, yxsleo, zppan55, xyzhanghust}@gmail.com
q22201127@stu.ahu.edu.cn hpma@ahu.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Existing graph learning-based cognitive diagnosis (CD) methods have made relatively good results, but their student, exercise, and concept representations are
learned and exchanged in an implicit unified graph, which makes the interactionagnostic exercise and concept representations be learned poorly, failing to provide high robustness against noise in students’ interactions. Besides, lower-order
exercise latent representations obtained in shallow layers are not well explored
when learning the student representation. To tackle the issues, this paper suggests a meta multigraph-assisted disentangled graph learning framework for CD
(DisenGCD), which learns three types of representations on three disentangled
graphs: student-exercise-concept interaction, exercise-concept relation, and concept dependency graphs, respectively. Specifically, the latter two graphs are
first disentangled from the interaction graph. Then, the student representation
is learned from the interaction graph by a devised meta multigraph learning module; multiple learnable propagation paths in this module enable current student
latent representation to access lower-order exercise latent representations, which
can lead to more effective nad robust student representations learned; the exercise and concept representations are learned on the relation and dependency
graphs by graph attention modules. Finally, a novel diagnostic function is devised to handle three disentangled representations for prediction. Experiments
show better performance and robustness of DisenGCD than state-of-the-art CD
methods and demonstrate the effectiveness of the disentangled learning framework and meta multigraph module. The source code is available at https:
//github.com/BIMK/Intelligent-Education/tree/main/DisenGCD.

1

Introduction

In the realm of intelligent education [43, 27, 47], cognitive diagnosis (CD) plays a crucial role in
estimating students’ mastery/proficiency on each knowledge concept [1], which mainly models the
exercising process of students by predicting students’ responses based on their response records/logs
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

