LuSh-NeRF: Lighting up and Sharpening NeRFs for
Low-light Scenes

Ke Xu† Gerhard Petrus Hancke Rynson W.H. Lau†
Department of Computer Science
City University of Hong Kong
zefanqu2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, kkangwing@gmail.com,
{gp.hancke, Rynson.Lau}@cityu.edu.hk

Zefan Qu

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) have shown remarkable performances in producing novel-view images from high-quality scene images. However, hand-held
low-light photography challenges NeRFs as the captured images may simultaneously suffer from low visibility, noise, and camera shakes. While existing NeRF
methods may handle either low light or motion, directly combining them or incorporating additional image-based enhancement methods does not work as these
degradation factors are highly coupled. We observe that noise in low-light images is
always sharp regardless of camera shakes, which implies an implicit order of these
degradation factors within the image formation process. This inspires us to explore
such an order to decouple and remove these degradation factors while training the
NeRF. To this end, we propose in this paper a novel model, named LuSh-NeRF,
which can reconstruct a clean and sharp NeRF from a group of hand-held low-light
images. The key idea of LuSh-NeRF is to sequentially model noise and blur in the
images via multi-view feature consistency and frequency information of NeRF, respectively. Specifically, LuSh-NeRF includes a novel Scene-Noise Decomposition
(SND) module for decoupling the noise from the scene representation and a novel
Camera Trajectory Prediction (CTP) module for the estimation of camera motions
based on low-frequency scene information. To facilitate training and evaluations,
we construct a new dataset containing both synthetic and real images. Experiments
show that LuSh-NeRF outperforms existing approaches. Our code and dataset can
be found here: https://github.com/quzefan/LuSh-NeRF.

1

Introduction

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [31, 2, 3, 5, 24] have achieved notable success in modeling 3D scene
information via implicit functions learned from a set of 2D images with known camera poses. Since
optimizing NeRFs by measuring the colorimetric errors of training views essentially requires bright
and sharp training images, hand-held low-light photography, which is prevalent in our daily life (e.g.,
in nighttime scenes), cannot be used directly for training NeRFs to produce visually pleasing novel
view images (Fig. 1(b)), due to the co-existence of low visibility, noise, and camera motion blur in
the captured images.
A straightforward solution is to incorporate existing low-light enhancement/deblurring methods
(e.g., [57, 12, 67, 59, 13, 45]) to preprocess the captured images before using them for training the
NeRFs. However, it raises two problems. First, as these methods are typically image-based, they
do not consider the multi-view consistency. Second, These enhancement methods may introduce
†

Joint corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

