AFBench: A Large-scale Benchmark
for Airfoil Design

Jian Liu1,2 Jianyu Wu2 Hairun Xie3 Guoqing Zhang1 Jing Wang3 Wei Liu3
Wanli Ouyang2 Junjun Jiang1 Xianming Liu1∗ Shixiang Tang2∗ Miao Zhang3∗
1

Harbin Institute of Technology 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
Shanghai Aircraft Design and Research Institute

Generate
leading edge radius (

)

.

Change
source keypoints

target keypoints.

𝑅

Outputs:

Outputs:

Option 1

Option 2

Change

.
Outputs:

Option 3

Figure 1: Our Airfoil Generation and Editing Software. (a) Generating diverse candidate airfoils.
(b) Editing Keypoints and Editing Physical Parameters.

Abstract
Data-driven generative models have emerged as promising approaches towards
achieving efficient mechanical inverse design. However, due to prohibitively high
cost in time and money, there is still lack of open-source and large-scale benchmarks in this field. It is mainly the case for airfoil inverse design, which requires to
generate and edit diverse geometric-qualified and aerodynamic-qualified airfoils
following the multimodal instructions, i.e., dragging points and physical parameters.
This paper presents the open-source endeavors in airfoil inverse design, AFBench,
including a large-scale dataset with 200 thousand airfoils and high-quality aerodynamic and geometric labels, two novel and practical airfoil inverse design tasks, i.e.,
conditional generation on multimodal physical parameters, controllable editing,
and comprehensive metrics to evaluate various existing airfoil inverse design methods. Our aim is to establish AFBench as an ecosystem for training and evaluating
airfoil inverse design methods, with a specific focus on data-driven controllable
inverse design models by multimodal instructions capable of bridging the gap
between ideas and execution, the academic research and industrial applications.
We have provided baseline models, comprehensive experimental observations,
and analysis to accelerate future research. Our baseline model is trained on an
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

