To Learn or Not to Learn, That is the Question
— A Feature-Task Dual Learning Model
of Perceptual Learning
Xiao Liu1,2 , Muyang Lyu1,2 , Cong Yu2* , and Si Wu1,2*
1

Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies,
Beijing Key Laboratory of Behavior and Mental Health,
IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research,
Center of Quantitative Biology, Peking University
2
School of Psychological and Cognitive Sciences, Peking University
{xiaoliu23, yucong, siwu}@pku.edu.cn
lyumuyang@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Perceptual learning refers to the practices through which participants learn to improve their performance in perceiving sensory stimuli. Two seemingly conflicting
phenomena of specificity and transfer have been widely observed in perceptual
learning. Here, we propose a dual-learning model to reconcile these two phenomena. The model consists of two learning processes. One is task-based learning,
which is fast and enables the brain to adapt to a task rapidly by using existing
feature representations. The other is feature-based learning, which is slow and
enables the brain to improve feature representations to match the statistical change
of the environment. Associated with different training paradigms, the interactions
between these two learning processes induce the rich phenomena of perceptual
learning. Specifically, in the training paradigm where the same stimulus condition
is presented excessively, feature-based learning is triggered, which incurs specificity, while in the paradigm where the stimulus condition varies during the training,
task-based learning dominates to induce the transfer effect. As the number of training sessions under the same stimulus condition increases, a transition from transfer
to specificity occurs. We demonstrate that the dual-learning model can account for
both the specificity and transfer phenomena observed in classical psychophysical
experiments. We hope that this study gives us insight into understanding how the
brain balances the accomplishment of a new task and the consumption of learning
effort.

1

Introduction

Perceptual learning refers to the practices through which human participants learn to improve their
performances of perceiving sensory stimuli [1]. Perceptual learning has been widely used as a
research paradigm to ascertain the learning strategies in the brain. Over the years, two seemingly
contradictory phenomena have been widely found in perceptual learning. One is specificity, referring
to that after learning, the improved performance of participants is restricted to the trained location or
the trained feature of the stimulus [2, 3]. The other is transfer, referring to that after learning, the
improved performance is transferable to untrained locations or untrained features of the stimulus [4,
* These authors contributed equally to this work and should be considered co-corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

