N EO RL: Efficient Exploration for Nonepisodic RL

Bhavya Sukhija∗, Lenart Treven, Florian Dörfler, Stelian Coros, Andreas Krause
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
We study the problem of nonepisodic reinforcement learning (RL) for nonlinear
dynamical systems, where the system dynamics are unknown and the RL agent has
to learn from a single trajectory, i.e., adapt online and without resets. This setting is
ubiquitous in the real world, where resetting is impossible or requires human intervention. We propose Nonepisodic Optimistic RL (N EO RL), an approach based on
the principle of optimism in the face of uncertainty. N EO RL uses well-calibrated
probabilistic models and plans optimistically w.r.t. the epistemic uncertainty about
the unknown dynamics. Under continuity and bounded energy
√ assumptions on
the system, we provide a first-of-its-kind regret bound of O(βT T ΓT ) for general
nonlinear systems with Gaussian process dynamics. We compare N EO RL to
other baselines on several deep RL environments and empirically demonstrate that
N EO RL achieves the optimal average cost while incurring the least regret.

1

Introduction

In recent years, data-driven control approaches, such as reinforcement learning (RL), have demonstrated remarkable achievements. However, most RL algorithms are devised for an episodic setting,
where during each episode, the agent interacts in the environment for a predetermined episode length
or until a termination condition is met. After the episode, the agent is reset back to an initial state
from where the next episode commences. Episodes prevent the system from blowing up, i.e., maintain
stability, while also restricting exploration to states that are relevant to the task at hand. Moreover,
resets ensure that the agent explores close to the initial states and does not end up at undesirable
parts of the state space that exhibit low reward. In simulation, resetting is typically straightforward.
However, if we wish to enable agents to learn and adapt by interacting online with the real world,
resets are often prohibitive since they typically involve manual intervention. Instead, agents should
be able to learn autonomously (Sharma et al., 2021b) i.e., from a single trajectory. This problem is
extensively studied in adaptive control (Åström & Wittenmark, 2013), where classical works focus
on controller design (Lai & Wei, 1982, 1987; Krstić et al., 1992, 1995; Annaswamy, 2023) and not
on the exploration/learning aspect of the problem. Only a few works consider these two aspects
jointly (Abbasi-Yadkori & Szepesvári, 2011; Cohen et al., 2019; Dean et al., 2020; Simchowitz &
Foster, 2020; Zhao et al., 2024). However, these works study linear systems with quadratic costs, i.e.,
the LQR setting. While several works in the Deep RL community have also studied this problem,
(c.f., Section 5), the theoretical results for this setting are fairly limited. In particular, theoretical
results mostly exist for the finite state and action spaces (Kearns & Singh, 2002; Brafman & Tennenholtz, 2002; Jaksch et al., 2010) and the extension to nonlinear systems with continuous spaces is
much less understood. In our work, we address this gap and propose a practical RL algorithm that is
grounded in theory. In particular, we make the following contributions.
Contributions
1. We propose, N EO RL, a novel model-based RL algorithm based on the principle of optimism in
the face of uncertainty. N EO RL operates in a nonepisodic setting and picks average cost optimal
policies optimistically w.r.t. to the model’s epistemic uncertainty.
∗

Correspondence to sukhijab@ethz.ch

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

