Perceiving Longer Sequences With
Bi-Directional Cross-Attention Transformers
Markus Hiller, Krista A. Ehinger, and Tom Drummond
School of Computing and Information Systems
The University of Melbourne, Australia
m.hiller@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
We present a novel bi-directional Transformer architecture (BiXT) which scales
linearly with input size in terms of computational cost and memory consumption, but does not suffer the drop in performance or limitation to only one input
modality seen with other efficient Transformer-based approaches. BiXT is inspired
by the Perceiver architectures but replaces iterative attention with an efficient bidirectional cross-attention module in which input tokens and latent variables attend
to each other simultaneously, leveraging a naturally emerging attention-symmetry
between the two. This approach unlocks a key bottleneck experienced by Perceiverlike architectures and enables the processing and interpretation of both semantics
(‘what’) and location (‘where’) to develop alongside each other over multiple
layers – allowing its direct application to dense and instance-based tasks alike. By
combining efficiency with the generality and performance of a full Transformer
architecture, BiXT can process longer sequences like point clouds, text or images
at higher feature resolutions and achieves competitive performance across a range
of tasks like point cloud part segmentation, semantic image segmentation, image
classification, hierarchical sequence modeling and document retrieval. Our experiments demonstrate that BiXT models outperform larger competitors by leveraging
longer sequences more efficiently on vision tasks like classification and segmentation, and perform on par with full Transformer variants on sequence modeling and
document retrieval – but require 28% fewer FLOPs and are up to 8.4× faster. 1

1

Introduction

Much of the data we obtain when perceiving our environment can be interpreted via a division into
‘what’ and ‘where’. If we consider for example the image pictured in Figure 1 on the left, we can
easily describe its content by ‘what’ we see – the building, sky and a flag. If we were to draw
conclusions on a more fine-grained level though, we would likely include more specific descriptions
like “lower left corner” referring to their positions within the image – the ‘where’. In other words,
‘where’ denotes the actual geometric location of the individual elements (e.g. pixels) and ‘what’ the
semantic entities (e.g. objects) that collectively describe the data as a whole. Note that this similarly
applies to many other modalities, like point clouds or even language where we form words via letters
that together have a certain meaning.
Thanks to the few structural constraints placed on the input data paired with high performance,
Transformers [44] have shown great capabilities in extracting both ’what’ and ’where’ for a range of
input modalities, giving rise to significant advances across various fields such as Natural Language
Processing [9] and Computer Vision [10, 41, 42]. However, their success comes at the high cost of
scaling quadratically in memory and time with the input length, practically prohibiting their use on
1

Code and models are publicly available at https://github.com/mrkshllr/BiXT.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

