GenRL: Multimodal-foundation world models
for generalization in embodied agents

Pietro Mazzaglia∗
IDLab, Ghent University

Tim Verbelen
VERSES AI Research Lab

Aaron Courville
Mila, University of Montreal

Bart Dhoedt
IDLab, Ghent University

Sai Rajeswar
ServiceNow Research

Figure 1: Multimodal-foundation world models connect and align the video-language space of a
foundation model with the latent space of a generative world model for reinforcement learning,
requiring vision-only data. Our GenRL framework turns visual and/or language prompts into latent
targets and learns to realize the corresponding behaviors by training in the world model’s imagination.

Abstract
Learning generalist embodied agents, able to solve multitudes of tasks in different
domains is a long-standing problem. Reinforcement learning (RL) is hard to scale
up as it requires a complex reward design for each task. In contrast, language can
specify tasks in a more natural way. Current foundation vision-language models
(VLMs) generally require fine-tuning or other adaptations to be adopted in embodied contexts, due to the significant domain gap. However, the lack of multimodal
data in such domains represents an obstacle to developing foundation models for
embodied applications. In this work, we overcome these problems by presenting
multimodal-foundation world models, able to connect and align the representation
of foundation VLMs with the latent space of generative world models for RL,
without any language annotations. The resulting agent learning framework, GenRL,
allows one to specify tasks through vision and/or language prompts, ground them
in the embodied domain’s dynamics, and learn the corresponding behaviors in
imagination. As assessed through large-scale multi-task benchmarking in locomotion and manipulation domains, GenRL enables multi-task generalization from
language and visual prompts. Furthermore, by introducing a data-free policy learning strategy, our approach lays the groundwork for foundational policy learning
using generative world models.
Website, code and data: mazpie.github.io/genrl
∗

Work done while interning at Mila/ServiceNow Research. Email: pietro.mazzaglia@ugent.be

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

