3D Gaussian Rendering Can Be Sparser:
Efficient Rendering via Learned Fragment Pruning

Zhifan Ye, Chenxi Wan, Chaojian Li, Jihoon Hong, Sixu Li,
Leshu Li, Yongan Zhang, Yingyan (Celine) Lin
Georgia Institute of Technology
{zye327, celine.lin}@gatech.edu

Abstract
3D Gaussian splatting has recently emerged as a promising technique for novel
view synthesis from sparse image sets, yet comes at the cost of requiring millions
of 3D Gaussian primitives to reconstruct each 3D scene. This largely limits its
application to resource-constrained devices and applications. Despite advances in
Gaussian pruning techniques that aim to remove individual 3D Gaussian primitives,
the significant reduction in primitives often fails to translate into commensurate
increases in rendering speed, impeding efficiency and practical deployment. We
identify that this discrepancy arises due to the overlooked impact of fragment
count per Gaussian (i.e., the number of pixels each Gaussian is projected onto). To
bridge this gap and meet the growing demands for efficient on-device 3D Gaussian
rendering, we propose fragment pruning, an orthogonal enhancement to existing
pruning methods that can significantly accelerate rendering by selectively pruning
fragments within each Gaussian. Our pruning framework dynamically optimizes
the pruning threshold for each Gaussian, markedly improving rendering speed
and quality. Extensive experiments in both static and dynamic scenes validate the
effectiveness of our approach. For instance, by integrating our fragment pruning
technique with state-of-the-art Gaussian pruning methods, we achieve up to a
1.71× speedup on an edge GPU device, the Jetson Orin NX, and enhance rendering
quality by an average of 0.16 PSNR on the Tanks&Temples dataset. Our code is
available at https://github.com/GATECH-EIC/Fragment-Pruning.

1

Introduction

Novel view synthesis, which aims to generate photo-realistic images of a 3D scene from unseen
viewpoints given a set of posed multi-view images as input, has been crucial for many virtual reality
(VR) and augmented reality (AR) applications [1, 2, 3]. In recent years, Neural Radiance Field [4]
(NeRF) and its variants [5, 6, 7] have shown promise in delivering high-quality rendering. However,
the volume rendering approach [8] adopted in NeRF requires expensive sampling (e.g., more than
100 times neural network inference per emitted ray [4]) in 3D space, leading to slow rendering speeds.
To mitigate this problem, subsequent works have attempted to enhance rendering performance by:
(1) storing radiance in explicit 3D representations such as voxel grids [9, 10, 11], octrees [12],
and hash grids [13]; and (2) converting pre-trained NeRFs into meshes [14, 15]. However, these
methods still rely on the aforementioned costly volume rendering and often lead to increased storage
consumption and decreased rendering fidelity. Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting [16], which adopts a
rasterization-based rendering pipeline to avoid the costly point sampling required in volume rendering,
has emerged as a promising solution for achieving a superior trade-off between rendering speed and
quality. Nevertheless, 3D Gaussian Splatting [16] requires millions of 3D Gaussian primitives to
reconstruct a 3D scene (e.g., an average of 3 million per scene in the Mip-NeRF 360 dataset [6]),
which still hinders real-time rendering on resource-constrained devices. For instance, as illustrated in
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

