SPIQA: A Dataset for Multimodal
Question Answering on Scientific Papers

Shraman Pramanick?1,2 Rama Chellappa2 Subhashini Venugopalan?1†
1
Google Research 2 Johns Hopkins University
https://huggingface.co/datasets/google/spiqa
https://github.com/google/spiqa

Abstract
Seeking answers to questions within long scientific research articles is a crucial
area of study that aids readers in quickly addressing their inquiries. However,
existing question-answering (QA) datasets based on scientific papers are limited
in scale and focus solely on textual content. We introduce SPIQA (Scientific
Paper Image Question Answering), the first large-scale QA dataset specifically
designed to interpret complex figures and tables within the context of scientific
research articles across various domains of computer science. Leveraging the
breadth of expertise and ability of multimodal large language models (MLLMs) to
understand figures, we employ automatic and manual curation to create the dataset.
We craft an information-seeking task on interleaved images and text that involves
multiple images covering plots, charts, tables, schematic diagrams, and result
visualizations. SPIQA comprises 270K questions divided into training, validation,
and three different evaluation splits. Through extensive experiments with 12
prominent foundational models, we evaluate the ability of current multimodal
systems to comprehend the nuanced aspects of research articles. Additionally, we
propose a Chain-of-Thought (CoT) evaluation strategy with in-context retrieval
that allows fine-grained, step-by-step assessment and improves model performance.
We further explore the upper bounds of performance enhancement with additional
textual information, highlighting its promising potential for future research and the
dataset’s impact on revolutionizing how we interact with scientific literature.

1

Introduction

Surfacing pertinent information within the context of academic research articles is an essential area of
study, as it empowers students and researchers to efficiently address their queries which are naturally
triggered when reading a scientific paper. However, existing question-answering (QA) datasets
anchored on academic articles are limited in terms of scale [75, 21, 30, 14, 35]. This limitation arises
due to the complexity and cost associated with curating questions, as understanding such articles
demands domain-specific expertise, a detailed understanding of the topic, and a significant amount of
time. Additionally, prior QA datasets in this domain only analyze the abstracts, conclusion [59, 21]
and the textual paragraphs [58, 56, 69, 30, 14, 66, 35] of scientific articles, overlooking the wealth
of information presented in meticulously crafted figures and tables, and hence, fail to leverage and
analyze the rich, multidimensional data embedded in these visual elements, which are crucial for a
comprehensive understanding of the research presented.
Numerous datasets have been curated to evaluate the QA abilities of Large Language Models (LLMs)
on various documents, including factual documents [85, 62, 22, 86, 32, 12, 68, 70], book chapters
[28, 29, 51], news articles [74, 36] and more. However, understanding scientific papers poses
unique challenges as the systems must comprehend underlying theoretical implications with domainspecific terminologies and verify claims with experimental results and visualizations. There are also
several datasets that focus on the comprehension of standalone science diagrams [27, 24, 18, 65],
?
†

equal technical contribution,  work done as a student researcher at Google Research.
Corresponding author (vsubhashini@google.com)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

