Multi-Agent Coordination via Multi-Level
Communication
Ziluo Ding1,2,∗,‡

Zeyuan Liu1,∗

Zhirui Fang1,∗

Kefan Su2

Liwen Zhu3

Zongqing Lu2,†
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University,
2
Peking University, 3 Tencent AI Lab

Abstract
The partial observability and stochasticity in multi-agent settings can be mitigated
by accessing more information about others via communication. However, the
coordination problem still exists since agents cannot communicate actual actions
with each other at the same time due to the circular dependencies. In this paper, we
propose a novel multi-level communication scheme, Sequential Communication
(SeqComm). SeqComm treats agents asynchronously (the upper-level agents
make decisions before the lower-level ones) and has two communication phases.
In the negotiation phase, agents determine the priority of decision-making by
communicating hidden states of observations and comparing the value of intention,
obtained by modeling the environment dynamics. In the launching phase, the
upper-level agents take the lead in making decisions and then communicate their
actions with the lower-level agents. Theoretically, we prove the policies learned by
SeqComm are guaranteed to improve monotonically and converge. Empirically,
we show that SeqComm outperforms existing methods in various cooperative
multi-agent tasks.

1

Introduction

Centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE) [Lowe et al., 2017] is a popular learning
paradigm in cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). Although the centralized
value function can be learned to evaluate the joint policy of agents, the decentralized policies of
agents are essentially independent. Therefore, a coordination problem arises. That is, agents may
make sub-optimal actions by mistakenly assuming others’ actions when there exist multiple optimal
joint actions [Busoniu et al., 2008]. Communication allows agents to obtain information about
others to avoid miscoordination [Jiang et al., 2024]. However, most existing work only focuses on
communicating messages, e.g., the information of agents’ current observation or historical trajectory
[Jiang and Lu, 2018, Singh et al., 2019, Das et al., 2019, Ding et al., 2020]. It is impossible for an
agent to acquire other’s actions before making decisions since the game model is usually synchronous,
i.e., agents make decisions and execute actions simultaneously.
A general approach to solving the coordination problem is to make sure that ties between equally
good actions are broken by all agents. One simple mechanism for doing so is to know exactly what
others will do and adjust the behavior accordingly under a unique ordering of agents and actions
* Equal contribution.
†
‡

Correspondence to Zongqing Lu <zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn>, Ziluo Ding <ziluoding@baai.ac.cn>
Work done during an internship at Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

