Learning Elastic Costs to Shape Monge Displacements

Michal Klein
Apple
michalk@apple.com

Aram-Alexandre Pooladian
NYU
aram-alexandre.pooladian@nyu.edu

Eugène Ndiaye
Apple
e_ndiaye@apple.com

Jonathan Niles-Weed
NYU
jnw@cims.nyu.edu

Pierre Ablin
Apple
p_ablin@apple.com
Marco Cuturi
Apple
cuturi@apple.com

Abstract
Given a source and a target probability measure, the Monge problem studies
efficient ways to map the former onto the latter. This efficiency is quantified by
defining a cost function between source and target data. Such a cost is often set
by default in the machine learning literature to the squared-Euclidean distance,
ℓ22 (x, y) := 21 ∥x − y∥22 . The benefits of using elastic costs, defined using a
regularizer τ as c(x, y) := ℓ22 (x, y)+τ (x−y), was recently highlighted in [Cuturi
et al., 2023]. Such costs shape the displacements of Monge maps T , namely the
difference between a source point and its image T (x) − x, by giving them a
structure that matches that of the proximal operator of τ . In this work, we make
two important contributions to the study of elastic costs: (i) For any elastic cost,
we propose a numerical method to compute Monge maps that are provably optimal.
This provides a much-needed routine to create synthetic problems where the groundtruth OT map is known, by analogy to the Brenier theorem, which states that the
gradient of any convex potential is always a valid Monge map for the ℓ22 cost;
(ii) We propose a loss to learn the parameter θ of a parameterized regularizer
τθ , and apply it in the case where τA (z) := ∥A⊥ z∥22 . This regularizer promotes
displacements that lie on a low-dimensional subspace of Rd , spanned by the p
rows of A ∈ Rp×d . We illustrate the soundness of our procedure on synthetic data,
generated using our first contribution, in which we show near-perfect recovery of
A’s subspace using only samples. We demonstrate the applicability of this method
by showing predictive improvements on single-cell data tasks.

1

Introduction

Finding efficient ways to map a distribution of points onto another is a low-level task that plays a
crucial role across many machine learning (ML) problems. Optimal transport (OT) theory [Santambrogio, 2015] has emerged as a tool of choice to solve such challenging matching problems, notably
in single-cell genomics [Schiebinger et al., 2019, Tong et al., 2020, Bunne et al., 2023, 2024, Klein
et al., 2023]. We focus in this work on the numerical resolution of the Monge problem, which aims,
using high-dimensional source and target data samples (x1 , . . . , xn ) and (y1 , . . . , ym ), to recover a
map T : Rd → Rd that is simultaneously (i) a pushfoward map, in the sense that T applied on source
samples recovers the distribution of target samples; (ii) efficient, in the sense that T (xi ) is not too
far, on average from xi . The notion of efficiency can be made precise by choosing a real-valued cost
function c that compares a point x and its mapping via c(x, T (x)) ∈ R.
Challenges in the estimation of OT maps. When using standard cost functions such as ℓ22 (x, y) :=
1
2
2 ∥x−y∥2 , the estimation of OT maps is hindered, in principle, by the curse of dimensionality [Hütter
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

