Enhancing Protein Mutation Effect Prediction through
a Retrieval-Augmented Framework

Ruihan Guo∗1 , Rui Wang∗1 , Ruidong Wu∗1 , Zhizhou Ren1 , Jiahan Li1
Shitong Luo1 , Zuofan Wu1 , Qiang Liu1,2 , Jian Peng1 , Jianzhu Ma1,3
1
Helixon Research, 2 The University of Texas at Austin University
3
Institute for AI Industry Research, Tsinghua
guoruihan.sansi@gmail.com
majianzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Predicting the effects of protein mutations is crucial for analyzing protein functions and understanding genetic diseases. However, existing models struggle to
effectively extract mutation-related local structure motifs from protein databases,
which hinders their predictive accuracy and robustness. To tackle this problem, we
design a novel retrieval-augmented framework for incorporating similar structure
information in known protein structures. We create a vector database consisting
of local structure motif embeddings from a pre-trained protein structure encoder,
which allows for efficient retrieval of similar local structure motifs during mutation
effect prediction. Our findings demonstrate that leveraging this method results in
the SOTA performance across multiple protein mutation prediction datasets, and
offers a scalable solution for studying mutation effects.

1

Introduction

Protein fitness plays significant roles in diverse applications in pharmaceutical industry [Amara,
2013], drug design [De Carvalho, 2011], biofuel production [Huang et al., 2020], and environmental
bioremediation [Lu et al., 2022]. Deciphering mutation effects on protein fitness is crucial for
understanding their functional dynamics and yet remains a central challenge in molecular biology.
Most recent breakthroughs on computational predictions of mutation effects are driven by coevolutionary information [Riesselman et al., 2018, Luo et al., 2021, Notin et al., 2022]. The mutations on
contacting residue pairs would become correlated under the evolutionary pressure to maintain protein
stability and optimize functional efficiency within cellular environments. Consequently, conserved
patterns within protein sequences and structures typically signify their stability and functionality. The
predominant methodology to exploit such coevolutionary patterns is to perform multiple sequence
alignments (MSA) [Thompson et al., 1994, 1997] and fit either statistical [Seemayer et al., 2014] or
machine learning models [Rao et al., 2021]. In addition to sequence-level alignments, performing
domain-level structure clustering [Orengo et al., 1997, Dong et al., 2018] is also a promising approach
to extract evolutionary information from a protein family.
In this paper, we explore an alternative perspective to retrieve information for mutation effect
prediction. In contrast to the global protein representation considered by MSA and domain-level
structure alignments, we extract coevolutionary information in the scope of local microenvironments.
We focus on the alignment of local structure motifs, i.e., a central amino-acid with a few contacting
neighbors. Such a local representation of coevolutionary information is specialized to the scenarios of
protein engineering, where a common practice involves introducing a few point mutations to enhance
a desired function [Shroff et al., 2020]. It is widely observed that the effects of point mutations are
mainly given by the alteration of local biochemical microenvironments [Kim et al., 2011, Lu et al.,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

