Ordered Momentum for Asynchronous SGD

Chang-Wei Shi
Yi-Rui Yang
Wu-Jun Li∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
School of Computer Science, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
{shicw, yangyr}@smail.nju.edu.cn, liwujun@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Distributed learning is essential for training large-scale deep models. Asynchronous
SGD (ASGD) and its variants are commonly used distributed learning methods,
particularly in scenarios where the computing capabilities of workers in the cluster
are heterogeneous. Momentum has been acknowledged for its benefits in both optimization and generalization in deep model training. However, existing works have
found that naively incorporating momentum into ASGD can impede the convergence. In this paper, we propose a novel method called ordered momentum (OrMo)
for ASGD. In OrMo, momentum is incorporated into ASGD by organizing the
gradients in order based on their iteration indexes. We theoretically prove the
convergence of OrMo with both constant and delay-adaptive learning rates for
non-convex problems. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to establish the convergence analysis of ASGD with momentum without dependence on
the maximum delay. Empirical results demonstrate that OrMo can achieve better
convergence performance compared with ASGD and other asynchronous methods
with momentum.

1

Introduction

Many machine learning problems can be formulated as optimization problems of the following form:
min F (w) = Eξ∼D [f (w; ξ)] ,

w∈Rd

(1)

where w denotes the model parameter, d is the dimension of the parameter, D represents the
distribution of the training instances and f (w; ξ) denotes the loss on the training instance ξ.
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [28] and its variants [6, 12] are widely employed to solve the
problem in (1). At each iteration, SGD uses one stochastic gradient or a mini-batch of stochastic
gradients as an estimate of the full gradient to update the model parameter. In practice, momentum [26,
36, 24, 33] is often incorporated into SGD as a crucial technique for faster convergence and better
generalization performance. Many popular machine learning libraries, such as TensorFlow [1] and
PyTorch [25], include SGD with momentum (SGDm) as one of the optimizers.
Due to the rapid increase in the sizes of both models and datasets in recent years, a single machine is
often insufficient to complete the training task of machine learning models within a reasonable time.
Distributed learning [42, 37] aims to distribute the computations across multiple machines (workers)
to accelerate the training process. Because of its necessity for training large-scale machine learning
models, distributed learning has become a hot research topic in recent years. Existing distributed
learning methods can be categorized into two main types: synchronous distributed learning (SDL)
methods [19, 35, 29, 38, 44, 39] and asynchronous distributed learning (ADL) methods [2, 27, 8, 47,
17, 43]. In SDL methods, faster workers that have completed the computation must wait idly for
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

