General Articulated Objects Manipulation in Real
Images via Part-Aware Diffusion Process

Zhou Fang

Yong-Lu Li∗
Lixin Yang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Cewu Lu∗

{joefang, yonglu_li, siriusyang, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Articulated object manipulation in real images is a fundamental step in computer
and robotic vision tasks. Recently, several image editing methods based on diffusion models have been proposed to manipulate articulated objects according to text
prompts. However, these methods often generate weird artifacts or even fail in real
images. To this end, we introduce the Part-Aware Diffusion Model to approach the
manipulation of articulated objects in real images. First, we develop Abstract 3D
Models to represent and manipulate articulated objects efficiently. Then we propose
dynamic feature maps to transfer the appearance of objects from input images to
edited ones, meanwhile generating the novel-appearing parts reasonably. Extensive
experiments are provided to illustrate the advanced manipulation capabilities of
our method concerning state-of-the-art editing works. Additionally, we verify our
method on 3D articulated object understanding for embodied robot scenarios and
the promising results prove that our method supports this task strongly. The project
page is at https://mvig-rhos.com/pa_diffusion.

1

Introduction

Image editing is a long-standing popular computer vision task. Specifically, manipulating articulated
objects has garnered significant attention owing to its application in various fields, such as image
augmentation for downstream tasks [44], building goal conditions to train reinforcement learning
models for robotic manipulation [42, 55], creating videos with extra supervision information [34],
detecting human-object interactions [22, 23, 26], reasoning object affordance [25, 24], etc. Thanks to
the large-scale training data and immense computing power, diffusion-based [41] generative models
have achieved surprising results in the field of image and video generation.
Inspired by these successes, several recent works have adopted diffusion models as the backbone and
implemented text-guided object manipulation [20, 16, 8, 51]. We can properly divide these studies
into a couple of groups. The first one is to directly edit 2D images by transferring the feature/attention
maps from original images to edited ones such as [13, 32, 8]. However, weird artifacts are prone
to appear when the objects are rotated and deformed, or novel views appear. Consequently, these
methods are restricted to structure-preserving image editing. Another group relies on reconstructing
3D object models. As the most related work to ours, [51] reconstructed 3D object models for
manipulation and projected them back to images later. Nevertheless, this approach depends on the
quality of reconstructed 3D models heavily. And the reconstruction model has to be fine-tuned when
dealing with new categories. Moreover, manipulation has to be done manually which is laborious and
impractical to support editing large quantities of images.
To address these problems, we propose the Part-Aware Diffusion Model (PA-Diffusion model) for
articulated object manipulation in real images, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Firstly, we introduce the
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

