Exploring Fixed Point in Image Editing: Theoretical
Support and Convergence Optimization

Chen Hang1∗, Zhe Ma2∗, Haoming Chen1 , Xuwei Fang3 , Weisheng Xie3 ,
Faming Fang1†, Guixu Zhang1 , Hongbin Wang2†
1
East China Normal University, Shanghai, 200062 China
2
Ant Group, Hangzhou, 310063 China
3
Bestpay AI Lab, Shanghai, 200080 China

Abstract
In image editing, Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models (DDIM) inversion has
become a widely adopted method and is extensively used in various image editing
approaches. The core concept of DDIM inversion stems from the deterministic
sampling technique of DDIM, which allows the DDIM process to be viewed as
an Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) process that is reversible. This enables
the prediction of corresponding noise from a reference image, ensuring that the
restored image from this noise remains consistent with the reference image. Image
editing exploits this property by modifying the cross-attention between text and
images to edit specific objects while preserving the remaining regions. However, in
the DDIM inversion, using the t − 1 time step to approximate the noise prediction
at time step t introduces errors between the restored image and the reference image.
Recent approaches have modeled each step of the DDIM inversion process as
finding a fixed-point problem of an implicit function. This approach significantly
mitigates the error in the restored image but lacks theoretical support regarding
the existence of such fixed points. Therefore, this paper focuses on the study
of fixed points in DDIM inversion and provides theoretical support. Based on
the obtained theoretical insights, we further optimize the loss function for the
convergence of fixed points in the original DDIM inversion, improving the visual
quality of the edited image. Finally, we extend the fixed-point based image editing
to the application of unsupervised image dehazing, introducing a novel text-based
approach for unsupervised dehazing.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have gained significant attention in recent years. Early versions of Denoising
Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) [1] and score-based generative models [2] were capable
of generating high-quality images and even surpassed the performance of Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) [3] at that time. However, the initial diffusion models required a large number
of sampling steps during image generation, which was a major bottleneck of diffusion models.
Subsequent research focused on reducing the number of sampling steps without compromising the
quality of generated images [4]. During this period, DDIM [5] was proposed and widely used
for its speed and flexibility in both deterministic and stochastic generation. When DDIM is set to
deterministic sampling, it can be viewed as an ODE process that is reversible. This property enables
realistic image editing, leading to the introduction of Prompt-to-Prompt (P2P) [6] editing. The core
idea of P2P is to modify the cross-attention between text and images. For local edits, such as replacing
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding Author, fmfang@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, hongbin.whb@antgroup.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

