DRIP: Unleashing Diffusion Priors for Joint
Foreground and Alpha Prediction in Image Matting

Xiaodi Li1,2 , Zongxin Yang3 , Ruijie Quan1,2 , Yi Yang1,2∗
The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
CCAI, College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
DBMI, HMS, Harvard University, Boston, USA
https://github.com/LiNO3Dy/Drip
1

Abstract
Recovering the foreground color and opacity/alpha matte from a single image (i.e.,
image matting) is a challenging and ill-posed problem where data priors play a
critical role in achieving precise results. Due to the limited matting datasets, traditional methods usually struggle to produce high-quality estimation.To address this,
we explore the potential of leveraging vision priors embedded in pre-trained latent
diffusion models (LDM) for estimating foreground RGBA values in challenging
scenarios and rare objects. We introduce Drip, a novel approach for image matting
that harnesses the rich prior knowledge of LDM models. Our method incorporates
a switcher and a cross-domain attention mechanism to extend the original LDM for
joint prediction of the foreground color and opacity. This setup facilitates mutual
information exchange and ensures high consistency across both modalities. To
mitigate the inherent reconstruction errors of the LDM’s VAE decoder, we propose
a latent transparency decoder to align the RGBA prediction with the input image,
thereby reducing discrepancies. Comprehensive experimental results demonstrate
that our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance in foreground and alpha
predictions and shows remarkable generalizability across various benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Image matting aims to isolate the foreground object from composited images, a long-standing and
fundamental task in vision intelligence [1]. It is indispensable for various downstream applications,
such as media production, virtual reality, and image/video editing [2, 3]. Mathematically, image
matting begins with solving the inverse problem of the composition equation:
Imagei = αi · F oregroundi + (1 − αi ) · Backgroundi ,

αi ∈ [0, 1],

(1)

where i denotes the index of a pixel. Here, all quantities on the right-hand side are unknown, and the
prediction of the alpha matte α and foreground color represents an ill-posed problem.
In the past decade, advances in deep learning have significantly pushed the boundaries of image
matting, rapidly becoming the mainstream direction in this field [2, 4–7]. Despite their impressive
performance, two challenges remain unresolved in this domain: (i) high-quality foreground color
prediction. As illustrated in Fig. 1, most matting methods consist of two stages: namely, alpha
prediction with neural networks and foreground isolation via post-processing. These methods
typically struggle to generalize and recover high-fidelity foregrounds due to the accumulated errors
in alpha prediction and post-processing. (ii) accurate prediction of semi-transparent objects.
When the target to be predicted contains large areas of semi-transparency (e.g., a water glass) or
∗

Corresponding author: Yi Yang.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

