Algorithmic Collective Action in Recommender
Systems: Promoting Songs by Reordering Playlists

Joachim Baumann∗
University of Zurich
baumann@ifi.uzh.ch

Celestine Mendler-Dünner
ELLIS Institute, Tübingen
MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
Tübingen AI Center
celestine@tue.ellis.eu

Abstract
We investigate algorithmic collective action in transformer-based recommender
systems. Our use case is a collective of fans aiming to promote the visibility of an
underrepresented artist by strategically placing one of their songs in the existing
playlists they control. We introduce two easily implementable strategies to select
the position at which to insert the song and boost recommendations at test time.
The strategies exploit statistical properties of the learner to leverage discontinuities
in the recommendations, and the long-tail nature of song distributions. We evaluate
the efficacy of our strategies using a publicly available recommender system model
released by a major music streaming platform. Our findings reveal that even
small collectives (controlling less than 0.01% of the training data) can achieve
up to 40× more test time recommendations than songs with similar training set
occurrences, on average. Focusing on the externalities of the strategy, we find that
the recommendations of other songs are largely preserved, and the newly gained
recommendations are distributed across various artists. Together, our findings
demonstrate how carefully designed collective action strategies can be effective
while not necessarily being adversarial.

1

Introduction

In the ever-evolving landscape of music discovery, the challenge of accessing and sifting through the
overwhelming number of tracks released daily has become increasingly difficult. This has resulted
in a strong dependence on platforms like Spotify, Deezer, and Apple Music, which distribute and
promote music through algorithmic song recommendations. These systems rely on historical data to
learn user preferences and predict future content consumption [21, 51, 34, 7, 6].
It has been widely documented that music recommendation systems suffer from popularity bias as
they tend to concentrate recommendation exposure on a limited fraction of artists, often overlooking
new and emerging talent [35, 4, 2, 15, 9, 28]. As the success and visibility of artists are deeply
influenced by the algorithms of these platforms, this can lead to a considerable imbalance in the
music industry [1, 41] and reinforce existing inequalities [50]. Thus, artists have started to fight
for more transparency and fairer payments from online streaming services. The “Justice at Spotify”
campaign, launched by the Union of Musicians and Allied Workers [54], has been signed by more
than 28,000 artists. At the same time, the International Society for Music Information Retrieval
has been arguing for promoting the discovery of less popular artists by recommending ‘long-tail’
items [3], as have other researchers [11, 53, 16, 40].
∗

Work completed while at the Max-Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

