StreamBench: Towards Benchmarking Continuous
Improvement of Language Agents

Cheng-Kuang Wu1,2∗, Zhi Rui Tam1∗, Chieh-Yen Lin1 , Yun-Nung Chen1,2 , Hung-yi Lee2
1
Appier AI Research
2
National Taiwan University
{brian.wu, ray.tam}@appier.com

Abstract
Recent works have shown that large language model (LLM) agents are able to
improve themselves from experience, which is an important ability for continuous
enhancement post-deployment. However, existing benchmarks primarily evaluate
their innate capabilities and do not assess their ability to improve over time. To
address this gap, we introduce StreamBench, a pioneering benchmark designed
to evaluate the continuous improvement of LLM agents over an input-feedback
sequence. StreamBench simulates an online learning environment where LLMs
receive a continuous flow of feedback stream and iteratively enhance their performance. In addition, we propose several simple yet effective baselines for improving
LLMs on StreamBench, and provide a comprehensive analysis to identify critical
components that contribute to successful streaming strategies. Our work serves as
a stepping stone towards developing effective online learning strategies for LLMs,
paving the way for more adaptive AI systems in streaming scenarios. Source code:
https://github.com/stream-bench/stream-bench. Benchmark website:
https://stream-bench.github.io.

1

Introduction

Recently, large-scale pretraining [1] and instruction fine-tuning [2] have driven paradigm shifts in how
we interact with language models. These advancements allow us to use them out-of-the-box to solve
problems. Consequently, many benchmarks have emerged to evaluate the general capabilities of these
models. Some notable examples include MMLU [3], GSM8K [4], and BIG-Bench-Hard [5]. All
these benchmarks aim to assess LLMs’ innate capabilities, which we define as the general knowledge
or reasoning abilities demonstrated when used out-of-the-box.
In addition to LLMs’ strong innate capabilities, recent works have shown that LLM agents, which
are LLMs augmented with extra components such as memory, retrievers, or tools, are able to improve
themselves from experience. MemPrompt [6] shows that memory-enhanced GPT-3 can improve
through time by storing past user feedback and retrieve them in the future. Reflexion [7] demonstrates
that LLM agents can perform better in future trials by running repeated trials on the same dataset via
self-reflection. ExpeL [8] further shows that LLM agents can learn from cross-task experience and
improve performance without executing repeated trials on the target task.
Given LLM agents’ self-improvement abilities, there remains a missing piece in the current evaluation
landscape. Beyond measuring LLMs’ innate capabilities with aforementioned offline benchmarks [3,
4, 5], it is important to assess their capacity to improve over time since we would like our systems to
gradually improve after deployment. This gap motivated us to develop a new evaluation scenario–an
online setting to measure LLM agents’ ability to continuously enhance their performance over time.
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

