Fine-Tuning Out-of-Vocabulary Item
Recommendation with User Sequence Imagination

Ruochen Liu1 , Hao Chen2 , Yuanchen Bei3 , Qijie Shen4 ,
Fangwei Zhong5 , Senzhang Wang1∗ , Jianxin Wang1
1
Central South University, 2 City University of Macau,
3
Zhejiang University, 4 Alibaba Group, 5 Beijing Normal University
{ruochen, szwang∗, jxwang}@csu.edu.cn, sundaychenhao@gmail.com
yuanchenbei@zju.edu.cn, qjshenxdu@gmail.com, fangweizhong@bnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recommending out-of-vocabulary (OOV) items is a challenging problem since the
in-vocabulary (IV) items have well-trained behavioral embeddings but the OOV
items only have content features. Current OOV recommendation models often
generate ‘makeshift’ embeddings for OOV items from content features and then
jointly recommend with the ‘makeshift’ OOV item embeddings and the behavioral
IV item embeddings. However, merely using the ‘makeshift’ embedding will result
in suboptimal recommendation performance due to the substantial gap between the
content feature and the behavioral embeddings. To bridge the gap, we propose a
novel User Sequence IMagination (USIM) fine-tuning framework, which first
imagines the user sequences and then refines the generated OOV embeddings
with the user behavioral embeddings. Specifically, we frame the user sequence
imagination as a reinforcement learning problem and develop a recommendationfocused reward function to evaluate to what extent a user can help recommend
the OOV items. Besides, we propose an embedding-driven transition function to
model the embedding transition after imaging a user. USIM has been deployed
on a prominent e-commerce platform for months, offering recommendations for
millions of OOV items and billions of users. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that USIM outperforms traditional generative models in OOV item recommendation
performance across traditional collaborative filtering and GNN-based collaborative
filtering models.

1

Introduction

Recommendation systems, such as collaborative filtering models, learn behavioral embeddings from
historical interactions to represent the behavioral characteristics of billions of users and items [1–4].
For instance, the embeddings of interacted user-item pairs have higher inner products, whereas those
of un-interacted pairs have lower inner products. However, besides the items with user interactions,
thousands of out-of-vocabulary (OOV) items—such as short videos, photos, and posts—are generated
or uploaded every second. In the age of AGI, the generation speed of AI-made OOV content,
including text, images, and videos, will far exceed the speed of human consumption. To avoid
being overwhelmed by the OOV content, it is essential to replicate how humans handle these items,
recommending them without disrupting in-vocabulary (IV) items.
Traditional OOV recommendation models usually generate ‘makeshift’ embeddings from the content
features and then use them to recommend OOV items. The research can be classified into two
categories. (a) Generative models aim to generate realistic embeddings. GAR [5] uses a generative
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

