DrivingDojo Dataset: Advancing Interactive and
Knowledge-Enriched Driving World Model
Yuqi Wang1,2†⇤ Ke Cheng3† Jiawei He1,2† Qitai Wang1,2†
Hengchen Dai3 Yuntao Chen4B Fei Xia3 Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,4
1

New Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Meituan Inc. 4 Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI, CAS
Project page: https://drivingdojo.github.io

(a) Rich ego actions.

(b) Multi-agent interplay.

(c) Rich open-world knowledge.

(d) Diverse and rare cases.

Figure 1: Examples on DrivingDojo. (a) showcases various driving actions, such as lane changes,
abrupt braking at traffic control, and turning at intersections. (b) illustrates the ego-car’s interactions
with other dynamic agents, including cutting-in and cutting-off maneuvers. (c) displays encounters
with rolling or falling objects, moving or floating unknown objects, and interactions with traffic lights
and boom barriers. (d) presents diverse cases encountered in real-world driving scenarios.

Abstract
Driving world models have gained increasing attention due to their ability to model
complex physical dynamics. However, their superb modeling capability is yet to
be fully unleashed due to the limited video diversity in current driving datasets.
We introduce DrivingDojo, the first dataset tailor-made for training interactive
world models with complex driving dynamics. Our dataset features video clips
with a complete set of driving maneuvers, diverse multi-agent interplay, and rich
open-world driving knowledge, laying a stepping stone for future world model
development. We further define an action instruction following (AIF) benchmark
for world models and demonstrate the superiority of the proposed dataset for
generating action-controlled future predictions.
⇤

Work done during an internship at Meituan. † equal contributions. B Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

