SolarCube: An Integrative Benchmark Dataset
Harnessing Satellite and In-situ Observations for
Large-scale Solar Energy Forecasting

Ruohan Li1 ,

Yiqun Xie1∗, Xiaowei Jia2 , Dongdong Wang1 , Yanhua Li3 ,
Yingxue Zhang4 , Zhihao Wang1 , Zhili Li1
1
University of Maryland, 2 University of Pittsburgh, 3 Worcester Polytechnic Institute
4
SUNY - Binghamton
{r526li, xie, ddwang, zhwang1, lizhili}@umd.edu,
xiaowei@pitt.edu,
yli15@wpi.edu,
yzhang42@binghamton.edu

Abstract
Solar power is a critical source of renewable energy, offering significant potential
to lower greenhouse gas emissions and mitigate climate change. However, the
cloud induced-variability of solar radiation reaching the earth’s surface presents
a challenge for integrating solar power into the grid (e.g., storage and backup
management). The new generation of geostationary satellites such as GOES-16
has become an important data source for large-scale and high temporal frequency
solar radiation forecasting. However, no machine-learning-ready dataset has integrated geostationary satellite data with fine-grained solar radiation information to
support forecasting model development and benchmarking with consistent metrics.
We present SolarCube, a new ML-ready benchmark dataset for solar radiation
forecasting. SolarCube covers 19 study areas distributed over multiple continents:
North America, South America, Asia, and Oceania. The dataset supports short (i.e.,
30 minutes to 6 hours) and long-term (i.e., day-ahead or longer) solar radiation
forecasting at both point-level (i.e., specific locations of monitoring stations) and
area-level, by processing and integrating data from multiple sources, including
geostationary satellite images, physics-derived solar radiation, and ground station
observations from different monitoring networks over the globe. We also evaluated
a set of forecasting models for point- and image-based time-series data to develop
performance benchmarks under different testing scenarios. The dataset is available
at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.11498739. A Python library is available to conveniently generate different variations of the dataset based on user needs,
along with baseline models at https://github.com/Ruohan-Li/SolarCube.

1

Introduction

Solar power has emerged as a critical source of renewable energy, offering significant potential to
reduce the impact of climate change by lowering greenhouse gas emissions. Over the past decade,
solar power has steadily grown, now accounting for 27% of renewable energy generation [1]. It is
projected by the International Energy Agency’s Sustainable Development Scenario that 4,240 GW
of photovoltaic solar generating capacity will be deployed by 2040 [2]. However, the variability of
the amount of solar radiation that reaches the earth’s surface presents a challenge for integrating
solar power into the grid [3]. Limited forecasting skills for the fluctuation increase the costs due
to the need for larger backup battery sizes capacities [4] and the operation of peaking plants [5].
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

