Q-Distribution guided Q-learning for offline
reinforcement learning: Uncertainty penalized Q-value
via consistency model

Jing Zhang
HKUST
jzhanggy@connect.ust.hk

Linjiajie Fang
HKUST
lfangad@connect.ust.hk

Kexin Shi
HKUST
kshiaf@connect.ust.hk

Wenjia Wang∗
HKUST (GZ)
wenjiawang@hkust-gz.edu.cn
Bing-Yi Jing∗
SUSTech
jingby@sustech.edu.cn

Abstract
“Distribution shift” is the main obstacle to the success of offline reinforcement
learning. A learning policy may take actions beyond the behavior policy’s knowledge, referred to as Out-of-Distribution (OOD) actions. The Q-values for these
OOD actions can be easily overestimated. As a result, the learning policy is biased
by using incorrect Q-value estimates. One common approach to avoid Q-value
overestimation is to make a pessimistic adjustment. Our key idea is to penalize
the Q-values of OOD actions associated with high uncertainty. In this work, we
propose Q-Distribution Guided Q-Learning (QDQ), which applies a pessimistic
adjustment to Q-values in OOD regions based on uncertainty estimation. This
uncertainty measure relies on the conditional Q-value distribution, learned through
a high-fidelity and efficient consistency model. Additionally, to prevent overly
conservative estimates, we introduce an uncertainty-aware optimization objective
for updating the Q-value function. The proposed QDQ demonstrates solid theoretical guarantees for the accuracy of Q-value distribution learning and uncertainty
measurement, as well as the performance of the learning policy. QDQ consistently shows strong performance on the D4RL benchmark and achieves significant
improvements across many tasks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has seen remarkable success by using expressive deep neural networks
to estimate the value function or policy function [1]. However, in deep RL optimization, updating the
Q-value function or policy value function can be unstable and introduce significant bias [2]. Since
the learning policy is influenced by the Q-value function, any bias in the Q-values affects the learning
policy. In online RL, the agent’s interaction with the environment helps mitigate this bias through
reward feedback for biased actions. However, in offline RL, the learning relies solely on data from
a behavior policy, making information about rewards for states and actions outside the dataset’s
distribution unavailable.
∗

Corresponding authors: Bing-Yi Jing and Wenjia Wang.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

