Divide-and-Conquer Posterior Sampling for Denoising
Diffusion Priors
Yazid Janati∗,1 Badr Moufad∗,1
Alain Durmus1 Eric Moulines1,3 Jimmy Olsson2
1
CMAP, Ecole polytechnique 2 KTH Royal Institute of Technology

3

MBZUAI

Abstract
Recent advancements in solving Bayesian inverse problems have spotlighted denoising diffusion models (DDMs) as effective priors. Although these have great
potential, DDM priors yield complex posterior distributions that are challenging to sample. Existing approaches to posterior sampling in this context address
this problem either by retraining model-specific components, leading to stiff and
cumbersome methods, or by introducing approximations with uncontrolled errors that affect the accuracy of the produced samples. We present an innovative
framework, divide-and-conquer posterior sampling, which leverages the inherent structure of DDMs to construct a sequence of intermediate posteriors that
guide the produced samples to the target posterior. Our method significantly
reduces the approximation error associated with current techniques without the
need for retraining. We demonstrate the versatility and effectiveness of our approach for a wide range of Bayesian inverse problems. The code is available at
https://github.com/Badr-MOUFAD/dcps

1

Introduction

Many problems in machine learning can be formulated as inverse problems, such as superresolution,
deblurring, and inpainting, to name but a few. They all have the same goal, namely to recover a
signal of interest from an indirect observation. One line of research addresses these problems through
the lens of the Bayesian framework by specifying two components: a prior distribution, which
embodies the specification of the signal, and a likelihood that describes the law of the observation
conditionally on the signal. Once these elements are specified, the inverse problem is solved by
sampling from the posterior distribution, which, after including the observation, contains all available
information about the signal and thus about its uncertainty as well [12]. The importance of the
specification of the prior in solving Bayesian ill-posed inverse problems is paramount. In the last
decade, the success of priors based on deep generative models has fundamentally changed the field
of linear inverse problems [40, 55, 19, 36, 24]. Recently, denoising diffusion probabilistic models
(DDMs) have received special attention. Thanks to their ability to learn complex and multimodal
data distributions, DDM represent the state-of-the-art in many generative modeling tasks, e.g. image
generation [45, 20, 50, 52, 15, 46, 49], super-resolution [43, 1], and inpainting [45, 11, 22].
Popular methods to sample from posterior distribution include Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
and variational inference; see [53, 6] and the references therein. These methods are iterative schemes
that require an explicit procedure to evaluate pointwise the prior distribution and often its (Stein)
score function [21] in order to compute acceptance ratios and construct efficient proposals. While
* Equal contribution
Corresponding authors: {yazid.janati,badr.moufad}@polytechnique.edu
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

