Symmetry-Informed Governing Equation Discovery

Jianke Yang
UCSD

Wang Rao∗
Tsinghua University

Nima Dehmamy
IBM Research

Robin Walters
Northeastern University

Rose Yu
UCSD

Abstract
Despite the advancements in learning governing differential equations from observations of dynamical systems, data-driven methods are often unaware of fundamental
physical laws, such as frame invariance. As a result, these algorithms may search an
unnecessarily large space and discover less accurate or overly complex equations.
In this paper, we propose to leverage symmetry in automated equation discovery to
compress the equation search space and improve the accuracy and simplicity of
the learned equations. Specifically, we derive equivariance constraints from the
time-independent symmetries of ODEs. Depending on the types of symmetries,
we develop a pipeline for incorporating symmetry constraints into various equation
discovery algorithms, including sparse regression and genetic programming. In
experiments across diverse dynamical systems, our approach demonstrates better robustness against noise and recovers governing equations with significantly
higher probability than baselines without symmetry. Our codebase is available at
https://github.com/Rose-STL-Lab/symmetry-ode-discovery.

1

Introduction

Discovering governing equations that can describe and predict observational data from nature is a
primary goal of science. Compared to the black-box function approximators common in machine
learning, symbolic equations can reveal a deeper understanding of underlying physical processes.
In this paper, we consider a first-order dynamical system governed by an autonomous ordinary
differential equation (ODE):
ẋ(t) = h(x(t))
(1)
where t ∈ T denotes time, x(t) ∈ X is the system state at time t, X ⊆ Rd is the phase space of the
ODE, ẋ(t) the time derivative, and h : X → Rd the vector field describing the evolution dynamics of
the system. Our goal is to discover the function h in a symbolic form from the observed trajectories
of the system.
Traditionally, discovering governing equations has been a difficult task for human experts due to the
complexity of the underlying physical systems and the large search space for equations. Recently,
many new algorithms have been proposed for automatically discovering equations from data. When
applied to an ODE, these methods first estimate the label, i.e. the time derivative, by numerically
differentiating the trajectory. A variety of techniques including sparse function basis regression
(Brunton et al., 2016; Champion et al., 2019) and genetic programming (Cranmer et al., 2019) are
then used to fit the function between the measurement and the estimated derivative. Another class of
methods considers the differential equation’s variational form to eliminate the need for derivative
estimation and improve the robustness against noise (Messenger & Bortz, 2021; Qian et al., 2022).
An important aspect of equation discovery is the principle of parsimony (Sober, 1981) – the scientific
principle that the most acceptable explanation of a phenomenon is the simplest. It promotes the
scientific goal of identifying a model that offers robust predictive capabilities while maintaining
simplicity. Existing methods that fail to consider these principles may end up searching in an
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

