An Accelerated Algorithm for Stochastic Bilevel
Optimization under Unbounded Smoothness

Xiaochuan Gong
Jie Hao
Mingrui Liu∗
Department of Computer Science
George Mason University
{xgong2, jhao6, mingruil}@gmu.edu

Abstract
This paper investigates a class of stochastic bilevel optimization problems where
the upper-level function is nonconvex with potentially unbounded smoothness
and the lower-level problem is strongly convex. These problems have significant
applications in sequential data learning, such as text classification using recurrent
neural networks. The unbounded smoothness is characterized by the smoothness
constant of the upper-level function scaling linearly with the gradient norm, lacke −4 )
ing a uniform upper bound. Existing state-of-the-art algorithms require O(ϵ
oracle calls of stochastic gradient or Hessian/Jacobian-vector product to find an
ϵ-stationary point. However, it remains unclear if we can further improve the
convergence rate when the assumptions for the function in the population level
also hold for each random realization almost surely (e.g., Lipschitzness of each
realization of the stochastic gradient). To address this issue, we propose a new
Accelerated Bilevel Optimization algorithm named AccBO. The algorithm updates
the upper-level variable by normalized stochastic gradient descent with recursive
momentum and the lower-level variable by the stochastic Nesterov accelerated
gradient descent algorithm with averaging. We prove that our algorithm achieves
e −3 ) to find an ϵ-stationary point, when the lower-level
an oracle complexity of O(ϵ
stochastic gradient has a small variance O(ϵ). Our proof relies on a novel lemma
characterizing the dynamics of stochastic Nesterov accelerated gradient descent
algorithm under distribution drift with high probability for the lower-level variable,
which is of independent interest and also plays a crucial role in analyzing the hypergradient estimation error over time. Experimental results on various tasks confirm
that our proposed algorithm achieves the predicted theoretical acceleration and
significantly outperforms baselines in bilevel optimization. The code is available
here.

1

Introduction

Bilevel optimization receives tremendous attention recently in the machine learning community,
due to its applications in meta-learning [27, 59], hyperparameter optimization [27, 25], data hypercleaning [44], continual learning [7, 37], and reinforcement learning [47]. The bilevel optimization
problem has the following formulation:
min Φ(x) := f (x, y ∗ (x)), s.t., y ∗ (x) ∈ arg min g(x, y),

x∈Rdx

y∈Rdy

(1)

where f and g are upper-level and lower-level functions respectively. For example, in metalearning [26, 27], x denotes the layers of neural networks for shared representation learning, y
denotes the task-specific head encoded in the last layer, and the formulation (1) aims to learn the a
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

