Confidence Calibration of Classifiers with Many
Classes
Adrien Le Coz1,2,3 Stéphane Herbin2,3 Faouzi Adjed1
IRT SystemX 2 ONERA - DTIS 3 Paris-Saclay University

1

adrien.2mrvb@passinbox.com

stephane.herbin@onera.fr

faouzi.adjed@irt-systemx.fr

Abstract
For classification models based on neural networks, the maximum predicted class
probability is often used as a confidence score. This score rarely predicts well the
probability of making a correct prediction and requires a post-processing calibration
step. However, many confidence calibration methods fail for problems with many
classes. To address this issue, we transform the problem of calibrating a multiclass
classifier into calibrating a single surrogate binary classifier. This approach allows
for more efficient use of standard calibration methods. We evaluate our approach
on numerous neural networks used for image or text classification and show that it
significantly enhances existing calibration methods. Our code can be accessed at
the following link: https://github.com/allglc/tva-calibration.

1

Introduction

The considerable performance increase of modern deep neural networks (DNNs) and their potential
deployment in real-world applications has made reliably estimating the probability of wrong decisions
a key concern. When such components are expected to be embedded in safety-critical systems (e.g.,
medical or transportation), estimating this probability is crucial to mitigate catastrophic behavior. One
way to address this question is to treat it as an uncertainty quantification problem [2, 12], where the
uncertainty value computed for each prediction is considered as a confidence. This confidence can be
used to reject uncertain decisions proposed by the DNN [13], for out-of-distribution detection [22], or
to control active learning [34] or reinforcement learning based systems [76]. When confidence values
reliably reflect the true probability of correct decisions, i.e., their accuracy, a predictive system is said
to be calibrated. In this case, confidence values can be used as a reliable control for decision-making.
We are interested in producing an uncertainty indicator for decision problems where the input is high
dimensional and the decision space large, typically classifiers with tens to thousands of classes. For
this kind of problem, DNNs are common predictors, and their outputs can be used to provide an
uncertainty value at no cost, i.e., without necessitating heavy estimation such as Bayesian sampling
[15] or ensemble methods [33]. Indeed, most neural architectures for classification instantiate their
decision as a softmax layer, where the maximum value can be interpreted as the maximum of the
posterior probability and, therefore, as a confidence. Unfortunately, uncertainty values computed in
this way are often miscalibrated. DNNs have been shown to be over-confident [17], meaning their
confidence is higher than their accuracy: predictions with 90% confidence might be correct only 80%
of the time. A later study [44] suggests that model architecture impacts calibration more than model
size, pre-training, and accuracy. For ImageNet classifiers, the accuracy and the number of model
parameters are not correlated to calibration, but model families are [11].
These studies show that it is difficult to anticipate the calibration level of confidence values computed
directly from DNNs and exhibit the benefits of a complementary post-processing calibration. This
calibration process can be seen as a learning step that exploits data from a calibration set, distinct
from the training set, and is used to learn a function that maps classifier outputs into better-calibrated
values. This process is typically lightweight and decoupled from the issue of improving model
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

