Learning Generalized Linear Programming Value
Functions
Tu Anh-Nguyen
Google Research and Rice University
Houston, TX
tu.na@rice.edu

Joey Huchette
Google Research
Cambridge, MA
jhuchette@google.com

Christian Tjandraatmadja
Google Research
Cambridge, MA
ctjandra@google.com

Abstract
We develop a theoretically-grounded learning method for the Generalized Linear
Programming Value Function (GVF), which models the optimal value of a linear
programming (LP) problem as its objective and constraint bounds vary. This function plays a fundamental role in algorithmic techniques for large-scale optimization,
particularly in decomposition for two-stage mixed-integer linear programs (MILPs).
This paper establishes a structural characterization of the GVF that enables it to be
modeled as a particular neural network architecture, which we then use to learn
the GVF in a way that benefits from three notable properties. First, our method
produces a true under-approximation of the value function with respect to the
constraint bounds. Second, the model is input-convex in the constraint bounds,
which not only matches the structure of the GVF but also enables the trained
model to be efficiently optimized over using LP. Finally, our learning method is
unsupervised, meaning that training data generation does not require computing
LP optimal values, which can be prohibitively expensive at large scales. We numerically show that our method can approximate the GVF well, even when compared
to supervised methods that collect training data by solving an LP for each data
point. Furthermore, as an application of our framework, we develop a fast heuristic
method for large-scale two-stage MILPs with continuous second-stage variables,
via a compact reformulation that can be solved faster than the full model linear
relaxation at large scales and orders of magnitude faster than the original model.

1

Introduction

The linear programming (LP) value function models the optimal value of an LP as problem data in
that problem varies. Value functions are a fundamental abstraction used in many algorithms for largescale optimization. More concretely, many problems where decisions are made sequentially–e.g.,
two-stage stochastic programs [46], facility location problem [17], multi-commodity problems [19],
or network interdiction problems [49]–can be modeled as two-stage mixed-integer linear programs
(MILPs). To pick one common technique as a motivating example: Benders’ decomposition is an
algorithmic technique that decomposes such a large problem into many smaller ones [21, 42, 51]. At
a high level, Benders’ decomposition abstracts each LP subproblem away by replacing it with a value
function. If we somehow had a good approximation of these value functions that we could efficiently
optimize over, this reformulation would be straightforward to approximately solve. In Benders’
decomposition however, we do not have such a representation a priori, and thus we iteratively
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

