Deterministic Uncertainty Propagation for Improved
Model-Based Offline Reinforcement Learning

Abdullah Akgül
Manuel Haußmann
Melih Kandemir
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
University of Southern Denmark
Odense, Denmark
{akgul,haussmann,kandemir}@imada.sdu.dk

Abstract
Current approaches to model-based offline reinforcement learning often incorporate
uncertainty-based reward penalization to address the distributional shift problem.
These approaches, commonly known as pessimistic value iteration, use Monte
Carlo sampling to estimate the Bellman target to perform temporal difference-based
policy evaluation. We find out that the randomness caused by this sampling step
significantly delays convergence. We present a theoretical result demonstrating
the strong dependency of suboptimality on the number of Monte Carlo samples
taken per Bellman target calculation. Our main contribution is a deterministic
approximation to the Bellman target that uses progressive moment matching, a
method developed originally for deterministic variational inference. The resulting
algorithm, which we call Moment Matching Offline Model-Based Policy Optimization (MOMBO), propagates the uncertainty of the next state through a nonlinear
Q-network in a deterministic fashion by approximating the distributions of hidden
layer activations by a normal distribution. We show that it is possible to provide
tighter guarantees for the suboptimality of MOMBO than the existing Monte Carlo
sampling approaches. We also observe MOMBO to converge faster than these
approaches in a large set of benchmark tasks.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (Lange et al., 2012; Levine et al., 2020) aims to solve a control
task using an offline dataset without interacting with the target environment. Such an approach is
essential in cases where environment interactions are expensive or risky (Shortreed et al., 2011; Singh
et al., 2020; Nie et al., 2021; Micheli et al., 2022). Directly adapting traditional online off-policy
reinforcement learning methods to offline settings often results in poor performance due to the
adverse effects of the distributional shift caused by the policy updates (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Kumar
et al., 2019). The main reason for the incompatibility is the rapid accumulation of overestimated
action-values during policy improvement. Pessimistic Value Iteration (PEVI) (Jin et al., 2021) offers
a theoretically justified solution to this problem that penalizes the estimated rewards of synthetic state
transitions proportionally to the uncertainty of the predicted next state. The framework encompasses
many state-of-the-art offline reinforcement learning algorithms as special cases (Yu et al., 2020; Sun
et al., 2023).
Model-based offline reinforcement learning approaches first fit a probabilistic model on the real
state transitions and then supplement the real data with synthetic samples generated from this model
throughout policy search (Janner et al., 2019). One line of work addresses distributional shift by
constraining policy learning (Kumar et al., 2019; Fujimoto and Gu, 2021) where the policy is trained
to mimic the behavior policy and is penalized based on the discrepancy between its actions and those
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

