A versatile informative diffusion model for single-cell
ATAC-seq data generation and analysis

Lei Huang ∗
City University of Hong Kong
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Lei Xiong *
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Na Sun
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Zunpeng Liu
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Ka-Chun Wong
City University of Hong Kong

Manolis Kellis †
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Abstract
The rapid advancement of single-cell ATAC sequencing (scATAC-seq) technologies
holds great promise for investigating the heterogeneity of epigenetic landscapes at
the cellular level. The amplification process in scATAC-seq experiments often introduces noise due to dropout events, which results in extreme sparsity that hinders
accurate analysis. Consequently, there is a significant demand for the generation of
high-quality scATAC-seq data in silico. Furthermore, current methodologies are
typically task-specific, lacking a versatile framework capable of handling multiple
tasks within a single model. In this work, we propose ATAC-Diff, a versatile framework, which is based on a latent diffusion model conditioned on the latent auxiliary
variables to adapt for various tasks. ATAC-Diff is the first diffusion model for the
scATAC-seq data generation and analysis, composed of auxiliary modules encoding
the latent high-level variables to enable the model to learn the semantic information
to sample high-quality data. Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) as the latent prior
and auxiliary decoder, the yield variables reserve the refined genomic information
beneficial for downstream analyses. Another innovation is the incorporation of
mutual information between observed and hidden variables as a regularization term
to prevent the model from decoupling from latent variables. Through extensive
experiments, we demonstrate that ATAC-Diff achieves high performance in both
generation and analysis tasks, outperforming state-of-the-art models.

1

Introduction

Assay for Transposase Accessible Chromatin with sequencing (ATAC-seq) data has shed light on
genome research to dissect gene regulatory landscapes and cellular heterogeneity. Particularly, singlecell ATAC-seq (scATAC-seq) can be harnessed to probe the chromatin accessibility profile at singlecell level to reserve the diversity of cell types in a heterogeneous tissue, which can reveal important
genomic elements for transcription factor binding and regulating downstream gene expression,
particularly at distal non-coding regulatory regions[1, 2]. However, the analysis of such data poses
challenges due to the high levels of noise, sparsity, and data scale encountered. Furthermore, the
complexity of biological systems, with their intricate intercellular communications and numerous
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding Author: Manolis Kellis.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

