Improving Adversarial Robust Fairness via Anti-Bias
Soft Label Distillation
Shiji Zhao1 , Ranjie Duan2 , Xizhe Wang1 , Xingxing Wei1∗
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Security Department, Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
{zhaoshiji123,xizhewang,xxwei}@buaa.edu.cn, ranjieduan@gmail.com
1

Abstract
Adversarial Training (AT) has been widely proved to be an effective method to
improve the adversarial robustness against adversarial examples for Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs). As a variant of AT, Adversarial Robustness Distillation (ARD)
has demonstrated its superior performance in improving the robustness of small
student models with the guidance of large teacher models. However, both AT
and ARD encounter the robust fairness problem: these models exhibit strong
robustness when facing part of classes (easy class), but weak robustness when
facing others (hard class). In this paper, we give an in-depth analysis of the potential
factors and argue that the smoothness degree of samples’ soft labels for different
classes (i.e., hard class or easy class) will affect the robust fairness of DNNs from
both empirical observation and theoretical analysis. Based on the above finding,
we propose an Anti-Bias Soft Label Distillation (ABSLD) method to mitigate the
adversarial robust fairness problem within the framework of Knowledge Distillation
(KD). Specifically, ABSLD adaptively reduces the student’s error risk gap between
different classes to achieve fairness by adjusting the class-wise smoothness degree
of samples’ soft labels during the training process, and the smoothness degree
of soft labels is controlled by assigning different temperatures in KD to different
classes. Extensive experiments demonstrate that ABSLD outperforms state-of-theart AT, ARD, and robust fairness methods in the comprehensive metric (Normalized
Standard Deviation) of robustness and fairness.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great success in various tasks, e.g., classification
[10], detection [6], and segmentation [24]. However, DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial attacks
[30; 35; 33; 34], where adding small perturbations to the input examples will lead to misclassification.
To enhance the robustness of DNNs, Adversarial Training (AT) [20; 41; 32; 14] is proposed and has
been proven to be an effective method to defend against adversarial examples. To further improve the
robustness, Adversarial Robustness Distillation (ARD) [7] as a variant of AT is proposed and aims to
transfer the robustness of the large models into the small models based on Knowledge Distillation
(KD), and further researches [44; 45; 43; 12; 42] show the excellent performance of ARD.
Although AT and ARD can remarkably improve the adversarial robustness, some researches [2; 31;
39; 19; 28; 38] demonstrate the robust fairness problem: these models perform strong robustness
on part of classes (easy class) but show high vulnerability on others (hard class). This phenomenon
will raise further attention to class-wise security. Specifically, an overall robust model appears to
be relatively safe for model users, however, the robust model with poor robust fairness will lead
to attackers targeting vulnerable classes of the model, which leads to significant security risks to
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

