Decomposed Prompt Decision Transformer for
Efficient Unseen Task Generalization
Hongling Zheng1 Li Shen2† Yong Luo1† Tongliang Liu3 Jialie Shen4 Dacheng Tao5
1
Wuhan University 2 Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University 3 The University of Sydney
4
City, University of London 5 Nanyang Technological University
{hlzheng, luoyong}@whu.edu.cn {mathshenli, jialie, dacheng.tao}@gmail.com
tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Multi-task offline reinforcement learning aims to develop a unified policy for diverse tasks without requiring real-time interaction with the environment. Recent
work explores sequence modeling, leveraging the scalability of the transformer
architecture as a foundation for multi-task learning. Given the variations in task
content and complexity, formulating policies becomes a challenging endeavor, requiring careful parameter sharing and adept management of conflicting gradients to
extract rich cross-task knowledge from multiple tasks and transfer it to unseen tasks.
In this paper, we propose the Decomposed Prompt Decision Transformer (DPDT)
that adopts a two-stage paradigm to efficiently learn prompts for unseen tasks in a
parameter-efficient manner. We incorporate parameters from pre-trained language
models (PLMs) to initialize DPDT, thereby providing rich prior knowledge encoded
in language models. During the decomposed prompt tuning phase, we learn both
cross-task and task-specific prompts on training tasks to achieve prompt decomposition. In the test time adaptation phase, the cross-task prompt, serving as a good
initialization, were further optimized on unseen tasks through test time adaptation,
enhancing the model’s performance on these tasks. Empirical evaluation on a series
of Meta-RL benchmarks demonstrates the superiority of our approach. The project
is available at https://github.com/ruthless-man/DPDT.

1

Introduction

The purpose of offline reinforcement learning (Offline RL) [1] is to develop a reward-maximizing
RL strategy using offline data. This approach is of highly valuable in real-world scenarios where
online data collection is expensive, time-consuming, or impractical. Existing offline RL algorithms
typically perform well in single task but often struggle for multiple tasks with similar conditions and
objectives, as they lack the ability to separate common knowledge from conflicting task gradients.
In contrast, humans can leverage knowledge from existing tasks to excel in new ones, which has
led to increasing research interest in multi-task reinforcement learning (MTRL) [2, 3, 4]. The goal
of MTRL is to develop a universal strategy applicable to tasks with certain similarities, thereby
enhancing adaptability and performance in multi-task environments.
Decision transformer (DT) [5] and Prompt-DT [6] introduce the transformer architecture to the field
of RL, demonstrating the powerful data modeling capability of sequence offline RL. Additionally,
they provide possibilities for integrating advancements [7] from language modeling into MTRL
methodologies. Prompt-tuning DT [8] uses a gradient-free method to introduce prompts, retaining
context-specific information and catering to specific preferences. These existing sequence-based
offline RL methods are primarily trained and tested on the same task or perform fine-tuning using a
†

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

