Human-Aware Vision-and-Language
Navigation: Bridging Simulation to Reality with
Dynamic Human Interactions

Heng Li1∗ , Minghan Li1∗ , Zhi-Qi Cheng1∗† , Yifei Dong2 ,
Yuxuan Zhou , Jun-Yan He4 , Qi Dai5 , Teruko Mitamura1 , Alexander G. Hauptmann1
3

1

3

Carnegie Mellon University 2 Columbia University
University of Mannheim 4 Alibaba Group 5 Microsoft Research
Project Page: https://lpercc.github.io/HA3D_simulator/

Abstract
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) aims to develop embodied agents that
navigate based on human instructions. However, current VLN frameworks often rely on static environments and optimal expert supervision, limiting their
real-world applicability. To address this, we introduce Human-Aware Visionand-Language Navigation (HA-VLN), extending traditional VLN by incorporating dynamic human activities and relaxing key assumptions. We propose the
Human-Aware 3D (HA3D) simulator, which combines dynamic human activities
with the Matterport3D dataset, and the Human-Aware Room-to-Room (HA-R2R)
dataset, extending R2R with human activity descriptions. To tackle HA-VLN
challenges, we present the Expert-Supervised Cross-Modal (VLN-CM) and NonExpert-Supervised Decision Transformer (VLN-DT) agents, utilizing cross-modal
fusion and diverse training strategies for effective navigation in dynamic human
environments. A comprehensive evaluation, including metrics considering human
activities, and systematic analysis of HA-VLN’s unique challenges, underscores
the need for further research to enhance HA-VLN agents’ real-world robustness
and adaptability. Ultimately, this work provides benchmarks and insights for future
research on embodied AI and Sim2Real transfer, paving the way for more realistic
and applicable VLN systems in human-populated environments.

1

Introduction

The dream of autonomous robots carrying out assistive tasks, long portrayed in "The Simpsons,"
is becoming a reality through embodied AI, which enables agents to learn by interacting with
their environment [43]. However, effective Sim2Real transfer remains a critical challenge [3, 53].
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) [2, 7, 9, 40] has emerged as a key benchmark for evaluating
Sim2Real transfer [23], showing impressive performance in simulation [9, 21, 38]. Nevertheless,
many VLN frameworks [2, 12, 21, 44, 46, 52] rely on simplifying assumptions, such as static
environments [25, 39, 50], panoramic action spaces, and optimal expert supervision, limiting their
real-world applicability and often leading to an overestimation of Sim2Real capabilities [51].
To bridge this gap, we propose Human-Aware Vision-and-Language Navigation (HA-VLN), extending
traditional VLN by incorporating dynamic human activities and relaxing key assumptions. HA-VLN
advances previous frameworks by (1) adopting a limited 60◦ field-of-view egocentric action space,
(2) integrating dynamic environments with 3D human motion models encoded using the SMPL
model [31], and (3) learning to navigate considering dynamic environments from suboptimal expert
∗

Equal contribution, authors listed in random order. † Corresponding author. See Author Contributions section for detailed roles (Sec. 5).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

