Trajectory Data Sufﬁces for Statistically Efﬁcient
Learning in Ofﬂine RL with Linear q π -Realizability
and Concentrability

Volodymyr Tkachuk
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada

Gellért Weisz
Google DeepMind, London, UK

Csaba Szepesvári
Google DeepMind, Edmonton, Canada
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada

Abstract
We consider ofﬂine reinforcement learning (RL) in H-horizon Markov decision
processes (MDPs) under the linear q π -realizability assumption, where the actionvalue function of every policy is linear with respect to a given d-dimensional
feature function. The hope in this setting is that learning a good policy will be
possible without requiring a sample size that scales with the number of states
in the MDP. Foster et al. [2021] have shown this to be impossible even under
concentrability, a data coverage assumption where a coefﬁcient Cconc bounds the
extent to which the state-action distribution of any policy can veer off the data distribution. However, the data in this previous work was in the form of a sequence
of individual transitions. This leaves open the question of whether the negative
result mentioned could be overcome if the data was composed of sequences of
full trajectories. In this work we answer this question positively by proving that
with trajectory data, a dataset of size poly(d, H, Cconc )/ϵ2 is sufﬁcient for deriving
an ϵ-optimal policy, regardless of the size of the state space. The main tool that
makes this result possible is due to Weisz et al. [2023], who demonstrate that linear
MDPs can be used to approximate linearly q π -realizable MDPs. The connection
to trajectory data is that the linear MDP approximation relies on “skipping” over
certain states. The associated estimation problems are thus easy when working
with trajectory data, while they remain nontrivial when working with individual
transitions. The question of computational efﬁciency under our assumptions remains open.

1

Introduction

We study the ofﬂine reinforcement learning (RL) setting, where the objective is to derive a nearoptimal policy for an H-horizon Markov decision process (MDP) using ofﬂine data. This contrasts
with the online RL paradigm, where learners interact directly with an MDP – or its simulator – to
collect new data. Ofﬂine RL is especially relevant when acquiring new data guided by the learner is
infeasible or ill-advised for safety reasons.
Deriving a near-optimal policy is only possible from ofﬂine data that covers the MDP well enough.
One way to formalize this as an assumption, which we adopt for this work, is called concentrability.
This assumption posits that the ofﬂine data sufﬁciently covers the distribution of state-action pairs
that are accessible through running any policy. Challenges also arise in MDPs characterized by
large or inﬁnite state spaces. In such scenarios, an efﬁcient learner’s data requirements cannot scale
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

