Sparse maximal update parameterization: A holistic
approach to sparse training dynamics

Nolan Dey

Shane Bergsma Joel Hestness
Cerebras Systems
{nolan,joel}@cerebras.net

Abstract
Several challenges make it difficult for sparse neural networks to compete with
dense models. First, setting a large fraction of weights to zero impairs forward
and gradient signal propagation. Second, sparse studies often need to test multiple
sparsity levels, while also introducing new hyperparameters (HPs), leading to
prohibitive tuning costs. Indeed, the standard practice is to re-use the learning
HPs originally crafted for dense models. Unfortunately, we show sparse and dense
networks do not share the same optimal HPs. Without stable dynamics and effective
training recipes, it is costly to test sparsity at scale, which is key to surpassing
dense networks and making the business case for sparsity acceleration in hardware.
A holistic approach is needed to tackle these challenges and we propose sparse
maximal update parameterization (SµPar) as one such approach. For random
unstructured static sparsity, SµPar ensures activations, gradients, and weight updates all scale independently of sparsity level. Further, by reparameterizing the
HPs, SµPar enables the same HP values to be optimal as we vary both sparsity level and model width. HPs can be tuned on small dense networks and
transferred to large sparse models, greatly reducing tuning costs. On largescale language modeling, SµPar shows increasing improvements over standard
parameterization as sparsity increases, leading up to 11.9% relative loss improvement at 99.2% sparsity. A minimal implementation of SµPar is available at
https://github.com/EleutherAI/nanoGPT-mup/tree/supar.

1

Intro

Sparsity has emerged as a key technique to mitigate the increasing computational costs of training
and inference in deep neural networks. This work focuses on weight sparsity, whereby a significant
fraction of model weights are kept at zero. It has long been known that dense neural networks can be
heavily pruned after training [30]. With the goal of reducing costs during training, recent work has
explored static weight sparsity from initialization. In this work we focus on random unstructured
static sparsity, which has re-emerged as a surprisingly effective strategy [33, 58]. This type of sparsity
can be accelerated by CPUs, Cerebras, Graphcore, and SambaNova. Furthermore, GPUs and TPUs
support 2:4 block structured sparsity which is quite similar to 50% unstructured sparsity.
Unfortunately, several challenges have hindered progress in weight-sparse neural networks. First,
sparsity impairs signal propagation during training [31, 11, 1]. Second, with today’s techniques,
sparse training is costly. Sparse techniques typically introduce extra hyperparameters (HPs), e.g.,
number of pruning iterations at initialization [60, 7, 56], and it is common to train models across
different sparsity levels. Since tuning should be performed at each level and the search space grows
exponentially with the number of HPs, the tuning costs essentially “defeat the purpose” of sparsity,
i.e., to reduce computation [60]. Finally, today there is only a nascent ecosystem of hardware
acceleration for unstructured sparsity, so most researchers get little sparsity benefit when tuning.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

