TFGDA: Exploring Topology and Feature Alignment
in Semi-supervised Graph Domain Adaptation
through Robust Clustering

Jun Dan1* , Weiming Liu1* , Chunfeng Xie2 , Hua Yu3 , Shunjie Dong4 , Yanchao Tan5,6,7†
1
Zhejiang University 2 Queen Mary University of London
3
Dalian University of Technology 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 5 Fuzhou University
6
Engineering Research Center of Big Data Intelligence, Ministry of Education
7
Fujian Key Laboratory of Network Computing and Intelligent Information Processing
danjun@zju.edu.cn, 21831010@zju.edu.cn, c.xie@qmul.ac.uk
yhiccd@mail.dlut.edu.cn, sjdong@sjtu.edu.cn, yctan@fzu.edu.cn

Abstract
Semi-supervised graph domain adaptation, as a branch of graph transfer learning,
aims to annotate unlabeled target graph nodes by utilizing transferable knowledge
learned from a label-scarce source graph. However, most existing studies primarily
concentrate on aligning feature distributions directly to extract domain-invariant
features, while ignoring the utilization of the intrinsic structure information in
graphs. Inspired by the significance of data structure information in enhancing
models’ generalization performance, this paper aims to investigate how to leverage
the structure information to assist graph transfer learning. To this end, we propose
an innovative framework called TFGDA. Specially, TFGDA employs a structure
alignment strategy named STSA to encode graphs’ topological structure information into the latent space, greatly facilitating the learning of transferable features.
To achieve a stable alignment of feature distributions, we also introduce a SDA
strategy to mitigate domain discrepancy on the sphere. Moreover, to address the
overfitting issue caused by label scarcity, a simple but effective RNC strategy is
devised to guide the discriminative clustering of unlabeled nodes. Experiments on
various benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of TFGDA over SOTA methods.

1

Introduction

With the rise of deep learning, node classification techniques have made significant progress in
diverse fields. However, due to the distribution shift issue, well-trained models often suffer severe
performance degradation when applied directly to a new domain. Graph transfer learning (GTL) [1]
has been proposed to tackle this issue by transferring domain-invariant features from a labeled source
graph to an unlabeled target graph, effectively boosting the model’s performance on the target graph.
Although current studies on GTL have made significant strides, they often rely on the assumption
that all nodes in the source graph are labeled. However, this ideal assumption does not hold true in
many scenarios, as annotating the entire source graph is time-consuming, especially for large-scale
networks. Therefore, in this paper, we focus on a more realistic application scenario known as
semi-supervised graph domain adaptation (SGDA) [2], where the source graph only has a few labeled
nodes. Utilizing the transferable knowledge acquired from the label-scarce source graph to enhance
the model’s adaptation performance on the target graph is the most crucial challenge for SGDA.
*

Equal Contribution, † Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

