Attack-Resilient Image Watermarking
Using Stable Diffusion

Lijun Zhang
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003-9264
lijunzhang@cs.umass.edu

Xiao Liu
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003-9264
xiaoliu1990@umass.edu

Antoni Viros Martin
IBM Watson
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
aviros@ibm.com

Cindy Xiong Bearfield
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
cxiong@gatech.edu

Yuriy Brun
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003-9264
brun@cs.umass.edu

Hui Guan
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003-9264
huiguan@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Watermarking images is critical for tracking image provenance and proving ownership. With the advent of generative models, such as stable diffusion, that can create
fake but realistic images, watermarking has become particularly important to make
human-created images reliably identifiable. Unfortunately, the very same stable
diffusion technology can remove watermarks injected using existing methods. To
address this problem, we present ZoDiac, which uses a pre-trained stable diffusion
model to inject a watermark into the trainable latent space, resulting in watermarks
that can be reliably detected in the latent vector even when attacked. We evaluate
ZoDiac on three benchmarks, MS-COCO, DiffusionDB, and WikiArt, and find
that ZoDiac is robust against state-of-the-art watermark attacks, with a watermark
detection rate above 98% and a false positive rate below 6.4%, outperforming
state-of-the-art watermarking methods. We hypothesize that the reciprocating
denoising process in diffusion models may inherently enhance the robustness of
the watermark when faced with strong attacks and validate the hypothesis. Our
research demonstrates that stable diffusion is a promising approach to robust watermarking, able to withstand even stable-diffusion–based attack methods. ZoDiac is
open-sourced and available at https://github.com/zhanglijun95/ZoDiac.

1

Introduction

Digital image watermarking, a technique for subtly embedding information within digital images,
has become increasingly crucial and beneficial in the context of content protection and authenticity
verification [36, 10, 5, 4]. The advance in generative AI technologies [28, 30, 29], such as stable diffusion, further underscores the need for watermarking solutions to distinguish between AI-generated
and human-created images.
Given an existing image, many methods have been proposed to embed a watermark that is invisible
and robust to watermark removal attacks. Conventional watermarking strategies have employed
various methods, such as embedding information in texture-rich regions [3], manipulating the least
significant bits [43], or utilizing the frequency domain [21]. The emergence of deep learning has
introduced neural network (NN)-based watermarking methods [53, 24, 35, 48, 47, 19], which have
shown promise in achieving high invisibility and robustness against traditional attacks, such as adding
Gaussian noise or applying JPEG compression.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

