Prune and Repaint: Content-Aware Image Retargeting
for any Ratio

Feihong Shen1,2,4
feihongshen@seu.edu.cn
Yifeng Geng2
cangyu.gyf@alibaba-inc.com
1
4

Southeast University

2

Chao Li2
lllcho.lc@alibaba-inc.com

Yongjian Deng3
yjdeng@bjut.edu.cn

Alibaba Group

3

Hao Chen∗1,4
haochen303@seu.edu.cn

Beijing University of Technology

Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary
Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China

Abstract
Image retargeting is the task of adjusting the aspect ratio of images to suit different
display devices or presentation environments. However, existing retargeting methods often struggle to balance the preservation of key semantics and image quality,
resulting in either deformation or loss of important objects, or the introduction of
local artifacts such as discontinuous pixels and inconsistent regenerated content.
To address these issues, we propose a content-aware retargeting method called
PruneRepaint. It incorporates semantic importance for each pixel to guide the
identification of regions that need to be pruned or preserved in order to maintain
key semantics. Additionally, we introduce an adaptive repainting module that
selects image regions for repainting based on the distribution of pruned pixels
and the proportion between foreground size and target aspect ratio, thus achieving
local smoothness after pruning. By focusing on the content and structure of the
foreground, our PruneRepaint approach adaptively avoids key content loss and
deformation, while effectively mitigating artifacts with local repainting. We conduct experiments on the public RetargetMe benchmark and demonstrate through
objective experimental results and subjective user studies that our method outperforms previous approaches in terms of preserving semantics and aesthetics, as well
as better generalization across diverse aspect ratios. Codes will be available at
https://github.com/fhshen2022/PruneRepaint.

1

Introduction

With the popularity of multi-screen and multi-aspect environments, people’s demands for the adaptability and aesthetics of images across different devices are increasing. Consequently, image retargeting [35, 20, 9], which aims to adjust the aspect ratio to fit various display devices or presentation
environments while preserving the key content and maintaining the quality of the images, has
distinctive applications yet is understudied.
The core challenge of image retargeting lies in simultaneously 1) preserving the main information
and 2) avoiding artifacts such as deformation and distortion on key objects. Intuitive solutions for this
task include scaling and cropping. As shown in Figure 1 (b), scaling entirely preserves all contents
but results in severe deformation, decreasing aesthetic appeal and image quality, making it difficult
∗

Corresponding author (haochen303@seu.edu.cn)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

