Fairness-Aware Meta-Learning via Nash Bargaining
Yi Zeng∗1 , Xuelin Yang∗2 , Li Chen3 , Cristian Canton Ferrer3 , Ming Jin1 ,
Michael I. Jordan2 , Ruoxi Jia1
1

2

Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA
University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
3
Meta AI, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA

Abstract
To address issues of group-level fairness in machine learning, it is natural to
adjust model parameters based on specific fairness objectives over a sensitiveattributed validation set. Such an adjustment procedure can be cast within a
meta-learning framework. However, naive integration of fairness goals via metalearning can cause hypergradient conflicts for subgroups, resulting in unstable
convergence and compromising model performance and fairness. To navigate
this issue, we frame the resolution of hypergradient conflicts as a multi-player
cooperative bargaining game. We introduce a two-stage meta-learning framework
in which the first stage involves the use of a Nash Bargaining Solution (NBS) to
resolve hypergradient conflicts and steer the model toward the Pareto front, and
the second stage optimizes with respect to specific fairness goals. Our method is
supported by theoretical results, notably a proof of the NBS for gradient aggregation
free from linear independence assumptions, a proof of Pareto improvement, and
a proof of monotonic improvement in validation loss. We also show empirical
effects across various fairness objectives in six key fairness datasets and two image
classification tasks.

1

Introduction

The traditional formulation of machine learning is in terms of a system that improves its predictive and
decision-making performance by interacting with an environment. Such a formulation is overly narrow
in emerging applications—it lumps the social context of a learning system into the undifferentiated
concept of an “environment” and provides no special consideration of the collective nature of learning.
Such social context includes notions of scarcity and conflict, as well as goals such as social norms
and collaborative work that are best formulated at the level of social collectives. The neglect of
such considerations in traditional machine learning leads to undesirable outcomes in real-world
deployments of machine learning systems, including outcomes that favor particular groups of people
over others [44, 7, 31, 10, 38, 51], the amplification of social biases and stereotypes [28, 14, 47], and
an ongoing lack of clarity regarding issues of communication, trust, and fairness.
Our focus of the current paper is fairness, and we take a perspective on fairness that blends learning
methodology with economic mechanisms. The current favored methodology for addressing fairness
recognizes that it is not a one-size-fits-all concept—different fairness notions are appropriate for
different social settings [49, 32, 50]—and treats fairness via meta-learning ideas. Meta-learning is
implemented algorithmically with the tools of bi-level optimization. Specifically, fairness-aware
meta-learning employs outer optimization to align with a specific fairness goal over a small, demo∗
Xuelin and Yi contributed equally. Yi’s work is partially done at Responsible AI, Meta AI. Corresponding:
Li Chen and Ruoxi Jia. Code: Nash-Meta-Learning.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

