I NTERP B ENCH: Semi-Synthetic Transformers for
Evaluating Mechanistic Interpretability Techniques

Rohan Gupta
cybershiptrooper@gmail.com

Thomas Kwa
kwathomas0@gmail.com

Iván Arcuschin
University of Buenos Aires
iarcuschin@dc.uba.ar
Adrià Garriga-Alonso
FAR AI
adria@far.ai

Abstract
Mechanistic interpretability methods aim to identify the algorithm a neural network
implements, but it is difficult to validate such methods when the true algorithm
is unknown. This work presents I NTERP B ENCH, a collection of semi-synthetic
yet realistic transformers with known circuits for evaluating these techniques. We
train simple neural networks using a stricter version of Interchange Intervention
Training (IIT) which we call Strict IIT (SIIT). Like the original, SIIT trains neural
networks by aligning their internal computation with a desired high-level causal
model, but it also prevents non-circuit nodes from affecting the model’s output.
We evaluate SIIT on sparse transformers produced by the Tracr tool and find that
SIIT models maintain Tracr’s original circuit while being more realistic. SIIT can
also train transformers with larger circuits, like Indirect Object Identification (IOI).
Finally, we use our benchmark to evaluate existing circuit discovery techniques.

1

Introduction

The field of mechanistic interpretability (MI) aims to reverse-engineer the algorithm implemented
by a neural network [14]. The current MI paradigm holds that the neural network (NN) represents
concepts as features, which may have their dedicated subspace [8, 31] or be in superposition with
other features [15, 16, 32]. The NN arrives at its output by composing many circuits, which are
subcomponents that implement particular functions on the features [9, 20, 32]. To date, the field has
been very successful at reverse-engineering toy models on simple tasks [7, 10, 11, 30, 47]. For larger
models, researchers have discovered circuits that perform clearly defined subtasks [22, 23, 27, 43].
How confident can we be that the NNs implement the claimed circuits? The central piece of evidence
for many circuit papers is causal consistency: if we intervene on the network’s internal activations,
does the circuit correctly predict changes in the output? There are several competing formalizations of
consistency [10, 20, 25, 43] and many ways to ablate NNs, each yielding different results [12, 35, 46].
This problem is especially dire for automatic circuit discovery methods, which search for subgraphs
with the highest consistency [21, 45] or faithfulness [12, 39] measurements1 .
These results would be on much firmer ground if we had an agreed-upon protocol for thoroughly
checking a hypothesized circuit. To declare a candidate protocol valid, we need to check whether, in
practice, it correctly distinguishes true circuits from false circuits. Unfortunately, we do not know the
1
Faithfulness is a weaker form of consistency: if we ablate every part of the NN that is not part of the circuit,
does the NN still perform the task? [10, 43]

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

