Can LLMs Learn by Teaching for Better Reasoning?
A Preliminary Study

Xuefei Ning∗1 , Zifu Wang∗2 , Shiyao Li∗1,3 , Zinan Lin∗4 , Peiran Yao∗3,5 ,
Tianyu Fu1,3 , Matthew B. Blaschko2 , Guohao Dai6,3 , Huazhong Yang1 , Yu Wang1
1
Tsinghua University 2 KU Leuven 3 Infinigence-AI
4
Microsoft Research 5 University of Alberta 6 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Teaching to improve student models (e.g., knowledge distillation) is an extensively
studied methodology in LLMs. However, in human education, teaching enhances
not only the students but also the teachers by fostering more rigorous and clearer
reasoning, as well as deeper knowledge building. We ask: Can LLMs also learn by
teaching (LbT) for better reasoning? If the answer is yes, we can potentially unlock
the possibility of continuously advancing the models without solely relying on
human-produced data or stronger models. In this paper, we provide a preliminary
exploration of this question. We show that LbT ideas can be incorporated into
existing LLM training/prompting pipelines and bring improvements. Specifically,
we design three methods, each mimicking one of the three levels of LbT: observing
students’ feedback, learning from the feedback, and learning iteratively, with the
goal of improving answer accuracy without training or improving models’ inherent
capability with fine-tuning. We reveal some findings: (1) Teaching materials that
make it easier for students to learn (via in-context learning) have clearer and more
accurate logic; (2) Weak-to-strong generalization: LbT might help improve strong
models by teaching weak models; (3) Diversity in students might help: teaching
multiple students could be better than teaching a single student or the teacher
alone. We hope that our exploration can inspire future research on LbT and, more
broadly, the adoption of advanced education techniques to improve LLMs. The
code and website are at https://github.com/imagination-research/lbt
and https://sites.google.com/view/llm-learning-by-teaching.

1

Introduction
I couldn’t reduce it to the freshman level. That means we really don’t understand it.
– Richard Feynman

“Learning from teachers (LfT)” is a common pipeline in machine learning, especially in the realm of
Large Language Models (LLMs). For example, knowledge distillation [24, 44, 75] and distillation
via synthetic data [1, 28, 41] focus on transferring the knowledge from teacher LLMs to student
LLMs by letting teacher models teach student models through token logits, features, or synthetic
data [85]. They become the go-to methods for closing the performance gap between open-source and
proprietary LLMs, as well as for maintaining performance during model compression.
In fact, in human learning, teaching not only benefits students but can also improve the teachers
themselves. “Learning by teaching (LbT)”, also known as the Feynman learning method, is proven to
improve human learning by fostering rigorous and clear reasoning as well as knowledge building [5,
18, 22, 33, 62–65]. Fig. 1 illustrates the conceptual comparison of the LfT and LbT pipelines.
* Equal contribution.

Corresponding to: foxdoraame@gmail.com (Xuefei Ning), zinanlin@microsoft.com (Zinan Lin), yuwang@tsinghua.edu.cn (Yu Wang)
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

