The Sample Complexity of Gradient Descent
in Stochastic Convex Optimization

Roi Livni
School of Electrical Engineering
Tel Aviv University
rlivni@tauex.tau.ac.il

Abstract
We analyze the sample complexity of full-batch Gradient Descent (GD) in the setup
of non-smooth Stochastic Convex Optimization. We show that the generalization
√
error of GD, with common choice of hyper-parameters, can be Θ̃ (𝑑/𝑚 + 1/ 𝑚),
where 𝑑 is the dimension and 𝑚 is the sample size. This matches the sample
complexity of worst-case empirical risk minimizers. That means that, in contrast
with other algorithms, GD has no advantage over naive ERMs. Our bound follows
from a new generalization bound that depends on both the dimension as well as
the learning rate and number of iterations. Our bound also shows that, for general
hyper-parameters, when the dimension is strictly larger than number of samples,
𝑇 = Ω (1/ε4 ) iterations are necessary to avoid overfitting. This resolves an open
problem by Amir, Koren, and Livni [3], Schliserman, Sherman, and Koren [20],
and improves over previous lower bounds that demonstrated that the sample size
must be at least square root of the dimension.

1

Introduction

Stochastic Convex Optimization (SCO) is a theoretical model that depicts a learner that minimizes
a (Lipschitz) convex function, given finite noisy observations of the objective [22]. While often
considered simplistic, in recent years SCO has become a focus of theoretical research, partly, because
of its importance to the study of first-order optimization methods. But, also, it has become focus
of study because it is one of few theoretical settings that exhibit overparameterized learning . In
more detail, classical learning theory often focuses on the tension between number of samples, or
training data, and the complexity of the model to be learnt. A common wisdom of classical theories
[1, 7, 14, 24] is that, to avoid overfitting, the complexity of a model should be adjusted in proportion
to the amount of training data. However, recent advances in Machine Learning have challenged
this viewpoint. Evidently [18, 25], state-of-the-art algorithms generalize well but without, explicitly,
controlling the capacity of the model to be learnt. In turn, today, it is one of the most emerging
challenges, for learning theory, to understand learnability when the number of parameters in a learnt
model exceeds the number of examples, and when, seemingly, nothing withholds the algorithm from
overfitting.
Towards this, we look at SCO. In SCO, Shalev-Shwartz, Shamir, Srebro, and Sridharan [22] showed
how algorithms can overfit with dimension dependent sample size. But, at the same time, it was
known [8, 26] that there are algorithms that provably avoid overfitting with far fewer examples than
dimensions. As such, SCO became a canonical model to study how a well-designed algorithm can
avoid overfitting even when the number of examples is too small to guarantee generalization by an
algorithmic-independent argument [2–5, 11, 12, 16, 20–22]. A step towards understanding what
induces generalization is to identify which algorithms generalize. Then, we can ask what yields
the separation. Surprisingly, for many well-studied algorithms this question is not always answered.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

