From Biased to Unbiased Dynamics:
An Infinitesimal Generator Approach

Timothée Devergne
CSML & ATSIM, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia

Vladimir R. Kostic
CSML, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
University of Novi Sad

timothee.devergne@iit.it

vladimir.kostic@iit.it

Michele Parrinello
ATSIM, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
michele.parrinello@iit.it

Massimiliano Pontil
CSML, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
AI Centre, University College London
massimiliano.pontil@iit.it

Abstract
We investigate learning the eigenfunctions of evolution operators for time-reversal
invariant stochastic processes, a prime example being the Langevin equation used
in molecular dynamics. Many physical or chemical processes described by this
equation involve transitions between metastable states separated by high potential
barriers that can hardly be crossed during a simulation. To overcome this bottleneck, data are collected via biased simulations that explore the state space more
rapidly. We propose a framework for learning from biased simulations rooted in
the infinitesimal generator of the process and the associated resolvent operator.
We contrast our approach to more common ones based on the transfer operator,
showing that it can provably learn the spectral properties of the unbiased system
from biased data. In experiments, we highlight the advantages of our method over
transfer operator approaches and recent developments based on generator learning,
demonstrating its effectiveness in estimating eigenfunctions and eigenvalues. Importantly, we show that even with datasets containing only a few relevant transitions
due to sub-optimal biasing, our approach recovers relevant information about the
transition mechanism.

1

Introduction

Dynamical systems and stochastic differential equations (SDEs) provide a general mathematical
framework to study natural phenomena, with broad applications in science and engineering. Langevin
SDEs, the main focus of this paper, are widely used to simulate physical processes such as protein
folding or catalytic reactions [see e.g. 47, and references therein]. A main objective is to describe the
dynamics of the process, forecast its evolution from a starting state, ultimately gaining insights on
macroscopic properties of the system.
In molecular dynamics, the motion of a molecule is sampled according to a potential energy U (x),
where the state vector x represents the positions of all the atoms. Specifically, the Langevin equation
dXt = −∇U (Xt )dt + σdWt describes the stochastic behavior of the system at thermal equilibrium,
where Xt is the random position of the state at time t, the scalar σ is a multiple of the square root of the
system’s temperature, and Wt is a vector random variable describing thermal fluctuations (Brownian
motion). Most often, the atoms evolve in metastable states that are separated by barriers which can
hardly be crossed during a simulation. For instance, for a protein the free energy barrier between
the folded and unfolded states is larger than thermal agitation, making the transition between the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

