Semi-supervised Multi-label Learning with Balanced
Binary Angular Margin Loss

Ximing Li1,2

Silong Liang1,2

Changchun Li1,2,∗ Pengfei Wang3,4

Fangming Gu1,2

1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, China
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education,
Jilin University, China
3
Computer Network Information Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
liximing86@gmail.com, changchunli93@gmail.com, liangsl23@mails.jlu.edu.cn,
pfwang@cnic.cn, gufm@jlu.edu.cn

2

Abstract
Semi-supervised multi-label learning (SSMLL) refers to inducing classifiers using
a small number of samples with multiple labels and many unlabeled samples.
The prevalent solution of SSMLL involves forming pseudo-labels for unlabeled
samples and inducing classifiers using both labeled and pseudo-labeled samples
in a self-training manner. Unfortunately, with the commonly used binary type of
loss and negative sampling, we have empirically found that learning with labeled
and pseudo-labeled samples can result in the variance bias problem between the
feature distributions of positive and negative samples for each label. To alleviate this
problem, we aim to balance the variance bias between positive and negative samples
from the perspective of the feature angle distribution for each label. Specifically,
we extend the traditional binary angular margin loss to a balanced extension with
feature angle distribution transformations under the Gaussian assumption, where
the distributions are iteratively updated during classifier training. We also suggest
an efficient prototype-based negative sampling method to maintain high-quality
negative samples for each label. With this insight, we propose a novel SSMLL
method, namely Semi-Supervised Multi-Label Learning with Balanced Binary
Angular Margin loss (S2 ML2 - BBAM). To evaluate the effectiveness of S2 ML2 BBAM , we compare it with existing competitors on benchmark datasets. The
experimental results validate that S2 ML2 - BBAM can achieve very competitive
performance.

1

Introduction

Multi-label learning (MLL) refers to the classification problem where each training sample can
be associated with multiple labels [1]. For example, in text categorization, a text can involve a
certain number of topics simultaneously [2, 3]; and in image annotation, an image can contain
multiple objects of interest in one scene [4, 5]. Compared with single-label learning, MLL is a more
prevalent paradigm in real-world scenarios, and it has been widely used in many applications such as
information retrieval [6, 7] and recommendation systems [8, 9].
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

