Active Learning of General Halfspaces:
Label Queries vs Membership Queries

Ilias Diakonikolas∗
University of Wisconsin-Madison
ilias@cs.wisc.edu

Daniel M. Kane∗
University of California, San Diego
dakane@cs.ucsd.edu

Mingchen Ma∗
University of Wisconsin-Madison
mingchen@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of learning general (i.e., not necessarily homogeneous)
halfspaces under the Gaussian distribution on Rd in the presence of some form of
query access. In the classical pool-based active learning model, where the algorithm
is allowed to make adaptive label queries to previously sampled points, we establish
a strong information-theoretic lower bound ruling out non-trivial improvements
over the passive setting. Specifically, we show that any active learner requires label
complexity of Ω̃(d/(log(m)ϵ)), where m is the number of unlabeled examples.
Specifically, to beat the passive label complexity of Õ(d/ϵ), an active learner
requires a pool of 2poly(d) unlabeled samples. On the positive side, we show that
this lower bound can be circumvented with membership query access, even in the
agnostic model. Specifically, we give a computationally efficient learner with query
complexity of Õ(min{1/p, 1/ϵ} + dpolylog(1/ϵ)) achieving error guarantee of
O(opt + ϵ). Here p ∈ [0, 1/2] is the bias and opt is the 0-1 loss of the optimal
halfspace. As a corollary, we obtain a strong separation between the active and
membership query models. Taken together, our results characterize the complexity
of learning general halfspaces under Gaussian marginals in these models.

1

Introduction

In Valiant’s PAC learning model [Val84a, Val84b], the learner is given access to random labeled
examples and aims to find an accurate approximation to the function that generated the labels. The
standard PAC model is “passive” in the sense that the learner has no control over the selection of
the training set. Here we focus on interactive learning between a learner and a domain expert that
can potentially lead to significantly more efficient learning procedures. A standard such paradigm
is (pool-based) active learning [MN+ 98], where the learner has access to a large pool of unlabeled
examples S and has the ability to (adaptively) select a subset of S and obtain their labels. We will
henceforth refer to this type of data access as label query access. An even stronger interactive model
is that of PAC learning with membership queries [Ang88, Fel09]. A membership query (MQ) allows
the learner to obtain the value of the target function on any desired point in the support of the marginal
distribution. This model captures the ability to perform experiments or the availability of expert
advice. While in active learning, the learner is allowed to query the labels of previously sampled
points from S, in MQ learning the learner has black-box access to the target function. We refer the
reader to Appendix A for formal definitions of these two learning models. Roughly speaking, when
*

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

