Data subsampling for Poisson regression
with pth-root-link

Han Cheng Lie
Institut für Mathematik
Universität Potsdam
Germany
hanlie@uni-potsdam.de

Alexander Munteanu
Department of Statistics
TU Dortmund University
Germany
alexander.munteanu@tu-dortmund.de

Abstract
We develop and analyze data subsampling techniques for Poisson regression, the
standard model for count data y ∈ N. In particular, we consider the Poisson
generalized linear model with ID- and square root-link functions. We consider the
method of coresets, which are small weighted subsets that approximate the loss
function of Poisson regression up to a factor of 1 ± ε. We show Ω(n) lower bounds
against coresets for Poisson regression that continue to hold against arbitrary data
reduction techniques up to logarithmic factors. By introducing a novel complexity
parameter and a domain shifting approach, we show that sublinear coresets with
1 ± ε approximation guarantee exist when the complexity parameter is small.
In particular, the dependence on the number of input points can be reduced to
polylogarithmic. We show that the dependence on other input parameters can
also be bounded sublinearly, though not always logarithmically. In particular,
we show that the square root-link admits an O(log(ymax )) dependence, where
ymax
p denotes the largest count presented in the data, while the ID-link requires a
Θ( ymax / log(ymax )) dependence. As an auxiliary result for proving the tightness
of the bound with respect to ymax in the case of the ID-link, we show an improved
bound on the principal branch of the Lambert W0 function, which may be of
independent interest. We further show the limitations of our analysis when pth
degree root-link functions for p ≥ 3 are considered, which indicate that other
analytical or computational methods would be required if such a generalization is
even possible.

1

Introduction

Random sampling is arguably one of the most popular approaches to reduce large amounts of data
to save memory, runtime, and further downstream resources such as communication bandwidth and
energy. In contrast, classic statistical learning theory often uses uniform sampling and provides only
asymptotic approximation guarantees. These guarantees often require strict assumptions such as i.i.d.
data and for model assumptions to be met exactly. However, data collected from real applications
often violate these conditions: only finite samples are available, independence might not be satisfied,
and the model may deviate from reality. When model fitting algorithms are applied to such data, we
are not only interested in reducing the above-mentioned resource requirements, but also in providing
rigorous worst-case guarantees on approximation.
Arguably, the most popular approach is the Sensitivity Framework [26, 19], which provides a generalpurpose importance sampling scheme that yields a weighted subsample — or coreset — that given a
data matrix X approximates some loss function f (Xβ) within a factor (1 ± ε) for any query point
β. This guarantee can be stated as follows: a significantly smaller subset K ⊆ X, k := |K| ≪ |X|
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

