AdaPKC: PeakConv with Adaptive Peak Receptive
Field for Radar Semantic Segmentation
Teng Li2∗ Liwen Zhang1∗† Youcheng Zhang1 Zijun Hu1
Pengcheng Pi1 Zongqing Lu2 Qingmin Liao2† Zhe Ma1
1
Intelligent Science and Technology Academy of CASIC
2
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
liteng21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn∗ lwzhang9161@126.com∗†
liaoqm@tsinghua.edu.cn†

Abstract
Deep learning-based radar detection technology is receiving increasing attention
in areas such as autonomous driving, UAV surveillance, and marine monitoring.
Among recent efforts, PeakConv (PKC) provides a solution that can retain the
peak response characteristics of radar signals and play the characteristics of deep
convolution, thereby improving the effect of radar semantic segmentation (RSS).
However, due to the use of a pre-set fixed peak receptive field sampling rule,
PKC still has limitations in dealing with problems such as inconsistency of target frequency domain response broadening, non-homogeneous and time-varying
characteristic of noise/clutter distribution. Therefore, this paper proposes an idea
of adaptive peak receptive field, and upgrades PKC to AdaPKC based on this
idea. Beyond that, a novel fine-tuning technology to further boost the performance
of AdaPKC-based RSS networks is presented. Through experimental verification using various real-measured radar data (including publicly available low-cost
millimeter-wave radar dataset for autonomous driving and self-collected Ku-band
surveillance radar dataset), we found that the performance of AdaPKC-based
models surpasses other SoTA methods in RSS tasks. The code is available at
https://github.com/lihua199710/AdaPKC.

1

Introduction

As a common remote sensing device, radar exhibits superior robustness in complex environments
(e.g., varying weather and lighting conditions) compared to cameras, and it is more cost-effective
and resilient in extreme weather scenarios compared to LiDARs. Benefiting from the physical
advantages of radar sensors and the powerful capabilities of deep learning techniques, modern
deep learning-based radar signal interpretation has become a hot research topic in the field of radio
frequency detection technology. It has been extensively explored in autonomous driving [30, 19,
34, 6], UAV surveillance [9, 17], sea monitoring [27, 21, 28], etc. Considering the similar dense
representations between radar frequency maps and optical images, most of these works directly
transfer convolution networks or modules developed for optical signals to radar perception tasks,
such as radar object detection (ROD) and radar semantic segmentation (RSS), and they have achieved
impressive performance. Nevertheless, without specific design for the inherent characteristics of
radar signals, these approaches fail to fully liberate the potential of deep learning techniques.
Recently, PKCIn-Net [32] introduced an innovative convolution operator named PeakConv (PKC),
tailored for the efficient analysis of radar signals, and this operator seamlessly integrates the advan∗
Equal contribution. † Corresponding author. This research is supported by Young Science Foundation of
National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.62206258).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

