BoostAdapter: Improving Vision-Language Test-Time
Adaptation via Regional Bootstrapping

Taolin Zhang1 Jinpeng Wang 1 Hang Guo 1
Tao Dai∗ 2 Bin Chen 3 Shu-tao Xia 1,4
1
Tsinghua University 2 Shenzhen University
3
Harbin Institute of Technology 4 PengCheng Laboratory
https://github.com/taolinzhang/BoostAdapter

Abstract
Adaptation of pretrained vision-language models such as CLIP to various downstream tasks have raised great interest in recent researches. Previous works have
proposed a variety of test-time adaptation (TTA) methods to achieve strong generalization without any knowledge of the target domain. However, existing trainingrequired TTA approaches like TPT necessitate entropy minimization that involves
large computational overhead, while training-free methods like TDA overlook the
potential for information mining from the test samples themselves. In this paper,
we break down the design of existing popular training-required and training-free
TTA methods and bridge the gap between them within our framework. Specifically, we maintain a light-weight key-value memory for feature retrieval from
instance-agnostic historical samples and instance-aware boosting samples. The
historical samples are filtered from the testing data stream and serve to extract useful information from the target distribution, while the boosting samples are drawn
from regional bootstrapping and capture the knowledge of the test sample itself.
We theoretically justify the rationality behind our method and empirically verify
its effectiveness on both the out-of-distribution and the cross-domain datasets,
showcasing its applicability in real-world situations.

1

Introduction

Vision Language models [49, 16, 23–25, 7] have shown incredible performance in downstream vision
tasks [1], such as classification [29, 55, 54, 8], generation [20, 38, 9] and recognition [46, 47]. Among
these models, CLIP [36] has been trained with large-scale noisy image-text pairs and can generalize
well in zero-shot recognition tasks. The key idea behind CLIP is modality alignment during training
and similarity comparison during testing for classification. However, CLIP suffers from domain
shift problems during test-time inference. In the presence of out-of-distribution issues [27, 43, 12]
that commonly appear in real-world scenarios, CLIP may fail to effectively align the feature across
modalities, leading to performance degradation.
Test-time adaptation (TTA) has been widely explored in recent approaches [43, 15, 41, 17] to mitigate
misalignment issues and improve performance in downstream tasks. Current mainstream TTA methods can be divided into training-required methods and training-free methods, as depicted in Figure.
1a and Figure. 1b. Training-required approaches [43, 41, 39] adjust model parameters or learnable
prompts based on self-supervised objectives like entropy and increase the prediction confidence of
model for distribution adaptation. TPT [41] applies entropy minimization to the vision-language
model first. Furthermore, inspired by consistency regularization, TPT performs information mining
∗

Correspongding author: Tao Dai (daitao.edu@gmail.com)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

