Relational Concept Bottleneck Models

Pietro Barbiero
Università della Svizzera Italiana
University of Cambridge
barbiero@tutanota.com

Francesco Giannini
Scuola Normale Superiore
francesco.giannini@sns.it

Gabriele Ciravegna
Politecnico di Torino
gabriele.ciravegna@polito.it

Michelangelo Diligenti
University of Siena
michelangelo.diligenti@unisi.it

Giuseppe Marra
KU Leuven
giuseppe.marra@kuleuven.be

Abstract
The design of interpretable deep learning models working in relational domains
poses an open challenge: interpretable deep learning methods, such as Concept
Bottleneck Models (CBMs), are not designed to solve relational problems, while
relational deep learning models, such as Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), are
not as interpretable as CBMs. To overcome these limitations, we propose Relational Concept Bottleneck Models (R-CBMs), a family of relational deep learning
methods providing interpretable task predictions. As special cases, we show that
R-CBMs are capable of both representing standard CBMs and message-passing
GNNs. To evaluate the effectiveness and versatility of these models, we designed a
class of experimental problems, ranging from image classification to link prediction
in knowledge graphs. In particular we show that R-CBMs (i) match generalization performance of existing relational black-boxes, (ii) support the generation
of quantified concept-based explanations, (iii) effectively respond to test-time interventions, and (iv) withstand demanding settings including out-of-distribution
scenarios, limited training data regimes, and scarce concept supervisions.

1

Introduction

Chemistry, politics, economics, traffic jams: we constantly rely on relations to describe, explain and reason on everyday life problems. For instance, we
can easily deduce Bart’s citizenship if we consider
Homer’s citizenship and his status as Bart’s father
(Figure 1). While relational Deep Learning (DL)
models [29, 19, 32, 16] can effectively solve such
problems, the design of interpretable neural models capable of relational reasoning is still an open
challenge. Among DL methods, Concept Bottleneck
Models (CBMs) [13] are interpretable methods explaining their predictions by first mapping input features to a set of human-understandable concepts and

male(H)
parent(H, B)
task predictor
U S(H)

U S(B)

male(B)

Figure 1: Relational Concept Bottleneck Models
can correctly predict and explain Bart’s (B) citizenship by considering Homer’s (H) citizenship and
his status as Bart’s parent.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

