Inductive biases of multi-task learning and finetuning:
multiple regimes of feature reuse

Samuel Lippl∗
Center for Theoretical Neuroscience
Columbia University
New York, NY
samuel.lippl@columbia.edu

Jack Lindsey∗,∗∗
Anthropic
San Francisco, CA
jackwlindsey@gmail.com

Abstract
Neural networks are often trained on multiple tasks, either simultaneously (multitask learning, MTL) or sequentially (pretraining and subsequent finetuning,
PT+FT). In particular, it is common practice to pretrain neural networks on a
large auxiliary task before finetuning on a downstream task with fewer samples.
Despite the prevalence of this approach, the inductive biases that arise from learning multiple tasks are poorly characterized. In this work, we address this gap. We
describe novel implicit regularization penalties associated with MTL and PT+FT in
diagonal linear networks and single-hidden-layer ReLU networks. These penalties
indicate that MTL and PT+FT induce the network to reuse features in different
ways. 1) Both MTL and PT+FT exhibit biases towards feature reuse between
tasks, and towards sparsity in the set of learned features. We show a “conservation
law” that implies a direct tradeoff between these two biases. 2) PT+FT exhibits a
novel “nested feature selection” regime, not described by either the “lazy” or “rich”
regimes identified in prior work, which biases it to rely on a sparse subset of the
features learned during pretraining. This regime is much narrower for MTL. 3)
PT+FT (but not MTL) in ReLU networks benefits from features that are correlated
between the auxiliary and main task. We confirm these findings empirically with
teacher-student models, and introduce a technique – weight rescaling following
pretraining – that can elicit the nested feature selection regime. Finally, we validate
our theory in deep neural networks trained on image classification. We find that
weight rescaling improves performance when it causes models to display signatures
of nested feature selection. Our results suggest that nested feature selection may be
an important inductive bias for finetuning neural networks.

1

Introduction

Neural networks are often trained on multiple tasks, either simultaneously (“multi-task learning,”
henceforth MTL, see [1, 2]) or sequentially (“pretraining” and subsequent “finetuning,” henceforth
PT+FT, see [3, 4]). Empirically, models can transfer knowledge from auxiliary tasks to improve
performance on tasks of interest. However, theoretical understanding of how auxiliary tasks influence
learning and generalization is limited.
Auxiliary tasks are especially useful when there is less data available for the target task. Modern
“foundation models,” trained on data-rich general-purpose auxiliary tasks (like next-word prediction
or image generation) before adaptation to downstream tasks, are a timely example of this use case [5].
*
**

Equal contributions.
Work primarily conducted while at the Center for Theoretical Neuroscience, Columbia University.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

