Differentially Private Reinforcement Learning with
Self-Play

Dan Qiao
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
University of California, San Diego
San Diego, CA 92093
d2qiao@ucsd.edu

Yu-Xiang Wang
Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute
University of California, San Diego
San Diego, CA 92093
yuxiangw@ucsd.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of multi-agent reinforcement learning (multi-agent RL) with
differential privacy (DP) constraints. This is well-motivated by various real-world
applications involving sensitive data, where it is critical to protect users’ private
information. We first extend the definitions of Joint DP (JDP) and Local DP
(LDP) to two-player zero-sum episodic Markov Games, where both definitions
ensure trajectory-wise privacy protection. Then we design a provably efficient
algorithm based on optimistic Nash value iteration and privatization of Bernsteintype bonuses. The algorithm is able to satisfy JDP and LDP requirements when
instantiated with appropriate privacy mechanisms. Furthermore, for both notions of
DP, our regret bound generalizes the best known result under the single-agent RL
case, while our regret could also reduce to the best known result for multi-agent RL
without privacy constraints. To the best of our knowledge, these are the first results
towards understanding trajectory-wise privacy protection in multi-agent RL.

1

Introduction

This paper considers the problem of multi-agent reinforcement learning (multi-agent RL), wherein
several agents simultaneously make decisions in an unfamiliar environment with the goal of maximizing their individual cumulative rewards. Multi-agent RL has been deployed not only in large-scale
strategy games like Go [Silver et al., 2017], Poker [Brown and Sandholm, 2019] and MOBA games
[Ye et al., 2020], but also in various real-world applications such as autonomous driving [ShalevShwartz et al., 2016], negotiation [Bachrach et al., 2020], and trading in financial markets [Shavandi
and Khedmati, 2022]. In these applications, the learning agent analyzes users’ private feedback in
order to refine its performance, where the data from users usually contain sensitive information. Take
autonomous driving as an instance, here a trajectory describes the interaction between the cars in a
neighborhood during a fixed time window. At each timestamp, given the current situation of each
car, the system (central agent) will send a command for each car to take (e.g. speed up, pull over),
and finally the system gathers the feedback from each car (e.g. whether the driving is safe, whether
the customer feels comfortable) and enhances its policy. Here, (situation, command, feedback)
corresponds to (state, action, reward) in a Markov Game where the state and reward of each user
are considered as sensitive information. Therefore, leakage of such information is not acceptable.
Regrettably, it has been demonstrated that without the implementation of privacy safeguards, learning
agents tend to inadvertently memorize details from individual training data points [Carlini et al.,
2019], regardless of their relevance to the learning process [Brown et al., 2021]. This susceptibility
exposes multi-agent RL agents to potential privacy threats.
To handle the above privacy issue, Differential privacy (DP) [Dwork et al., 2006] has been widely
considered. The output of a differentially private reinforcement learning algorithm cannot be discerned
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

