Simplifying Latent Dynamics with Softly
State-Invariant World Models
Tankred Saanum1†

Peter Dayan1,2

Eric Schulz1,3

1

3

Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, 2 University of Tübingen
Helmholtz Institute for Human-Centered AI, Helmholtz Center Munich, Neuherberg, Germany
†
tankred.saanum@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
To solve control problems via model-based reasoning or planning, an agent needs
to know how its actions affect the state of the world. The actions an agent has at its
disposal often change the state of the environment in systematic ways. However,
existing techniques for world modelling do not guarantee that the effect of actions
are represented in such systematic ways. We introduce the Parsimonious Latent
Space Model (PLSM), a world model that regularizes the latent dynamics to make
the effect of the agent’s actions more predictable. Our approach minimizes the
mutual information between latent states and the change that an action produces
in the agent’s latent state, in turn minimizing the dependence the state has on the
dynamics. This makes the world model softly state-invariant. We combine PLSM
with different model classes used for i) future latent state prediction, ii) planning,
and iii) model-free reinforcement learning. We find that our regularization improves
accuracy, generalization, and performance in downstream tasks, highlighting the
importance of systematic treatment of actions in world models.

1

Introduction

In Reinforcement Learning (RL), the actions that an agent can use to solve tasks often have systematic
and predictable effects on the state of the environment. When stepping on the gas pedal, the car tends
to accelerate, when holding down the joystick in a given direction, the video game character tends
to move in that direction, and so forth. These typical effects have exceptions that are predictable
as well, e.g. stepping on the gas will not lead to acceleration if the car engine is turned off, and
the video game character will not move if it is facing a wall. How can we learn world models that
capture these systematic properties of actions? World models predict the agent’s future states, given
the current state and action [1, 2, 3]. Most approaches to world modelling represent high-dimensional
observations (such as images) in compact, low-dimensional latent states zt , simplifying model-based
prediction and control [4]. Here we explore the possibility of compressing states and dynamics
jointly to learn systematic effects of actions (see Fig. 1). As is common practice in many dynamics
model architectures [4, 5], we consider the case where the model predicts the next latent z̃t+1 state
by predicting the difference ˜
∆at t , or the change, between the current and future latent state, given an
action at .
˜ at t
z̃t+1 = zt + ∆

(1)

Even if zt is low-dimensional, the effects of actions might not be represented parsimoniously within
the world model: Performing the same action at in two similar states z, z′ might produce two very
different deltas ∆, ∆′ , due to how the observation encoder has constructed the latent state space (see
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

