On the Efficiency of ERM in Feature Learning

Ayoub El Hanchi
University of Toronto &
Vector Institute
aelhan@cs.toronto.edu

Chris J. Maddison
University of Toronto &
Vector Institute
cmaddis@cs.toronto.edu

Murat A. Erdogdu
University of Toronto &
Vector Institute
erdogdu@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Given a collection of feature maps indexed by a set T , we study the performance
of empirical risk minimization (ERM) on regression problems with square loss
over the union of the linear classes induced by these feature maps. This setup
aims at capturing the simplest instance of feature learning, where the model is
expected to jointly learn from the data an appropriate feature map and a linear
predictor. We start by studying the asymptotic quantiles of the excess risk of
sequences of empirical risk minimizers. Remarkably, we show that when the set
T is not too large and when there is a unique optimal feature map, these quantiles
coincide, up to a factor of two, with those of the excess risk of the oracle procedure,
which knows a priori this optimal feature map and deterministically outputs an
empirical risk minimizer from the associated optimal linear class. We complement
this asymptotic result with a non-asymptotic analysis that quantifies the decaying
effect of the global complexity of the set T on the excess risk of ERM, and relates
it to the size of the sublevel sets of the suboptimality of the feature maps. As an
application of our results, we obtain new guarantees on the performance of the best
subset selection procedure in sparse linear regression under general assumptions.

1

Introduction

A central idea in modern machine learning is that of data-driven feature learning. Specifically,
instead of performing linear prediction on top of handcrafted features, the current dominant paradigm
suggests to use models that select useful features for linear prediction in a data-dependent way [e.g.
KSH12; LBH15; He+16; Vas+17]. Of course, by putting the burden of picking a feature map on the
model and data, we should expect that the resulting learning problem will require more samples to be
solved. But just how many more samples do we need to learn such feature-learning-based models?
In this paper, we investigate this question in a general setting. We study the performance of empirical
risk minimization (ERM) on regression tasks with square loss and over model classes induced by
arbitrary collections of features maps. More precisely, let X be the random input taking value in a set
X , and let (ϕt )t∈T , ϕt : X → Rd , be a collection of feature maps indexed by a set T . For a given
regression task and
 i.i.d. samples, our aim is to understand the performance of ERM over the class of
predictors ∪t∈T x 7→ ⟨w, ϕt (x)⟩ | w ∈ Rd as a function of the sample size, the distribution of the
data, and relevant properties of the collection of feature maps (ϕt )t∈T .
Classical uniform-convergence-based analyses would suggest that the performance of ERM in this
setting is determined by the size of the model class, appropriately measured. The main message
of this paper is that in this case, this is wrong in a strong sense. Specifically, we prove an upper
bound on the excess risk of ERM on this problem whose dependence on the size of the model class
decays monotonically with the sample size, and eventually depends only on the size of the model
class induced by the collection of optimal feature maps, which is typically much smaller.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

