Improved Bayes Regret Bounds for Multi-Task
Hierarchical Bayesian Bandit Algorithms

1

Jiechao Guan1
Hui Xiong1,2,∗
AI Thrust , The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, HKUST, China
{jiechaoguan, xionghui}@hkust-gz.edu.cn

Abstract
Hierarchical Bayesian bandit refers to the multi-task bandit problem in which
bandit tasks are assumed to be drawn from the same distribution. In this work,
we provide improved Bayes regret bounds for hierarchical Bayesian bandit algorithms in the multi-task linear bandit and semi-bandit settings. For the multi-task
linear bandit, we first analyze the preexisting hierarchical Thompson sampling
(HierTS)
p algorithm, and improve√its gap-independent Bayes regret bound from
O(m n log n log (mn)) to O(m n log n) in the case of infinite action set, with
m being the number of tasks and n the number of iterations per task. In the case
of finite action set, we propose a novel hierarchical Bayesian bandit algorithm,
named hierarchical BayesUCB (HierBayesUCB), that achieves the logarithmic but
gap-dependent regret bound O(m log (mn) log n) under mild assumptions. All
of the above regret bounds hold in many variants of hierarchical Bayesian linear
bandit problem, including when the tasks are solved sequentially or concurrently.
Furthermore, we extend the aforementioned HierTS and HierBayesUCB algorithms
to the multi-task combinatorial semi-bandit setting. Concretely, our√combinatorial
HierTS algorithm attains comparable Bayes regret bound O(m n log n) with
respect to the latest one. Moreover, our combinatorial HierBayesUCB yields a
sharper Bayes regret bound O(m log (mn) log n). Experiments are conducted to
validate the soundness of our theoretical results for multi-task bandit algorithms.

1

Introduction

A stochastic bandit [26, 6, 27] is a sequential decision-making problem where at each round, an agent
has to choose an action, and receives a stochastic reward without knowing its expected value. The gap
between the cumulative reward of optimal actions in hindsight and the cumulative reward of agent
is defined as regret. The goal is to minimize regret, through a combination of exploring different
actions and exploiting those with high rewards in the past. Typical applications of bandit algorithms
include news article recommendation [28], computational advertisement [20], and dynamic pricing
[24]. For example, in news article recommendation, the agent must choose a news article for a user.
The actions in this bandit setting are articles and the reward could be an indicator of a click from user.
When the agent has to solve multiple bandit tasks, many machine learning researchers resort to
multi-task learning/meta-learning paradigm [8, 34] to benefit task adaptation. The existing works
focused on the multi-task bandit problem can be categorized into three main groups: (1) The first
group attempts to learn a low-dimensional representation shared by different bandit tasks, to derive a
sharper cumulative regret bound than that derived by learning each task independently [19, 10]. (2)
The second group leverages the similarity of contexts (e.g. the feature of actions) in bandit tasks
to improve agent’s ability to predict rewards in a new task [14, 36]. (3) The third group chooses to
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

