DarkSAM: Fooling Segment Anything Model to
Segment Nothing

Ziqi Zhou1,2,3∗ , Yufei Song† , Minghui Li‡ , Shengshan Hu1,2,4,5† , Xianlong Wang1,2,4,5† ,
Leo Yu Zhang§ , Dezhong Yao1,2,3∗ , Hai Jin1,2,3∗
1
National Engineering Research Center for Big Data Technology and System
2
Services Computing Technology and System Lab 3 Cluster and Grid Computing Lab
4
Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security
5
Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed System Security
∗ School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
† School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
‡ School of Software Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
§ School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University
{zhouziqi,yufei17,minghuili,hushengshan,wxl99,dyao,hjin}@hust.edu.cn
leo.zhang@griffith.edu.au

Abstract
Segment Anything Model (SAM) has recently gained much attention for its outstanding generalization to unseen data and tasks. Despite its promising prospect,
the vulnerabilities of SAM, especially to universal adversarial perturbation
(UAP) have not been thoroughly investigated yet. In this paper, we propose DarkSAM, the first prompt-free universal attack framework against SAM, including a
semantic decoupling-based spatial attack and a texture distortion-based frequency
attack. We first divide the output of SAM into foreground and background. Then,
we design a shadow target strategy to obtain the semantic blueprint of the image
as the attack target. DarkSAM is dedicated to fooling SAM by extracting and
destroying crucial object features from images in both spatial and frequency domains. In the spatial domain, we disrupt the semantics of both the foreground and
background in the image to confuse SAM. In the frequency domain, we further enhance the attack effectiveness by distorting the high-frequency components (i.e.,
texture information) of the image. Consequently, with a single UAP, DarkSAM
renders SAM incapable of segmenting objects across diverse images with varying
prompts. Experimental results on four datasets for SAM and its two variant models demonstrate the powerful attack capability and transferability of DarkSAM.
Our codes are available at: https://github.com/CGCL-codes/DarkSAM.

1

Introduction

With the advancement of deep learning, large language models, such as GPT [2], LaMDA [33], and
PaLM [6], have achieved tremendous success, yet the development of large vision models lags behind. Recently, Segment Anything Model (SAM) [19] was proposed as a foundational vision model,
demonstrating exceptional generalization capabilities for handling complex segmentation tasks. Unlike traditional segmentation models [24, 42] that output pixel-level labels, SAM introduces a novel
prompt-guided image segmentation paradigm by directly producing label-free masks for object segmentation. Benefiting from its powerful zero-shot capability, SAM has been rapidly deployed across
various downstream scenarios, such as medical images [34], videos [36], and 3D point clouds [12].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

