ARC: A Generalist Graph Anomaly Detector
with In-Context Learning

Yixin Liu1,∗ , Shiyuan Li2,∗, Yu Zheng3,∗ , Qingfeng Chen2,†, Chengqi Zhang4 , Shirui Pan1,†
1
Griffith University, 2 Guangxi University, 3 La Trobe University,
4
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
yixin.liu@griffith.edu.au, shiy.li@alu.gxu.edu.cn, yu.zheng@latrobe.edu.au
qingfeng@gxu.edu.cn, chengqi.zhang@polyu.edu.hk, s.pan@griffth.edu.au

Abstract
Graph anomaly detection (GAD), which aims to identify abnormal nodes that differ
from the majority within a graph, has garnered significant attention. However,
current GAD methods necessitate training specific to each dataset, resulting in high
training costs, substantial data requirements, and limited generalizability when
being applied to new datasets and domains. To address these limitations, this paper
proposes ARC, a generalist GAD approach that enables a “one-for-all” GAD model
to detect anomalies across various graph datasets on-the-fly. Equipped with incontext learning, ARC can directly extract dataset-specific patterns from the target
dataset using few-shot normal samples at the inference stage, without the need for
retraining or fine-tuning on the target dataset. ARC comprises three components
that are well-crafted for capturing universal graph anomaly patterns: 1) smoothnessbased feature Alignment module that unifies the features of different datasets
into a common and anomaly-sensitive space; 2) ego-neighbor Residual graph
encoder that learns abnormality-related node embeddings; and 3) cross-attentive
in-Context anomaly scoring module that predicts node abnormality by leveraging
few-shot normal samples. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmark datasets
from various domains demonstrate the superior anomaly detection performance,
efficiency, and generalizability of ARC. The source code of ARC is available at
https://github.com/yixinliu233/ARC.

1

Introduction

Graph anomaly detection (GAD) aims to distinguish abnormal nodes that show significant dissimilarity from the majority of nodes in a graph. GAD has broad applications across various
real-world scenarios, such as fraud detection in financial transaction networks [1] and rumor detection in social networks [2]. As a result, GAD has attracted increasing research attention in recent
years [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. Conventional GAD methods employ shallow mechanisms to model node-level
abnormality [9, 10, 11]; however, they face limitations in handling high-dimensional features and complex interdependent relations on graphs. Recently, graph neural network (GNN)-based approaches
have emerged as the go-to solution for the GAD problem due to their superior performance [4, 6].
Some GNN-based GAD approaches regard GAD as a supervised binary classification problem and
use specifically designed GNN architectures to capture anomaly patterns [6, 12, 13, 14]. Another line
of approaches targets the more challenging unsupervised paradigm, employing various unsupervised
learning objectives and frameworks to identify anomalies without relying on labels [4, 15, 16, 17].
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

