Transcoders Find Interpretable LLM Feature Circuits

Jacob Dunefsky∗
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06511
jacob.dunefsky@yale.edu

Philippe Chlenski∗
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
pac@cs.columbia.edu

Neel Nanda

Abstract
A key goal in mechanistic interpretability is circuit analysis: finding sparse subgraphs of models corresponding to specific behaviors or capabilities. However,
MLP sublayers make fine-grained circuit analysis on transformer-based language
models difficult. In particular, interpretable features—such as those found by
sparse autoencoders (SAEs)—are typically linear combinations of extremely many
neurons, each with its own nonlinearity to account for. Circuit analysis in this
setting thus either yields intractably large circuits or fails to disentangle local and
global behavior. To address this we explore transcoders, which seek to faithfully
approximate a densely activating MLP layer with a wider, sparsely-activating MLP
layer. We introduce a novel method for using transcoders to perform weights-based
circuit analysis through MLP sublayers. The resulting circuits neatly factorize into
input-dependent and input-invariant terms. We then successfully train transcoders
on language models with 120M, 410M, and 1.4B parameters, and find them to
perform at least on par with SAEs in terms of sparsity, faithfulness, and humaninterpretability. Finally, we apply transcoders to reverse-engineer unknown circuits
in the model, and we obtain novel insights regarding the “greater-than circuit” in
GPT2-small. Our results suggest that transcoders can prove effective in decomposing model computations involving MLPs into interpretable circuits. Code is available at https://github.com/jacobdunefsky/transcoder_circuits/.

1

Introduction

In recent years, transformer-based large language models (LLMs) have displayed outstanding performance on a wide variety of tasks [8, 43, 46]. However, the mechanisms by which LLMs perform these
tasks are opaque by default [10, 33]. The field of mechanistic interpretablity [9] seeks to understand
these mechanisms, and doing so relies on decomposing a model into circuits [41]: interpretable
subcomputations responsible for specific model behaviors [15, 32, 42, 50].
A core problem in fine-grained circuit analysis is incorporating MLP sublayers [32, 38]. Attempting to
analyze MLP neurons directly suffers from “polysemanticity” [3, 16, 24, 40]: the tendency of neurons
to activate on many unrelated concepts. To address this, sparse autoencoders (SAEs) [7, 12, 51]
have been used to perform fine-grained circuit analysis by instead looking at features—vectors in the
model’s representation space—instead of individual neurons [14, 34]. However, while SAE features
are often interpretable, these vectors tend to be dense linear combinations of many neurons [36].
Thus, mechanistically understanding how an SAE feature before one or more MLP layers affects a
later SAE feature may require considering an infeasible number of neurons and their nonlinearities.
Prior attempts to circumvent this [14, 34] use a mix of causal interventions and gradient-based
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

