DN-4DGS: Denoised Deformable Network with
Temporal-Spatial Aggregation for Dynamic Scene
Rendering

Jiahao Lu1 Jiacheng Deng1
Ruijie Zhu1
Yanzhe Liang1
1,2
1∗
Wenfei Yang
Tianzhu Zhang
Xu Zhou3
1

University of Science and Technology of China/Deep Space Exploration Lab,
2
Jianghuai Advance Technology Center, 3 Sangfor Technologies Inc.
{lujiahao, dengjc, ruijiezhu, yzliang}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
{yangwf, tzzhang}@ustc.edu.cn, zhouxu@sangfor.com.cn

Figure 1: (a) The visualization results on PlenopticVideo [1] dataset. (b) The visualization results on
HyperNeRF [2] dataset. The numbers below the images represent PSNR.

Abstract
Dynamic scenes rendering is an intriguing yet challenging problem. Although
current methods based on NeRF have achieved satisfactory performance, they
still can not reach real-time levels. Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)
has garnered researchers’ attention due to their outstanding rendering quality
and real-time speed. Therefore, a new paradigm has been proposed: defining
a canonical 3D gaussians and deforming it to individual frames in deformable
fields. However, since the coordinates of canonical 3D gaussians are filled with
noise, which can transfer noise into the deformable fields, and there is currently no
method that adequately considers the aggregation of 4D information. Therefore,
we propose Denoised Deformable Network with Temporal-Spatial Aggregation
for Dynamic Scene Rendering (DN-4DGS). Specifically, a Noise Suppression
Strategy is introduced to change the distribution of the coordinates of the canonical
3D gaussians and suppress noise. Additionally, a Decoupled Temporal-Spatial
Aggregation Module is designed to aggregate information from adjacent points and
frames. Extensive experiments on various real-world datasets demonstrate that our
method achieves state-of-the-art rendering quality under a real-time level. Code is
available at https://github.com/peoplelu/DN-4DGS.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

