Be like a Goldfish, Don’t Memorize!
Mitigating Memorization in Generative LLMs

Abhimanyu Hans1 , Yuxin Wen1 , Neel Jain1 , John Kirchenbauer1
Hamid Kazemi1 , Prajwal Singhania1 , Siddharth Singh1 , Gowthami Somepalli1
Jonas Geiping2,3 , Abhinav Bhatele1 , Tom Goldstein1
1

University of Maryland,
ELLIS Institute Tübingen,
3
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen AI Center ∗
2

Abstract
Large language models can memorize and repeat their training data, causing privacy
and copyright risks. To mitigate memorization, we introduce a subtle modification
to the next-token training objective that we call the goldfish loss. During training,
a randomly sampled subsets of tokens are excluded from the loss computation.
These dropped tokens are not memorized by the model, which prevents verbatim
reproduction of a complete chain of tokens from the training set. We run extensive
experiments training billion-scale LLaMA-2 models, both pre-trained and trained
from scratch, and demonstrate significant reductions in extractable memorization
with little to no impact on downstream benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Language model memorization is a phenomenon in which models internally store and later regenerate
verbatim copies of training data. Memorization creates a number of risks when LLMs are used for
commercial purposes. First, there are copyright risks for customers, as LLM outputs may contain
intellectual property [Shoaib, 2023]. This is particularly problematic for code models, as the verbatim
reuse of code can impact downstream licenses. This is true even when the regenerated code has
an open-source license, and many such licenses contain terms that restrict commercial use. Next,
there are copyright risks for providers, as the legality of hosting and distributing models that can
regenerate copyrighted content is not yet resolved. Finally, there are privacy risks, as regenerated
training data may contain PII or other sensitive data. A number of works [Eldan and Russinovich,
2023, Zhang et al., 2024b, Jang et al., 2023] have tried to mitigate memorization through model
editing or “unlearning” after the model is trained. Instances of commerical LLMs employing such
stopgaps to prevent lawsuits from data owners have been noted [Hays, 2023]. We argue that it is best
to stop memorization at the source and leave such approaches for last-mile touchups.
We present the goldfish loss, a strikingly simple technique that leverages properties of the next-token
prediction objective to mitigate verbatim generation of memorized training data (Section 3). Like
standard training, the proposed approach begins with a forward pass on all tokens in a batch. Unlike
standard training, in which the next token prediction loss is calculated on all tokens, we exclude
a pseudo-random subset (e.g., 25% i.e. with probability 1/4) of the training tokens. The tokens
are dropped with 1/k probability where k is a chosen hyperparameter. On the backward pass, the
model never learns to reproduce the excluded tokens. At inference time, the model must make an
∗
Correspondence to ahans1@umd.edu. Code and checkpoints at: https://github.com/ahans30/
goldfish-loss.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

