Surge Phenomenon in Optimal Learning Rate and
Batch Size Scaling

Shuaipeng Li∗,1,† , Penghao Zhao∗,1,2 , Hailin Zhang∗,1,2 , Xingwu Sun∗,1,3 , Hao Wu1 ,
Dian Jiao1 , Weiyan Wang1 , Chengjun Liu1 , Zheng Fang1 , Jinbao Xue1 , Yangyu Tao1 ,
Bin Cui2,4† , Di Wang1,†
1

Tencent Hunyuan
School of Computer Science & Key Lab of High Confidence
Software Technologies (MOE), Peking University
3
University of Macau
4
Institute of Computational Social Science, Peking University (Qingdao)
2

Abstract
In current deep learning tasks, Adam-style optimizers—such as Adam, Adagrad,
RMSprop, Adafactor, and Lion—have been widely used as alternatives to SGDstyle optimizers. These optimizers typically update model parameters using the sign
of gradients, resulting in more stable convergence curves. The learning rate and
the batch size are the most critical hyperparameters for optimizers, which require
careful tuning to enable effective convergence. Previous research has shown that
the optimal learning rate increases linearly (or follows similar rules) with batch size
for SGD-style optimizers. However, this conclusion is not applicable to Adam-style
optimizers. In this paper, we elucidate the connection between optimal learning
rates and batch sizes for Adam-style optimizers through both theoretical analysis
and extensive experiments. First, we raise the scaling law between batch sizes and
optimal learning rates in the “sign of gradient” case, in which we prove that the
optimal learning rate first rises and then falls as the batch size increases. Moreover,
the peak value of the surge will gradually move toward the larger batch size as
training progresses. Second, we conduct experiments on various CV and NLP
tasks and verify the correctness of the scaling law.

1

Introduction

Deep learning techniques, initiated by Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) learning on large datasets,
have significantly revolutionized various real-world applications [1]. Over the past decade, numerous
optimizers, such as momentum [2], Adagrad [3], ADADELTA [4], RMSprop [5], Adam [6], Adafactor [7], and Lion [8], have been introduced to stabilize the iterative learning process and expedite
convergence. Among them, the Adam optimizer is the most widely used across various domains
including Computer Vision (CV) [9–11], Natural Language Processing (NLP) [12–15] and many
others [16, 17]. It retains the first and second moment information of parameters to facilitate adaptive
learning step size. Unlike SGD-style optimizers that use the raw gradient to determine the learning
direction and step size, Adam and its variants (Adagrad, RMSprop, Lion, etc.) employ the sign of
gradient for this purpose, thereby ensuring greater robustness [18].
Beyond specific hyper-parameters in optimizer configurations, the batch size and the learning rate are
the most critical hyperparameters influencing convergence. As the scale of training datasets in various
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

