Locally Private and Robust Multi-Armed Bandits

Wei Zhang ∗
Texas A&M University
komo@tamu.edu

Xingyu Zhou
Wayne State University
xingyu.zhou@wayne.edu

Abstract
We study the interplay between local differential privacy (LDP) and robustness
to Huber corruption and possibly heavy-tailed rewards in the context of multiarmed bandits (MABs). We consider two different practical settings: LDP-thenCorruption (LTC) where each user’s locally private response might be further
corrupted during the data collection process, and Corruption-then-LDP (CTL)
where each user’s raw data may be corrupted such that the LDP mechanism will
only be applied to the corrupted data. To start with, we present the first tight
characterization of the mean estimation error in high probability under both LTC
and CTL settings. Leveraging this new result, we then present an almost tight
characterization (up to log factor) of the minimax regret in online MABs and
sub-optimality in offline MABs under both LTC and CTL settings, respectively.
Our theoretical results in both settings are also corroborated by a set of systematic
simulations. One key message in this paper is that LTC is a more difficult setting
that leads to a worse performance guarantee compared to the CTL setting (in
the minimax sense). Our sharp understanding of LTC and CTL also naturally
allows us to give the first tight performance bounds for the most practical setting
where corruption could happen both before and after the LDP mechanism. As
an important by-product, we also give the first correct and tight regret bound for
locally private and heavy-tailed online MABs, i.e., without Huber corruption, by
identifying a fundamental flaw in the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

The Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problem (Berry & Fristedt, 1985) offers a fundamental approach for
sequential decision-making under uncertainty based on only bandit feedback. Take online advertising
as an illustrative example, where the advertising platform (i.e., the central learner) sequentially and
adaptively displays ads (i.e., arm) based on users’ reward feedback (e.g., engagement score) so as to
maximize the cumulative rewards. In practice, several important factors have to be considered when
designing real-world MAB algorithms, as illustrated below using online advertising.
Privacy. The raw engagement score (which is calculated based on clicks, purchases, and time spent
viewing the ad, etc.) from a user’s device may lead to privacy leakage. For instance, when the ad is
about medicine on some rare or uncommon disease, a high engagement score might imply interest or
association with the uncommon disease. Such privacy leakage may lead to unintended personal and
social consequences as well as trust issues on the platform. One principled way to mitigate it is via
local differential privacy (LDP) (Kasiviswanathan et al., 2011; Duchi et al., 2018), i.e., each user’s
device locally adds a suitable amount of noise (depending on the privacy mechanism and budget) to
obfuscate the raw feedback before sending it out from the device (see the yellow region in Fig. 1).
Robustness. Another important factor in real-world scenarios is the robustness of MAB algorithms
under both possibly heavy-tailed feedback and adversary corruption.
∗

Work done during research intern at Wayne State University

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

