Prediction-Powered Ranking of
Large Language Models

Ivi Chatzi
Max Planck Institute for
Software Systems
Kaiserslautern, Germany
ichatzi@mpi-sws.org

Eleni Straitouri
Max Planck Institute for
Software Systems
Kaiserslautern, Germany
estraitouri@mpi-sws.org

Suhas Thejaswi
Max Planck Institute for
Software Systems
Kaiserslautern, Germany
thejaswi@mpi-sws.org

Manuel Gomez Rodriguez
Max Planck Institute for
Software Systems
Kaiserslautern, Germany
manuelgr@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
Large language models are often ranked according to their level of alignment with
human preferences—a model is better than other models if its outputs are more frequently preferred by humans. One of the popular ways to elicit human preferences
utilizes pairwise comparisons between the outputs provided by different models
to the same inputs. However, since gathering pairwise comparisons by humans is
costly and time-consuming, it has become a common practice to gather pairwise
comparisons by a strong large language model—a model strongly aligned with
human preferences. Surprisingly, practitioners cannot currently measure the uncertainty that any mismatch between human and model preferences may introduce
in the constructed rankings. In this work, we develop a statistical framework to
bridge this gap. Given a (small) set of pairwise comparisons by humans and a large
set of pairwise comparisons by a model, our framework provides a rank-set—a set
of possible ranking positions—for each of the models under comparison. Moreover, it guarantees that, with a probability greater than or equal to a user-specified
value, the rank-sets cover the true ranking consistent with the distribution of human pairwise preferences asymptotically. Using pairwise comparisons made by
humans in the LMSYS Chatbot Arena platform and pairwise comparisons made
by three strong large language models, we empirically demonstrate the effectivity
of our framework and show that the rank-sets constructed using only pairwise
comparisons by the strong large language models are often inconsistent with (the
distribution of) human pairwise preferences.

1

Introduction

During the last years, large language models (LLMs) have shown a remarkable ability to generate
and understand general-purpose language [1]. As a result, there has been an increasing excitement in
their potential to help humans solve a variety of open-ended, complex tasks across many application
domains such as coding [2], healthcare [3] and scientific discovery [4], to name a few. However,
evaluating and comparing the performance of different LLMs has become very challenging [5]. The
main reason is that, in contrast to traditional machine learning models, LLMs can solve a large
number of different tasks and, in many of these tasks, there is not a unique, structured solution. As a
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

