Self-Calibrated Tuning of Vision-Language Models for
Out-of-Distribution Detection
Geng Yu1
1

Jianing Zhu2

Jiangchao Yao1,3∗ Bo Han2,4

CMIC, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 TMLR Group, Hong Kong Baptist University
3
Shanghai A I Laboratory 4 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
{warriors30, Sunarker}@sjtu.edu.cn
{csjnzhu, bhanml}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is crucial for deploying reliable machine
learning models in open-world applications. Recent advances in CLIP-based OOD
detection have shown promising results via regularizing prompt tuning with OOD
features extracted from ID data. However, the irrelevant context mined from ID
data can be spurious due to the inaccurate foreground-background decomposition,
thus limiting the OOD detection performance. In this work, we propose a novel
framework, namely, Self-Calibrated Tuning (SCT), to mitigate this problem for
effective OOD detection with only the given few-shot ID data. Specifically, SCT
introduces modulating factors respectively on the two components of the original
learning objective. It adaptively directs the optimization process between the two
tasks during training on data with different prediction uncertainty to calibrate the
influence of OOD regularization, which is compatible with many prompt tuning
based OOD detection methods. Extensive experiments and analyses have been
conducted to characterize and demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed SCT.
The code is publicly available at: https://github.com/tmlr-group/SCT.

1

Introduction

The deep neural networks (DNNs) are demonstrated to be overconfident on the OOD data out of
the pre-defined label space [Hendrycks and Gimpel, 2017], which can induce severe problems in
those safety-critical applications like autonomous driving or medical intelligence. Various explorations [Liang et al., 2018, Djurisic et al., 2022, Du et al., 2022, Zhu et al., 2023b] thus have been
conducted in designing scoring functions or fine-tuning methods with auxiliary outliers to improve
the OOD distinguishability. Specially, with the emergence of the powerful pretrained vision-language
models (VLMs) [Radford et al., 2021], a series of prompt tuning based methods [Miyai et al., 2024b,
Tao et al., 2023, Bai et al., 2023, Ming et al., 2022c] show impressive performance in current OOD
detection benchmarks, with the regularization given only few-shot in-distribution (ID) data.
Generally, these regularizations [Wang et al., 2023, Miyai et al., 2024b] are built upon the ID-irrelevant
local context as the surrogate OOD source, which is extracted by VLMs (refer to Figure 1) based on
its alignment with ID-class text features. Although this saves the costly collection of auxiliary outliers
from the open world, the quality of the ID-irrelevant local context also becomes the bottleneck, which
can be greatly affected by the foreground-background decomposition with VLMs. Specifically, as
revealed in previous studies [Oh et al., 2023, Tu et al., 2024, Wang et al., 2024], the prevalent VLMs
struggle with poor calibration, which means that the decomposition performance on downstream data
might not be well guaranteed. Thus, it naturally motivates the following question:
∗

Correspondence to Jiangchao Yao (Sunarker@sjtu.edu.cn).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

