Robust Contrastive Multi-view Clustering against
Dual Noisy Correspondence

Ruiming Guo1∗, Mouxing Yang1∗ , Yijie Lin1 , Xi Peng1,2 , Peng Hu1†
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Hydraulics and
Mountain River Engineering, Sichuan University, China
{guoruiming.gm, yangmouxing, linyijie.gm, pengx.gm, penghu.ml}@gmail.com

Abstract
Recently, contrastive multi-view clustering (MvC) has emerged as a promising
avenue for analyzing data from heterogeneous sources, typically leveraging the
off-the-shelf instances as positives and randomly sampled ones as negatives. In
practice, however, this paradigm would unavoidably suffer from the Dual Noisy
Correspondence (DNC) problem, where noise compromises the constructions
of both positive and negative pairs. Specifically, the complexity of data collection and transmission might mistake some unassociated pairs as positive (namely,
false positive correspondence), while the intrinsic one-to-many contrast nature of
contrastive MvC would sample some intra-cluster samples as negative (namely,
false negative correspondence). To handle this daunting problem, we propose
a novel method, dubbed Contextually-spectral based correspondence refinery
(CANDY). CANDY dexterously exploits inter-view similarities as context to
uncover false negatives. Furthermore, it employs a spectral-based module to
denoise correspondence, alleviating the negative influence of false positives. Extensive experiments on five widely-used multi-view benchmarks, in comparison with eight competitive multi-view clustering methods, verify the effectiveness of our method in addressing the DNC problem. The code is available at
https://github.com/XLearning-SCU/2024-NeurIPS-CANDY.

1

Introduction

In real-world applications, data are often presented in various modalities or views, including but not
limited to visible images, thermal images, text, and audio [1, 2]. Multi-view Clustering (MvC), a
fundamental tool in multi-view data analysis, aimed at learning a common space in which data are
grouped into distinct clusters, attracts significant attention across various research communities [3–9].
In recent years, contrastive MvC methods have emerged as a central focus in multi-view clustering
researches [10, 11]. The typical implementation of these methods involves leveraging the off-the-shelf
data pairs as positives and randomly sampling cross-view pairs as negatives, followed by employing
contrastive learning upon them [12–14]. As a result, the cross-view discrepancy could be eliminated,
revealing the underlying cluster structure.
Although existing contrastive MvC methods have achieved promising performance, their success
heavily relies on the assumption of faultless cross-view correspondence. In practice, however, this
assumption is hard or even impossible to meet [15–19], leading to inevitable contamination of the
cross-view correspondence, as shown in Fig. 1a. More specifically, the complexity of data collection
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

