Symmetry Discovery Beyond Affine Transformations

Ben Shaw
Utah State University
Logan, UT 84322
ben.shaw@usu.edu

Abram Magner
University at Albany
Albany, NY 12222
amagner@albany.edu

Kevin R. Moon
Utah State University
Logan, UT 84322
kevin.moon@usu.edu

Abstract
Symmetry detection can improve various machine learning tasks. In the context
of continuous symmetry detection, current state of the art experiments are limited
to detecting affine transformations. Under the manifold assumption, we outline a
framework for discovering continuous symmetry in data beyond the affine transformation group. We also provide a similar framework for discovering discrete
symmetry. We experimentally compare our method to an existing method known
as LieGAN and show that our method is competitive at detecting affine symmetries
for large sample sizes and superior than LieGAN for small sample sizes. We also
show our method is able to detect continuous symmetries beyond the affine group
and is generally more computationally efficient than LieGAN.

1

Introduction

Approaching various machine learning tasks with prior knowledge, commonly in the form of symmetry present in datasets and tasks, has been shown to improve performance and/or computational
efficiency [1, 2, 3, 4]. While research in symmetry detection in data has enjoyed recent success [5],
the current state of the art leaves room for improvement, particularly with respect to the detection
of continuous symmetry [6]. Herein, we seek to address two issues at hand: primarily, the inability
of current methods to detect continuous symmetry beyond the affine group; secondly, the apparent
increase of difficulty in identifying continuous symmetries when compared with discrete symmetries.
Our methodology is summarized as follows. First, given a dataset, certain quantities of interest,
hereafter referred to as machine learning functions, are identified, such as an underlying probability
distribution which generates the dataset, a classification or regression function, or a dimensionality
reduction function. Second, we estimate tangent vector fields which annihilate the machine learning
functions. The estimated vector fields themselves are generators of continuous symmetries. Thus
estimating the vector fields provides an indirect estimate of the continuous symmetries. Third, we use
the estimated vector fields to estimate functions which, in addition to the machine learning functions,
are annihilated by the vector fields. The discovered functions define a feature space which is invariant
with respect to the continuous symmetries implied by the vector field generators. On this constructed
feature space, the outcome of any machine learning task is, by definition, invariant with respect to the
symmetries generated by the estimated vector fields, and we show in examples how symmetry-based
feature engineering can improve performance on machine learning tasks.
Vector fields have been used to describe symmetry in the context of machine learning before [7].
However, our use of vector fields differs from previous approaches for two reasons. First, we fully
exploit the vector fields as objects which operate on machine learning functions directly. Second,
we estimate vector fields associated with continuous symmetries beyond affine transformations.
Our main contributions are the following: 1) We show that our method can detect symmetry in
a number of cases previously examined with other methods, with our method offering a number
of computational advantages. 2) We also show that our method can be used to detect continuous
symmetries beyond the affine group, experimenting with both synthetic and real data.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

