Expressive Gaussian Human Avatars
from Monocular RGB Video
Hezhen Hu1

Zhiwen Fan1 Tianhao Wu2 Yihan Xi1 Seoyoung Lee1
Georgios Pavlakos1 Zhangyang Wang1
1
University of Texas at Austin 2 University of Cambridge

Abstract
Nuanced expressiveness, especially through detailed hand and facial expressions,
is pivotal for enhancing the realism and vitality of digital human representations.
In this work, we aim to learn expressive human avatars from a monocular RGB
video; a setting that introduces new challenges in capturing and animating finegrained details. To this end, we introduce EVA, a drivable human model that can
recover fine details based on 3D Gaussians and an expressive parametric human
model, SMPL-X. Focused on enhancing expressiveness, our work makes three key
contributions. First, we highlight the importance of aligning the SMPL-X model
with the video frames for effective avatar learning. Recognizing the limitations
of current methods for estimating SMPL-X parameters from in-the-wild videos,
we introduce a reconstruction module that significantly improves the image-model
alignment. Second, we propose a context-aware adaptive density control strategy,
which is adaptively adjusting the gradient thresholds to accommodate the varied
granularity across body parts. Third, we develop a feedback mechanism that
predicts per-pixel confidence to better guide the optimization of 3D Gaussians.
Extensive experiments on two benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of our
approach both quantitatively and qualitatively, especially on the fine-grained hand
and facial details. We make our code available at the project website: https:
//evahuman.github.io.

1

Introduction

High-quality digital avatar modeling has a wide range of applications, including AR/VR, movie
production, sign language, and more. For digital human representation, capturing nuanced expressions
is essential for enhancing fidelity and vitality. This is particularly evident in the detailed portrayal
of hands and facial expressions, which add emotional depth and interactive expression capabilities
to human avatars. In this work, we investigate expressiveness when building human avatars from
monocular video. The task involves taking as input a monocular human video and learning an
animated human avatar which enables multiple capabilities, such as novel view and pose synthesis.
Reconstructing expressive human avatars is challenging, particularly due to the subtle and complex
movements of the hands and face. Compared to the body, hands and faces occupy smaller spatial
areas and have distinct characteristics. For example, the hand has many degrees of freedom, intricate
textures, and frequent self-occlusions. To achieve accurate avatar modeling, it is crucial to capture
these fine textures from RGB video and ensure effective animation.
Current studies [49, 31, 15, 22, 12] mainly focus on learning human avatar on the body region
and have made remarkable progress. Early works [49, 31, 15] mainly utilize NeRF as an implicit
representation but usually have the drawback of low training/inference speed. Recently, more and
more works build on top of 3D Gaussian Splatting [19] for its effectiveness and efficiency, which
could further speed up rendering to over 100fps. GART [22] utilizes a mixture of moving 3D
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

