Improving Generalization and Convergence by
Enhancing Implicit Regularization

Mingze Wang1,3,† Jinbo Wang1,3 Haotian He1,3 Zilin Wang1 Guanhua Huang5,6
Feiyu Xiong3 Zhiyu Li3 Weinan E1,2,3,4 Lei Wu1,2,†
1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
Center for Machine Learning Research, Peking University
3
Institute for Advanced Algorithms Research (Shanghai) 4 AI for Science Institute
5
School of Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China 6 ByteDance Research
2

{mingzewang, wangjinbo, haotianhe, wangzilin}@stu.pku.edu.cn
guanhuahuang@mail.ustc.edu.cn {xiongfy, lizy}@iaar.ac.cn
{weinan, leiwu}@math.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
In this work, we propose an Implicit Regularization Enhancement (IRE) framework
to accelerate the discovery of flat solutions in deep learning, thereby improving
generalization and convergence. Specifically, IRE decouples the dynamics of flat
and sharp directions, which boosts the sharpness reduction along flat directions
while maintaining the training stability in sharp directions. We show that IRE
can be practically incorporated with generic base optimizers without introducing significant computational overload. Experiments show that IRE consistently
improves the generalization performance for image classification tasks across a
variety of benchmark datasets (CIFAR-10/100, ImageNet) and models (ResNets
and ViTs). Surprisingly, IRE also achieves a 2× speed-up compared to AdamW in
the pre-training of Llama models (of sizes ranging from 60M to 229M) on datasets
including Wikitext-103, Minipile, and Openwebtext. Moreover, we provide theoretical guarantees, showing that IRE can substantially accelerate the convergence
towards flat minima in sharpness-aware minimization (SAM).

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved remarkable success across a variety of fields, including computer vision,
scientific computing, and artificial intelligence. The core challenge in deep learning lies in how to
train deep neural networks (DNNs) efficiently to achieve superior performance. Understanding and
improving the generalization and convergence of commonly-used optimizers, such stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) (Robbins and Monro, 1951; Rumelhart et al., 1986), in deep learning is crucial for
both theoretical research and practical applications.
Notably, optimizers often exhibit a preference for certain solutions in training DNNs. For instance,
SGD and its variants consistently converge to solutions that generalize well, even when DNNs are
highly over-parameterized and there are many solutions that generalize poorly. This phenomenon is
referred to as implicit regularization in the literature (Neyshabur et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2017).
The most popular explanation for implicit regularization is that SGD and its variants tend to converge
to flat minima (Keskar et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2017), and flat minima generalize better (Hochreiter and
† Correspondence to: Mingze Wang and Lei Wu.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

