Language Without Borders: A Dataset and
Benchmark for Code-Switching Lip Reading
Xueyi Zhang1,2,4∗,
Jun Tang1 ,

Chengwei Zhang5,∗ ,

Yanming Guo1 ,

Siqi Cai2,3,4 ,

Mingrui Lao1†,

Peng Zhao1,2,4

Xianghu Yue3 ,

Haizhou Li2,3,4 ,

1

National University of Defense Technology, China
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
3
National University of Singapore, Singapore
4
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen, China
5
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences Beijing, China
2

Abstract
Lip reading aims at transforming the videos of continuous lip movement into
textual contents, and has achieved significant progress over the past decade. It
serves as a critical yet practical assistance for speech-impaired individuals, with
more practicability than speech recognition in noisy environments. With the
increasing interpersonal communications in social media owing to globalization,
the existing monolingual datasets for lip reading may not be sufficient to meet the
exponential proliferation of bilingual and even multilingual users. However, to our
best knowledge, research on code-switching is only explored in speech recognition,
while the attempts in lip reading are seriously neglected. To bridge this gap,
we have collected a bilingual code-switching lip reading benchmark composed
of Chinese and English, dubbed CSLR. As the pioneering work, we recruited
62 speakers with proficient foundations in both spoken Chinese and English to
express sentences containing both involved languages. Through rigorous criteria in
data selection, CSLR benchmark has accumulated 85,560 video samples with a
resolution of 1080x1920, totaling over 71.3 hours of high-quality code-switching
lip movement data. To systematically evaluate the technical challenges in CSLR, we
implement commonly-used lip reading backbones, as well as competitive solutions
in code-switching speech for benchmark testing. Experiments show CSLR to be a
challenging and under-explored lip reading task. We hope our proposed benchmark
will extend the applicability of code-switching lip reading, and further contribute
to the communities of cross-lingual communication and collaboration. Our dataset
and benchmark are accessible at GitHub.

1

Introduction

Speech serves as a pivotal medium for both human communications and human-computer interactions.
Lip reading, known as Visual Speech Recognition (VSR), focuses on deciphering the semantic
information conveyed by a speaker through the analysis of lip movements. It holds substantial
significance across diverse real-world applications, such as keyword spotting [1, 2], biometric
validation [3, 4], and speech enhancement [5, 6], audio-visual synchronization [7], transforming
visual speech into audible speech [8, 9], speaker recognition and verification [10–13], medical
communicative aids [14, 15], and human-computer interfaces [16]. Mainstream research efforts on
∗
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author: Mingrui Lao (laomingrui@vip.sina.cn)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

