Towards a Theoretical Understanding of the ‘Reversal
Curse’ via Training Dynamics

Hanlin Zhu∗
UC Berkeley
hanlinzhu@berkeley.edu
Shaolun Zhang
UC Berkeley
shaolun_zhang@berkeley.edu
Yuandong Tian
Meta AI
yuandong@meta.com

Baihe Huang∗
UC Berkeley
baihe_huang@berkeley.edu

Michael Jordan
UC Berkeley
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Jiantao Jiao
UC Berkeley
jiantao@berkeley.edu

Stuart Russell
UC Berkeley
russell@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Auto-regressive large language models (LLMs) show impressive capacities to
solve many complex reasoning tasks while struggling with some simple logical
reasoning tasks such as inverse search: when trained on “A → B” (e.g., Tom is
the parent of John), LLM fails to directly conclude “B ← A” (e.g., John is the
child of Tom) during inference even if the two sentences are semantically identical,
which is known as the “reversal curse”. In this paper, we theoretically analyze the
reversal curse via the training dynamics of (stochastic) gradient descent for two
auto-regressive models: (1) a bilinear model that can be viewed as a simplification
of a one-layer transformer; (2) one-layer transformers under certain assumptions.
Our analysis reveals that for both models, the reversal curse is a consequence
of the (effective) model weights asymmetry, i.e., the increase of weights from a
token A to token B during training does not necessarily cause the increase of the
weights from B to A, which is caused by the training dynamics under certain
choice of loss function and the optimization space of model parameters. Moreover,
our analysis can be naturally applied to other logical reasoning tasks such as
chain-of-thought (COT), which provides a new perspective different from previous
work that focuses on expressivity. Finally, we conduct experiments to validate our
theory on multi-layer transformers under different settings. Our code is available at
https://github.com/marlo-z/reversal_curse_analysis/.

1

Introductions

Large language models (LLMs) have shown great performance in solving complex reasoning tasks that
require multiple reasoning steps through in-context learning (ICL), such as zero-shot learning [1, 2],
few-shot learning [3, 4, 5], or via further fine-tuning [6, 7, 8]. However, without the above inferencetime techniques or model fine-tuning (probably combined with data manipulations), an auto-regressive
LLM might struggle with simple logical reasoning tasks that require multiple reasoning steps learned
during training separately [9], where the reversal curse [10] serves as a well-known example.
*

Equal contributions.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

