Teach Better or Show Smarter? On Instructions and
Exemplars in Automatic Prompt Optimization

Xingchen Wan, Ruoxi Sun, Hootan Nakhost, Sercan Ö. Arık
Google Cloud AI Research
{xingchenw, ruoxis, hootan, soarik}@google.com

Abstract
Large language models have demonstrated remarkable capabilities but their performance is heavily reliant on effective prompt engineering. Automatic prompt
optimization (APO) methods are designed to automate this and can be broadly
categorized into those targeting instructions (instruction optimization, IO) vs. those
targeting exemplars (exemplar optimization, EO). Despite their shared objective,
these have evolved rather independently, with IO receiving more research attention
recently. This paper seeks to bridge this gap by comprehensively comparing the
performance of representative IO and EO techniques both isolation and combination on a diverse set of challenging tasks. Our findings reveal that intelligently
reusing model-generated input-output pairs obtained from evaluating prompts on
the validation set as exemplars, consistently improves performance on top of IO
methods but is currently under-investigated. We also find that despite the recent
focus on IO, how we select exemplars can outweigh how we optimize instructions,
with EO strategies as simple as random search outperforming state-of-the-art IO
methods with seed instructions without any optimization. Moreover, we observe a
synergy between EO and IO, with optimal combinations surpassing the individual
contributions. We conclude that studying exemplar optimization both as a standalone method and its optimal combination with instruction optimization remain a
crucial aspect of APO and deserve greater consideration in future research, even in
the era of highly capable instruction-following models.

1

Introduction

Significant advancements in large language models
(LLMs) have revolutionized various natural language processing tasks [9, 4, 1, 15]. One notable aspect of LLMs,
however, is their sensitivity to the input "prompts," which
has given rise to the burgeoning field of prompt engineering [26, 38]. On black-box LLMs where we can neither
modify or access internal parameters, prompt engineering involves crafting input prompts that effectively guide
LLMs to generate desired outputs. Starting from manual
processes requiring human expertise, the complexity and
volume of prompts have necessitated the development of
automatic prompt optimization (APO) methods aiming to
streamline and automate prompt generation, thereby alleviating the burden of manual intervention. Broadly, since
prompts consist of instructions and exemplars, we may
roughly categorize APO into instruction optimization (IO)
and exemplar optimization (EO) approaches. IO focuses

Optimized instruction + Optimized exemplars
Initial instruction + Optimized exemplars
70.8
Optimized instruction + Random exemplars
68.1
Optimized instruction + No exemplars

76.1

Optimizing
72.9 exemplars only
outperforms
SoTA IO

Most
existing IO
works

60.3
Initial instruction + No exemplars

Figure 1: Average performance over >20
tasks on PaLM 2 – We compare and
combine APO targeting exemplars and
instructions, and find that how we optimize exemplars (orange) can eclipse how
we optimize instructions despite current
research favoring the latter (blue and purple), whereas optimizing both is the best
(cyan) within similar budget.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

