The Best of Both Worlds: On the Dilemma of
Out-of-distribution Detection
Qingyang Zhang1∗, Qiuxuan Feng1 , Joey Tianyi Zhou2 , Yatao Bian3 ,
Qinghua Hu1 , Changqing Zhang1†
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University1
A*STAR2 , Tencent AI Lab3

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is essential for model trustworthiness which
aims to sensitively identify semantic OOD samples and robustly generalize for
covariate-shifted OOD samples. However, we discover that the superior OOD
detection performance of state-of-the-art methods is achieved by secretly sacrificing
the OOD generalization ability. Specifically, the classification accuracy of these
models could deteriorate dramatically when they encounter even minor noise. This
phenomenon contradicts the goal of model trustworthiness and severely restricts
their applicability in real-world scenarios. What is the hidden reason behind
such a limitation? In this work, we theoretically demystify the “sensitive-robust”
dilemma that lies in many existing OOD detection methods. Consequently, a
theory-inspired algorithm is induced to overcome such a dilemma. By decoupling
the uncertainty learning objective from a Bayesian perspective, the conflict between
OOD detection and OOD generalization is naturally harmonized and a dual-optimal
performance could be expected. Empirical studies show that our method achieves
superior performance on standard benchmarks. To our best knowledge, this work
is the first principled OOD detection method that achieves state-of-the-art OOD
detection performance without compromising OOD generalization ability. Our
code is available at https://github.com/QingyangZhang/DUL.

1

Introduction

Endowing machine learning models with out-of-distribution (OOD) detection and OOD generalization
ability are both essential for their deployment in the open world [1, 2, 3]. We borrow an example
of autonomous driving from [4] to demonstrate the motivation of these two tasks. Given a machine
learning model trained on in-distribution (ID) data (top image in Fig. 1 (a)), OOD detection aims
to sensitively perceive uncertainty arising upon outliers that do not belong to any known classes of
training data [5] (bottom right image in Fig. 1 (a)). While OOD generalization expects machine
learning models to be robust in the presence of unexpected noise or corruption, e.g., rainy or snowy
weather (bottom left image in Fig. 1 (a)). In this paper, we reveal that many previous methods pursue
OOD detection performance at a secret cost of sacrificing OOD generalization ability. To make things
worse, we observe that some SOTA OOD detection methods may result in a catastrophic collapse
in classification performance (∼15% accuracy degradation) when encountering even slight noise.
One pioneering work [4] makes a trade-off between OOD detection and OOD generalization, but
the relationship between these two tasks is still largely unexplored. The learning objectives of these
two tasks are seemingly conflicting at first glance. OOD detection encourages sensitive uncertainty
awareness (highly uncertain prediction) on unseen data, while generalization expects the prediction
to be confident and robust under unforeseeable distributional shifts. Previous work in OOD detection
∗
†

Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
Correspondence to Changqing Zhang <zhangchangqing@tju.edu.cn>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

