Toward Self-Improvement of LLMs via Imagination,
Searching, and Criticizing

Ye Tian1,2∗, Baolin Peng1∗, Linfeng Song1∗, Lifeng Jin1 , Dian Yu1 , Lei Han2
Haitao Mi1† , Dong Yu1
1
Tencent AI Lab, Bellevue, WA
2
Tencent Robotics X
{baolinpeng,lfsong,lifengjin,yudian,haitaomi,dyu}@global.tencent.com
{yaptian,lxhan}@tencent.com

Abstract
Despite the impressive capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) on various tasks, they still struggle with scenarios that involves complex reasoning and
planning. Self-correction and self-learning emerge as viable solutions, employing
strategies that allow LLMs to refine their outputs and learn from self-assessed
rewards. Yet, the efficacy of LLMs in self-refining its response, particularly in
complex reasoning and planning task, remains dubious. In this paper, we introduce
A LPHA LLM for the self-improvements of LLMs, which integrates Monte Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS) with LLMs to establish a self-improving loop, thereby enhancing the capabilities of LLMs without additional annotations. Drawing inspiration
from the success of AlphaGo, A LPHA LLM addresses the unique challenges of
combining MCTS with LLM for self-improvement, including data scarcity, the
vastness search spaces of language tasks, and the subjective nature of feedback
in language tasks. A LPHA LLM is comprised of prompt synthesis component, an
efficient MCTS approach tailored for language tasks, and a trio of critic models for
precise feedback. Our experimental results in mathematical reasoning tasks demonstrate that A LPHA LLM significantly enhances the performance of LLMs without
additional annotations, showing the potential for self-improvement in LLMs. The
code is available at https://github.com/YeTianJHU/AlphaLLM.

1

Introduction

LLMs, trained on trillions of tokens with billions of parameters have shown unparalleled capabilities
in a wide range of natural language processing tasks (Touvron et al., 2023b; Team et al., 2023;
OpenAI, 2023). Nevertheless, they continue to face challenges in scenarios requiring complex
reasoning and strategic planning (Valmeekam et al., 2022; Stechly et al., 2024). While advanced
prompting approaches such as Chain, Tree, Graph-of-Thought (Wei et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2024;
Besta et al., 2024; Ding et al., 2023), it remains essential to fine-tune LLMs using a substantial
volume of high-quality, supervised data to fundamentally improve the model performance (Nye et al.,
2021; Lewkowycz et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2022). This methodology is inherently limited by the
scope and quality of data that humans can provide.
Considering these challenges, the concept of self-correction and self-learning have been proposed
as promising solutions (Madaan et al., 2024; Saunders et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2024). Within these
framework, LLMs typically operate by employing two main strategies: 1) they continuously refine
∗

Equal Contribution; †Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

