Temporal Sentence Grounding with Relevance
Feedback in Videos
Jianfeng Dong1 2

Xiaoman Peng1

Xun Yang5

Daizong Liu3∗ Xiaoye Qu4

Cuizhu Bao1 2∗ Meng Wang6

1

Zhejiang Gongshang University
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Big Data and Future E-Commerce Technology
3
Peking University 4 Huazhong University of Science and Technology
5
University of Science and Technology of China 6 Hefei University of Technology
2

Abstract
As a widely explored multi-modal task, Temporal Sentence Grounding in videos
(TSG) endeavors to retrieve a specific video segment matched with a given query
text from a video. The traditional paradigm for TSG generally assumes that relevant segments always exist within a given video. However, this assumption
is restrictive and unrealistic in real-world applications where the existence of a
query-related segment is uncertain, easily resulting in erroneous grounding. Motivated by the research gap and practical application, this paper introduces a new
task, named Temporal Sentence Grounding with Relevance Feedback (TSG-RF)
in videos, which accommodates the possibility that a video may or may not include a segment related to the query. This task entails localizing precise video
segments that semantically align with the query text when such content is present,
while delivering definitive feedback on the non-existence of related segments when
absent. Moreover, we propose a novel Relation-aware Temporal Sentence Grounding (RaTSG) network for addressing this challenging task. This network first
reformulates the TSG-RF task as a foreground-background detection problem by
investigating whether the query-related semantics exist in both frame and video
levels. Then, a multi-granularity relevance discriminator is exploited to produce
precise video-query relevance feedback and a relation-aware segment grounding
module is employed to selectively conduct the grounding process, dynamically
adapting to the presence or absence of query-related segments in videos. To validate our RaTSG network, we reconstruct two popular TSG datasets, establishing a
rigorous benchmark for TSG-RF. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed RaTSG for the TSG-RF task. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/HuiGuanLab/RaTSG.

1

Introduction

Grounding target content described by users in videos is a fundamental capability that facilitates
various multimedia applications, such as intelligent robotic service [1], video on demand [2], and
metaverse [3]. Following this demand, temporal sentence grounding in videos (TSG) [4] has recently
become a research hotspot, attracting wide attention from researchers in various fields [5–9]. Despite
the significant advancements made in this field, the existing TSG task is overly idealistic. It aims to
identify segments that are semantically relevant to a given query from a given long video, assuming
that relevant segments always exist in the given video [10–12]. However, this setting limits the
applicability of TSG in real-world scenarios as the given video may not contain the query-related
contents, resulting mismatched or wrong grounding results. As illustrated in Figure 1(a), given a
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

