Computing the Bias of Constant-step Stochastic
Approximation with Markovian Noise

Sebastian Allmeier
Univ. Grenoble Alpes and Inria
F-38000 Grenoble, France.

Nicolas Gast
Univ. Grenoble Alpes and Inria
F-38000 Grenoble, France.

Abstract
We study stochastic approximation algorithms with Markovian noise and constant
step-size α. We develop a method based on infinitesimal generator comparisons
to study the bias of the algorithm, which is the expected difference between θn
—the value at iteration n— and θ˚ —the unique equilibrium of the corresponding
ODE. We show that, under some smoothness conditions, this bias is of order Opαq.
Furthermore, we show that the time-averaged bias is equal to αV ` Opα2 q,“ where
‰
V is a constant characterized by a Lyapunov equation, showing that E θ̄n «
ř
n
θ˚ `V α`Opα2 q, where θ̄n “ p1{nq k“1 θk is the Polyak-Ruppert average. We
also show that θ̄n converges with high probability around θ˚ ` αV . We illustrate
how to combine this with Richardson-Romberg extrapolation to derive an iterative
scheme with a bias of order Opα2 q.

1

Introduction

Stochastic approximation (SA) is a widely used algorithmic paradigm to solve fixed-point problems
under noisy observations. While SA was introduced in the 1950s [30, 6], it is still widely used
today in many applications to solve optimization problems, or to implement machine learning or
reinforcement learning algorithms [23, 5]. A typical SA is a stochastic recurrence of the form
θn`1 “ θn ` αn pf pθn , Xn q ` Mn`1 q,

(1)

where θn P Rd is a vector of parameters, Xn and Mn`1 are sources of randomness, and αn is the
step-size. The step-size might be decreasing to 0 as n grow or can be fixed to a small constant (in
which case we simply call it α).
The goal of running a SA algorithm is to obtain a sequence θn that gets close to the root θ˚ of
the function f¯pθq “ E rf pθ, Xq ` M | θs, the expectation of the iterate (1), as n goes to infinity.
The SA procedure described in (1) models many algorithms that are used in machine learning, like
first-order optimization and stochastic gradient descent [24, 16], and Q-learning or policy gradient
algorithms [5, 35].
The theory of stochastic approximation has been studied extensively and is covered by a lot of
textbooks, e.g., [4, 8, 23]. This theory shows that the limit points of θn as n grows are similar to
the limit points of the ODE x9 “ f¯pxq [3, 9]. In particular, one can show that if all solutions of the
ODE converge to θ˚ , then θn gets close to θ˚ as n grows large (under technical conditions on f , the
step size αn , and the noise Xn or Mn`1 ). The asymptotic behavior of θn depends on the nature of
the step-size: When the step-size αn depends on n and converges to 0 as n goes to infinity, then θn
generally converges almost surely to θ˚ . When αn is kept constant and does not depend on n, then
θn will in general
not converge to θ˚ but keeps oscillating around θ˚ , with fluctuation amplitudes
?
of order Op αq. In this work, we focus on the latter case and propose a method to quantify these
fluctuations.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

