DetectRL: Benchmarking LLM-Generated Text
Detection in Real-World Scenarios
Junchao Wu1 Runzhe Zhan1 Derek F. Wong1∗ Shu Yang1
Xinyi Yang1 Yulin Yuan2 Lidia S. Chao1
1
2
NLP CT Lab, Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
2
Department of Chinese Language and Literature, University of Macau
nlp2ct.{junchao,runzhe,shuyang,xinyi}@gmail.com
{derekfw,yulinyuan,lidiasc}@um.edu.mo

Abstract
Detecting text generated by large language models (LLMs) is of great recent interest. With zero-shot methods like DetectGPT, detection capabilities have reached
impressive levels. However, the reliability of existing detectors in real-world applications remains underexplored. In this study, we present a new benchmark,
DetectRL, highlighting that even state-of-the-art (SOTA) detection techniques still
underperformed in this task. We collected human-written datasets from domains
where LLMs are particularly prone to misuse. Using popular LLMs, we generated
data that better aligns with real-world applications. Unlike previous studies, we
employed heuristic rules to create adversarial LLM-generated text, simulating various prompts usages, human revisions like word substitutions, and writing noises
like spelling mistakes. Our development of DetectRL reveals the strengths and
limitations of current SOTA detectors. More importantly, we analyzed the potential impact of writing styles, model types, attack methods, the text lengths, and
real-world human writing factors on different types of detectors. We believe DetectRL could serve as an effective benchmark for assessing detectors in real-world
scenarios, evolving with advanced attack methods, thus providing more stressful
evaluation to drive the development of more efficient detectors2 .

1

Introduction

Detecting text generated by LLMs is a challenging task. It is often more difficult for humans
than for detection techniques to identify LLM-generated text, as humans typically underperform
detection methods designed for this purpose [1]. Recently, the implications of LLM-generated content
have come into focus, highlighting their significant societal and academic impacts and associated
risks [2, 3]. The main concerns stem from the hallucinations and misuse of LLMs [4], leading to
issues such as plagiarism [5], the spread of fake news [6], and challenges to educators and human
scholarship in AI-assisted academic writing [7]. Previous and current popular detection benchmarks,
such as TuringBench [8], MGTBench [9], MULTITuDE [10], MAGE [11] and M4 [12], have
primarily focused on evaluating detectors’ performance across various domains, generative models,
and languages by constructing idealized test data. However, they have overlooked the assessment of
detectors’ capabilities in more common scenarios encountered in practical applications [4], such as
various prompt usages, human revisions, and writing noises, as shown in Table 1.
In this paper, we study the following questions: (1) How do SOTA LLM-generated text detectors
perform in real-world application scenarios? (2) What real-world factors influence detector
∗
2

Corresponding author
Data and code are publicly available at: https://github.com/NLP2CT/DetectRL

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

