Lightweight Frequency Masker for Cross-Domain
Few-Shot Semantic Segmentation

Jintao Tong
Yixiong Zou∗
Yuhua Li
Ruixuan Li
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{jintaotong, yixiongz, idcliyuhua, rxli}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Cross-domain few-shot segmentation (CD-FSS) is proposed to first pre-train the
model on a large-scale source-domain dataset, and then transfer the model to
data-scarce target-domain datasets for pixel-level segmentation. The significant
domain gap between the source and target datasets leads to a sharp decline in the
performance of existing few-shot segmentation (FSS) methods in cross-domain
scenarios. In this work, we discover an intriguing phenomenon: simply filtering
different frequency components for target domains can lead to a significant performance improvement, sometimes even as high as 14% mIoU. Then, we delve into
this phenomenon for an interpretation, and find such improvements stem from the
reduced inter-channel correlation in feature maps, which benefits CD-FSS with
enhanced robustness against domain gaps and larger activated regions for segmentation. Based on this, we propose a lightweight frequency masker, which further
reduces channel correlations by an Amplitude-Phase Masker (APM) module and an
Adaptive Channel Phase Attention (ACPA) module. Notably, APM introduces only
0.01% additional parameters but improves the average performance by over 10%,
and ACPA imports only 2.5% parameters but further improves the performance by
over 1.5%, which significantly surpasses the state-of-the-art CD-FSS methods.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in semantic segmentation have been driven by large-scale annotated datasets
and developments in deep neural networks [8, 29, 50, 44]. Nevertheless, the requirement for extensive
labeled data remains a significant challenge, particularly for dense prediction tasks like semantic
segmentation. Hence, few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS) [35, 11, 49] has been proposed to meet
this challenge, aiming to produce predictions for the unseen categories with only limited annotated
data. However, these FSS methods perform poorly when confronted with domain shifts, particularly
when there is a significant gap between the novel class (target domain) and the base class (source
domain). This issue has spurred the development of the cross-domain few-shot semantic segmentation
(CD-FSS) task [24]. Despite various efforts in CD-FSS, the outcomes remain sub-optimal.
To handle the domain shift problem, efforts have been made to study the generalization of neural networks. Recently, some works [42, 40, 7] have explored this from the perspective of the
frequency domain, achieving theoretical breakthroughs. Compared to humans, neural networks
exhibit heightened sensitivity to different frequency components. Additionally, amplitude and phase
exhibit distinct properties and effects on neural network performance. Inspired by these works,
we study the domain shift problem from the perspective of the frequency domain and discover an
intriguing phenomenon shown in Figure 1: for a model already trained on the source domain, simply
filtering frequency components of images during testing can lead to significant performance
improvements, sometimes even as high as 14% mIoU.
∗

Corresponding author. Code is available at https://github.com/TungChintao/APM.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

