The Sample-Communication Complexity Trade-off in
Federated Q-Learning

Sudeep Salgia
Carnegie Mellon University
ssalgia@andrew.cmu.edu

Yuejie Chi
Carnegie Mellon University
yuejiechi@cmu.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of Federated Q-learning, where M agents aim to collaboratively learn the optimal Q-function of an unknown infinite horizon Markov
Decision Process with finite state and action spaces. We investigate the trade-off
between sample and communication complexity for the widely used class of intermittent communication algorithms. We first establish the converse result, where
we show that any Federated Q-learning that offers a linear speedup with respect to
number of agents in sample complexity needs to incur a communication cost of
1
at least Ω( 1−γ
), where γ is the discount factor. We also propose a new Federated
Q-learning algorithm, called Fed-DVR-Q, which is the first Federated Q-learning
algorithm to simultaneously achieve order-optimal sample and communication
complexities. Thus, together these results provide a complete characterization of
the sample-communication complexity trade-off in Federated Q-learning.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) [Sutton and Barton, 2018] refers to an online sequential decision
making paradigm where the learning agent aims to learn an optimal policy, i.e., a policy that
maximizes the long-term reward, through repeated interactions with an unknown environment. RL
finds applications across a diverse array of fields including, but not limited to, autonomous driving,
games, recommendation systems, robotics and Internet of Things (IoT) [Kober et al., 2013, Yurtsever
et al., 2020, Silver et al., 2016, Lim et al., 2020].
The primary hurdle in RL applications is often the high-dimensional nature of the decision space
that necessitates the learning agent to have to access to an enormous amount of data in order to have
any hope of learning the optimal policy. Moreover, the sequential collection of such an enormous
amount of data through a single agent is extremely time-consuming and often infeasible in practice.
Consequently, practical implementations of RL involve deploying multiple agents to collect data
in parallel. This decentralized approach to data collection has fueled the design and development
of distributed or federated RL algorithms that can collaboratively learn the optimal policy without
actually transferring the collected data to a centralized server. Such a federated approach to RL, which
does not require the transfer of local data, is gaining interest due to lower bandwidth requirements
and lower security and privacy risks. In this work, we focus on federated variants of Q-learning
algorithms where the agents collaborate to directly learn the optimal Q-function without forming an
estimate of the underlying unknown environment.
A particularly important aspect of designing Federated RL algorithms, including Federated Q-learning
algorithms, is to address the natural tension between sample and communication complexity. At
one end of the spectrum lies the naïve approach of running a centralized algorithm with optimal
sample complexity after transferring and combining all the collected data at a central facility/server.
Such an approach trivially achieves the optimal sample complexity while suffering from a very
high and infeasible communication complexity. On the other hand, several recently proposed
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

