A Globally Optimal Portfolio for m-Sparse Sharpe
Ratio Maximization
Yizun Lin1

Zhao-Rong Lai1∗
Cheng Li1
Department of Mathematics
College of Information Science and Technology
Jinan University, Guangzhou, China
{linyizun,laizhr}@jnu.edu.cn
licheng@stu2020.jnu.edu.cn
1

Abstract
The Sharpe ratio is an important and widely-used risk-adjusted return in financial
engineering. In modern portfolio management, one may require an m-sparse
(no more than m active assets) portfolio to save managerial and financial costs.
However, few existing methods can optimize the Sharpe ratio with the m-sparse
constraint, due to the nonconvexity and the complexity of this constraint. We
propose to convert the m-sparse fractional optimization problem into an equivalent
m-sparse quadratic programming problem. The semi-algebraic property of the
resulting objective function allows us to exploit the Kurdyka-Łojasiewicz property
to develop an efficient Proximal Gradient Algorithm (PGA) that leads to a portfolio
which achieves the globally optimal m-sparse Sharpe ratio under certain conditions.
The convergence rates of PGA are also provided. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first proposal that achieves a globally optimal m-sparse Sharpe ratio with
a theoretically-sound guarantee.

1

Introduction

The Sharpe ratio (SR) [33] is an important and widely-used performance metric in finance. Suppose
an investing strategy is represented by a portfolio w ∈ RN of N assets from a financial market.
µ ∈ RN and Σ ∈ RN ×N denote the expected return vector (in excess of the risk-free
rate) and its
√
covariance matrix for the N assets, respectively. It can be seen that w> µ and w> Σw represent
the expected return and its standard deviation (i.e., risk) for the portfolio w. The original definition
of SR is given as the follow quotient between return and risk:
w> µ
S0 (w) = √
.
(1.1)
w> Σw
Ever since the proposal of SR, how to maximize it becomes an attractive research topic. Ordinary
portfolio optimization methods based on either the mean-variance approach [5, 10] or the exponential
growth rate approach [22, 24] can reduce the portfolio risk and increase the portfolio return to some
extent [23], and hence improve the SR. On the other hand, direct SR optimization methods are
also proposed. Hung et al. [18], Yu and Xu [35] consider the SR as a differentiable function of
the portfolio, which can be solved via the augmented Lagrangian method. Pang [29] converts the
SR maximization under the self-financing and long-only constraints into a linear complementarity
problem, which can be solved via the Parametric Linear Complementarity Technique (PLCT) and the
principle pivoting algorithm [12]. Note that PLCT requires µi > 0 for at least some asset i in order
to be feasible.
∗

Correspondence to: Zhao-Rong Lai

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

