UniFL: Improve Latent Diffusion Model via Unified
Feedback Learning
Jiacheng Zhang1,2,‡ Jie Wu2,†,‡,∗ Yuxi Ren2 Xin Xia2 Huafeng Kuang2
Pan Xie2 Jiashi Li2 Xuefeng Xiao2
Weilin Huang2 Shilei Wen2 Lean Fu2 Guanbin Li1,3∗
1
3
Sun Yat-sen University 2 Bytedance Inc
Peng Cheng Laboratory
Project Page: https://uni-fl.github.io/

UniFL

Figure 1: Generated samples with 20 steps inference from stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0 optimized by
Unified Feedback Learning (UniFL). The last three images of the third row are generated with 4 steps.

Abstract
Latent diffusion models (LDM) have revolutionized text-to-image generation,
leading to the proliferation of various advanced models and diverse downstream
applications. However, despite these significant advancements, current diffusion
models still suffer from several limitations, including inferior visual quality, inadequate aesthetic appeal, and inefficient inference, without a comprehensive solution
in sight. To address these challenges, we present UniFL, a unified framework that
leverages feedback learning to enhance diffusion models comprehensively. UniFL
stands out as a universal, effective, and generalizable solution applicable to various
diffusion models, such as SD1.5 and SDXL. Notably, UniFL consists of three key
components: perceptual feedback learning, which enhances visual quality; decoupled feedback learning, which improves aesthetic appeal; and adversarial feedback
learning, which accelerates inference. In-depth experiments and extensive user
studies validate the superior performance of our method in enhancing generation
quality and inference acceleration. For instance, UniFL surpasses ImageReward
by 17% user preference in terms of generation quality and outperforms LCM and
SDXL Turbo by 57% and 20% general preference with 4-step inference.
∗

Corresponding authors: wujie10558@gmail.com ,liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn ; †: project lead ; ‡: Equal
Contribution. Work done during an internship at ByteDance.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

