Efficiently Learning Significant Fourier Feature Pairs
for Statistical Independence Testing

Yixin Ren1 , Yewei Xia1,4 , Hao Zhang3,∗ , Jihong Guan2,∗ , Shuigeng Zhou1,∗
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and School of
Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
3
SIAT, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China
4
Machine Learning Department, MBZUAI, Abu Dhabi, UAE
{yxren21, ywxia23}@m.fudan.edu.cn, h.zhang10@siat.ac.cn
jhguan@tongji.edu.cn, sgzhou@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose a novel method to efficiently learn significant Fourier feature pairs for
maximizing the power of Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) based
independence tests. We first reinterpret HSIC in the frequency domain, which
reveals its limited discriminative power due to the inability to adapt to specific
frequency-domain features under the current inflexible configuration. To remedy
this shortcoming, we introduce a module of learnable Fourier features, thereby
developing a new criterion. We then derive a finite sample estimate of the test
power by modeling the behavior of the criterion, thus formulating an optimization
objective for significant Fourier feature pairs learning. We show that this optimization objective can be computed in linear time (with respect to the sample size n),
which ensures fast independence tests. We also prove the convergence property
of the optimization objective and establish the consistency of the independence
tests. Extensive empirical evaluation on both synthetic and real datasets validates
our method’s superiority in effectiveness and efficiency, particularly in handling
high-dimensional data and dealing with large-scale scenarios.

1

Introduction

Testing for independence is a crucial and challenging task in machine learning and statistics, with
wide-range applications in causal inference [16, 31], feature selection [6] and deep learning [23, 42].
Its primary objective is to determine whether two random variables, X and Y are independent, based
on the observations of the underlying joint distribution PXY . While traditional independence tests,
such as Pearson’s correlation coefficient [9] and Kendall’s τ , can only detect monotonic relationships
between low-dimensional variables, more modern tests [26, 43, 7, 25, 27, 35, 19, 20] aim to deal
with complex non-linear interactions in much more challenging higher-dimensional space [45, 29].
One class of nonlinear dependence measures [3, 15] aims to capture distributional characteristics using
kernel embeddings [13], primarily derived from the cross-covariance operators in the reproducing
kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). Among them, Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) [14]
is the most popular one. It utilizes the squared Hilbert-Schmidt norm to detect dependence and
exhibits outstanding performance across various data contexts by choosing suitable kernels. On the
other hand, some other fundamental nonlinear dependence measures employ characteristic functions
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

