LLMCBench: Benchmarking Large Language Model
Compression for Efficient Deployment

Ge Yang1 , Changyi He1 , Jinyang Guo1∗, Jianyu Wu1 , Yifu Ding1 ,
Aishan Liu1 , Haotong Qin2 , Pengliang Ji3 , Xianglong Liu1
1
Beihang University 2 ETH Zurich 3 Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Although large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated their strong intelligence ability, the high demand for computation and storage hinders their practical
application. To this end, many model compression techniques are proposed to
increase the efficiency of LLMs. However, current researches only validate their
methods on limited models, datasets, metrics, etc, and still lack a comprehensive
evaluation under more general scenarios. So it is still a question of which model
compression approach we should use under a specific case. To mitigate this gap,
we present the Large Language Model Compression Benchmark (LLMCBench), a
rigorously designed benchmark with an in-depth analysis for LLM compression algorithms. We first analyze the actual model production requirements and carefully
design evaluation tracks and metrics. Then, we conduct extensive experiments and
comparison using multiple mainstream LLM compression approaches. Finally, we
perform an in-depth analysis based on the evaluation and provide useful insight for
LLM compression design. We hope our LLMCBench can contribute insightful suggestions for LLM compression algorithm design and serve as a foundation for future
research. Our code is available at https://github.com/AboveParadise/LLMCBench.

1

Introduction

Recently, large language models (LLMs) have attracted increasing attention because of their strong
intelligence ability. While it achieves excellent performance, the huge computation and storage
burden hinders the practical usage of these LLMs. To solve this problem, many model compression
techniques specifically designed for efficient LLMs have been proposed in recent years, including
sparsification [6, 35], quantization [46, 33], knowledge distillation [8], and so on.
Among these compression technologies, sparsification and quantization are two mainstream approaches for LLM compression, and most LLM compression methods recently proposed belong to
these two categories. However, existing LLM compression works are still far away from practical
usage due to two main challenges:
Challenge-1: Performance evaluation scope is limited. The emergence of large language models is
less than two years, and this is still an active research area now. Following this trend, new types of
LLMs have surged quickly in recent years. It causes a problem that the current LLM compression
researches often use different types of LLMs for evaluation, which cannot form a fair comparison
between different methods. For example, the classic quantization method SmoothQuant [46] uses
OPT [49], BLOOM [21], and GLM [5] as the base model for evaluation, while the latter approach
OmniQuant [33] utilizes LLaMA [38] for evaluation. The evaluation protocol can be very different
between different methods. Moreover, even the base model performance is different in current
works. For example, the perplexity of LLaMA-7B in sparsity method LLM-Pruner [27] is 12.62,
∗

Corresponding Author: Jinyang Guo <jinyangguo@buaa.edu.cn>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

