ODGEN: Domain-specific Object Detection Data
Generation with Diffusion Models
Jingyuan Zhu1
1

Shiyu Li2 Yuxuan Liu2 Jian Yuan1
Jiulong Shan2 Huimin Ma3∗
2

Tsinghua University, China

motorcycle
motorcycle

motorcycle
car

3

Apple

University of Science and Technology Beijing

echinus

car

crosswalk

Ping Huang2

scallop

car

scallop holothurian

starfish

motorcycle

‘motorcycles
in a traffic scene’

‘scallops and a holothurian
in an underwater scene’

‘cars and crosswalks
in a traffic scene’

penguin
object
negative

penguin
avatar

‘an echinus and a starfish
in an underwater scene’

penguin
starfish

penguin

avatar
shark

‘a negative area
in an MRI image’

‘an avatar and an object
in a screen shot of the Apex game’

‘penguins
in a photo of aquarium’

‘a starfish and a shark
in a photo of aquarium’

Figure 1: The proposed ODGEN enables controllable image generation from bounding boxes and
text prompts. It can generate high-quality data for complex scenes, encompassing multiple categories,
dense objects, and occlusions, which can be used to enrich the training data for object detection.
avatar avatar

avatar

Abstract

Modern diffusion-based image generative models have made significant progress
and become promising to enrich training data for the object detection task. However,
the generation quality and the controllability for complex scenes containing multiclass objects and dense objects with occlusions remain limited. This paper presents
ODGEN, a novel method to generate high-quality images conditioned on bounding
boxes, thereby facilitating data synthesis for object detection. Given a domainspecific object detection dataset, we first fine-tune a pre-trained diffusion model
on both cropped foreground objects and entire images to fit target distributions.
Then we propose to control the diffusion model using synthesized visual prompts
with spatial constraints and object-wise textual descriptions. ODGEN exhibits
robustness in handling complex scenes and specific domains. Further, we design a
dataset synthesis pipeline to evaluate ODGEN on 7 domain-specific benchmarks to
demonstrate its effectiveness. Adding training data generated by ODGEN improves
up to 25.3% mAP@.50:.95 with object detectors like YOLOv5 and YOLOv7,
outperforming prior controllable generative methods. In addition, we design an
evaluation protocol based on COCO-2014 to validate ODGEN in general domains
and observe an advantage up to 5.6% in mAP@.50:.95 against existing methods.

1

Introduction

Object detection is one of the most widely used computer vision tasks in real-world applications.
However, data scarcity poses a significant challenge to the performance of state-of-the-art models
∗

H. Ma is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

