A Simple Remedy for Dataset Bias via Self-Influence:
A Mislabeled Sample Perspective
Yeonsung Jung*1 , Jaeyun Song*1 , June Yong Yang1
Jin-Hwa Kim2,3 , Sung-Yub Kim1 , Eunho Yang1,4
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, 2 NAVER AI Lab
3
Seoul National University, 4 AITRICS
{ys.jung, mercery}@kaist.ac.kr1

Abstract
Learning generalized models from biased data is an important undertaking toward
fairness in deep learning. To address this issue, recent studies attempt to identify
and leverage bias-conflicting samples free from spurious correlations without prior
knowledge of bias or an unbiased set. However, spurious correlation remains an
ongoing challenge, primarily due to the difficulty in precisely detecting these
samples. In this paper, inspired by the similarities between mislabeled samples
and bias-conflicting samples, we approach this challenge from a novel perspective
of mislabeled sample detection. Specifically, we delve into Influence Function,
one of the standard methods for mislabeled sample detection, for identifying
bias-conflicting samples and propose a simple yet effective remedy for biased
models by leveraging them. Through comprehensive analysis and experiments on
diverse datasets, we demonstrate that our new perspective can boost the precision
of detection and rectify biased models effectively. Furthermore, our approach is
complementary to existing methods, showing performance improvement even when
applied to models that have already undergone recent debiasing techniques.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have demonstrated remarkable performance in various fields of machine
learning tasks comparable to or superior to humans on well-curated benchmark datasets [7, 4, 60, 14].
Nevertheless, the efficacy of these models trained on unfiltered, real-world data remains an open
question. In this scenario, a significant concern arises due to the presence of dataset bias [52], where
task-irrelevant attributes are spuriously correlated with labels only in the training set. This can lead to
models that rely on misleading correlations rather than learning the task-related features, resulting in
biased models with poor generalization performance [62, 10].
To prevent models from learning detrimental bias, various methods are proposed to encourage
models to prioritize learning task-relevant features. Recent studies enhance task-related features
by first identifying bias-conflicting (unbiased) samples through loss [40, 36], gradients [1], or bias
prediction techniques [35] during training, using an auxiliary biased model trained with Empirical Risk
Minimization (ERM). Then, they amplify bias-conflicting samples by counteracting the bias-aligned
(biased) samples through loss weighting [40] or weighted sampling [35]. The effectiveness of such
methods largely depends on their precision of bias-conflicting sample detection. Specifically, there is
a risk of erroneously amplifying malignant bias instead of task-relevant features when bias-aligned
samples are inaccurately identified as bias-conflicting. Due to the limited detection performance of
previous methods [40, 36, 1, 35], it presents a crucial challenge that remains unresolved.
*Equal contribution.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

