Self-Retrieval: End-to-End Information Retrieval
with One Large Language Model

Qiaoyu Tang1,2∗, Jiawei Chen1,2∗, Zhuoqun Li1,2 , Bowen Yu3 , Yaojie Lu1 , Cheng Fu3 ,
Haiyang Yu3 , Hongyu Lin1†, Fei Huang3 , Ben He1,2 , Xianpei Han1†, Le Sun1 , Yongbin Li3†
1
Chinese Information Processing Laboratory, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Alibaba Group
{tangqiaoyu2020,jiawei2020,lizhuoqun2021}@iscas.ac.cn
{luyaojie,hongyu,xianpei,sunle}@iscas.ac.cn
{yubowen.ybw,fucheng.fuc,yifei.yhy,f.huang,shuide.lyb}@alibaba-inc.com
benhe@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
The rise of large language models (LLMs) has signiﬁcantly transformed both
the construction and application of information retrieval (IR) systems. However,
current interactions between IR systems and LLMs remain limited, with LLMs
merely serving as part of components within IR systems, and IR systems being
constructed independently of LLMs. This separated architecture restricts knowledge sharing and deep collaboration between them. In this paper, we introduce
Self-Retrieval, a novel end-to-end LLM-driven information retrieval architecture.
Self-Retrieval uniﬁes all essential IR functions within a single LLM, leveraging the inherent capabilities of LLMs throughout the IR process. Speciﬁcally,
Self-Retrieval internalizes the retrieval corpus through self-supervised learning,
transforms the retrieval process into sequential passage generation, and performs
relevance assessment for reranking. Experimental results demonstrate that SelfRetrieval not only outperforms existing retrieval approaches by a signiﬁcant margin, but also substantially enhances the performance of LLM-driven downstream
applications like retrieval-augmented generation. 3

1

Introduction

Recently, information retrieval (IR) systems and large language models (LLMs) have witnessed a
growing synergy, with advancements in one ﬁeld driving progress in the other [13, 56]. On one
hand, IR systems have proven effective in augmenting LLMs and mitigating challenges such as
hallucinations and outdated knowledge [22, 16]. By providing accurate, up-to-date external knowledge, IR systems signiﬁcantly enhance the reliability and performance of LLMs. On the other hand,
the powerful language understanding and generation capabilities of LLMs have been leveraged to
enhance almost all components of traditional IR systems–indexing, retrieval [42, 9, 26], and reranking [58, 27, 40]. Through the integration of LLMs into the IR pipeline, these systems achieve
substantially improved retrieval accuracy [57, 1].
However, current IR systems typically adopt a pipeline architecture where different components
operate in isolation, limiting LLMs’ role to speciﬁc components rather than leveraging their full
∗

Equally Contribution.
Corresponding authors.
3
The code of this work is available at https://github.com/icip-cas/SelfRetrieval.

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

