Dynamic Service Fee Pricing under Strategic Behavior:
Actions as Instruments and Phase Transition
Rui Ai
MIT
ruiai@mit.edu

David Simchi-Levi
MIT
dslevi@mit.edu
Feng Zhu
MIT
fengzhu@mit.edu

Abstract
We study a dynamic pricing problem for third-party platform service fees under
strategic, far-sighted customers. In each time period, the platform sets a service
fee based on historical data, observes the resulting transaction quantities, and
collects revenue. The platform also monitors equilibrium prices influenced by
both demand and supply. The objective is to maximize total revenue over a time
horizon T . Our problem incorporates three practical challenges: (a) initially,
the platform lacks knowledge of the demand side beforehand, necessitating a
balance between exploring (learning the demand curve) and exploiting (maximizing
revenue) simultaneously; (b) since only equilibrium prices and quantities are
observable, traditional Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) estimators would be biased
and inconsistent; (c) buyers are rational and strategic, seeking to maximize their
consumer surplus and potentially misrepresenting their preferences. To address
these challenges, we propose novel algorithmic solutions. Our approach involves:
(i) a carefully designed active randomness injection to balance exploration and
exploitation effectively; (ii) using non-i.i.d. actions as instrumental variables (IV)
to consistently estimate demand; (iii) a low-switching cost design that√promotes
nearly truthful buyer behavior. We show an expected regret bound of e
O( T ∧ σS−2 )
and demonstrate its optimality, up to logarithmic factors, with respect to both the
time horizon T and the randomness in supply σS . Despite its simplicity, our
model offers valuable insights into the use of actions as estimation instruments, the
benefits of low-switching pricing policies in mitigating strategic buyer behavior,
and the role of supply randomness in facilitating exploration which leads to a phase
transition of policy performance.

1

Introduction

A large number of transactions nowadays take place on third-party platforms, such as shopping
on Amazon, taking rides on Uber, and ordering takeout food on DoorDash [33, 39]. For these
platforms, deciding how to set the service fee is an important issue [35, 40, 49] that not only affects
the platform’s short-term revenue but also impacts long-term user retention. Therefore, understanding
buyers’ demand curve is of significant importance for platforms aiming to maximize their revenue.
Example 1.1. As an illustrative example, as a ride-hailing platform, Uber possesses information
on the supply side (drivers), specifically the number of drivers available on the road at any given
moment. Simultaneously, when buyers (passengers) request a ride, it matches drivers with passengers
and charges a certain fee. Uber charges a booking fee for each reservation. Over a certain time period,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

