Score Distillation via Reparametrized DDIM

Artem Lukoianov1
Kristjan Greenewald3

Haitz Sáez de Ocáriz Borde2

Vitor Campagnolo Guizilini4

Vincent Sitzmann1
1

Timur Bagautdinov5

Justin Solomon1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 University of Oxford 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM
Research 4 Toyota Research Institute 5 Meta Reality Labs Research
https://lukoianov.com/sdi/

Abstract
While 2D diffusion models generate realistic, high-detail images, 3D shape generation methods like Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) built on these 2D diffusion
models produce cartoon-like, over-smoothed shapes. To help explain this discrepancy, we show that the image guidance used in Score Distillation can be
understood as the velocity field of a 2D denoising generative process, up to the
choice of a noise term. In particular, after a change of variables, SDS resembles
a high-variance version of Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models (DDIM) with
a differently-sampled noise term: SDS introduces noise i.i.d. randomly at each
step, while DDIM infers it from the previous noise predictions. This excessive
variance can lead to over-smoothing and unrealistic outputs. We show that a better
noise approximation can be recovered by inverting DDIM in each SDS update step.
This modification makes SDS’s generative process for 2D images almost identical
to DDIM. In 3D, it removes over-smoothing, preserves higher-frequency detail,
and brings the generation quality closer to that of 2D samplers. Experimentally,
our method achieves better or similar 3D generation quality compared to other
state-of-the-art Score Distillation methods, all without training additional neural
networks or multi-view supervision, and providing useful insights into relationship
between 2D and 3D asset generation with diffusion models.

a) DDIM (CFG=7.5)

b) 2D SDS (CFG=7.5) c) 2D ours (CFG = 7.5) d) 3D SDS (CFG=100) e) 3D ours (CFG=7.5)

Figure 1: Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) “distills” 3D shapes from 2D image generative models
like DDIM. While DDIM produces high-quality images (a), the same diffusion model, yields blurry
results with SDS in the task of 2D image generation (b); in 3D, SDS yields over-saturated and
simplified shapes (d). By replacing the noise term in SDS to agree with DDIM, our algorithm better
matches the quality of the diffusion model in 2D (c) and significantly improves 3D generation (e).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

