Queueing Matching Bandits with Preference Feedback

Min-hwan Oh
Seoul National University
Seoul, South Korea
minoh@snu.ac.kr

Jung-hun Kim
Seoul National University
Seoul, South Korea
junghunkim@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
In this study, we consider multi-class multi-server asymmetric queueing systems
consisting of N queues on one side and K servers on the other side, where jobs randomly arrive in queues at each time. The service rate of each job-server assignment
is unknown and modeled by a feature-based Multi-nomial Logit (MNL) function.
At each time, a scheduler assigns jobs to servers, and each server stochastically
serves at most one job based on its preferences over the assigned jobs. The primary
goal of the algorithm is to stabilize the queues in the system while learning the
service rates of servers. To achieve this goal, we propose algorithms based on
UCB and Thompson Sampling, which achieve system stability with an average
queue length bound of O(min{N, K}/ϵ) for a large time horizon T , where ϵ is
a traffic slackness of the √
system. Furthermore, the algorithms achieve sublinear
e
regret bounds of O(min{
T Qmax , T 3/4 }), where Qmax represents the maximum
queue length over agents and times. Lastly, we provide experimental results to
demonstrate the performance of our algorithms.

1

Introduction

Multi-class multi-server queueing systems, which have been extensively studied by [20, 19, 37, 8, 4],
are motivated by real-world applications such as ride-hailing platforms, where riders are assigned to
drivers. Other examples are online job markets, where applicants are recommended for employment,
and online labor service markets, where tasks are recommended to freelance workers. In these
systems, there are two sides: queues (agents) on one side and servers (arms) on the other. At each
time step, jobs stochastically arrive in multiple queues and are then assigned to multiple servers by a
matchmaking or scheduler algorithm to stabilize the systems. Importantly, the previous work assumes
that the service rates for each server are known for scheduling jobs.
However, real-world observations reveal that the service rate may not be known beforehand. Therefore,
learning the service rates associated with the stochastic behavior of servers is essential for real-world
applications. Furthermore, the behavior of servers may depend on their (relative) preferences
over assigned jobs. For example, in ride-hailing platforms where there are riders and drivers, the
preferences of drivers over riders (not necessarily based on personal information but rather a rider’s
pick-up location, destination, etc.) may not be known in advance to riders or even the systems,
necessitating the learning of drivers’ preferences through preference feedback over assigned riders.
Learning service rates in an online manner, based on partial feedback from each scheduling, is
highly associated with multi-armed bandit problems [33]. These problems are fundamental sequential
learning tasks where, for queueing systems, a job is assigned to a server and receives feedback on
whether the job is served or not. The utilization of bandit strategies for queueing systems has been
recently studied by Choudhury et al. [12], Stahlbuhk et al. [48], Gaitonde and Tardos [17]; Freund
et al. [15], Hsu et al. [22], Krishnasamy et al. [30, 31, 32], Sentenac et al. [46], Yang et al. [52], Huang
et al. [23], which primary focus is naturally on establishing stability of the systems while learning
service rates.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

