R EBORN: Reinforcement-Learned Boundary
Segmentation with Iterative Training
for Unsupervised ASR

Liang-Hsuan Tseng∗ En-Pei Hu∗ Cheng-Han Chiang Yuan Tseng
Hung-yi Lee Lin-shan Lee Shao-Hua Sun
National Taiwan University

Abstract
Unsupervised automatic speech recognition (ASR) aims to learn the mapping
between the speech signal and its corresponding textual transcription without the
supervision of paired speech-text data. A word/phoneme in the speech signal
is represented by a segment of speech signal with variable length and unknown
boundary, and this segmental structure makes learning the mapping between speech
and text challenging, especially without paired data. In this paper, we propose
R EBORN, Reinforcement-Learned Boundary Segmentation with Iterative Training
for Unsupervised ASR. R EBORN alternates between (1) training a segmentation
model that predicts the boundaries of the segmental structures in speech signals
and (2) training the phoneme prediction model, whose input is the speech feature
segmented by the segmentation model, to predict a phoneme transcription. Since
supervised data for training the segmentation model is not available, we use reinforcement learning to train the segmentation model to favor segmentations that
yield phoneme sequence predictions with a lower perplexity. We conduct extensive
experiments and find that under the same setting, R EBORN outperforms all prior
unsupervised ASR models on LibriSpeech, TIMIT, and five non-English languages
in Multilingual LibriSpeech. We comprehensively analyze why the boundaries
learned by R EBORN improve the unsupervised ASR performance.

1

Introduction

Automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems convert speech signals into their transcription texts.
Most state-of-the-art ASR systems are trained with dense supervision using a large amount of labeled
speech-text paired data [10, 52]. However, more than 80% of languages in the world have limited
access to speech-text paired data [51], and collecting such paired data requires intensive labor and
costs, fundamentally limiting the applicability of supervised ASR systems to these languages. This
leads to significant efforts devoted to developing unsupervised ASR (UASR) systems, which aim to
learn the mapping between speech signals and textual transcriptions (words or phonemes) without
any speech-text pairs [4, 11, 18, 30, 33].
UASR models learn to align the distribution of input speech signal and output text without paired
data. Learning to match two distributions of sequences unsupervisedly has been extensively studied
in unsupervised neural machine translation (NMT) [1], where the aim is to learn a neural network
that can translate text in a source language to text in a target language without paired data [26, 27].
Prior works show that adversarial training [20] can be used to learn such mappings [26, 27], which
employs a generator learning to translate, and a discriminator learning to distinguish generated text
from the real text in the target language.
∗

Equal contribution.

Correspondence to: Shao-Hua Sun <shaohuas@ntu.edu.tw>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

