CLUES: Collaborative Private-domain High-quality
Data Selection for LLMs via Training Dynamics

Wanru Zhao 1∗, Hongxiang Fan2,1 , Shell Xu Hu 3 , Bofan Chen 1 , Nicholas D. Lane1,4
1
2
University of Cambridge, UK
Imperial College London, UK
3
Samsung AI Center Cambridge 4 Flower Labs

Abstract
Recent research has highlighted the importance of data quality in scaling large
language models (LLMs). However, automated data quality control faces unique
challenges in collaborative settings where sharing is not allowed directly between
data silos. To tackle this issue, this paper proposes a novel data quality control
technique based on the notion of data influence on the training dynamics of LLMs,
that high quality data are more likely to have similar training dynamics to the
anchor dataset. We then leverage the influence of the training dynamics to select
high-quality data from different private domains, with centralized model updates
on the server side in a collaborative training fashion by either model merging or
federated learning. As for the data quality indicator, we compute the per-sample
gradients with respect to the private data and the anchor dataset, and use the trace
of the accumulated inner products as a measurement of data quality. In addition,
we develop a quality control evaluation tailored for collaborative settings with
heterogeneous medical domain data. Experiments show that training on the highquality data selected by our method can often outperform other data selection
methods for collaborative fine-tuning of LLMs, across diverse private domain
datasets, in medical, multilingual and financial settings. Our code is released at
CLUES.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) training has predominantly relied on the accumulation of vast datasets.
Recent observations suggest that even a modest quantity of high-quality diverse data can significantly
enhance the instruction following capacity of LLMs. Previously, data quality control relied heavily
on manual selection processes [37, 36]. This approach, while being commonly used, rendered
scalability challenges due to the substantial labor costs. Recent advancements have seen automated
low-quality data filters [3], such as perplexity filters [29] and de-duplication filters [22]. However,
their effectiveness in data quality control in more complex environments remains to be explored,
where data are spread across silos and locations in different formats and difficult to find.
Collaborative training techniques, such as model merging [11] and federated learning [20], are
common paradigms for addressing data-sharing constraints and GDPR [28] compliance. However,
data quality control for private data is even more challenging if users are in charge of manually
filtering data. We summarize here the two unique challenges: (1) Quality Heterogeneity Some
clients may possess a higher proportion of low-quality data compared to others, thus we should not
select data from all clients with a fixed selection ratio. (2) Domain Heterogeneity Different data
silos may come from different vertical domains, for example, in the multilingual setting, different
languages have different quality standards that are never unified.
∗

Corresponding Author: Wanru Zhao (wz341@cam.ac.uk)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

