S-SOS: Stochastic Sum-Of-Squares for Parametric
Polynomial Optimization

Richard L. Zhu
Department of Computational and Applied Mathematics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
richardzhu@uchicago.edu
Mathias Oster ∗
Institute of Geometry and Practical Mathematics
RWTH Aachen
Aachen, Germany
oster@igpm.rwth-aachen.de
Yuehaw Khoo
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
yuehaw.khoo@uchicago.edu

Abstract
Global polynomial optimization is an important tool across applied mathematics,
with many applications in operations research, engineering, and the physical sciences. In various settings, the polynomials depend on external parameters that
may be random. We discuss a stochastic sum-of-squares (S-SOS) algorithm based
on the sum-of-squares hierarchy that constructs a series of semidefinite programs
to jointly find strict lower bounds on the global minimum and extract candidates
for parameterized global minimizers. We prove quantitative convergence of the
hierarchy as the degree increases and use it to solve unconstrained and constrained
polynomial optimization problems parameterized by random variables. By employing n-body priors from condensed matter physics to induce sparsity, we can
use S-SOS to produce solutions and uncertainty intervals for sensor network localization problems containing up to 40 variables and semidefinite matrix sizes
surpassing 800 × 800.

1

Introduction

Many effective nonlinear and nonconvex optimization techniques use local information to identify
local minima. But it is often the case that we want to find global optima. Sum-of-squares (SOS)
optimization is a powerful and general technique in this setting.
The core idea is as follows: suppose we are given polynomials g1 , . . . , gm , f where each function
is on Rn → R and we seek to determine the minimum value of f on the closed set S: S = {x ∈
Rn | gi (x) ≥ 0 ∀ i = 1, . . . , m}. Our optimization problem is then to find inf x∈Rn {f (x)|x ∈ S}.
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

