S2FT: Efficient, Scalable and Generalizable LLM
Fine-tuning by Structured Sparsity
Xinyu Yang1 , Jixuan Leng1 , Geyang Guo2 , Jiawei Zhao3 , Ryumei Nakada4 ,
Linjun Zhang4 , Huaxiu Yao5 , Beidi Chen1
1
2
CMU, Georgia Tech, 3 Caltech, 4 Rutgers, 5 UNC-Chapel Hill
xinyuya2, beidic@andrew.cmu.edu
https://infini-ai-lab.github.io/S2FT-Page

Abstract
Current PEFT methods for LLMs can achieve high quality, efficient training, or
scalable serving, but not all three simultaneously. To address this limitation, we
investigate sparse fine-tuning and observe a remarkable improvement in generalization ability. Utilizing this key insight, we propose a family of Structured Sparse
Fine-Tuning (S2 FT) methods for LLMs, which concurrently achieve state-of-theart fine-tuning performance, training efficiency, and inference scalability. S2 FT
accomplishes this by “selecting sparsely and computing densely”. Based on the
coupled structures in LLMs, S2 FT selects a few attention heads and channels in
the MHA and FFN modules for each Transformer block, respectively. Next, it
co-permutes the weight matrices on both sides of all coupled structures to connect
the selected subsets in each layer into a dense submatrix. Finally, S2 FT performs
in-place gradient updates on all selected submatrices. Through theoretical analyses
and empirical results, our method prevents forgetting while simplifying optimization, delivers SOTA performance on both commonsense and arithmetic reasoning
with 4.6% and 1.3% average improvements compared to LoRA, and surpasses full
FT by 11.5% when generalizing to various domains after instruction tuning. Using
our partial back-propagation algorithm, S2 FT saves training memory up to 3× and
improves latency by 1.5-2.7× compared to full FT, while achieving an average
10% improvement over LoRA on both metrics. We further demonstrate that the
weight updates in S2 FT can be decoupled into adapters, enabling effective fusion,
fast switch, and efficient parallelism when serving multiple fine-tuned models.

1

Introduction

Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved significant success [16, 1, 66]. With these
models being applied in diverse domains, full fine-tuning (FT) is commonly employed to enhance their
downstream capabilities [56, 6, 74]. However, retraining all parameters comes with three drawbacks:
(i) Full FT suffers from catastrophic forgetting, where a model forgets pre-trained knowledge while
acquiring new information [44, 8]. (ii) As the model and dataset sizes grow at scale, full FT becomes
increasingly computation-demanding and memory-intensive [70]. (iii) It is impractical to store and
serve thousands of fine-tuned LLMs on modern GPUs if each requires full parameter storage [81, 60].
Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods propose to address these bottlenecks by updating a
small fraction of parameters [21]. Rather than merely reducing the number of learnable parameters,
an ideal PEFT method should possess three key properties to be practically effective and efficient:
High Quality: It should exhibit both memorization and generalization capabilities, balancing the
acquisition of new information from fine-tuning tasks with the retention of pre-trained knowledge.
Efficient Training: It should minimize the memory footprint for model gradient and optimization
states, and further translate such memory efficiency into less computation and fine-tuning speedup.
Scalable Serving: It should avoid adding inference overhead when serving a single PEFT model. For
multiple models, new parameters should be partially stored as adapters to save memory, and allows
for effective fusion [78], fast switch [33], and efficient parallelism [60] among thousands of adapters.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

