Precipitation Downscaling
with Spatiotemporal Video Diffusion

Prakhar Srivastava1 Ruihan Yang1 Gavin Kerrigan1
Gideon Dresdner2
2
2
Jeremy McGibbon
Christopher Bretherton
Stephan Mandt1
1
University of California, Irvine 2 Allen Institute for AI, Seattle
{prakhs2,ruihan.yang,gavin.k,mandt}@uci.edu
{gideond,jeremym,christopherb}@allenai.org

Abstract
In climate science and meteorology, high-resolution local precipitation (rain and
snowfall) predictions are limited by the computational costs of simulation-based
methods. Statistical downscaling, or super-resolution, is a common workaround
where a low-resolution prediction is improved using statistical approaches. Unlike
traditional computer vision tasks, weather and climate applications require capturing the accurate conditional distribution of high-resolution given low-resolution
patterns to assure reliable ensemble averages and unbiased estimates of extreme
events, such as heavy rain. This work extends recent video diffusion models to
precipitation super-resolution, employing a deterministic downscaler followed
by a temporally-conditioned diffusion model to capture noise characteristics and
high-frequency patterns. We test our approach on FV3GFS output, an established
large-scale global atmosphere model, and compare it against six state-of-the-art
baselines. Our analysis, capturing CRPS, MSE, precipitation distributions, and
qualitative aspects using California and the Himalayas as examples, establishes our
method as a new standard for data-driven precipitation downscaling.

1

Introduction

Figure 1: Static snapshot from the Spatiotemporal Video Diffusion (STVD) model, illustrating input
(left) and output (right) precipitation frames. The input panel displays simulated coarse-resolution
precipitation (rain, snow) fields (Section 3), super-resolved into the high-resolution output shown in
the right panel. Both frames use Robinson projection and cover six tiles of the cubed-sphere grid,
providing a detailed global view (optimal viewing with zoom). For dynamics, see Fig. 3.
Precipitation patterns are central to human and natural life. In a rapidly warming climate, reliable
simulations of changing precipitation patterns can help adapt to climate change. However, these
simulations are challenging due to the multi-scale variability of weather systems and the influence
of complex surface features (like mountains and coastlines) on precipitation trends and extremes
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

