Efficient Policy Evaluation Across Multiple Different
Experimental Datasets

Alexis Bellot˚:
Independent Researcher
abellot@gmail.com

Yonghan Jung˚
Purdue University
jung222@purdue.edu

Abstract
Artificial intelligence systems are trained combining various observational and
experimental datasets from different source sites, and are increasingly used to
reason about the effectiveness of candidate policies. One common assumption
in this context is that the data in source and target sites (where the candidate
policy is due to be deployed) come from the same distribution. This assumption is
often violated in practice, causing challenges for generalization, transportability,
or external validity. Despite recent advances for determining the identifiability of
the effectiveness of policies in a target domain, there are still challenges for the
accurate estimation of effects from finite samples. In this paper, we develop novel
graphical criteria and estimators for evaluating the effectiveness of policies (e.g.,
conditional, stochastic) by combining data from multiple experimental studies.
Asymptotic error analysis of our estimators provides fast convergence guarantee.
We empirically verified the robustness of estimators through simulations.

1

Introduction

In the empirical sciences, conclusions on the effect of actions or policies is often supported by evidence
drawn from prior observations and experiments. The conditions under which such inferences can
be formally justified can be traced back (in part) to Campbell, Stanley and Cook [10, 11, 14]. They
argued for a basic dichotomy in the kinds of questions that scientists seek to answer from experimental
data. On the one hand asking whether “in fact, the experimental stimulus made some significant
difference in this specific instance?”, and on the other hand asking “to what populations, settings, and
treatments can this effect be generalized?” [10, p. 297]. These inferences have since been labelled as
internal validity and external validity, respectively.
External validity is concerned with the extent to which findings from one population can be “reprocessed”, or “re-calibrated” so as to circumvent population differences and produce valid generalizations in a target population where experiments cannot be performed (e.g., outside the laboratory,
different domains, etc.). The validity of these inferences will necessarily be contingent on a careful
analysis to ascertain the commonalities and differences between domains as, for example, if the
target domain is completely arbitrary generalization is impossible. In the causal transportability
literature, the basis for generalization (also called transportability) is justified by the stability and
invariance of the causal mechanisms shared across populations and domains [20, 32]. Several graphical characterizations exist to delineate the conditions under which transportability is possible, with
recent algorithms proposing solutions for general instances of the external validity task combining
observational and experimental distributions under partial observability [36, 2, 3, 16, 30].
˚

Equal contribution. Correspondence to Yonghan Jung: jung222@purdue.edu.
Now at Google DeepMind. Work done partly while affiliated with Columbia University and partly in an
independent capacity.
:

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

