The Selective G-Bispectrum and its Inversion:
Applications to G-Invariant Networks
Simon Mataigne∗
ICTEAM, UCLouvain
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
simon.mataigne@uclouvain.be
Sophia Sanborn
Science
San Francisco, CA
sophiasanborn@gmail.com

Johan Mathe
Atmo
San Francisco, CA
johan@atmo.ai

Christopher Hillar
Algebraic
San Francisco, CA
hillarmath@gmail.com

Nina Miolane†
UC Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA
ninamiolane@ucsb.edu

Abstract
An important problem in signal processing and deep learning is to achieve invariance to nuisance factors not relevant for the task. Since many of these factors
are describable as the action of a group G (e.g., rotations, translations, scalings),
we want methods to be G-invariant. The G-Bispectrum extracts every characteristic of a given signal up to group action: for example, the shape of an object
in an image, but not its orientation. Consequently, the G-Bispectrum has been
incorporated into deep neural network architectures as a computational primitive
for G-invariance—akin to a pooling mechanism, but with greater selectivity and
robustness. However, the computational cost of the G-Bispectrum (O(|G|2 ), with
|G| the size of the group) has limited its widespread adoption. Here, we show that
the G-Bispectrum computation contains redundancies that can be reduced into a
selective G-Bispectrum with O(|G|) complexity. We prove desirable mathematical
properties of the selective G-Bispectrum and demonstrate how its integration in neural networks enhances accuracy and robustness compared to traditional approaches,
while enjoying considerable speeds-up compared to the full G-Bispectrum.

1

Introduction

The visual world is rich with symmetries. For example, the identity of an object is invariant to its
position in the visual field; vision has translational symmetry. Group theory is the mathematics used
to describe transformations, their actions on objects, and the object’s symmetry. As such, group
theory has penetrated the fields of signal processing and deep learning alike. For example, the Fourier
transform, pillar of signal processing, has been adapted to the G-Fourier transform, with its spectrum
decomposing a signal defined over a group into several frequencies. More recently, researchers
have become interested in the properties of higher-order spectra such as the Bispectrum, and its
generalization to signals over groups via the G-Bispectrum.
G-Bispectrum The G-Bispectrum is the Fourier transform of the G-Triple Correlation (G-TC).
Historically, higher-order spectra found initial applications in the context of classical signal processing
as generalizations of the two-point autocorrelation [31, 2, 25]. The work of Kakarala [15] illuminated
∗
†

Simon Mataigne is a Research Fellow of the Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique - FNRS.
Nina Miolane acknowledges funding from the NSF grant 2313150.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

