Drift-Resilient TabPFN: In-Context Learning
Temporal Distribution Shifts on Tabular Data

Kai Helli∗,1,2 David Schnurr∗,1,3 Noah Hollmann1,4 Samuel Müller1 Frank Hutter5,1
1
University of Freiburg, 2 Technical University of Munich, 3 ETH Zurich,
4
Charité University Medicine Berlin, 5 ELLIS Institute Tübingen, ∗ Equal contribution.
Correspondence to kai.helli@tum.de

Abstract
While most ML models expect independent and identically distributed data, this
assumption is often violated in real-world scenarios due to distribution shifts,
resulting in the degradation of machine learning model performance. Until now,
no tabular method has consistently outperformed classical supervised learning,
which ignores these shifts. To address temporal distribution shifts, we present
Drift-Resilient TabPFN, a fresh approach based on In-Context Learning with a
Prior-Data Fitted Network that learns the learning algorithm itself: it accepts the
entire training dataset as input and makes predictions on the test set in a single
forward pass. Specifically, it learns to approximate Bayesian inference on synthetic
datasets drawn from a prior that specifies the model’s inductive bias. This prior is
based on structural causal models (SCM), which gradually shift over time. To model
shifts of these causal models, we use a secondary SCM, that specifies changes in the
primary model parameters. The resulting Drift-Resilient TabPFN can be applied to
unseen data, runs in seconds on small to moderately sized datasets and needs no
hyperparameter tuning. Comprehensive evaluations across 18 synthetic and realworld datasets demonstrate large performance improvements over a wide range of
baselines, such as XGB, CatBoost, TabPFN, and applicable methods featured in the
Wild-Time benchmark. Compared to the strongest baselines, it improves accuracy
from 0.688 to 0.744 and ROC AUC from 0.786 to 0.832 while maintaining stronger
calibration. This approach could serve as significant groundwork for further
research on out-of-distribution prediction.

1

Introduction

In traditional machine learning the train and test data are assumed to be sampled from the same
distribution [1]. However, this assumption of independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data
is commonly violated in real-world scenarios due to distribution shifts, resulting in performance
degradation of standard machine learning (ML) models over time [1, 2]. Research in the area of
temporal domain generalization (Temporal DG) tries to address these shifts by developing methods
that perform consistently across temporal domains and generalize beyond the training regimen, i.e.
into the future. In fields such as healthcare, climate science, or finance, data is most often organized
in a tabular format [3, 4]. Here shifts are driven by hidden variables such as policy or climate changes,
equipment updates, seasonal changes, or activity cycles, limiting real-world model deployment [2].
Young and Steele [5] describe declining mortality quantification in a hospital system while Pasterkamp
et al. [6] show deterioration of cardiovascular risk models over time, leading to increased mortality;
Ganesan et al. [7] show the COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated this issue, as ICU mortality prediction
models failed to adapt to the unique characteristics of COVID-19 patients; environmental models
need to continually adapt to climate changes [8]; fraud detection models need to continuously adapt
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

