Gradual Domain Adaptation via
Manifold-Constrained Distributionally Robust
Optimization

Amirhossein Saberi∗ ,§
Amir Najafi†
Amin Behjati†,‡
†
†
Yasaman Zolfi
Mahdi Shadrooy
Abolfazl Motahari†

Ala Emrani†,‡
Babak H. Khalaj∗,§

∗

Department of Electrical Engineering,
Department of Computer Engineering,
§ Sharif Center for Information Systems and Data Science,
Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran
†

Abstract
The aim of this paper is to address the challenge of gradual domain adaptation
within a class of manifold-constrained data distributions. In particular, we consider a sequence of T ≥ 2 data distributions P1 , . . . , PT undergoing a gradual
shift, where each pair of consecutive measures Pi , Pi+1 are close to each other
in Wasserstein distance. We have a supervised dataset of size n sampled from
P0 , while for the subsequent distributions in the sequence, only unlabeled i.i.d.
samples are available. Moreover, we assume that all distributions exhibit a known
favorable attribute, such as (but not limited to) having intra-class soft/hard margins. In this context, we propose a methodology rooted in Distributionally Robust
Optimization (DRO) with an adaptive Wasserstein radius. We theoretically show
that this method guarantees the classification error across all Pi s can be suitably
bounded. Our bounds rely on a newly introduced compatibility measure, which
fully characterizes the error propagation dynamics along the sequence. Specifically,
for inadequately constrained distributions, the error can exponentially escalate as
we progress through the gradual shifts. Conversely, for appropriately constrained
distributions, the error can be demonstrated to be linear or even entirely eradicated. We have substantiated our theoretical findings through several experimental
results.

1

Introduction

Gradual domain adaptation addresses a critical challenge in machine learning: the high cost and
impracticality of continually preparing labeled datasets for training ML models. Once an initial
labeled dataset is obtained through costly labor, machine learning models can use it to automatically
label future unlabeled datasets—a procedure called self-training. However, as these future datasets
experience gradual domain shifts from the original one, the initial dataset may become less effective,
necessitating renewed human effort. Gradual domain adaptation has been proposed to mitigate
this issue by learning a model on the initial dataset and then gradually adapting it to the future
unlabeled data in a sequential manner. Formally, we consider a sequence of datasets modeled via
empirical measures Pb0 , . . . , PbT , where Pb0 represents the initial labeled dataset and the remaining Pbi
are unlabeled. Here, T denotes the length of the sequence, and each Pbi is an empirical estimate of an
unknown distribution Pi based on ni i.i.d. samples. We assume that consecutive measures Pi and
∗
Emails: sah.saberi@ee.sharif.edu, {amir.najafi,motahari,khalaj}@sharif.edu. (‡) Authors
with equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

