FilterNet: Harnessing Frequency Filters for
Time Series Forecasting

Kun Yi1,2 , Jingru Fei3 , Qi Zhang4 , Hui He3 , Shufeng Hao5 , Defu Lian6 , Wei Fan7∗
1
North China Institute of Computing Technology, 2 State Information Center of China
3
Beijing Institute of Technology, 4 Tongji University, 5 Taiyuan University of Technology
6
University of Science and Technology of China, 7 University of Oxford
kunyi.cn@gmail.com, {jingrufei, hehui617}@bit.edu.cn, zhangqi_cs@tongji.edu.cn
haoshufeng@tyut.edu.cn, liandefu@ustc.edu.cn, weifan.oxford@gmail.com

Abstract
Given the ubiquitous presence of time series data across various domains, precise forecasting of time series holds significant importance and finds widespread
real-world applications such as energy, weather, healthcare, etc. While numerous forecasters have been proposed using different network architectures, the
Transformer-based models have state-of-the-art performance in time series forecasting. However, forecasters based on Transformers are still suffering from
vulnerability to high-frequency signals, efficiency in computation, and bottleneck
in full-spectrum utilization, which essentially are the cornerstones for accurately
predicting time series with thousands of points. In this paper, we explore a novel
perspective of enlightening signal processing for deep time series forecasting.
Inspired by the filtering process, we introduce one simple yet effective network,
namely FilterNet, built upon our proposed learnable frequency filters to extract key
informative temporal patterns by selectively passing or attenuating certain components of time series signals. Concretely, we propose two kinds of learnable filters
in the FilterNet: (i) Plain shaping filter, that adopts a universal frequency kernel for
signal filtering and temporal modeling; (ii) Contextual shaping filter, that utilizes
filtered frequencies examined in terms of its compatibility with input signals for
dependency learning. Equipped with the two filters, FilterNet can approximately
surrogate the linear and attention mappings widely adopted in time series literature,
while enjoying superb abilities in handling high-frequency noises and utilizing the
whole frequency spectrum that is beneficial for forecasting. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments on eight time series forecasting benchmarks, and experimental
results have demonstrated our superior performance in terms of both effectiveness
and efficiency compared with state-of-the-art methods. Our code is available at 1 .

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting has been playing a pivotal role across a multitude of contemporary applications,
spanning diverse domains such as climate analysis [1], energy production [2], traffic flow patterns [3],
financial markets [4], and various industrial systems [5]. The ubiquity and profound significance of
time series data has recently garnered substantial research efforts, culminating in a plethora of deep
learning forecasting models [6] that have significantly enhanced the domain of time series forecasting.
Previously, leveraging different kinds of deep neural networks derives a series of time series forecasting methods, such as Recurrent Neural Network-based methods including DeepAR [7], LSTNet [8],
∗
1

Corresponding author
https://github.com/aikunyi/FilterNet

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

