On the Inductive Bias of Stacking Towards
Improving Reasoning

Nikunj Saunshi∗
Google Research
nsaunshi@google.com
Sobhan Miryoosefi
Google Research
miryoosefi@google.com

Stefani Karp
Google Research
stefanik@google.com

Shankar Krishnan
Google Research
skrishnan@google.com

Sashank J. Reddi
Google Research
sashank@google.com

Sanjiv Kumar
Google Research
sanjivk@google.com

Abstract
Given the increasing scale of model sizes, efficient training strategies like gradual
stacking [Gong et al., 2019, Reddi et al., 2023] have garnered interest. Stacking
enables efficient training by gradually growing the depth of a model in stages
and using layers from a smaller model in an earlier stage to initialize the next
stage. Although efficient for training, the model biases induced by such growing
approaches are largely unexplored. In this work, we examine this fundamental
aspect of gradual stacking, going beyond its efficiency benefits. We propose a
variant of gradual stacking called M IDAS that can speed up language model training by up to 40%. Furthermore we discover an intriguing phenomenon: M IDAS
is not only training-efficient but surprisingly also has an inductive bias towards
improving downstream tasks, especially tasks that require reasoning abilities like
reading comprehension and math problems, despite having similar or slightly worse
perplexity compared to baseline training. To further analyze this inductive bias, we
construct reasoning primitives – simple synthetic tasks that are building blocks for
reasoning – and find that a model pretrained with stacking is significantly better
than standard pretraining on these primitives, with and without fine-tuning. This
provides stronger and more robust evidence for this inductive bias towards reasoning. These findings of training efficiency and inductive bias towards reasoning are
verified at 1B, 2B and 8B parameter language models. Finally, we conjecture the
underlying reason for this inductive bias by exploring the connection of stacking to
looped models and provide strong supporting empirical analysis.

1

Introduction

With the advent of very large deep learning models, efficient training to reduce the compute and
time requirements is becoming increasingly important. Along with efficient optimization procedures,
there has been a surge in interest to design efficient training strategies. One practical approach is
to use smaller models to initialize larger models. Usually, this results in much faster convergence
compared to vanilla training [Chen et al., 2022, 2016, Gong et al., 2019, Reddi et al., 2023, Wang
et al., 2023, Li et al., 2023, Kim et al., 2023, Yao et al., 2024, Wang et al., 2024]. Stacking and
growing based approaches have particularly gained traction recently. For instance, gradual stacking
[Reddi et al., 2023] is a prominent approach where in each stage the last few layers of the model
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

