On the Effects of Data Scale on
UI Control Agents
Wei Li1 , William Bishop1 , Alice Li1 , Chris Rawles1 , Folawiyo Campbell-Ajala1 ,
Divya Tyamagundlu2 , and Oriana Riva1
1

Google DeepMind
2
Google

Abstract
Autonomous agents that control user interfaces to accomplish human tasks are
emerging. Leveraging LLMs to power such agents has been of special interest,
but unless fine-tuned on human-collected task demonstrations, performance is
still relatively low. In this work we study whether fine-tuning alone is a viable
approach for building real-world UI control agents. To this end we collect and
release a new dataset, A NDROID C ONTROL, consisting of 15,283 demonstrations
of everyday tasks with Android apps. Compared to existing datasets, each A N DROID C ONTROL task instance includes both high and low-level human-generated
instructions, allowing us to explore the level of task complexity an agent can handle. Moreover, A NDROID C ONTROL is the most diverse UI control dataset to date,
including 14,548 unique tasks over 833 Android apps, thus allowing us to conduct
in-depth analysis of the model performance in and out of the domain of the training
data. Using the dataset, we find that when tested in domain fine-tuned models
outperform zero and few-shot baselines and scale in such a way that robust performance might feasibly be obtained simply by collecting more data. Out of domain,
performance scales significantly more slowly and suggests that in particular for
high-level tasks, fine-tuning on more data alone may be insufficient for achieving
robust out-of-domain performance.

1

Introduction

Recent work has studied how large language models (LLMs) can be leveraged to build UI control
agents [18, 43, 39, 17, 7] that accomplish human tasks by interacting with a digital device environment.
These agents perceive the state of the device by observing its screen (from screenshots or application
UI trees), and generate actions (click, type, scroll, etc.) that are executed through the device’s user
interface. Tasks, specified in natural language, can range from configuring device settings and sending
emails, to navigating shopping websites and planning a trip.
While progress is rapidly advancing, absolute performance of UI control agents that leverage pretrained LLMs without fine-tuning on task demonstrations is still relatively low. When tested in
real-world environments, where agents control everyday applications and websites, recently-reported
task success rates range from 12% on desktop applications [38] to 46% on mobile applications [3].
In contrast, agents that leverage models fine-tuned for task execution [25, 10], achieve even 80% [10]
success rate, when tested on websites and tasks similar to what they are trained on.
While the pattern of collecting new datasets and fine-tuning shows promise, there are at least two
important unanswered questions. First, to the best of our knowledge no prior work has examined
the question of scaling: how much data must be collected in order to obtain a given performance
level with fine-tuned models. This question is particularly important because human demonstrations
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

