Neuronal Competition Groups with Supervised STDP
for Spike-Based Classification
Gaspard Goupy1 , Pierre Tirilly1 , and Ioan Marius Bilasco1,*
1

Univ. Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France
*
Corresponding author: marius.bilasco@univ-lille.fr

Abstract
Spike Timing-Dependent Plasticity (STDP) is a promising substitute to backpropagation for local training of Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) on neuromorphic
hardware. STDP allows SNNs to address classification tasks by combining unsupervised STDP for feature extraction and supervised STDP for classification.
Unsupervised STDP is usually employed with Winner-Takes-All (WTA) competition to learn distinct patterns. However, WTA for supervised STDP classification
faces unbalanced competition challenges. In this paper, we propose a method to
effectively implement WTA competition in a spiking classification layer employing
first-spike coding and supervised STDP training. We introduce the Neuronal Competition Group (NCG), an architecture that improves classification capabilities by
promoting the learning of various patterns per class. An NCG is a group of neurons
mapped to a specific class, implementing intra-class WTA and a novel competition
regulation mechanism based on two-compartment thresholds. We incorporate our
proposed architecture into spiking classification layers trained with state-of-the-art
supervised STDP rules. On top of two different unsupervised feature extractors,
we obtain significant accuracy improvements on image recognition datasets such as
CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100. We show that our competition regulation mechanism
is crucial for ensuring balanced competition and improved class separation.

1

Introduction

Neuromorphic computing [1] with Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) [2] is a promising solution
to address the high energy consumption of Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) on von Neumann
architectures [3]. However, direct training of SNNs on neuromorphic hardware faces a major
constraint: implementing network-level communication is difficult and requires significant circuitry
overhead [4]. As a result, the learning mechanisms should be local, i.e., with weight updates based
only on the activity of the two neurons that the synapse connects.
Training SNNs to achieve state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance is typically accomplished with
adaptations of backpropagation (BP) [5, 6]. However, these methods are challenging to implement
on neuromorphic hardware since they employ non-local learning [4, 7]. In addition, they only rely
on supervised learning, making them highly dependent on labeled data. We believe that machine
learning algorithms should minimize this dependence on supervision by leveraging unsupervised
feature learning [8]. Hence, an appealing classification system may comprise both unsupervised and
supervised components, for feature extraction and classification, respectively.
Hebbian learning [9] is an unsupervised and local alternative to BP, inspired by the principal form
of plasticity observed in biological synapses. Specifically, Spike Timing-Dependent Plasticity
(STDP) [10] is a form of Hebbian learning where the time difference between the input and output
neuron spikes defines synaptic plasticity. STDP could solve all the aforementioned limitations of BP,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

