Truth is Universal: Robust Detection of Lies in LLMs
Lennart Bürger1 Fred A. Hamprecht1 Boaz Nadler2
IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany 2 Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel
lennart.buerger@stud.uni-heidelberg.de fred.hamprecht@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de
boaz.nadler@weizmann.ac.il
1

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionised natural language processing,
exhibiting impressive human-like capabilities. In particular, LLMs are capable
of "lying", knowingly outputting false statements. Hence, it is of interest and
importance to develop methods to detect when LLMs lie. Indeed, several authors
trained classifiers to detect LLM lies based on their internal model activations.
However, other researchers showed that these classifiers may fail to generalise, for
example to negated statements. In this work, we aim to develop a robust method to
detect when an LLM is lying. To this end, we make the following key contributions:
(i) We demonstrate the existence of a two-dimensional subspace, along which
the activation vectors of true and false statements can be separated. Notably, this
finding is universal and holds for various LLMs, including Gemma-7B, LLaMA213B, Mistral-7B and LLaMA3-8B. Our analysis explains the generalisation failures
observed in previous studies and sets the stage for more robust lie detection; (ii)
Building upon (i), we construct an accurate LLM lie detector. Empirically, our
proposed classifier achieves state-of-the-art performance, attaining 94% accuracy in
both distinguishing true from false factual statements and detecting lies generated
in real-world scenarios.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) exhibit impressive capabilities, some of which were once considered
unique to humans. However, among these capabilities is the concerning ability to lie and deceive,
defined as knowingly outputting false statements. Not only can LLMs be instructed to lie, but they
can also lie if there is an incentive, engaging in strategic deception to achieve their goal [Hagendorff,
2024, Park et al., 2024]. This behaviour appears even in models trained to be honest.
Scheurer et al. [2024] presented a case where several Large Language Models, including GPT-4,
strategically lied despite being trained to be helpful, harmless and honest. In their study, a LLM acted
as an autonomous stock trader in a simulated environment. When provided with insider information,
the model used this tip to make a profitable trade and then deceived its human manager by claiming
the decision was based on market analysis. "It’s best to maintain that the decision was based on
market analysis and avoid admitting to having acted on insider information," the model wrote in its
internal chain-of-thought scratchpad. In another example, GPT-4 pretended to be a vision-impaired
human to get a TaskRabbit worker to solve a CAPTCHA for it [Achiam et al., 2023].
Given the popularity of LLMs, robustly detecting when they are lying is an important and not yet
fully solved problem, with considerable research efforts invested over the past two years. A method
by Pacchiardi et al. [2023] relies purely on the outputs of the LLM, treating it as a black box. Other
approaches leverage access to the internal activations of the LLM. Several researchers have trained
classifiers on the internal activations to detect whether a given statement is true or false, using
both supervised [Dombrowski and Corlouer, 2024, Azaria and Mitchell, 2023] and unsupervised
techniques [Burns et al., 2023, Zou et al., 2023]. The supervised approach by Azaria and Mitchell
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

