Implicit Regularization Paths of
Weighted Neural Representations

Jin-Hong Du
Carnegie Mellon University

Pratik Patil
University of California Berkeley

jinhongd@andrew.cmu.edu

pratikpatil@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study the implicit regularization effects induced by (observation) weighting of
pretrained features. For weight and feature matrices of bounded operator norms
that are infinitesimally free with respect to (normalized) trace functionals, we
derive equivalence paths connecting different weighting matrices and ridge regularization levels. Specifically, we show that ridge estimators trained on weighted
features along the same path are asymptotically equivalent when evaluated against
test vectors of bounded norms. These paths can be interpreted as matching the
effective degrees of freedom of ridge estimators fitted with weighted features. For
the special case of subsampling without replacement, our results apply to independently sampled random features and kernel features and confirm recent conjectures
(Conjectures 7 and 8) of the authors on the existence of such paths in [50]. We
also present an additive risk decomposition for ensembles of weighted estimators
and show that the risks are equivalent along the paths when the ensemble size
goes to infinity. As a practical consequence of the path equivalences, we develop
an efficient cross-validation method for tuning and apply it to subsampled pretrained representations across several models (e.g., ResNet-50) and datasets (e.g.,
CIFAR-100).

1

Introduction

In recent years, neural networks have become state-of-the-art models for tasks in computer vision and
natural language processing by learning rich representations from large datasets. Pretrained neural
networks, such as ResNet, which are trained on massive datasets like ImageNet, serve as valuable
resources for new, smaller datasets [32]. These pretrained models reduce computational burden and
generalize well in tasks such as image classification and object detection due to their rich feature
space [32, 69]. Furthermore, pretrained features or neural embeddings, such as the neural tangent
kernel, extracted from these models, serve as valuable representations of diverse data [33, 66].
However, despite their usefulness, fitting models based on pretrained features on large datasets can
be challenging due to computational and memory constraints. When dealing with high-dimensional
pretrained features and large sample sizes, direct application of even simple linear regression may be
computationally infeasible or memory-prohibitive [23, 44]. To address this issue, subsampling has
emerged as a practical solution that reduces the dataset size, thereby alleviating the computational and
memory burden. Subsampling involves creating smaller datasets by randomly selecting a subset of the
original data points. Beyond these computational and memory advantages, subagging can also greatly
improve predictive performance in overparameterized regimes, especially near model interpolation
thresholds [53]. Moreover, through distributed learning, models fitted on multiple subsampled
datasets can be aggregated as an ensemble to provide more stable predictions [20, 21, 51].
There has been growing interest in understanding the effects of subsampling (without replacement)
[16, 25, 37, 50, 51]. These works relate subsampling to explicit ridge regularization, assuming either
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

