MTGS: A Novel Framework for Multi-Person
Temporal Gaze Following and Social Gaze Prediction

Anshul Gupta Samy Tafasca Arya Farkhondeh Pierre Vuillecard Jean-Marc Odobez
Idiap Research Institute, Martigny, Switzerland
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland
{agupta, stafasca, afarkhondeh, pvuillecard, odobez}@idiap.ch

Figure 1: Results of our multi-person and temporal transformer architecture for joint gaze following
and social gaze prediction, namely Looking at Humans (LAH), Looking at Each Other (LAEO), and
Shared Attention (SA). For each person, the social gaze predictions are listed with the associated
person ID (e.g. in frame 1, person 2 is in SA with person 4). More qualitative results can be found in
the supplementary G.

Abstract
Gaze following and social gaze prediction are fundamental tasks providing insights
into human communication behaviors, intent, and social interactions. Most previous
approaches addressed these tasks separately, either by designing highly specialized
social gaze models that do not generalize to other social gaze tasks or by considering
social gaze inference as an ad-hoc post-processing of the gaze following task.
Furthermore, the vast majority of gaze following approaches have proposed models
that can handle only one person at a time and are static, therefore failing to take
advantage of social interactions and temporal dynamics. In this paper, we address
these limitations and introduce a novel framework to jointly predict the gaze target
and social gaze label for all people in the scene. It comprises (i) a temporal,
transformer-based architecture that, in addition to frame tokens, handles personspecific tokens capturing the gaze information related to each individual; (ii) a new
dataset, VSGaze, built from multiple gaze following and social gaze datasets by
extending and validating head detections and tracks, and unifying annotation types.
We demonstrate that our model can address and benefit from training on all tasks
jointly, achieving state-of-the-art results for multi-person gaze following and social
gaze prediction. Our annotations and code will be made publicly available.

1

Introduction

Social interaction plays a pivotal role in our daily lives and is influenced by an array of behavioral
elements, encompassing not only verbal communication but also non-verbal cues like gestures (53) or
body language. In particular, the ability to decode people’s gaze, including communicative behaviors
like eye contact and shared attention on a particular object, is highly related to our capacity to connect
with or learn from others (44). In contrast, the absence or impairment of these skills is often indicative
of developmental disorders such as autism (42). Thus, designing social gaze prediction algorithms
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

