Conformalized Multiple Testing after Data-dependent
Selection
Xiaoning Wang1∗ Yuyang Huo1∗ Liuhua Peng2† Changliang Zou1†
1
School of Statistics and Data Sciences, LPMC, KLMDASR and LEBPS,
Nankai University, Tianjin, China
2
School of Mathematics and Statistics, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia
1120220048@mail.nankai.edu.cn,huoyynk@gmail.com
liuhua.peng@unimelb.edu.au, zoucl@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
The task of distinguishing individuals of interest from a vast pool of candidates
using predictive models has garnered significant attention in recent years. This
task can be framed as a conformalized multiple testing procedure, which aims at
quantifying prediction uncertainty by controlling the false discovery rate (FDR)
via conformal inference. In this paper, we tackle the challenge of conformalized
multiple testing after data-dependent selection procedures. To guarantee the construction of valid test statistics that accurately capture the distorted distribution
resulting from the selection process, we leverage a holdout labeled set to closely
emulate the selective distribution. Our approach involves adaptively picking labeled
data to create a calibration set based on the stability of the selection rule. This
strategy ensures that the calibration data and the selected test unit are exchangeable,
allowing us to develop valid conformal p-values. Implementing with the famous
Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) procedure, it effectively controls the FDR over the selected subset. To handle the randomness of the selected subset and the dependence
among the constructed p-values, we establish a unified theoretical framework. This
framework extends the application of conformalized multiple testing to complex
selective settings. Furthermore, we conduct numerical studies to showcase the
effectiveness and validity of our procedures across various scenarios.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been a notable focus on the use of predictive models to distinguish specific
individuals from a pool of candidates. For instance, in the field of financial investment [17, 2], machine
learning models can be used to predict profits for different investment opportunities. Candidates
with high predicted profits can then be given more preference and considered as potential investment
options. Similarly, in disease diagnostics [29, 45], researchers can utilize relevant information and
corresponding predictions from machine learning models to identify potential patients.
In a typical scenario, we are presented with a labeled/holdout data set Dc = {Zi = (Xi , Yi )}ni=1 ,
where Xi ∈ Rd is the observed covariate and Yi ∈ R is the response, and an unlabelled/test set
Du = {Xi }n+m
i=n+1 . In practice, we only observe the covariates in the test set Du and the responses Y
are unknown. Our goal is to distinguish individuals in Du whose undisclosed responses fall within a
predetermined region A. Region A can take various forms, such as (b, ∞), [a, b] and (−∞, a) per
user’s requirements. To estimate the value of Y for the identification, we employ a predictive model
µ̂ : Rd → R. However, directly using the black-box prediction µ̂(Xi ) as a substitute for Yi leads to
*
†

Equal contribution.
Correspondence to: Liuhua Peng <liuhua.peng@unimelb.edu.au>, Changliang Zou <zoucl@nankai.edu.cn>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

