AsyncDiff: Parallelizing Diffusion Models by
Asynchronous Denoising

Zigeng Chen, Xinyin Ma, Gongfan Fang, Zhenxiong Tan, Xinchao Wang∗
National University of Singapore
zigeng99@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

2.8x️

Speedup

Figure 1: We introduce a new distributed acceleration paradigm that attains a 2.8x speed-up on Stable
Diffusion XL while maintaining pixel-level consistency, using four NVIDIA A5000 GPUs.

Abstract
Diffusion models have garnered significant interest from the community for their
great generative ability across various applications. However, their typical multistep sequential-denoising nature gives rise to high cumulative latency, thereby
precluding the possibilities of parallel computation. To address this, we introduce
AsyncDiff, a universal and plug-and-play acceleration scheme that enables model
parallelism across multiple devices. Our approach divides the cumbersome noise
prediction model into multiple components, assigning each to a different device.
To break the dependency chain between these components, it transforms the conventional sequential denoising into an asynchronous process by exploiting the high
similarity between hidden states in consecutive diffusion steps. Consequently, each
component is facilitated to compute in parallel on separate devices. The proposed
strategy significantly reduces inference latency while minimally impacting the generative quality. Specifically, for the Stable Diffusion v2.1, AsyncDiff achieves a 2.7x
speedup with negligible degradation and a 4.0x speedup with only a slight reduction
of 0.38 in CLIP Score, on four NVIDIA A5000 GPUs. Our experiments also demonstrate AsyncDiff can be readily applied to video diffusion models with encouraging
performances. Code is available at https://github.com/czg1225/AsyncDiff

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [13] stand out in generative modeling and have significantly advanced various
fields including text-to-image [43, 41, 45, 46, 72, 78] and text-to-video generation [64, 9, 61, 21, 2],
∗

Correspoding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

