Job-SDF: A Multi-Granularity Dataset for Job Skill
Demand Forecasting and Benchmarking

Xi Chen1∗, Chuan Qin2∗, Chuyu Fang3 , Chao Wang1 ,
Chen Zhu1 , Fuzhen Zhuang4,5 , Hengshu Zhu2†, Hui Xiong6,7†
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Computer Network Information Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Baidu Inc. 4 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University
5
SKLSDE, School of Computer Science, Beihang University
6
AI Thrust, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
7
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
The HongKong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR
chenxi0401@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
{chuanqin0426, fangchuyu2022, chadwang2012, zc3930155}@gmail.com,
zhuangfuzhen@buaa.edu.cn, zhuhengshu@gmail.com, xionghui@ust.hk

Abstract
In a rapidly evolving job market, skill demand forecasting is crucial as it enables
policymakers and businesses to anticipate and adapt to changes, ensuring that
workforce skills align with market needs, thereby enhancing productivity and
competitiveness. Additionally, by identifying emerging skill requirements, it
directs individuals towards relevant training and education opportunities, promoting
continuous self-learning and development. However, the absence of comprehensive
datasets presents a significant challenge, impeding research and the advancement
of this field. To bridge this gap, we present Job-SDF, a dataset designed to
train and benchmark job-skill demand forecasting models. Based on millions
of public job advertisements collected from online recruitment platforms, this
dataset encompasses monthly recruitment demand. Our dataset uniquely enables
evaluating skill demand forecasting models at various granularities, including
occupation, company, and regional levels. We benchmark a range of models on this
dataset, evaluating their performance in standard scenarios, in predictions focused
on lower value ranges, and in the presence of structural breaks, providing new
insights for further research. Our code and dataset are publicly accessible via the
https://github.com/Job-SDF/benchmark.

1

Introduction

Job skills encompass a range of abilities and competencies essential for performing tasks effectively in the workplace. These skills are broadly categorized into hard skills, such as technical
and analytical abilities, and soft skills, including communication, teamwork, and adaptability [1].
Accurate forecasting of skill demand helps businesses and policymakers anticipate and address skill
shortages and mismatches, and promotes skill development in high-demand areas, thereby supporting
economic growth and stability [2, 3]. By identifying emerging skill requirements, individuals are
directed towards relevant training and education opportunities, fostering continuous self-learning
and development to stay competitive in the labor market [4–10]. By tracking skill demand trends,
∗
†

Equal contributions
Corresponding Authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

