KALM: Knowledgeable Agent by Offline Reinforcement
Learning from Large Language Model Rollouts

Jing-Cheng Pang, Si-Hang Yang, Kaiyuan Li, Xiong-Hui Chen, Nan Tang, Yang Yu∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
& School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
Polixir Technology
{pangjc,yangsh,liky,chenxh,tangn}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, yuy@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) traditionally trains agents using interaction data,
which limits their capabilities to the scope of the training data. To create more
knowledgeable agents, leveraging knowledge from large language models (LLMs)
has shown a promising way. Despite various attempts to combine LLMs with RL,
there is commonly a semantic gap between action signals and LLM tokens, which
hinders their integration. This paper introduces a novel approach, KALM (Knowledgeable Agents from Language Model Rollouts), to learn knowledgeable agents by
bridging this gap. KALM extracts knowledge from LLMs in the form of imaginary
rollouts, which agents can learn through offline RL. To overcome the limitation
that LLMs are inherently text-based and may be incompatible with numerical
environmental data, KALM fine-tunes the LLM to perform bidirectional translation
between textual goals and rollouts. This process enables the LLM to understand
the environment better, facilitating the generation of meaningful rollouts. Experiments on robotic manipulation tasks demonstrate that KALM allows agents to
rephrase complex goals and tackle novel tasks requiring new optimal behaviors.
KALM achieves a 46% success rate in completing 1400 various novel goals, significantly outperforming the 26% success rate of baseline methods. Project homepage:
https://kalmneurips2024.github.io.

1

Introduction

Developing knowledgeable agents that complete diverse manipulation tasks is a hallmark of machine
intelligence. Reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a powerful mechanism for training
intelligent agents to acquire such abilities in interactive environments [1, 2, 3]. In this approach,
agents can learn from the environmental interaction data. Although RL has shown promise in many
challenging tasks, it is limited by the scope of the available interaction data: agents often struggle
to accomplish tasks not covered by the interaction data and lack the ability to generalize to new or
slightly altered tasks. For instance, a policy trained to move the block to the left often fails to complete
the instruction move the block to the right, despite them being highly similar tasks.
On the other hand, advancements in large language models (LLMs) have opened up new opportunities
for developing intelligent agents that solve general tasks in text domain [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. Trained
on extensive text corpora, LLMs embed a wide array of general world knowledge. Developing
approaches effectively leveraging such knowledge to build knowledgeable agents for interactive and
physical tasks recently presents a promising research frontier [10]. Fortunately, existing research
evidence has indicated LLMs’ utility beyond textual domains. They successfully utilize LLMs
∗

Corresponding: yuy@nju.edu.cn.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

