Last-Iterate Convergence for Generalized
Frank-Wolfe in Monotone Variational Inequalities

Zaiwei Chen
Purdue IE
West Lafayette, IN 47907
chen5252@purdue.edu

Eric Mazumdar
Caltech CMS
Pasadena, CA 91125
mazumdar@caltech.edu

Abstract
We study the convergence behavior of a generalized Frank-Wolfe algorithm in
constrained (stochastic) monotone variational inequality (MVI) problems. In recent years, there have been numerous efforts to design algorithms for solving
constrained MVI problems due to their connections with optimization, machine
learning, and equilibrium computation in games. Most work in this domain has
focused on extensions of simultaneous gradient play, with particular emphasis on
understanding the convergence properties of extragradient and optimistic gradient
methods. In contrast, we examine the performance of an algorithm from another
well-known class of optimization algorithms: Frank-Wolfe. We show that a generalized variant of this algorithm achieves a fast O(T −1/2 ) last-iterate convergence
rate in constrained MVI problems. By drawing connections between our generalized Frank-Wolfe algorithm and the well-known smoothed fictitious play (FP)
from game theory, we also derive a finite-sample convergence rate for smoothed FP
in zero-sum matrix games. Furthermore, we demonstrate that a stochastic variant
of the generalized Frank-Wolfe algorithm for MVI problems also converges in a
last-iterate sense, albeit at a slower O(T −1/6 ) convergence rate.

1

Introduction

A constrained monotone variational inequality (MVI) problem consists of solving for an x∗ ∈ X ⊆
Rd such that
max (x∗ − s)⊤ F (x∗ ) ≤ 0,
s∈X

where F : X → Rd is a monotone operator [56, 37] and X is a convex set. MVIs arise in many
foundational and emerging problems. In particular, many problems in optimization [10, 1, 39],
equilibrium computation [43, 42], reinforcement learning [57, 38], and learning in games [13] can be
formulated as MVI problems.
Due to their wide applicability, recent years have seen significant advances in developing efficient
algorithms to solve these problems. Despite the structure provided by the monotone mapping,
MVI problems are well-known to be challenging to solve, as simple first-order algorithms may
diverge or exhibit complex limiting behaviors such as chaos [3, 27, 18]. This has motivated the
analysis of algorithms such as the extragradient method [37], the optimistic gradient method [51],
and the Halpern iteration method [19]. These algorithms, particularly the extragradient and optimistic
gradient methods—which can be viewed as approximating proximal point algorithms [46]—have
been the focus of numerous recent works, with matching upper and lower bounds established under
various assumptions about the feasible set X and the operator F (·) [29, 30, 15, 26, 41]. Due to their
connection with gradient descent and various extensions in convex optimization, these algorithms
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

