HDR-GS: Efficient High Dynamic Range Novel
View Synthesis at 1000x Speed via Gaussian Splatting

Yuanhao Cai 1 , Zihao Xiao 1 , Yixun Liang 2 , Minghan Qin 3 ,
Yulun Zhang 4,∗ , Xiaokang Yang 4 , Yaoyao Liu 5 , Alan Yuille 1
1
Johns Hopkins University, 2 HKUST, 3 Tsinghua University,
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 5 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
High dynamic range (HDR) novel view synthesis (NVS) aims to create photorealistic images from novel viewpoints using HDR imaging techniques. The rendered
HDR images capture a wider range of brightness levels containing more details
of the scene than normal low dynamic range (LDR) images. Existing HDR NVS
methods are mainly based on NeRF. They suffer from long training time and slow
inference speed. In this paper, we propose a new framework, High Dynamic Range
Gaussian Splatting (HDR-GS), which can efficiently render novel HDR views and
reconstruct LDR images with a user input exposure time. Specifically, we design
a Dual Dynamic Range (DDR) Gaussian point cloud model that uses spherical
harmonics to fit HDR color and employs an MLP-based tone-mapper to render
LDR color. The HDR and LDR colors are then fed into two Parallel Differentiable
Rasterization (PDR) processes to reconstruct HDR and LDR views. To establish the
data foundation for the research of 3D Gaussian splatting-based methods in HDR
NVS, we recalibrate the camera parameters and compute the initial positions for
Gaussian point clouds. Comprehensive experiments show that HDR-GS surpasses
the state-of-the-art NeRF-based method by 3.84 and 1.91 dB on LDR and HDR
NVS while enjoying 1000× inference speed and only costing 6.3% training time.
Code and data are released at https://github.com/caiyuanhao1998/HDR-GS

Introduction

HDR-GS (Ours)

38.3

34
36.4

0.122

542

e

∗

126

Tim
ing
Train

Compared to normal low dynamic range (LDR) images, high dynamic range (HDR) images capture a broader range of luminance
levels to retain the details in dark and bright regions, allowing
for more accurate representation of real-world scenes. Novel
view synthesis (NVS) aims to produce photo-realistic images of
a scene at unobserved viewpoints, given a set of posed images
of the same scene. NVS has been widely applied in autonomous
driving [1–4], image editing [5–8], digital human [9–12], etc.
NVS is a challenging topic in computer vision because the limited capacity of camera sensor usually leads to a low dynamic
range (from 0 to 255) of luminance in rendered images. This results in the loss of image details in very bright or dark areas, color
distortions, and a limited capacity to display subtle gradations
in light and shadow that the human eye can normally perceive.
Hence, there is a growing demand to render HDR (from 0 to +∞)
views for better image quality and visualization performance.

Inference Speed

PSN
R

1

HDR-NeRF
0.018
0.956

SS
IM

0.972

0.013

IP
LP

S

Figure 1: HDR-GS vs. HDR-NeRF.
Our HDR-GS achieves better PSNR
in dB, SSIM, and LPIPS performance
with shorter training time in minutes
and faster inference speed in fps.

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

