On the Complexity of Teaching a Family of Linear
Behavior Cloning Learners

Shubham Bharti
UW-Madison
skbharti@cs.wisc.edu

Stephen Wright
UW-Madison
swright@cs.wisc.edu

Adish Singla
MPI-SWS
adishs@mpi-sws.org

Xiaojin Zhu
UW-Madison
jerryzhu@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
We study optimal teaching for a family of Behavior Cloning learners that learn using
a linear hypothesis class. In this setup, a knowledgeable teacher can demonstrate
a dataset of state and action tuples and is required to teach an optimal policy to
an entire family of BC learners using the smallest possible dataset. We analyze
the linear family and design a novel teaching algorithm called ‘TIE’ that achieves
the instance optimal Teaching Dimension for the entire family. However, we
show that this problem is NP-hard for action spaces with |A| > 2 and provide an
efficient approximation algorithm with a log(|A| − 1) guarantee on the optimal
teaching size. We present empirical results to demonstrate the effectiveness of
our algorithm in different teaching environments. The code is available at https:
//github.com/skbharti/Optimal-Teaching-Linear-BC-Family

1

Motivation

Behavior Cloning (BC) [7, 13, 30] is an important paradigm of learning in Reinforcement Learning
(RL), that has been applied extensively to solve real-world problems like teaching machines to
drive autonomous vehicles [24, 25], fly planes [28], perform robotic manipulations [19] etc. These
real-world environments have large state space where the ability to generalize using linear or neural
hypothesis class becomes essential for effective learning.
However, naively teaching an optimal policy to a BC learner using i.i.d. sample often demands a
dataset that scales with the horizon length, the complexity of learner’s hypothesis class and desired
error [4, 27]. In many scenarios, like teaching to drive cars, an expert teacher may know a (near)optimal policy and can leverage this knowledge to construct a small, non-i.i.d. dataset to teach the
target policy to the BC learner far more efficiently. This problem is known as Machine Teaching and
the size of smallest teaching set so produced is called Teaching Dimension (TD) [16, 32].
Several existing works [20, 23, 21] have studied optimal teaching in linear settings, primarily targeting
individual surrogate learners, such as linear support vector machines (SVM). These surrogate learners
often exhibit optimization biases, arguably making it easier to teach them individually. Consequently,
the teaching set for a specific learner is often highly tailored to their biases, limiting its effectiveness
for others. In contrast, in many real-world scenarios, such as teaching a classroom of students [33],
the teacher must teach the entire class of students with a single lesson, even though each student may
have unique biases. In this work, we focus on the task of optimally teaching a family of linear BC
learners that satisfy the consistency property, meaning each learner in this family produce a (subset
of) hypotheses consistent with a demonstration dataset. We seek to answer the following question:
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

