Building a stable classifier with the inflated argmax

Rina Foygel Barber
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
rina@uchicago.edu

Jake A. Soloff
Department of Statistics
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
soloff@uchicago.edu

Rebecca Willett
Departments of Statistics and Computer Science
NSF-Simons National Institute for Theory and Mathematics in Biology
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
willett@uchicago.edu

Abstract
We propose a new framework for algorithmic stability in the context of multiclass
classification. In practice, classification algorithms often operate by first assigning
a continuous score (for instance, an estimated probability) to each possible label,
then taking the maximizer—i.e., selecting the class that has the highest score. A
drawback of this type of approach is that it is inherently unstable, meaning that
it is very sensitive to slight perturbations of the training data, since taking the
maximizer is discontinuous. Motivated by this challenge, we propose a pipeline
for constructing stable classifiers from data, using bagging (i.e., resampling and
averaging) to produce stable continuous scores, and then using a stable relaxation
of argmax, which we call the “inflated argmax”, to convert these scores to a set of
candidate labels. The resulting stability guarantee places no distributional assumptions on the data, does not depend on the number of classes or dimensionality of
the covariates, and holds for any base classifier. Using a common benchmark data
set, we demonstrate that the inflated argmax provides necessary protection against
unstable classifiers, without loss of accuracy.

1

Introduction

An algorithm that learns from data is considered to be stable if small perturbations of the training data
do not lead to large changes in its output. Algorithmic stability is an important consideration in many
statistical applications. Within the fairness literature, for instance, stability is one aspect of reliable
decision-making systems [FSVC19; HV19]. In interpretable machine learning, it similarly serves
as a form of reproducibility [MSKA19; YK20; YB24]. [CMX11] relates stability to robustness,
where a machine learning algorithm is robust if two samples with similar feature vectors have
similar test error. In the context of generalization bounds, [BE02] and subsequent authors study
stability of an algorithm’s real-valued output—for instance, values of a regression function. In the
setting of a multiclass classification problem, where the data consists of features X ∈ X and labels
Y ∈ [L] = {1, . . . , L}, the results of this literature can thus be applied to analyzing a classifier’s
predicted probabilities p̂ℓ (X) ∈ [0, 1]—i.e., our learned estimates of the conditional probabilities
Pr{Y = ℓ | X}, for each ℓ ∈ [L]. However, as we will see, stability of these predicted probabilities
by no means implies stability of the predicted label itself, ŷ = argmaxℓ∈[L] p̂ℓ (x)—an arbitrarily
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

