emg2pose: A Large and Diverse Benchmark for
Surface Electromyographic Hand Pose Estimation
Sasha Salter∗, Richard Warren∗ , Collin Schlager∗ , Adrian Spurr, Shangchen Han, Rohin
Bhasin†, Yujun Cai, Peter Walkington, Anuoluwapo Bolarinwa, Robert Wang, Nathan
Danielson, Josh Merel† , Eftychios Pnevmatikakis, and Jesse Marshall
Reality Labs, Meta

Figure 1: We introduce the emg2pose dataset and benchmark to facilitate the development of pose
estimation models from sEMG. Our vemg2pose model is capable of estimating in real-time hand
pose (lower) from held-out users wearing an sEMG wristband (top). See text for further details.

Abstract
Hands are the primary means through which humans interact with the world.
Reliable and always-available hand pose inference could yield new and intuitive control schemes for human-computer interactions, particularly in virtual
and augmented reality. Computer vision is effective but requires one or multiple cameras and can struggle with occlusions, limited field of view, and poor
lighting. Wearable wrist-based surface electromyography (sEMG) presents a
promising alternative as an always-available modality sensing muscle activities that drive hand motion. However, sEMG signals are strongly dependent
on user anatomy and sensor placement; existing sEMG models have thus
required hundreds of users and device placements to effectively generalize for
tasks other than pose inference. To facilitate progress on sEMG pose inference,
we introduce the emg2pose benchmark, which is to our knowledge the first
publicly available dataset of high-quality hand pose labels and wrist sEMG
recordings. emg2pose contains 2kHz, 16 channel sEMG and pose labels from
a 26-camera motion capture rig for 193 users, 370 hours, and 29 stages with
diverse gestures - a scale comparable to vision-based hand pose datasets. We
provide competitive baselines and challenging tasks evaluating real-world
generalization scenarios: held-out users, sensor placements, and stages. This
benchmark provides the machine learning community a platform for exploring
complex generalization problems, holding potential to significantly enhance
the development of sEMG-based human-computer interactions.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work done while at Meta.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

