Bridging semantics and pragmatics
in information-theoretic emergent communication

Eleonora Gualdoni
Apple MLR∗
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
e_gualdoni@apple.com

Mycal Tucker
MIT
mycal@mit.edu

Roger P. Levy
MIT
rplevy@mit.edu

Noga Zaslavsky
NYU
nogaz@nyu.edu

Abstract
Human languages support both semantic categorization and local pragmatic interactions that require context-sensitive reasoning about meaning. While semantics
and pragmatics are two fundamental aspects of language, they are typically studied
independently and their co-evolution is largely under-explored. Here, we aim to
bridge this gap by studying how a shared lexicon may emerge from local pragmatic
interactions. To this end, we extend a recent information-theoretic framework for
emergent communication in artificial agents, which integrates utility maximization, associated with pragmatics, with general communicative constraints that are
believed to shape human semantic systems. Specifically, we show how to adapt
this framework to train agents via unsupervised pragmatic interactions, and then
evaluate their emergent lexical semantics. We test this approach in a rich visual
domain of naturalistic images, and find that key human-like properties of the lexicon emerge when agents are guided by both context-specific utility and general
communicative pressures, suggesting that both aspects are crucial for understanding
how language may evolve in humans and in artificial agents.

1

Introduction

Languages evolve through repeated interactions in rich contexts, where various communicative and
non-communicative goals co-exist. The conveyed meaning is often shaped by the local conversational
context of utterances (Figure 1), as captured by the pragmatic behavior of interlocutors [1]. For
example, the word ‘player’ can be interpreted as a baseball batter, catcher, or a guitar player, depending
on the conversational context that shapes the listener’s beliefs about the speaker’s state of mind. That
is, understanding meaning in context requires pragmatic reasoning about other agents’ intentions
and beliefs [1–3]. At the same time, words are associated with non-contextualized meanings, as
captured by lexical semantics. For example, we have a shared idea of what ‘player’ means, regardless
of any specific context in which this word might appear, and we can use it to communicate with new
conversational partners in new contexts. While semantics and pragmatics are widely studied, their
interface and co-evolution is largely under-explored and not well understood. In this work, we focus
on a key open question at the interface of lexical semantics and pragmatic reasoning: How can a
shared human-like lexicon emerge from local context-sensitive pragmatic interactions?
To address this question, we build on a framework for information-theoretic emergent communication
in multi-agent reinforcement learning systems [4]. This framework is particularly relevant for
addressing our question because it integrates task-specific utility maximization — a central component
in well-established models of human pragmatic reasoning [2, 3, 5], which has also been center-stage
in the literature on emergent communication in artificial agents [6–8] — with general informationtheoretic constraints that are believed to shape human lexical semantic systems [9–13] and have
∗

Work finished prior to joining Apple

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

