An Efficient Memory Module for Graph Few-Shot
Class-Incremental Learning
Dong Li2,3 , Aijia Zhang4 , Junqi Gao4 , Biqing Qi1,2∗
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University,
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,
3
Institute for Advanced Study in Mathematics, Harbin Institute of Technology,
4
School of Mathematics, Harbin Institute of Technology
1

{arvinlee826, zhangaijia065, gjunqi97, qibiqing7}@gmail.com

Abstract
Incremental graph learning has gained significant attention for its ability to address
the catastrophic forgetting problem in graph representation learning. However,
traditional methods often rely on a large number of labels for node classification,
which is impractical in real-world applications. This makes few-shot incremental
learning on graphs a pressing need. Current methods typically require extensive
training samples from meta-learning to build memory and perform intensive finetuning of GNN parameters, leading to high memory consumption and potential
loss of previously learned knowledge. To tackle these challenges, we introduce
Mecoin, an efficient method for building and maintaining memory. Mecoin employs Structured Memory Units to cache prototypes of learned categories, as well
as Memory Construction Modules to update these prototypes for new categories
through interactions between the nodes and the cached prototypes. Additionally,
we have designed a Memory Representation Adaptation Module to store probabilities associated with each class prototype, reducing the need for parameter
fine-tuning and lowering the forgetting rate. When a sample matches its corresponding class prototype, the relevant probabilities are retrieved from the MRaM.
Knowledge is then distilled back into the GNN through a Graph Knowledge Distillation Module, preserving the model’s memory. We analyze the effectiveness of
Mecoin in terms of generalization error and explore the impact of different distillation strategies on model performance through experiments and VC-dimension
analysis. Compared to other related works, Mecoin shows superior performance
in accuracy and forgetting rate. Our code is publicly available on the MecoinGFSCIL.

1

Introduction

In the field of graph learning, conventional methods often assume that graphs are static[1]. However,
in the real world, graphs tend to grow over time, with new nodes and edges gradually emerging. For
example, in citation networks, new papers are published and cited; in e-commerce, new products
are introduced and updated; and in social networks, new social groups form as users join. In these
dynamic contexts, simply updating graph representation learning methods with new data often leads
to catastrophic forgetting of previously acquired knowledge.
Despite numerous methods proposed to mitigate the catastrophic forgetting problem in Graph Neural Networks(GNNs)[2, 3, 4], a critical and frequently neglected challenge is the scarcity of labels
for newly introduced nodes. Most current graph incremental learning methods [5, 6] combat catastrophic forgetting by retaining a substantial number of nodes from previous graphs to preserve prior
knowledge. However, these methods become impractical in graph few-shot class-incremental learn∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

