FACTOR S IM: Generative Simulation
via Factorized Representation

Fan-Yun Sun
Stanford University
Alex Zook
Nvidia

S. I. Harini
Stanford University

Angela Yi
Stanford University

Jonathan Tremblay
Nvidia

Jiajun Wu
Stanford University

Yihan Zhou
Stanford University

Logan Cross
Stanford University
Nick Haber
Stanford University

Abstract
Generating simulations to train intelligent agents in game-playing and robotics
from natural language input, from user input or task documentation, remains an
open-ended challenge. Existing approaches focus on parts of this challenge, such
as generating reward functions or task hyperparameters. Unlike previous work,
we introduce FACTOR S IM that generates full simulations in code from language
input that can be used to train agents. Exploiting the structural modularity specific
to coded simulations, we propose to use a factored partially observable Markov
decision process representation that allows us to reduce context dependence during
each step of the generation. For evaluation, we introduce a generative simulation
benchmark that assesses the generated simulation code’s accuracy and effectiveness
in facilitating zero-shot transfers in reinforcement learning settings. We show that
FACTOR S IM outperforms existing methods in generating simulations regarding
prompt alignment (i.e., accuracy), zero-shot transfer abilities, and human evaluation.
We also demonstrate its effectiveness in generating robotic tasks.

1

Introduction

Simulations hold significant potential for training agents to perform real-world tasks where data
collection is costly, dangerous, or infringes on individual privacy. A major bottleneck in harnessing
the potential of simulations at scale for agent training is the cost of designing and developing
them, especially when we need a distribution of simulations that meet detailed design specifications
to train more generalized policies. In this paper, we aim to generate coded simulations given text
specifications. Code provides a natural interface for users to inspect, modify, and debug the simulation.
It also allows us to craft diverse environments for Reinforcement Learning (RL) purposes.
Generating full simulations in code to train agents from a text prompt is an under-explored challenge.
Previous works focus on parts of this challenge, including reward function design [22], hyperparameter tuning [24], and task configuration while relying on an existing simulator [35]. These methods
use large language models (LLMs) to generate the components of simulations specified as code.
However, when faced with large and detailed contexts, LLMs often generate simulations that ignore
or fail to adhere to parts of the input prompt [21]. This issue is not solely due to the limitations of
1

Work done while Harini S I was an intern at Stanford.
Correspondence to sunfanyun@cs.stanford.edu
3
Project website: https://cs.stanford.edu/ sunfanyun/factorsim/
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

