Stable-Pose: Leveraging Transformers for
Pose-Guided Text-to-Image Generation
Jiajun Wang∗1 , Morteza Ghahremani∗1,3 , Yitong Li∗1,3 , Björn Ommer2,3 , and Christian Wachinger1,3
1

Lab for AI in Medical Imaging, Technical University of Munich (TUM), Germany
2
CompVis @ LMU Munich, Germany
3
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML), Germany

Abstract
Controllable text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models have shown impressive performance in generating high-quality visual content through the incorporation of
various conditions. Current methods, however, exhibit limited performance when
guided by skeleton human poses, especially in complex pose conditions such as side
or rear perspectives of human figures. To address this issue, we present Stable-Pose,
a novel adapter model that introduces a coarse-to-fine attention masking strategy
into a vision Transformer (ViT) to gain accurate pose guidance for T2I models.
Stable-Pose is designed to adeptly handle pose conditions within pre-trained Stable
Diffusion, providing a refined and efficient way of aligning pose representation
during image synthesis. We leverage the query-key self-attention mechanism of
ViTs to explore the interconnections among different anatomical parts in human
pose skeletons. Masked pose images are used to smoothly refine the attention
maps based on target pose-related features in a hierarchical manner, transitioning
from coarse to fine levels. Additionally, our loss function is formulated to allocate
increased emphasis to the pose region, thereby augmenting the model’s precision in
capturing intricate pose details. We assessed the performance of Stable-Pose across
five public datasets under a wide range of indoor and outdoor human pose scenarios.
Stable-Pose achieved an AP score of 57.1 in the LAION-Human dataset, marking
around 13% improvement over the established technique ControlNet. The project
link and code are available at https://github.com/ai-med/StablePose.

1

Introduction

Pose-guided text-to-image (T2I) generation holds immense potential for swiftly producing photorealistic images that exhibit contextual relevance and accurate posing through the integration of text
prompts and pose instructions. The kinematic or skeleton pose provides a set of key points (joints)
that represent the skeletal framework of the human body (shown in Figure A.1). Despite the sparsity,
skeleton-pose data offers sufficient details of human poses with high flexibility and computational
efficiency for T2I generation in various applications such as animation, robotics, sports training,
and e-commerce, making it user-friendly and ideal for real-time applications [21]. Juxtaposed with
other forms of pose information like volumetric pose with dense content, skeleton pose is capable
of conveying heightened articulation information, facilitating intuitive interpretation and flexible
manipulation of human poses [28; 20].
Traditional pose-guided human image generation methods require a source image during training
for dictating the style of the generated images [22; 23; 42; 38; 47]. Such methods, while offering
*

Equal Contribution. {jiajun.wang, morteza.ghahremani, yi_tong.li}@tum.de

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

