HHD-GP: Incorporating Helmholtz-Hodge
Decomposition into Gaussian Processes for Learning
Dynamical Systems

Hao Xu1,2 , Jia Pan1,2,3∗
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
2
Centre for Transformative Garment Production, Hong Kong, China
3
LimX Dynamics
xuhaovic@connect.hku.hk, jpan@cs.hku.hk
1

Abstract
Machine learning models provide alternatives for efficiently recognizing complex
patterns from data, but the main concern in applying them to modeling physical
systems stems from their physics-agnostic design, leading to learning methods
that lack interpretability, robustness, and data efficiency. This paper mitigates this
concern by incorporating the Helmholtz-Hodge decomposition into a Gaussian
process model, leading to a versatile framework that simultaneously learns the
curl-free and divergence-free components of a dynamical system. Learning a
predictive model in this form facilitates the exploitation of symmetry priors. In
addition to improving predictive power, these priors make the model indentifiable,
thus the identified features can be linked to comprehensible scientific properties of
the system. We show that compared to baseline models, our model achieves better
predictive performance on several benchmark dynamical systems while allowing
physically meaningful decomposition of the systems from noisy and sparse data.

1

Introduction

A dynamical system describes how the state of a system evolves over time [64]. Data-driven modeling
of dynamical systems has become a fundamental task in many modern science and engineering
applications, such as physical emulation [21] and robotics control [13]. Mathematically, a dynamical
system is often a set of first-order ordinary differential equations (ODEs) or, equivalently, a smooth
vector field on a manifold [28]. Given the functional form of ODEs, classical data-driven methods
typically involve optimizing their parameters [52]. However, for many complex systems it is
practically difficult to determine the form of the ODEs governing their dynamics.
Recent advances in machine learning (ML) focus on the use of neural networks [11] and nonparametric Bayesian models [63, 27, 26] for the black-box approximation of vector fields. Despite
the rich expressive power, the physics-agnostic design of these models hinders their performance
when applied to physical systems. To address this issue, a popular approach is to develop ML models
that incorporate strong physical priors as inductive biases. Such prior knowledge commonly stems
from basic physical principles related to certain differential invariants of vector fields. For example,
in scenarios of learning Hamiltonian systems [23, 67, 54] and incompressible fluid dynamics [73, 33],
ML models are constructed to learn divergence-free (div-free) vector fields, as a consequence of
conservation laws of energy or mass. By constraining the solution space, the powerful physical
principles effectively improve the extrapolation performance of ML models and enhance their
interpretability. However, enforcing the model’s behavior to adhere to centain fundamental physical
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

