Vector Quantization Prompting for
Continual Learning

Li Jiao1 , Qiuxia Lai1∗, Yu Li2 , Qiang Xu3
1
Communication University of China
2
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{jl0930,qxlai}@cuc.edu.cn;li.yu@hit.edu.cn;qxu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Continual learning requires to overcome catastrophic forgetting when training a
single model on a sequence of tasks. Recent top-performing approaches are promptbased methods that utilize a set of learnable parameters (i.e., prompts) to encode
task knowledge, from which appropriate ones are selected to guide the fixed pretrained model in generating features tailored to a certain task. However, existing
methods rely on predicting prompt identities for prompt selection, where the
identity prediction process cannot be optimized with task loss. This limitation leads
to sub-optimal prompt selection and inadequate adaptation of pre-trained features
for a specific task. Previous efforts have tried to address this by directly generating
prompts from input queries instead of selecting from a set of candidates. However,
these prompts are continuous, which lack sufficient abstraction for task knowledge
representation, making them less effective for continual learning. To address
these challenges, we propose VQ-Prompt, a prompt-based continual learning
method that incorporates Vector Quantization (VQ) into end-to-end training of
a set of discrete prompts. In this way, VQ-Prompt can optimize the prompt
selection process with task loss and meanwhile achieve effective abstraction of
task knowledge for continual learning. Extensive experiments show that VQPrompt outperforms state-of-the-art continual learning methods across a variety of
benchmarks under the challenging class-incremental setting. The code is available
at https://github.com/jiaolifengmi/VQ-Prompt.

1

Introduction

Humans have the remarkable capability to continually acquire and integrate knowledge of new
concepts or categories without forgetting old ones, whereas deep learning models struggle with
catastrophic forgetting [40] when tasked with learning a sequence of classes [42, 10, 39]. Continual
learning aims at addressing catastrophic forgetting in deep neural networks (DNNs) by striking a
balance between plasticity for learning new incoming data effectively and stability to retain prior
knowledge. Approaches in this field vary: some methods dynamically expand network architectures [64, 29, 58] or reconfigure their internal structures [48, 17, 24] for new tasks. Others penalize
the update of crucial parameters from previous tasks [20, 27, 65, 1, 49] or alter parameter update rules
to prevent interference across tasks [34, 7, 47, 23]. Additionally, certain methods interleave stored
past data with current ones for training [18, 8, 44, 45, 4, 6, 36]. Despite recent advances, continual
learning remains an open challenge for DNNs.
Recently, prompt-based continual learning has emerged as a promising solution to mitigate catastrophic forgetting in sequential task learning. This approach enhances a pre-trained Vision Trans∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

