Kernel Language Entropy: Fine-grained Uncertainty
Quantification for LLMs from Semantic Similarities

Alexander Nikitin1

Jannik Kossen2

Yarin Gal2

Pekka Marttinen1

1

2

Department of Computer Science, Aalto University
OATML, Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
alexander.nikitin@aalto.fi

Abstract
Uncertainty quantification in Large Language Models (LLMs) is crucial for applications where safety and reliability are important. In particular, uncertainty can
be used to improve the trustworthiness of LLMs by detecting factually incorrect
model responses, commonly called hallucinations. Critically, one should seek to
capture the model’s semantic uncertainty, i.e., the uncertainty over the meanings
of LLM outputs, rather than uncertainty over lexical or syntactic variations that
do not affect answer correctness. To address this problem, we propose Kernel
Language Entropy (KLE), a novel method for uncertainty estimation in white- and
black-box LLMs. KLE defines positive semidefinite unit trace kernels to encode
the semantic similarities of LLM outputs and quantifies uncertainty using the von
Neumann entropy. It considers pairwise semantic dependencies between answers
(or semantic clusters), providing more fine-grained uncertainty estimates than previous methods based on hard clustering of answers. We theoretically prove that
KLE generalizes the previous state-of-the-art method called semantic entropy and
empirically demonstrate that it improves uncertainty quantification performance
across multiple natural language generation datasets and LLM architectures.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated exceptional capabilities across a wide array of
natural language processing tasks [58, 66, 69]. This has led to their application in many domains,
including medicine [11], education [32], and software development [40]. Unfortunately, LLM generations suffer from so-called hallucinations, commonly defined as responses that are “nonsensical or unfaithful to the provided source content” [26, 18, 52]. Hallucinations pose significant risks when LLMs
are deployed to high-stakes applications, and methods that reliably detect them are sorely needed.
A promising direction to improve the reliability of LLMs is estimating the uncertainty of model
generations [36, 13, 51, 44, 23]. For instance, high predictive uncertainty is indicative of model
errors or hallucinations in settings such as answering multiple-choice questions [30]. This allows us
to prevent harmful outcomes by abstaining from prediction or by consulting human experts. However,
the best means of estimating uncertainty for free-form natural language generation remains an active
research question. The unique properties of LLMs and natural language preclude the application
of established methods for uncertainty quantification [20, 39, 45, 59, 55].
A particular challenge is that language outputs can contain multiple types of uncertainty, including
lexical (which word is used), syntactic (how the words are ordered), and semantic (what a text means).
For many problems, semantic uncertainty is the desired quantity, as it pertains directly to the accuracy
of the meaning of the generated response. However, measuring the uncertainty of the generation via
token likelihoods conflates all types of uncertainty. To address this, Kuhn et al. [36] have recently
introduced semantic entropy (SE), which estimates uncertainty as the predictive entropy of generated
texts with respect to clusters of identical semantic meaning (we discuss this in more detail in Sec. 2).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

