Adversarial Representation Engineering: A General
Model Editing Framework for Large Language Models

Yihao Zhang1,2
1

Zeming Wei1

Peking University

2

Jun Sun2∗

Meng Sun1∗

Singapore Management University

Abstract
Since the rapid development of Large Language Models (LLMs) has achieved remarkable success, understanding and rectifying their internal complex mechanisms
has become an urgent issue. Recent research has attempted to interpret their behaviors through the lens of inner representation. However, developing practical and efficient methods for applying these representations for general and flexible model editing remains challenging. In this work, we explore how to leverage insights from representation engineering to guide the editing of LLMs by deploying a representation
discriminator as an editing oracle. We first identify the importance of a robust and
reliable discriminator during editing, then propose an Adversarial Representation
Engineering (ARE) framework to provide a unified and interpretable approach for
conceptual model editing without compromising baseline performance. Experiments on multiple tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of ARE in various model
editing scenarios. Our code and data are available at https://github.com/
Zhang-Yihao/Adversarial-Representation-Engineering.

1

Introduction

While Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable success in a variety of tasks [34],
their complex internal mechanism makes interpreting and censoring their behaviors (e.g., for safety
alignment or hallucination reduction) challenging. To improve the interpretability and consequently the safety of LLMs, numerous efforts have been dedicated to interpreting the internal
mechanisms from various perspectives like feature attribution [8, 40], neuron analysis [12, 33], and
self-explanation [17].
Recently, Zou et al. proposed the idea of Representation Engineering (RepE) [69], which offers a
way of understanding how LLMs work internally by focusing on the overall feature representations
rather than individual neurons. Specifically, RepE extracts and analyzes the intermediate features of
different concepts (e.g., honesty, fairness, and harmlessness), enabling the monitoring of the internal
behaviors of LLMs. More relevantly, RepE potentially allows editing and controlling the behaviors of
LLMs by directly intervening in the internal hidden layers during inference. However, as RepE was
essentially proposed to monitor the behaviors of LLMs, their proposed method for editing the model
through representation vector incorporation is rather limited for practical uses. For instance, their
method could disrupt the underlying structure of general LLMs, potentially hindering the model’s
performance. Additionally, the representation vector used for model editing may not be robust and
heavily reliant on carefully chosen hyper-parameters, due to problems such as overfitting.
To address these shortcomings, in this work we investigate ways to efficiently fine-tune the model
using the representations provided by RepE to achieve specific editing goals. Specifically, we attempt
to train an oracle discriminator with the extracted representations given a particular goal of editing
∗

Corresponding Authors: Jun Sun (junsun@smu.edu.sg) and Meng Sun (sunm@pku.edu.cn).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

