Generalization Bounds via Conditional f -Information

Ziqiao Wang
School of Computer Science and Technology
Tongji University
Shanghai, China
ziqiaowang@tongji.edu.cn
Yongyi Mao
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of Ottawa
Ottawa, Canada
ymao@uottawa.ca

Abstract
In this work, we introduce novel information-theoretic generalization bounds
using the conditional f -information framework, an extension of the traditional
conditional mutual information (MI) framework. We provide a generic approach
to derive generalization bounds via f -information in the supersample setting,
applicable to both bounded and unbounded loss functions. Unlike previous MIbased bounds, our proof strategy does not rely on upper bounding the cumulantgenerating function (CGF) in the variational formula of MI. Instead, we set the CGF
or its upper bound to zero by carefully selecting the measurable function invoked
in the variational formula. Although some of our techniques are partially inspired
by recent advances in the coin-betting framework (e.g., Jang et al. (2023)), our
results are independent of any previous findings from regret guarantees of online
gambling algorithms. Additionally, our newly derived MI-based bound recovers
many previous results and improves our understanding of their potential limitations.
Finally, we empirically compare various f -information measures for generalization,
demonstrating the improvement of our new bounds over the previous bounds.

1

Introduction

Understanding generalization is a longstanding topic of machine learning research. Recently,
information-theoretic generalization measures, e.g., mutual information (MI) between the input
(i.e. data) and output (i.e. hypothesis) of a learning algorithm, have been proposed by [2–4]. While
original MI-based information-theoretic generalization bounds have made significant progress in
analyzing the generalization of stochastic gradient-based algorithms in nonconvex learning problems
(e.g., deep learning) [5–13], they are found to have several limitations. One of the most severe
limitations is their unboundedness, where the MI measure can be infinite while the true generalization
error is small [14]. To mitigate this issue, various bound-tightening techniques have been proposed
[15, 6, 7]. Among them, [16] introduces a conditional mutual information (CMI) framework, which
allows for the derivation of a CMI-based bound that is strictly upper-bounded by a constant. In the
CMI framework, an additional “ghost sample” is introduced alongside the original sample drawn from
the unknown data distribution. A Bernoulli random variable sequence is then used to determine the
membership of training data from these two samples. Ultimately, the CMI between these Bernoulli
random variables and the output hypothesis of the learning algorithm, conditioned on these two
samples, characterizes generalization. This setup, known as the “supersample” setting, ensures the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

