Towards Scalable and Stable Parallelization of
Nonlinear RNNs
Xavier Gonzalez1,2 , Andrew Warrington1,2,3 , Jimmy T.H. Smith2,4,5 , Scott W. Linderman1, 2
1
Department of Statistics, Stanford University.
2
Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University.
3
GE Healthcare. 4 ICME, Stanford University. 5 Liquid AI.
{xavier18,scott.linderman}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Transformers and linear state space models can be evaluated in parallel on modern
hardware, but evaluating nonlinear RNNs appears to be an inherently sequential
problem. Recently, however, Lim et al. [1] developed an approach called DEER,
which evaluates nonlinear RNNs in parallel by posing the states as the solution
to a fixed-point problem. They derived a parallel form of Newton’s method to
solve the fixed-point problem and achieved significant speedups over sequential
evaluation. However, the computational complexity of DEER is cubic in the state
size, and the algorithm can suffer from numerical instability. We address these
limitations with two novel contributions. To reduce the computational complexity, we apply quasi-Newton approximations and show they converge comparably
to Newton, use less memory, and are faster. To stabilize DEER, we leverage a
connection between the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm and Kalman smoothing,
which we call ELK. This connection allows us to stabilize Newton’s method while
using efficient parallelized Kalman smoothing algorithms to retain performance.
Through several experiments, we show that these innovations allow for parallel
evaluation of nonlinear RNNs at larger scales and with greater stability.

1

Introduction

Parallel computation has helped fuel the rise of deep learning [2]. Architectures such as transformers [3] and linear RNNs [4–8] are specifically designed to allow parallelization over the length of
the input sequence. However, most conventional nonlinear RNNs (e.g. Elman RNNs, GRUs [9],
LSTMs [10] etc.) are not readily parallelizable over the sequence length due to their sequential
architecture. Thus, they do not benefit as much from parallel hardware. Nonetheless, these nonlinear RNN architectures are still used widely across the scientific community [11–13]. Furthermore,
recent work has suggested that linear RNNs (and transformers) are fundamentally limited in their
expressivity compared to nonlinear RNNs [14]. Finally, nonlinear RNNs continue to be of significant interest in computational and theoretical neuroscience as models of neural systems [15–22].
Therefore, scalable and stable parallelization methods for nonlinear RNNs offer significant benefits
across many fields.
Towards this goal, Lim et al. [1] proposed DEER, a method for evaluating a nonlinear RNN in
parallel. DEER casts inference as finding the solution of a fixed-point equation designed specifically
to capture the nonlinear dynamics of the RNN. Newton’s method is used to solve the resulting fixedpoint equation. With good initialization, Newton’s method enjoys quadratic convergence rates [23,
Chapter 11]. Lim et al. [1] also show that the inversion of the structured Jacobian matrix required
by Newton’s method can be cast as an associative parallel scan [24]. DEER therefore reduces the
evaluation runtime over sequential evaluation by as much as factor of twenty.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

