Easy2Hard-Bench: Standardized Difficulty Labels for
Profiling LLM Performance and Generalization

Mucong Ding∗ †
Chenghao Deng∗†
Jocelyn Choo†
Zichu Wu△
†
□
†
Aakriti Agrawal
Avi Schwarzschild
Tianyi Zhou
Tom Goldstein†
α
▷◁
John Langford
Anima Anandkumar
Furong Huang†
{mcding,dengch16,furongh}@umd.edu

Abstract
While generalization over tasks from easy to hard is crucial to profile language
models (LLMs), the datasets with fine-grained difficulty annotations for each problem across a broad range of complexity are still missing. Aiming to address this
limitation, we present Easy2Hard-Bench, a consistently formatted collection of
6 benchmark datasets spanning various domains, such as mathematics and programming problems, chess puzzles, and reasoning questions. Each problem within
these datasets is annotated with numerical difficulty scores. To systematically
estimate problem difficulties, we collect abundant performance data on attempts
to each problem by humans in the real world or LLMs on the prominent leaderboard. Leveraging the rich performance data, we apply well-established difficulty
ranking systems, such as Item Response Theory (IRT) and Glicko-2 models, to
uniformly assign numerical difficulty scores to problems. Moreover, datasets in
Easy2Hard-Bench distinguish themselves from previous collections by a higher
proportion of challenging problems. Through extensive experiments with six stateof-the-art LLMs, we provide a comprehensive analysis of their performance and
generalization capabilities across varying levels of difficulty, with the aim of inspiring future research in LLM generalization. The datasets are available at https:
//huggingface.co/datasets/furonghuang-lab/Easy2Hard-Bench.

1

Introduction

The development and evaluation of Large Language Models (LLMs) depend crucially on their ability
to generalize across a broad spectrum of tasks, ranging from basic to complex problem-solving
scenarios. However, among the current prevalent benchmarks, only a select few include problems
with annotated difficulty levels. These annotations are typically presented as categorical values
[37, 43, 4, 24] or through pairwise comparisons [52], neither of which provide a detailed portrayal of
the difficulty distribution within the dataset. Such granularity is essential for effectively benchmarking
and enhancing the adaptability and training approaches of LLMs. To address this gap, there is a
pressing need for a benchmark that provides numerical difficulty estimations for problems across
various domains.
In previous datasets, difficulty estimation has typically been based on domain-specific characteristics,
such as language similarity in linguistic reasoning [5] and equations in mathematical problems [52],
or a few human validators’ opinions on each problem [37]. Relying solely on these features makes
it challenging to rate problem difficulty uniformly across a continuum and restricts the evaluation
∗

▷◁

Equal contribution. † University of Maryland, △ University of Waterloo, □ Carnegie Mellon University,
California Institute of Technology, α Microsoft.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

