UrbanKGent: A Unified Large Language Model Agent
Framework for Urban Knowledge Graph Construction

1

Yansong Ning1 , Hao Liu1,2∗
AI Thrust, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
CSE, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
yning092@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn liuh@ust.hk

Abstract
Urban knowledge graph has recently worked as an emerging building block to distill critical knowledge from multi-sourced urban data for diverse urban application
scenarios. Despite its promising benefits, urban knowledge graph construction
(UrbanKGC) still heavily relies on manual effort, hindering its potential advancement. This paper presents UrbanKGent, a unified large language model agent
framework, for urban knowledge graph construction. Specifically, we first construct the knowledgeable instruction set for UrbanKGC tasks (such as relational
triplet extraction and knowledge graph completion) via heterogeneity-aware and
geospatial-infused instruction generation. Moreover, we propose a tool-augmented
iterative trajectory refinement module to enhance and refine the trajectories distilled
from GPT-4. Through hybrid instruction fine-tuning with augmented trajectories
on Llama 2 and Llama 3 family, we obtain UrbanKGC agent family2 , consisting
of UrbanKGent-7/8/13B version. We perform a comprehensive evaluation on two
real-world datasets using both human and GPT-4 self-evaluation. The experimental
results demonstrate that UrbanKGent family can not only significantly outperform
31 baselines in UrbanKGC tasks, but also surpass the state-of-the-art LLM, GPT-4,
by more than 10% with approximately 20 times lower cost. Compared with the
existing benchmark, the UrbanKGent family could help construct an UrbanKG
with hundreds of times richer relationships using only one-fifth of the data. Our
data and code are available at https://github.com/usail-hkust/UrbanKGent.

1

Introduction

Urban Knowledge Graph (UrbanKG) aims to model intricate relationships and semantics within
a city by extracting and organizing urban entities (e.g., POIs, road networks, etc.) into a multirelational heterogeneous graph [1]. As an emerging building block, multi-sourced urban data are
widely used to construct an UrbanKG to provide critical knowledge for various knowledge-enhanced
urban downstream tasks, such as traffic management, pollution monitoring, and emergency response
[2, 3, 4, 5]. UrbanKG has gradually become an essential tool of the modern smart city.
In prior literature, many efforts have been devoted to urban knowledge graph construction (UrbanKGC) using massive urban data sources. In particular, one commonly used approach [6, 7, 8] is to
extract entities from structured urban data (e.g., geographic data, city sensor data, and traffic data) and
define the relationships between obtained urban entities based on manually designed rules or patterns.
However, these approaches suffer heavy reliance on a deep understanding of the application domain
and are labor-intensive. Recently, inspired by the success of the Large Language Models (LLMs)
∗

Corresponding author.
https://huggingface.co/usail-hkust/UrbanKGent-7B, https://huggingface.co/usail-hkust/UrbanKGent-8B and
https://huggingface.co/usail-hkust/UrbanKGent-13B
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

