ReEvo: Large Language Models as Hyper-Heuristics
with Reflective Evolution
Haoran Ye1 , Jiarui Wang2 , Zhiguang Cao3 , Federico Berto4 ,
Chuanbo Hua4 , Haeyeon Kim4 , Jinkyoo Park4 , Guojie Song1 5∗
1
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
Southeast University 3 Singapore Management University
4
KAIST 5 PKU-Wuhan Institute for Artificial Intelligence AI4CO†
hrye@stu.pku.edu.cn, jiarui_wang@seu.edu.cn, zgcao@smu.edu.sg
{fberto, cbhua, haeyeonkim, jinkyoo.park}@kaist.ac.kr, gjsong@pku.edu.cn
Project Website: https://ai4co.github.io/reevo

Abstract
The omnipresence of NP-hard combinatorial optimization problems (COPs) compels domain experts to engage in trial-and-error heuristic design. The long-standing
endeavor of design automation has gained new momentum with the rise of large language models (LLMs). This paper introduces Language Hyper-Heuristics (LHHs),
an emerging variant of Hyper-Heuristics that leverages LLMs for heuristic generation, featuring minimal manual intervention and open-ended heuristic spaces.
To empower LHHs, we present Reflective Evolution (ReEvo), a novel integration
of evolutionary search for efficiently exploring the heuristic space, and LLM reflections to provide verbal gradients within the space. Across five heterogeneous
algorithmic types, six different COPs, and both white-box and black-box views of
COPs, ReEvo yields state-of-the-art and competitive meta-heuristics, evolutionary
algorithms, heuristics, and neural solvers, while being more sample-efficient than
prior LHHs.

1

Introduction

NP-hard combinatorial optimization problems (COPs) pervade numerous real-world systems, each
characterized by distinct constraints and objectives. The intrinsic complexity and heterogeneity
of these problems compel domain experts to laboriously develop heuristics for their approximate
solutions [23]. Automation of heuristic designs represents a longstanding pursuit.
Classic Hyper-Heuristics (HHs) automate heuristic design by searching for the best heuristic (combination) from a set of heuristics or heuristic components [64]. Despite decades of development, HHs
are limited by heuristic spaces predefined by human experts [64]. The rise of large language models
(LLMs) opens up new possibilities for HHs. This paper introduces the general concept of Language
Hyper-Heuristics (LHH) to advance beyond preliminary attempts in individual COP settings [68, 46].
LHH constitutes an emerging variant of HH that utilizes LLMs for heuristic generations. It features
minimal human intervention and open-ended heuristic spaces, showing promise to comprehensively
shift the HH research paradigm.
∗
†

Correspondence to: Guojie Song <gjsong@pku.edu.cn>.
Work made with contributions from the AI4CO open research community.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

