Exponential Quantum Communication Advantage in
Distributed Inference and Learning

Dar Gilboa∗†
Google Quantum AI
Venice, CA, United States

Hagay Michaeli†
Technion
Haifa, Israel

Daniel Soudry
Technion
Haifa, Israel

Jarrod R. McClean
Google Quantum AI
Venice, CA, United States

Abstract
Training and inference with large machine learning models that far exceed the
memory capacity of individual devices necessitates the design of distributed architectures, forcing one to contend with communication constraints. We present
a framework for distributed computation over a quantum network in which data
is encoded into specialized quantum states. We prove that for models within this
framework, inference and training using gradient descent can be performed with
exponentially less communication compared to their classical analogs, and with
relatively modest overhead relative to standard gradient-based methods. We show
that certain graph neural networks are particularly amenable to implementation
within this framework, and moreover present empirical evidence that they perform
well on standard benchmarks. To our knowledge, this is the first example of exponential quantum advantage for a generic class of machine learning problems that
hold regardless of the data encoding cost. Moreover, we show that models in this
class can encode highly nonlinear features of their inputs, and their expressivity
increases exponentially with model depth. We also delineate the space of models
for which exponential communication advantages hold by showing that they cannot
hold for linear classification. Communication of quantum states that potentially
limit the amount of information that can be extracted from them about the data and
model parameters may also lead to improved privacy guarantees for distributed
computation. Taken as a whole, these findings form a promising foundation for
distributed machine learning over quantum networks.

1

Introduction

As the scale of the datasets and parameterized models used to perform computation over data
continues to grow [62, 51], distributing workloads across multiple devices becomes essential for
enabling progress. The choice of architecture for large-scale training and inference must not only
make the best use of computational and memory resources, but also contend with the fact that
communication may become a bottleneck [97]. This is particularly pertinent as models grow so large
that they cannot rely on high-bandwidth interconnects within datacenters [17], but are instead trained
across multiple datacenters [108]. When using modern optical interconnects, classical computers
exchange bits represented by light. This however does not fully utilize the potential of the physical
substrate; given suitable computational capabilities and algorithms, the quantum nature of light
can be harnessed as a powerful communication resource. Here we show that for a broad class
of parameterized models, if quantum bits (qubits) are communicated instead of classical bits, an
exponential reduction in the communication required to perform inference and gradient-based training
can be achieved. This protocol additionally guarantees improved privacy of both the user data and
∗
†

darg@google.com.
Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

