Locating What You Need: Towards Adapting
Diffusion Models to OOD Concepts In-the-Wild

Jianan Yang1,2

Chenchao Gao4,2 Zhiqing Xiao1,2 Junbo Zhao1,2 Sai Wu1,2
Gang Chen1,2 , Haobo Wang3,2∗
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
3
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
4
International School of Information Science and Engineering, Dalian University of Technology
{jianan0115,zhiqing.xiao,j.zhao,wusai,cg,wanghaobo}@zju.edu.cn
gccgyllyp@gmail.com

Abstract
The recent large-scale text-to-image generative models have attained unprecedented performance, while people established adaptor modules like LoRA and
DreamBooth to extend this performance to even more unseen concept tokens.
However, we empirically find that this workflow often fails to accurately depict
the out-of-distribution concepts. This failure is highly related to the low quality
of training data. To resolve this, we present a framework called Controllable
Adaptor Towards Out-of-Distribution Concepts (CATOD). Our framework follows
the active learning paradigm which includes high-quality data accumulation and
adaptor training, enabling a finer-grained enhancement of generative results. The
aesthetics score and concept-matching score are two major factors that impact the
quality of synthetic results. One key component of CATOD is the weighted scoring
system that automatically balances between these two scores and we also offer
comprehensive theoretical analysis for this point. Then, it determines how to select
data and schedule the adaptor training based on this scoring system. The extensive
results show that CATOD significantly outperforms the prior approaches with an
11.10 boost on the CLIP score and a 33.08% decrease on the CMMD metric.

1

Introduction

The generative modeling for text-to-image has attained unprecedented performance most recently [37,
45, 41, 49]. Notably, by training over billions of text-image data pairs [52, 51], the family of diffusion
models has allowed high-fidelity image synthesis directed by the prompt provided in production.
Despite their massive successes, these models still fail to generate images with decent quality and
matching semantics, when encountering prompts that contain unseen or out-of-distribution concept
tokens [60, 12, 21]. Simply put, the reason causing this failure is due to that the training set is not
unbounded with limited variations. On the side of production, this limitation could significantly
impact the practicality of this technique in real-world applications.
To deal with such concepts, recent works have resorted to adaptors such as Textual Inversion [18],
DreamBooth [47, 58, 48], and LoRA [25, 66, 76], which tunes only a small part of the text-to-image
model or insert extra modules. These adaptors largely reduce the training costs, and more importantly,
preserve the visual aesthetic information originally learned by the underlying model.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

