EGSST: Event-based Graph Spatiotemporal Sensitive
Transformer for Object Detection

Sheng Wu1
Hang Sheng1
Hui Feng1,2 ∗
Bo Hu1,2
School of Information Science and Technology, Fudan University
2
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Chips and Systems, Fudan University
1

Abstract
Event cameras provide exceptionally high temporal resolution in dynamic vision
systems due to their unique event-driven mechanism. However, the sparse and
asynchronous nature of event data makes frame-based visual processing methods
inappropriate. This study proposes a novel framework, Event-based Graph Spatiotemporal Sensitive Transformer (EGSST), for the exploitation of spatial and
temporal properties of event data. Firstly, a well-designed graph structure is employed to model event data, which not only preserves the original temporal data but
also captures spatial details. Furthermore, inspired by the phenomenon that human
eyes pay more attention to objects that produce significant dynamic changes, we
design a Spatiotemporal Sensitivity Module (SSM) and an adaptive Temporal Activation Controller (TAC). Through these two modules, our framework can mimic
the response of the human eyes in dynamic environments by selectively activating
the temporal attention mechanism based on the relative dynamics of event data,
thereby effectively conserving computational resources. In addition, the integration
of a lightweight, multi-scale Linear Vision Transformer (LViT) markedly enhances
processing efficiency. Our research proposes a fully event-driven approach, effectively exploiting the temporal precision of event data and optimising the allocation
of computational resources by intelligently distinguishing the dynamics within
the event data. The framework provides a lightweight, fast, accurate, and fully
event-based solution for object detection tasks in complex dynamic environments,
demonstrating significant practicality and potential for application. The source
code can be found at: EGSST.

1

Introduction

There is an increasing demand for devices capable of accurately capturing targets in high-speed
dynamic scenes, such as autonomous driving, where traditional CMOS or CCD visual sensors often
encounter motion blur and overexposure [1, 2, 3]. In response, event cameras, which employ a novel
event-driven mechanism, have garnered significant attention. Each pixel in event cameras operates
independently, activating only upon detecting a brightness change. This mechanism results in a
series of high-speed, asynchronous event streams with exceptionally high temporal resolution, which
enables the rapid and precise capture of data [4, 5].
Our objective in processing the output data from event cameras is to effectively utilize their high
temporal precision in detection tasks without inducing significant delays. However, the data format
of event cameras is entirely different from that of frame-based cameras, rendering existing object
detection methods based on RGB images inapplicable [6]. Some methods adopt conversion strategies,
utilizing techniques such as temporal slicing to transform sparse data into dense formats, with
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

