Handling Learnwares from Heterogeneous Feature
Spaces with Explicit Label Exploitation

Peng Tan, Hai-Tian Liu, Zhi-Hao Tan, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{tanp,liuht,tanzh,zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
The learnware paradigm aims to help users leverage numerous existing highperforming models instead of starting from scratch, where a learnware consists
of a well-trained model and the specification describing its capability. Numerous
learnwares are accommodated by a learnware dock system. When users solve tasks
with the system, models that fully match the task feature space are often rare or even
unavailable. However, models with heterogeneous feature space can still be helpful.
This paper finds that label information, particularly model outputs, is helpful yet
previously less exploited in the accommodation of heterogeneous learnwares. We
extend the specification to better leverage model pseudo-labels and subsequently
enrich the unified embedding space for better specification evolvement. With label
information, the learnware identification can also be improved by additionally
comparing conditional distributions. Experiments demonstrate that, even without a
model explicitly tailored to user tasks, the system can effectively handle tasks by
leveraging models from diverse feature spaces.

1

Introduction

The current machine learning paradigm has achieved remarkable success across various domains.
This success, however, hinges on several critical factors: access to abundant high-quality labeled data,
expensive computational resources, and deep expertise in feature engineering and algorithm design.
These requirements pose a significant challenge for ordinary individuals aiming to build high-quality
models from scratch. Moreover, issues such as data privacy, the difficulty of model adaptation, and
catastrophic forgetting complicate the reuse or adaptation of trained models across different users.
Indeed, most efforts have focused on these issues separately, paying less attention to the fact that
these problems are entangled. To address these challenges simultaneously, the learnware paradigm
was proposed by Zhou [2016]. The learnware paradigm [Zhou and Tan, 2024] aims to assist users in
solving their tasks by leveraging existing high-performing models, through the establishment of a
learnware dock system. One important purpose of learnware paradigm is to enable high-performing
models, submitted by developers, to be used "beyond-what-was-submitted." This means that models
can be repurposed to assist with tasks not originally targeted by developers. To achieve this, learnware
is designed as a high-performing model with a specification describing its capability and utility. The
specification, a central component for learnware management and identification, can be implemented
by sketching the data distribution in which the model is proficient [Zhou and Tan, 2024]. Recently,
to facilitate research on the learnware paradigm, the learnware dock system, Beimingwu, has been
released [Tan et al., 2024a].
Previous research [Liu et al., 2024, Xie et al., 2023, Zhang et al., 2021] focuses on the homogeneous
case where models and user tasks share the same feature space. However, in real-world scenarios,
the feature spaces of models often differ due to varied feature engineering. As an example, we
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

