FedGTST: Boosting Global Transferability of
Federated Models via Statistics Tuning

Evelyn Ma, Chao Pan, Rasoul Etesami, Han Zhao, Olgica Milenkovic
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{pingm, chaopan2, etesami1, hanzhao, milenkov}@illinois.edu

Abstract
The performance of Transfer Learning (TL) significantly depends on effective
pretraining, which not only requires extensive amounts of data but also substantial
computational resources. As a result, in practice, it is challenging to successfully
perform TL at the level of individual model developers. Federated Learning (FL)
addresses these challenges by enabling collaborations among individual clients
through an indirect expansion of the available dataset, distribution of the computational across different clients, and privacy-preserving communication mechanisms.
Despite several attempts to design effective transferable FL approaches, several
important issues remain unsolved. First, existing methods primarily focus on optimizing transferability within local client domains, thereby ignoring transferability
across clients. Second, most approaches focus on analyzing indirect transferability
metrics, which does not allow for accurate assessment of the final target loss and
the degree of transferability. To address these issues, we introduce two important
FL features into the model. The first boosts transferability via an exchange protocol
between the clients and the server that includes information about cross-client
Jacobian (gradient) norms. The second feature promotes an increase of the average
of the Jacobians of the clients at the server side, which is subsequently used as a
local regularizer that reduces the cross-client Jacobian variance. A rigorous analysis of our transferable federated algorithm, termed FedGTST (Federated Global
Transferability via Statistics Tuning), reveals that increasing the averaged Jacobian
norm across clients and reducing the Jacobian variance ensures tight control of the
target loss. This insight leads to an upper bound on the target loss of transferable
FL regarding the source loss and source-target domain discrepancy. Empirically,
experiments on public benchmarks show that FedGTST significantly outperforms
other baselines, such as FedSR.

1

Introduction

Transfer Learning (TL) has received significant interest in the machine learning community due to its
ability to extract representative features from source tasks and use them to improve the generalization
capability on related target domain problems [48, 52]. In addition to boosting the performance of
a target domain model, TL also reduces the computational cost of fine-tuning the target domain
model. Nevertheless, effective source pretraining in TL is practically challenging for individual
model developers because it requires access to large datasets as well as significant computational
resources [35]. To resolve this problem, one can leverage Federated Learning (FL), which refers
to decentralized learning protocols used in mobile and IoT devices [18]. FL not only increases
access to multiple datasets in a decentralized manner and alleviates the computational burden of
individual clients, but it also protects the privacy of local data [32]. As a result, a number of
recent works have outlined methods for transferable FL, including FedADG (Federated Adversarial
Domain Generalization) [55], FedCDG (Federated Contrastive Domain Generalization) [53], FedSR
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

