A Theoretical Understanding of Self-Correction
through In-context Alignment

Yifei Wang1∗

Yuyang Wu2∗ Zeming Wei3

Stefanie Jegelka5,1

Yisen Wang4,6†

1

MIT CSAIL 2 School of EECS, Peking University
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
4
State Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
5
CIT, MCML, MDSI, TU Munich
6
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
3

Abstract
Going beyond mimicking limited human experiences, recent studies show initial evidence that, like humans, large language models (LLMs) are capable of improving
their abilities purely by self-correction, i.e., correcting previous responses through
self-examination, as seen in models like OpenAI o1. Nevertheless, little is known
about how such capabilities arise. In this work, based on a simplified setup akin to
an alignment task, we theoretically analyze self-correction from an in-context learning perspective, showing that when LLMs give relatively accurate self-examinations
as rewards, they are capable of refining responses in an in-context way. Notably,
going beyond previous theories on over-simplified linear transformers, our theoretical construction underpins the roles of several key designs of realistic transformers
for self-correction: softmax attention, multi-head attention, and the MLP block.
We validate these findings extensively on synthetic datasets. Inspired by these
findings, we propose a simple self-correction strategy, Checking as Context (CaC),
which finds novel applications in alleviating social bias and defending against LLM
jailbreaks. We believe that these findings will inspire further research on understanding, exploiting, and enhancing self-correction for building better foundation
models. Code is at https://github.com/yifeiwang77/Self-Correction.

1

Introduction
“Who among people is without fault? Making mistakes and being able to correct
them is the greatest goodness.” – Zuo Zhuan (∼400 BC), Translated by ChatGPT

The capacity for self-correction, traditionally viewed as a distinctive human trait, is increasingly being
explored within the realm of artificial intelligence, particularly in Large Language Models (LLMs).
Recent studies have sparked optimism about LLMs’ self-correction capabilities for enhancing reasoning [48, 65], planning [81], and alignment [21]. Although some find that self-correction may lead to
worse performance without external feedbacks [28, 70], more recent evidence shows that with careful
designs of instructions on the self-criticizing process, self-correction can yield considerable benefits
on various tasks [38, 86, 42, 32, 34, 69]. Remarkably, self-correction is recognized to be pivotal for
building strong reasoning models like OpenAI o1 [52].
Driven by these intruiging empirical findings, we want to establish a principled understanding of how
the self-correction ability emerges in LLMs. A particular difficulty is to formulate the multifaceted
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author: Yisen Wang (yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

