MGF: Mixed Gaussian Flow for Diverse Trajectory
Prediction
Jiahe Chen1,2∗
1

Jinkun Cao3∗†

Dahua Lin4,2,5

Kris Kitani3

Jiangmiao Pang2†

Zhejiang University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 Carnegie Mellon University
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 5 CPII under InnoHK
∗: co-first authors

†: co-corresponding authors

Abstract
To predict future trajectories, the normalizing flow with a standard Gaussian
prior suffers from weak diversity. The ineffectiveness comes from the conflict
between the fact of asymmetric and multi-modal distribution of likely outcomes and
symmetric and single-modal original distribution and supervision losses. Instead,
we propose constructing a mixed Gaussian prior for a normalizing flow model for
trajectory prediction. The prior is constructed by analyzing the trajectory patterns
in the training samples without requiring extra annotations while showing better
expressiveness and being multi-modal and asymmetric. Besides diversity, it also
provides better controllability for probabilistic trajectory generation. We name our
method Mixed Gaussian Flow (MGF). It achieves state-of-the-art performance in
the evaluation of both trajectory alignment and diversity on the popular UCY/ETH
and SDD datasets. Code is available at https://github.com/mulplue/MGF.

1

Introduction

In this work, we aim to improve the diversity for probabilistic trajectory prediction. In trajectory
prediction, diversity describes the fact that agents (pedestrians) can move in different directions,
speeds, and interact with other agents. Because the motion intentions of agents can not be determined
by their historical positions, there is typically no global-optimal strategy to predict a single outcome
of future trajectories. Therefore, recent works have focused on probabilistic methods to generate
multiple likely outcomes. However, existing solutions are argued to lack good diversity and they
often fail to generate the under-represented future trajectory patterns in the training data.
Different motion patterns are usually imbalanced in a dataset. For example, agents are more likely
to move straight than turn around in most datasets. Thus, many motion patterns are highly underrepresented though discoverable. Therefore, intuitively, an ideal distribution to represent the possible
future trajectories should be asymmetric, multi-modal, and expressive to represent long-tailed patterns.
However, most existing generative models solve the problem of trajectory prediction by modeling it
as a single-modal and symmetric distribution, i.e., standard Gaussian. This is because the standard
Gaussian is tractable and there is a belief that it can be transformed into any desired distribution of
the same or a lower dimension. However, deriving a desired complex distribution from a simple and
symmetric prior distribution is challenging, especially with limited and imbalanced data. Moreover,
when we derive the target distribution by transforming from the tractable original distribution as
Normalizing Flows, GANs, and VAEs do, a dilemma arises: an over-smoothing transformation model
can neglect under-represented samples while an over-decorated transformation model will overfit.
Especially for normalizing flow, some studies[22, 3] discussed the difficulty of training normalizing
flow in practice to represent a complex target distribution.
To solve this dilemma, we propose a prior distribution with more expressiveness and data-driven
statistics. It is asymmetric, multi-modal, and adaptive to the training data in the form of a mixed set
of Gaussians. Compared to the standard Gaussian, the mixture of Gaussians can better summarize the
under-represented samples scattered far away in the representation space. This relieves the sparsity
issue of rare cases and thus enhances the diversity of the generated outcomes. Besides diversity, as
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

