SCube: Instant Large-Scale Scene Reconstruction
using VoxSplats

Xuanchi Ren1,2,3∗ ,Yifan Lu1,4∗, Hanxue Liang1,5 , Zhangjie Wu1,6 ,
Huan Ling1,2,3 , Mike Chen1 , Sanja Fidler1,2,3 , Francis Williams1 , Jiahui Huang1
1

NVIDIA, 2 University of Toronto, 3 Vector Institute, 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
5
University of Cambridge, 6 National University of Singapore
https://research.nvidia.com/labs/toronto-ai/scube/

Abstract
We present SCube, a novel method for reconstructing large-scale 3D scenes (geometry, appearance, and semantics) from a sparse set of posed images. Our method
encodes reconstructed scenes using a novel representation VoxSplat, which is a
set of 3D Gaussians supported on a high-resolution sparse-voxel scaffold. To reconstruct a VoxSplat from images, we employ a hierarchical voxel latent diffusion
model conditioned on the input images followed by a feedforward appearance prediction model. The diffusion model generates high-resolution grids progressively
in a coarse-to-fine manner, and the appearance network predicts a set of Gaussians
within each voxel. From as few as 3 non-overlapping input images, SCube can
generate millions of Gaussians with a 10243 voxel grid spanning hundreds of
meters in 20 seconds. Past works tackling scene reconstruction from images either
rely on per-scene optimization and fail to reconstruct the scene away from input
views (thus requiring dense view coverage as input) or leverage geometric priors
based on low-resolution models, which produce blurry results. In contrast, SCube
leverages high-resolution sparse networks and produces sharp outputs from few
views. We show the superiority of SCube compared to prior art using the Waymo
self-driving dataset on 3D reconstruction and demonstrate its applications, such as
LiDAR simulation and text-to-scene generation.

1

Introduction

Recovering 3D geometry and appearance from images is a fundamental problem in computer vision
and graphics which has been studied for decades. This task lies at the core of many practical
applications spanning robotics, autonomous driving, and augmented reality; just to name a few. Early
algorithms tackling this problem use stereo matching and structure from motion (SfM) to recover
3D signals from image data (e.g.[44]). More recently, a line of work starting from Neural Radiance
Fields [32] (NeRFs) has augmented traditional SfM pipelines by fitting a volumetric field to a set of
images, which can be rendered from novel views. NeRFs augment traditional reconstruction pipelines
by encoding dense geometry, and view-dependent lighting effects. While radiance-field methods
present a drastic step forward in our ability to recover 3D information from images, they require
a time-consuming per-scene optimization scheme. Furthermore, since each scene is recovered in
isolation, radiance fields do not make use of data priors, and cannot extrapolate reconstructions away
from the input views. Thus, radiance-field methods require dense view coverage in order to produce
high-quality 3D reconstructions.
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

