FairJob: A Real-World Dataset
for Fairness in Online Systems

Mariia Vladimirova∗, Eustache Diemert
Criteo AI Lab
{m.vladimirova,e.diemert}@criteo.com

Federico Pavone
Université Paris Dauphine-PSL
federico.pavone@dauphine.psl.eu

Abstract
We introduce a fairness-aware dataset for job recommendation in advertising,
designed to foster research in algorithmic fairness within real-world scenarios.
It was collected and prepared to comply with privacy standards and business
confidentiality. An additional challenge is the lack of access to protected user
attributes such as gender, for which we propose a solution to obtain a proxy
estimate. Despite being anonymized and including a proxy for a sensitive attribute,
our dataset preserves predictive power and maintains a realistic and challenging
benchmark. This dataset addresses a significant gap in the availability of fairnessfocused resources for high-impact domains like advertising – the actual impact
being having access or not to precious employment opportunities, where balancing
fairness and utility is a common industrial challenge. We also explore various
stages in the advertising process where unfairness can occur and introduce a method
to compute a fair utility metric for the job recommendations in online systems
case from a biased dataset. Experimental evaluations of bias mitigation techniques
on the released dataset demonstrate potential improvements in fairness and the
associated trade-offs with utility.
The dataset is hosted at https://huggingface.co/datasets/criteo/FairJob. Source code
for the experiments is hosted at https://github.com/criteo-research/FairJob-dataset/.

1

Introduction

The intersection of technology and human dynamics presents both opportunities and challenges,
particularly in the realm of artificial intelligence (AI). Despite advancements, persistent biases
rooted in historical inequalities permeate our data-driven systems, perpetuating unfairness and
exacerbating societal divides. Historical biases shape data collection, influencing AI model outcomes
and often amplifying existing inequalities [Bolukbasi et al., 2016, Zhao et al., 2017, Chen et al.,
2023]. Despite concerns regarding privacy, liability, and public relations, the collection of special
and sensitive category data is crucial for bias assessments [Andrus et al., 2021]. Moreover, evolving
legal frameworks, exemplified by the recent AI Act and General Data Protector Regulation [UK
Information Commissioner’s Office, 2022], mandate the detection, prevention, and mitigation of
biases, while imposing some restrictions on the use of sensitive data.
Recent advances in fairness often involve computer vision, natural language processing and speech
recognition tasks [Gustafson et al., 2023, Andrews et al., 2024, Hall et al., 2024, Schumann et al.,
2024, Veliche and Fung, 2023], while lacking attention to algorithmic decision-making that involves
tabular data, where each row represents an individual or an observation, and each column represents
a feature or attribute [Le Quy et al., 2022, Zhang et al., 2021], resulting in a very few benchmark
papers [Gorishniy et al., 2021, 2022, Grinsztajn et al., 2022, Shwartz-Ziv and Armon, 2022, Matteucci
et al., 2023]. Tabular data is commonly used in various high-risk domains such as finance, healthcare,
hiring, criminal justice, and advertising [van Breugel and van der Schaar, 2024].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

