Alias-Free Mamba Neural Operator
Jianwei Zheng, Wei Li, Ni Xu, Junwei Zhu, Xiaoxu Lin, and Xiaoqin Zhang∗
Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou, Zhejiang

Abstract
Benefiting from the booming deep learning techniques, neural operators (NO) are
considered as an ideal alternative to break the traditions of solving Partial Differential Equations (PDE) with expensive cost. Yet with the remarkable progress,
current solutions concern little on the holistic function features–both global and
local information– during the process of solving PDEs. Besides, a meticulously designed kernel integration to meet desirable performance often suffers from a severe
computational burden, such as GNO with O(N (N − 1)), FNO with O(N logN ),
and Transformer-based NO with O(N 2 ). To counteract the dilemma, we propose a
mamba neural operator with O(N ) computational complexity, namely MambaNO.
Functionally, MambaNO achieves a clever balance between global integration,
facilitated by state space model of Mamba that scans the entire function, and
local integration, engaged with an alias-free architecture. We prove a property of
continuous-discrete equivalence to show the capability of MambaNO in approximating operators arising from universal PDEs to desired accuracy. MambaNOs are
evaluated on a diverse set of benchmarks with possibly multi-scale solutions and
set new state-of-the-art scores, yet with fewer parameters and better efficiency.

1

Introduction

Numerous scientific and engineering problems entail recurrently resolving intricate Partial Differential
Equation (PDE) [1] for various parameter values, including morphology across biomes [2], physical
system state [3], and Radcliffe wave oscillation [4], to name just a few. Nonetheless, traditional
solvers, such as Finite Element Methods (FEM) and Finite Difference Methods (FDM), necessitate
an equilibrium between the speed of obtaining solutions and the level of refinement due to the
requirement of resolving equations through domain discretization. Another disadvantage of these
methods lies in the unavoidable resolving stage when the initial conditions of PDEs are varied.
Recently, data-driven methods have emerged as an alternative for the development of faster, more
robust, and more accurate solvers due to the natural ability to directly ascertain the trajectory of an
PDE family from the data, instead of a single instance of the equation.
These techniques, collectively termed operator learning or neural operator, strive to approximate
a well-behaved mapping from input function spaces, such as initial and boundary conditions, to
solutions of some PDEs valued also within function spaces. As a burgeoning subject, most wellknown NOs have been substantiated, encompassing Operator networks [5], DeepONets (DON) [6],
Graph Neural Operator (GNO) [7], Fourier Neural Operator (FNO) [8], [9, 10], Transformer-based
learning architectures [11, 12], and the most recent Convolution Neural Operators (CNO) [13].
Despite the substantial success of recently introduced operator learning frameworks, existing algorithms continue to demonstrate specific limitations to various degrees. The focus of operator network
learning is on mapping between finite-dimensional function spaces, yet the truthful NO often engages
with functions owning infinite dimensions. The practice of DON cannot take inputs at any point,
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

