Almost Free: Self-concordance in Natural Exponential
Families and an Application to Bandits

Shuai Liu
University of Alberta
shuailiu725@gmail.com
Flore Sentenac
HEC Paris
sentenac@hec.fr

Alex Ayoub
University of Alberta
aayoub@ualberta.ca

Xiaoqi Tan
University of Alberta
xiaoqi.tan@ualberta.ca

Csaba Szepesvári
University of Alberta
csaba.szepesvari@gmail.com

Abstract
We prove that single-parameter natural exponential families with subexponential
tails are self-concordant with polynomial-sized parameters. For subgaussian natural
exponential families we establish an exact characterization of the growth rate of
the self-concordance parameter. Applying these findings to bandits allows us to fill
gaps in the literature: We show that optimistic algorithms for generalized linear
bandits enjoy regret bounds that are both second-order (scale with the variance of
the optimal arm’s reward distribution) and free of an exponential dependence on the
bound of the problem parameter in the leading term. To the best of our knowledge,
ours is the first regret bound for generalized linear bandits with subexponential
tails, broadening the class of problems to include Poisson, exponential and gamma
bandits.

1

Introduction

Single-parameter natural exponential families (NEFs) [Mor82] abound in statistical applications
[MN89; Bro86; WJ08; ML09]. In this paper we study properties of NEFs and in doing so we make
two main contributions:
1. We study how tail properties of the base distribution of a NEF impose limits on the NEF:
if the base distribution is subexponential (subgaussian), we show that the NEF is selfconcordant with a stretch factor that grows inverse quadratically (respectively, linearly)
2. In generalized linear bandits whose reward distributions follow a NEF with subexponential
base distribution, we show how this new result can be utilized to derive a novel second
order regret bound whose leading term is free of exponential dependencies on the problem
parameter — the first such result for this setting.
The class of distributions our results extend to includes: normal, Poisson, exponential, gamma and
negative binomial distributions. Our findings partially address conjectures on whether generalized
linear models with unbounded targets are self-concordant [Bac10; Fau+20]. This significantly
generalizes the case when the targets are assumed to be bounded1 [Mar+19; OB21; Rus+21] and thus
extends the applicability of the results therein.
1

This assumption does not hold for distributions with unbounded support such as: normal, Poisson, exponential, gamma and negative binomial distributions.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

