The surprising efficiency of temporal difference
learning for rare event prediction

Xiaoou Cheng
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
New York, NY 10012
chengxo@nyu.edu

Jonathan Weare
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
New York, NY 10012
weare@nyu.edu

Abstract
We quantify the efficiency of temporal difference (TD) learning over the direct, or
Monte Carlo (MC), estimator for policy evaluation in reinforcement learning, with
an emphasis on estimation of quantities related to rare events. Policy evaluation
is complicated in the rare event setting by the long timescale of the event and by
the need for relative accuracy in estimates of very small values. Specifically, we
focus on least-squares TD (LSTD) prediction for finite state Markov chains, and
show that LSTD can achieve relative accuracy far more efficiently than MC. We
prove a central limit theorem for the LSTD estimator and upper bound the relative
asymptotic variance by simple quantities characterizing the connectivity of states
relative to the transition probabilities between them. Using this bound, we show
that, even when both the timescale of the rare event and the relative error of the
MC estimator are exponentially large in the number of states, LSTD maintains a
fixed level of relative accuracy with a total number of observed transitions of the
Markov chain that is only polynomially large in the number of states.

1

Introduction

Prediction of the future behavior of a dynamical system from time series observations is a fundamental
task in science and engineering. One need only remember the weather forecast consulted this morning
to appreciate the substantial intersection this problem has with our everyday lives. Beyond its own
obvious importance, prediction is also a key component in modern machine learning tasks like
reinforcement learning, where the rules governing the dynamical system are adjusted to optimize some
reward. Exciting applications in that field, like self-driving cars, have captured public imagination.
Prediction is made particularly difficult when the future behavior of interest involves some rare or
extreme event. Examples include extreme weather or climate events, failure of reliable engineering
products, and the conformational rearrangements that determine critical functions of biomolecules in
our bodies. Precisely because of their out-sized impact on our lives and society, rare and extreme
events are the most important to predict. Unfortunately, by definition, data sets often contain relatively
few examples of these events. In this article we ask: can rare events be predicted accurately with
time series data sets much shorter than the typical timescale of the event? The surprising answer is
Yes. Our mathematical results support recent studies demonstrating accurate rare event prediction
with limited data using methods related to those studied here, including in state-of-the-art application
settings and for very rare events [Thiede et al., 2019, Strahan et al., 2021, Finkel et al., 2021,
2023b, Antoszewski et al., 2021, Lucente et al., 2021, Finkel et al., 2023a, Strahan et al., 2023a,
Jacques-Dumas et al., 2023, Strahan et al., 2023b, Guo et al., 2024].
Within the context of reinforcement learning, “prediction” refers to policy evaluation, that is, calculation of the value function of states given a policy [Sutton and Barto, 2018]. Prediction is the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

