Images that Sound:
Composing Images and Sounds on a Single Canvas

Ziyang Chen

Daniel Geng

Andrew Owens

University of Michigan

Color image

https://ificl.github.io/images-that-sound/

”tigers, grayscale, black background”

Frequency

Spectrogram

”castle with bell towers, grayscale, lithograph style”

”tiger growling”

Time

Time

Waveform

”bell ringing”

Figure 1: Images that sound. We use diffusion models to generate visual spectrograms (second row) that
look like natural images, which we call images that sound. These spectrograms can be converted into natural
sounds (third row) using a pretrained vocoder, or colorized to obtain more visually pleasing results (first row).
Please refer to our website to listen to the sounds.

Abstract
Spectrograms are 2D representations of sound that look very different from the
images found in our visual world. And natural images, when played as spectrograms, make unnatural sounds. In this paper, we show that it is possible to
synthesize spectrograms that simultaneously look like natural images and sound
like natural audio. We call these visual spectrograms images that sound. Our
approach is simple and zero-shot, and it leverages pre-trained text-to-image and
text-to-spectrogram diffusion models that operate in a shared latent space. During
the reverse process, we denoise noisy latents with both the audio and image diffusion models in parallel, resulting in a sample that is likely under both models.
Through quantitative evaluations and perceptual studies, we find that our method
successfully generates spectrograms that align with a desired audio prompt while
also taking the visual appearance of a desired image prompt. Please see our project
page for video results: https://ificl.github.io/images-that-sound/

1

Introduction

The spectrogram is a ubiquitous low-dimensional representation for audio machine learning that plots
the energy within different frequencies over time. But it is also widely used as a tool for converting
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

