Flipping-based Policy for Chance-Constrained
Markov Decision Processes
Xun Shen
Osaka University
shenxun@eei.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp

Shuo Jiang
Osaka University
u316354h@ecs.osaka-u.ac.jp

Akifumi Wachi
LY Corporation
akifumi.wachi@lycorp.co.jp
Kazumune Hashimoto
Osaka University
hashimoto@eei.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp

Sebastien Gros
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
sebastien.gros@ntnu.no

Abstract
Safe reinforcement learning (RL) is a promising approach for many real-world
decision-making problems where ensuring safety is a critical necessity. In safe
RL research, while expected cumulative safety constraints (ECSCs) are typically
the first choices, chance constraints are often more pragmatic for incorporating
safety under uncertainties. This paper proposes a flipping-based policy for ChanceConstrained Markov Decision Processes (CCMDPs). The flipping-based policy
selects the next action by tossing a potentially distorted coin between two action
candidates. The probability of the flip and the two action candidates vary depending
on the state. We establish a Bellman equation for CCMDPs and further prove the
existence of a flipping-based policy within the optimal solution sets. Since solving
the problem with joint chance constraints is challenging in practice, we then
prove that joint chance constraints can be approximated into Expected Cumulative
Safety Constraints (ECSCs) and that there exists a flipping-based policy in the
optimal solution sets for constrained MDPs with ECSCs. As a specific instance
of practical implementations, we present a framework for adapting constrained
policy optimization to train a flipping-based policy. This framework can be applied
to other safe RL algorithms. We demonstrate that the flipping-based policy can
improve the performance of the existing safe RL algorithms under the same limits
of safety constraints on Safety Gym benchmarks.

1

Introduction

In safety-critical decision-making problems, such as healthcare, economics, and autonomous driving,
it is fundamentally necessary to consider safety requirements in the operation of physical systems to
avoid posing risks to humans or other objects [14, 19, 43]. Thus, safe reinforcement learning (RL),
which incorporates safety in learning problems [19], has recently received significant attention for
ensuring the safety of learned policies during the operation phases. Safe RL is typically addressed by
formulating a constrained RL problem in which the policy is optimized subject to safety constraints
[1, 15, 32, 49]. The safety constraints have various types of representations (e.g., expected cumulative
safety constraint [4, 5, 7], instantaneous hard constraint [36, 45], almost surely safe [9, 44], joint
chance constraint [29–31]). In many real applications, such as drone trajectory planning [40] and
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

