Efficient Recurrent Off-Policy RL Requires a
Context-Encoder-Specific Learning Rate

Fan-Ming Luo1,2 Zuolin Tu2 Zefang Huang1 Yang Yu1,2∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
2
Polixir.ai
luofm@lamda.nju.edu.cn, zuolin.tu@polixir.ai, zf.frank.huang@gmail.com,
yuy@nju.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Real-world decision-making tasks are usually partially observable Markov decision
processes (POMDPs), where the state is not fully observable. Recent progress
has demonstrated that recurrent reinforcement learning (RL), which consists of
a context encoder based on recurrent neural networks (RNNs) for unobservable
state prediction and a multilayer perceptron (MLP) policy for decision making,
can mitigate partial observability and serve as a robust baseline for POMDP
tasks. However, prior recurrent RL algorithms have faced issues with training
instability. In this paper, we find that this instability stems from the autoregressive
nature of RNNs, which causes even small changes in RNN parameters to produce
large output variations over long trajectories. Therefore, we propose Recurrent
Off-policy RL with Context-Encoder-Specific Learning Rate (RESeL) to tackle
this issue. Specifically, RESeL uses a lower learning rate for context encoder
than other MLP layers to ensure the stability of the former while maintaining
the training efficiency of the latter. We integrate this technique into existing offpolicy RL methods, resulting in the RESeL algorithm. We evaluated RESeL in
18 POMDP tasks, including classic, meta-RL, and credit assignment scenarios,
as well as five MDP locomotion tasks. The experiments demonstrate significant
improvements in training stability with RESeL. Comparative results show that
RESeL achieves notable performance improvements over previous recurrent RL
baselines in POMDP tasks, and is competitive with or even surpasses state-ofthe-art methods in MDP tasks. Further ablation studies highlight the necessity
of applying a distinct learning rate for the context encoder. Code is available at
https://github.com/FanmingL/Recurrent-Offpolicy-RL.

1

Introduction

In many real-world reinforcement learning (RL) tasks [1], complete state observations are often
unavailable due to limitations such as sensor constraints, cost considerations, or task-specific requirements. For example, visibility can be obstructed by obstacles in autonomous driving [2, 3] or robotic
manipulation [4], and measuring ground friction may be infeasible when controlling quadruped
robots on complex terrain [5]. These scenarios are common and typically conceptualized as Partially
Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs). Traditional RL struggles with POMDPs due to
the lack of essential state information [6].
A mainstream class of POMDP RL algorithms infers unobservable states by leveraging historical
observation information, either explicitly or implicitly [6]. This often requires memory-augmented
∗

Yang Yu is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

