DMPlug: A Plug-in Method for Solving Inverse
Problems with Diffusion Models
Hengkang Wang1 Xu Zhang2∗ Taihui Li1 Yuxiang Wan1 Tiancong Chen1 Ju Sun1
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota
{wang9881,lixx5027,wan01530,chen6271,jusun}@umn.edu
2
Amazon.com Inc., spongezhang@gmail.com

Abstract
Pretrained diffusion models (DMs) have recently been popularly used in solving
inverse problems (IPs). The existing methods mostly interleave iterative steps in the
reverse diffusion process and iterative steps to bring the iterates closer to satisfying
the measurement constraint. However, such interleaving methods struggle to produce final results that look like natural objects of interest (i.e., manifold feasibility)
and fit the measurement (i.e., measurement feasibility), especially for nonlinear
IPs. Moreover, their capabilities to deal with noisy IPs with unknown types and
levels of measurement noise are unknown. In this paper, we advocate viewing
the reverse process in DMs as a function and propose a novel plug-in method
for solving IPs using pretrained DMs, dubbed DMPlug. DMPlug addresses the
issues of manifold feasibility and measurement feasibility in a principled manner,
and also shows great potential for being robust to unknown types and levels of
noise. Through extensive experiments across various IP tasks, including two linear
and three nonlinear IPs, we demonstrate that DMPlug consistently outperforms
state-of-the-art methods, often by large margins especially for nonlinear IPs. The
code is available at https://github.com/sun-umn/DMPlug.

1

Introduction

Inverse problems (IPs) are prevalent in numerous fields, such as computer vision, medical imaging,
remote sensing, and autonomous driving [1–4]. The goal of IPs is to recover an unknown object x
from noisy measurements y = A(x) + n, where A is a (possibly nonlinear) forward model and n
denotes the measurement noise. IPs are often ill-posed: typically, even if y is noiseless, x cannot
be uniquely determined from y and A. Hence, incorporating prior knowledge on x is necessary to
obtain a reliable estimate of the underlying x.
Traditionally, IPs are solved in the regularized data-fitting framework, often motivated as performing
the Maximum a Posterior (MAP) inference:
minx ℓ(y, A(x)) + Ω(x)

ℓ(y, A(x)) : data-fitting loss, Ω(x) : regularizer.

(1)

Here, minimizing the data-fitting loss promotes y ≈ A(x), and the regularizer encodes prior knowledge on x. Recently, the advent of deep learning (DL) has brought about a few new algorithmic ideas
to solve IPs. For example, given a training set of measurement-object pairs, i.e., {(yi , xi )}i=1,...,N ,
one can hope to train a DL model that directly predicts x for a given y [5–16]. However, such hopes
can be shattered by practical challenges in collecting massive and realistic paired training sets,
especially for complex IPs [17, 18]. Even if such challenges can be tackled, one may need to collect
a new training set and train a new DL model for every new IP [15], overlooking potential shared
priors on x across IPs. An attractive alternative family of ideas combine pretrained priors on x and
∗

This work is not related to Dr. Xu Zhang’s position at Amazon.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

