Great Minds Think Alike: The Universal Convergence
Trend of Input Salience

Yipei Wang, Jeffrey Mark Siskind, Xiaoqian Wang
Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
wang4865,qobi,joywang@purdue.edu

Abstract
Uncertainty is introduced in optimized DNNs through stochastic algorithms, forming specific distributions. Training models can be seen as random sampling from
this distribution of optimized models. In this work, we study the distribution of
optimized DNNs as a family of functions by leveraging a pointwise approach.
We focus on the input saliency maps, as the input gradient field is decisive to
the models’ mathematical essence. Our investigation of saliency maps reveals
a counter-intuitive trend: two stochastically optimized models tend to resemble
each other more as either of their capacities increases. Therefore, we hypothesize
several properties of these distributions, suggesting that (1) Within the same model
architecture (e.g., CNNs, ResNets), different family variants (e.g., varying capacities) tend to align in terms of their population mean directions of the input salience.
And (2) the distributions of optimized models follow a convergence trend to their
shared population mean as the capacity increases. Furthermore, we also propose
semi-parametric distributions based on the Saw distribution to model the convergence trend, satisfying all the counter-intuitive observations. Our experiments
shed light on the significant implications of our hypotheses in various application
domains, including black-box attacks, deep ensembles, etc. These findings not
only enhance our understanding of DNN behaviors but also offer valuable insights
for their practical application in diverse areas of deep learning.

1

Introduction

The advancement in computational power has significantly enhanced the capabilities of Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs), leading to their unparalleled expressiveness and success in a multitude of applications across various fields (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al., 2016; Rajkomar et al., 2018; Berner
et al., 2019; Rombach et al., 2022; Padmaja et al., 2023; Thirunavukarasu et al., 2023). Despite these
achievements, DNNs remain enigmatic, not only to end-users but also to researchers and practitioners
(Ribeiro et al., 2016; Rudin, 2018; Preece et al., 2018). Due to the over-parameterization nature of
modern DNNs, they are capable of reaching zero loss in the training distribution (Goodfellow et al.,
2014b; Allen-Zhu et al., 2019; Du et al., 2019). Furthermore, the inherent stochastic nature of training
algorithms means that even when using the same training data, DNNs tend to converge to various
minima (Huang et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2020). Thus even though these models may exhibit comparable
performance in terms of metrics like testing loss or accuracy, their underlying mechanisms can still
differ significantly. Because of the stochastic nature of the training procedure, optimized DNNs
collectively form a distribution over the functional space C 1 (X ), and training DNNs from scratch
is thereby equivalent to randomly sampling from such a distribution without any guarantee. This
inherent opacity, combined with the high dimensionality and nonlinearity, limits our understanding
of the internal mechanisms of DNNs.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

