SpaFL: Communication-Efficient Federated Learning
with Sparse Models and Low Computational Overhead

Minsu Kim ∗
Virginia Tech

Walid Saad
Virginia Tech

Merouane Debbah
Khalifa University

Choong Seon Hong
Kyung Hee University

Abstract
The large communication and computation overhead of federated learning (FL)
is one of the main challenges facing its practical deployment over resourceconstrained clients and systems. In this work, SpaFL: a communication-efficient FL
framework is proposed to optimize sparse model structures with low computational
overhead. In SpaFL, a trainable threshold is defined for each filter/neuron to prune
its all connected parameters, thereby leading to structured sparsity. To optimize
the pruning process itself, only thresholds are communicated between a server
and clients instead of parameters, thereby learning how to prune. Further, global
thresholds are used to update model parameters by extracting aggregated parameter
importance. The generalization bound of SpaFL is also derived, thereby proving
key insights on the relation between sparsity and performance. Experimental results
show that SpaFL improves accuracy while requiring much less communication
and computing resources compared to sparse baselines. The code is available at
https://github.com/news-vt/SpaFL_NeruIPS_2024

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) is a distributed machine learning framework in which clients collaborate
to train a machine learning (ML) model without sharing private data [1]. In FL, clients perform
multiple epochs of local training using their own datasets and communicate model updates with
a server. Different from a classical, centralized ML, FL systems are typically deployed on edge
devices such as mobile or Internet of Things (IoT) devices, which have limited computing and
communication resources. However, current ML models are typically too large and complex to
be trained and deployed for inference by edge devices. Moreover, large model sizes can induce
significant FL communication costs on both devices and communication networks. Hence, the
practical deployment of FL over resource-constrained devices and systems requires optimized
computation and communication costs for both edge devices and communication networks. This
has motivated lines of research focused on reducing communication overhead in FL [2, 3], training
sparse models in FL [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9], and optimizing model architectures to find a compact model
for inference [10, 11, 12]. The works in [2, 3] proposed training algorithms such as quantization,
gradient compression, and transmitting the subset of models in order to reduce the communication
costs of FL. However, the associated computational overhead of these existing algorithms remains
high since devices have to train a dense model. In [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9], FL algorithms in which devices
train and communicate sparse models are proposed. However, the works in [4, 5] used unstructured
pruning, which is difficult to gain the computation efficiency in practice. Moreover, the computation
∗
This work was supported in part by a grant from the Amazon-Virginia Tech Initiative for Efficient and in
part by the Robust Machine Learning and U.S. National Science Foundation under Grant CNS-2114267.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

