Fixed Confidence Best Arm Identification in the
Bayesian Setting

Kyoungseok Jang
Universitá degli Studi di Milano
ksajks@gmail.com

Junpei Komiyama
New York University / RIKEN AIP
junpei@komiyama.info

Kazutoshi Yamazaki
The University of Queensland
k.yamazaki@uq.edu.au

Abstract
We consider the fixed-confidence best arm identification (FC-BAI) problem in the
Bayesian setting. This problem aims to find the arm of the largest mean with a fixed
confidence level when the bandit model has been sampled from the known prior.
Most studies on the FC-BAI problem have been conducted in the frequentist setting,
where the bandit model is predetermined before the game starts. We show that
the traditional FC-BAI algorithms studied in the frequentist setting, such as trackand-stop and top-two algorithms, result in arbitrarily suboptimal performances in
the Bayesian setting. We also obtain a lower bound of the expected number of
samples in the Bayesian setting and introduce a variant of successive elimination
that has a matching performance with the lower bound up to a logarithmic factor.
Simulations verify the theoretical results.

1

Introduction

In many sequential decision-making problems, the learner repeatedly chooses an arm (option) to play
with and observes a reward drawn from the unknown distribution of the corresponding arm. One of
the most widely-studied instances of such problems is the multi-armed bandit problem [Thompson,
1933, Robbins, 1952, Lai, 1987], where the goal is to maximize the sum of rewards during the rounds.
Since the learner does not know the distribution of rewards, they need to explore the different arms,
and yet, exploit the arms of the most rewarding arms so far. Different from the classical bandit
formulation, there are situations where one is more interested in collecting information rather than
maximizing intermediate rewards. The best arm identification (BAI) is a sequential decision-making
problem in which the learner is only interested in identifying the arm with the highest mean reward.
While the origin of this problem dates back to at least the 1950s [Bechhofer, 1954, Paulson, 1964,
Gupta, 1977], recent work in the field of machine learning reformulated the problem [Audibert et al.,
2010]. In the BAI, the learner needs to pull arms efficiently for better identification. To achieve
efficiency and accuracy, the learner should determine which arm to choose based on the history, when
to stop the sampling, and which arm to recommend as the learner’s final decision.
There are two types of BAI problems depending on the optimization objective. In the fixed-budget
(FB) setting [Audibert et al., 2010], the learner attempts to minimize the probability of error (misidentification of the best arm) given a limited number of arm pulls T . In the fixed confidence (FC) setting
[Jamieson and Nowak, 2014], the learner attempts to minimize the number of arm pulls, subject to a
predefined probability of error δ ∈ (0, 1). In this paper, we shall focus on the FC setting, which is
useful when we desire a rigorous statistical guarantee.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

