Spectral Adapter: Fine-Tuning in Spectral Space

Mert Pilanci
Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
pilanci@stanford.edu

Fangzhao Zhang
Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
zfzhao@stanford.edu

Abstract
Recent developments in Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) methods for pretrained deep neural networks have captured widespread interest. In this work, we
study the enhancement of current PEFT methods by incorporating the spectral
information of pretrained weight matrices into the fine-tuning procedure. We
investigate two spectral adaptation mechanisms, namely additive tuning and orthogonal rotation of the top singular vectors, both are done via first carrying out
Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) of pretrained weights and then fine-tuning
the top spectral space. We provide a theoretical analysis of spectral fine-tuning
and show that our approach improves the rank capacity of low-rank adapters
given a fixed trainable parameter budget. We show through extensive experiments
that the proposed fine-tuning model enables better parameter efficiency and tuning performance as well as benefits multi-adapter fusion. Code is released at
https://github.com/pilancilab/spectral_adapter.

1

Introduction

Size of language and vision model undergoes a drastic explosion in recent days and results in billions
of parameters up to date. While fine-tuning has been used a lot for adapting pretrained large models to
various downstream tasks, fine-tuning tasks become increasingly hard with current size of pretrained
models due to the huge demand of computing resource. Meanwhile, exchange and storing of finetuned models are also expensive given their enormous size. To alleviate these rising problems for
fine-tuning large pretrained models, a recent line of research has digged into the Parameter-Efficient
Fine-Tuning (PEFT) model family and harnessed great attention. A high-level philosophy behind
those PEFT methods is to train a reduced number of parameters compared to full fine-tuning, which
instantly saves computing resource and enables light-weight fine-tuned model exchange. Among
all PEFT methods, Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [20] model is a huge success attributed to its
simplicity and effectiveness. Specifically, LoRA proposes to tune an additive trainable low-rank
matrix and brings zero inference latency after merging the adapter into pretrained model weights.
Since its emergence, numerous variants of LoRA have been developed. For instance, AdaLoRA
[65], IncreLoRA [62], and DyLoRA [54] propose to dynamically adjust LoRA rank distribution
for improving tuning efficiency, QLoRA [10] combines LoRA with model quantization to further
save computing resource, LoRA+ [16] and PrecLoRA [61] study the optimization landscape of
LoRA training, and more recent variant DoRA [32] decomposes pretrained weights into magnitude
and direction components and applies LoRA for direction tuning, see Apppendix A for a more
comprehensive review of different LoRA variants. Other PEFT methods such as Orthogonal FineTuning (OFT) proposes to multiply pretrained weights by tunable orthogonal matrices for preservation
of hypersphere energy between pretrained neurons. Though these different PEFT methods focus
on improving fine-tuning efficiency with reduced parameters, rare attention has been paid to utilize
pretrained model weights’ information beyond its magnitude in the fine-tuning procedure.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

