SpGesture: Source-Free Domain-adaptive
sEMG-based Gesture Recognition with Jaccard
Attentive Spiking Neural Network

Weiyu Guo1

∗

∗

Ying Sun1, Yijie Xu1 Ziyue Qiao2 Yongkui Yang3 Hui Xiong1,4,
1
Thrust of Artificial Intelligence, HKUST (Guangzhou), China
2
School of Computing and Information Technology, Great Bay University, China
3
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, HKUST, Hong Kong SAR, China
wguo395@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn; yings@hkust-gz.edu.cn;
yxu409@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn; zyqiao@gbu.edu.cn;
yk.yang@siat.ac.cn; xionghui@ust.hk

Abstract
Surface electromyography (sEMG) based gesture recognition offers a natural and
intuitive interaction modality for wearable devices. Despite significant advancements in sEMG-based gesture recognition models, existing methods often suffer
from high computational latency and increased energy consumption. Additionally,
the inherent instability of sEMG signals, combined with their sensitivity to distribution shifts in real-world settings, compromises model robustness. To tackle these
challenges, we propose a novel SpGesture framework based on Spiking Neural
Networks, which possesses several unique merits compared with existing methods:
(1) Robustness: By utilizing membrane potential as a memory list, we pioneer
the introduction of Source-Free Domain Adaptation into SNN for the first time.
This enables SpGesture to mitigate the accuracy degradation caused by distribution
shifts. (2) High Accuracy: With a novel Spiking Jaccard Attention, SpGesture
enhances the SNNs’ ability to represent sEMG features, leading to a notable rise
in system accuracy. To validate SpGesture’s performance, we collected a new
sEMG gesture dataset which has different forearm postures, where SpGesture
achieved the highest accuracy among the baselines (89.26%). Moreover, the actual
deployment on the CPU demonstrated a latency below 100ms, well within real-time
requirements. This impressive performance showcases SpGesture’s potential to
enhance the applicability of sEMG in real-world scenarios. The code is available
at https://github.com/guoweiyu/SpGesture/.

1

Introduction

Surface electromyography (sEMG) is a sensing modality that decodes motor intentions from muscle
electrical signals preceding movement to enable natural and intuitive interactions. It has distinct
advantages in gesture recognition for real-time applications. Specifically, sEMG provides rich
and comprehensive motion information, making it an excellent resource for accurate and efficient
wearable gesture recognition [12]. Moreover, sEMG signals can emerge anywhere from 50 to 150
milliseconds prior to the actual motor activity, enabling the anticipation of movements.
In recent years, Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) [41, 21, 20] provide an unparalleled chance for
developing more practical and efficient sEMG-based gesture recognition systems. SNNs emulate
* Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

