ResAD: A Simple Framework for Class Generalizable
Anomaly Detection

1

Xincheng Yao1 , Zixin Chen1 , Chao Gao3 , Guangtao Zhai1 , Chongyang Zhang1,2∗
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
China Pacific Insurance (Group) Co., Ltd.
{i-Dover, CZX15724137864, zhaiguangtao, sunny_zhang}@sjtu.edu.cn1
gaochao-027@cpic.com.cn3

Abstract
This paper explores the problem of class-generalizable anomaly detection, where
the objective is to train one unified AD model that can generalize to detect anomalies in diverse classes from different domains without any retraining or fine-tuning
on the target data. Because normal feature representations vary significantly across
classes, this will cause the widely studied one-for-one AD models to be poorly classgeneralizable (i.e., performance drops dramatically when used for new classes). In
this work, we propose a simple but effective framework (called ResAD) that can be
directly applied to detect anomalies in new classes. Our main insight is to learn the
residual feature distribution rather than the initial feature distribution. In this way,
we can significantly reduce feature variations. Even in new classes, the distribution
of normal residual features would not remarkably shift from the learned distribution. Therefore, the learned model can be directly adapted to new classes. ResAD
consists of three components: (1) a Feature Converter that converts initial features
into residual features; (2) a simple and shallow Feature Constraintor that constrains
normal residual features into a spatial hypersphere for further reducing feature
variations and maintaining consistency in feature scales among different classes;
(3) a Feature Distribution Estimator that estimates the normal residual feature distribution, anomalies can be recognized as out-of-distribution. Despite the simplicity,
ResAD can achieve remarkable anomaly detection results when directly used in
new classes. The code is available at https://github.com/xcyao00/ResAD.

1

Introduction

Anomaly detection (AD) has achieved rapid advances in many application domains, such as industrial
inspection, video surveillance, and medical lesion detection [9, 26]. However, applying AD algorithms
in real-world scenarios still confronts many challenges. A critical challenge is that there are usually
diverse classes2 and new classes are continually emerging. Most previous one-for-one and also
one-for-many (i.e., learning one AD model for multiple classes) AD methods [13, 17, 43, 12, 30,
47, 46, 44] are still insufficient to satisfy the requirements of real-world applications. Because such
methods still require retraining or fine-tuning when encountering new classes, but application users
generally don’t have such ability. Another more fatal point is that some scenarios may not allow
retraining on target classes due to data privacy issues [41]. Therefore, the class-generalizable ability
is a critical issue in the AD community, but it still hasn’t been well studied in most AD literatures.
∗

Corresponding Author.
Class means the category of the object in the image. For industrial scenarios, it refers to the product category,
e.g., bottle, carpet, etc. For medical analysis, it refers to the body organ category, e.g., head CT, retina, etc.
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

