Continual Counting with Gradual Privacy Expiration

Joel Daniel Andersson
Basic Algorithms Research Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen
jda@di.ku.dk

Monika Henzinger
Institute of Science and Technology Austria
Klosterneuburg, Austria
monika.henzinger@ist.ac.at

Rasmus Pagh
Basic Algorithms Research Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen
pagh@di.ku.dk

Teresa Anna Steiner
University of Southern Denmark
steiner@imada.sdu.dk

Jalaj Upadhyay
Rutgers University
jalaj.upadhyay@rutgers.edu

Abstract
Differential privacy with gradual expiration models the setting where data items
arrive in a stream and at a given time t the privacy loss guaranteed for a data item
seen at time (t − d) is εg(d), where g is a monotonically non-decreasing function.
We study the fundamental continual (binary) counting problem where each data
item consists of a bit, and the algorithm needs to output at each time step the sum of
all the bits streamed so far. For a stream of length T and privacy without expiration
continual counting is possible with maximum (over all time steps) additive error
O(log2 (T )/ε) and the best known lower bound is Ω(log(T )/ε); closing this gap
is a challenging open problem.
We show that the situation is very different for privacy with gradual expiration by
giving upper and lower bounds for a large set of expiration functions g. Specifically,
our algorithm achieves an additive error of O(log(T )/ε) for a large set of privacy
expiration functions. We also give a lower bound that shows that if C is the additive
error of any ε-DP algorithm for this problem, then the product of C and the privacy
expiration function after 2C steps must be Ω(log(T )/ε). Our algorithm matches
this lower bound as its additive error is O(log(T )/ε), even when g(2C) = O(1).
Our empirical evaluation shows that we achieve a slowly growing privacy loss
with significantly smaller empirical privacy loss for large values of d than a natural
baseline algorithm.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy under continual observation [8, 16] has seen a renewed interest recently [2, 3,
15, 21, 25, 26, 27, 24] due to its application in private learning [10, 11, 13, 14, 34] and statistics [6, 7,
19, 22, 30, 37, 40, 41, 20, 32]. In this model, the curator gets the database in the form of a stream and
is required to output a given statistic continually. Chan et al. [8] and Dwork et al. [16] introduced the
binary (tree) mechanism which allows us to estimate the running count of a binary stream of length
T with additive error O(log2 (T )/ε) under ε-differential privacy.
The traditional definition of continual observation considers every single entry in the stream equally
important for analysis and has equal confidentiality. However, in many applications of continual
observation, the data becomes less sensitive with time. For example, consider the case where the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

