A Surprisingly Simple Approach to
Generalized Few-Shot Semantic Segmentation

Tomoya Sakai
IBM Research - Tokyo
tomoya.sakai2@ibm.com
Daiki Kimura
IBM Research - Tokyo
daiki@jp.ibm.com

Haoxiang Qiu
IBM Research - Tokyo
haoxiang.qiu@ibm.com

Takayuki Katsuki
IBM Research - Tokyo
kats@jp.ibm.com

Takayuki Osogami
IBM Research - Tokyo
osogami@jp.ibm.com

Tadanobu Inoue
IBM
inouet@jp.ibm.com

Abstract
The goal of generalized few-shot semantic segmentation (GFSS) is to recognize
novel-class objects through training with a few annotated examples and the baseclass model that learned the knowledge about the base classes. Unlike the classic
few-shot semantic segmentation, GFSS aims to classify pixels into both base and
novel classes, meaning it is a more practical setting. Current GFSS methods rely
on several techniques such as using combinations of customized modules, carefully
designed loss functions, meta-learning, and transductive learning. However, we
found that a simple rule and standard supervised learning substantially improve the
GFSS performance. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective method for
GFSS that does not use the techniques mentioned above. Also, we theoretically
show that our method perfectly maintains the segmentation performance of the
base-class model over most of the base classes. Through numerical experiments,
we demonstrated the effectiveness of our method. It improved in novel-class
segmentation performance in the 1-shot scenario by 6.1% on the PASCAL-5i
dataset, 4.7% on the PASCAL-10i dataset, and 1.0% on the COCO-20i dataset.
Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/IBM/BCM.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation is a vital task in various visual understanding systems, and the goal is to
obtain pixel-level semantic categories [1]. Recent developments in convolutional neural networks [2]
and vision transformers [3] have pushed the limits of semantic segmentation. With a large amount of
annotated images, we can obtain an accurate model that can recognize objects in the training data. In
real-world applications, however, the learned model will encounter novel-class objects that are not
classified in base classes, i.e., classes that are not annotated in the training data.
To solve this problem, few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS) aims to recognize novel-class objects
with a few annotated images while using the learned model, which has knowledge about the baseclass information. Although various FSS methods have been proposed [4–15], FSS only handles
novel-class object recognition, which restricts its applicability since base classes will still appear at
inference in practice.
Generalized FSS (GFSS) aims to recognize both base- and novel-class objects [16] and is regarded as
a more practical setting than FSS. Current GFSS methods rely on several techniques such as using
combinations of customized modules [16–19], carefully designed loss functions [20], meta-learning
[16, 18, 19], and transductive learning [20]. These techniques improved GFSS performance at the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

