Piecewise deterministic generative models

Andrea Bertazzi1,∗ , Dario Shariatian2
Umut Simsekli2 , Eric Moulines1,3 , Alain Durmus1
1
École Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
2
INRIA, CNRS, Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University
3
MBZUAI
∗
andrea.bertazzi@polytechnique.edu

Abstract
We introduce a novel class of generative models based on piecewise deterministic
Markov processes (PDMPs), a family of non-diffusive stochastic processes consisting of deterministic motion and random jumps at random times. Similarly to
diffusions, such Markov processes admit time reversals that turn out to be PDMPs
as well. We apply this observation to three PDMPs considered in the literature: the
Zig-Zag process, Bouncy Particle Sampler, and Randomised Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo. For these three particular instances, we show that the jump rates and kernels of the corresponding time reversals admit explicit expressions depending on
some conditional densities of the PDMP under consideration before and after a
jump. Based on these results, we propose efficient training procedures to learn
these characteristics and consider methods to approximately simulate the reverse
process. Finally, we provide bounds in the total variation distance between the
data distribution and the resulting distribution of our model in the case where the
base distribution is the standard d-dimensional Gaussian distribution. Promising
numerical simulations support further investigations into this class of models.

1

Introduction

Diffusion-based generative models [Ho et al., 2020, Song et al., 2021] have recently achieved stateof-the-art performance in various fields of application [Dhariwal and Nichol, 2021, Croitoru et al.,
2023, Jeong et al., 2021, Kong et al., 2021]. In their continuous time interpretation [Song et al.,
2021], these models leverage the idea that a diffusion process can bridge the data distribution µ⋆ to a
base distribution π, and its time reversal can transform samples from π into synthetic data from µ⋆ .
Anderson [1982] showed that the time reversal of a diffusion process, i.e., the backward process, is
itself a diffusion with explicit drift and covariance functions that are related to the score functions
of the time-marginal densities of the original, forward diffusion. Consequently, the key element
of these generative models is learning these score functions using techniques such as (denoising)
score-matching [Hyvärinen, 2005, Vincent, 2011].
In this work we propose a new family of generative models which use piecewise deterministic
Markov processes (PDMPs) as noising processes instead of diffusions. PDMPs were introduced
around forty years ago [Davis, 1984, 1993] and since then have been successfully applied in various
fields, including communication networks [Dumas et al., 2002], biology [Berg and Brown, 1972,
Cloez, Bertrand et al., 2017], risk theory [Embrechts and Schmidli, 1994], and the reliability of
complex systems [Zhang et al., 2008]. More recently, PDMPs have been intensively studied in the
context of Monte Carlo algorithms [Fearnhead et al., 2018] as alternatives to Langevin diffusionbased methods and Metropolis-Hastings mechanisms. This renewed interest in PDMPs has led to
the development of novel processes, such as the Zig-Zag process (ZZP) [Bierkens et al., 2019a],
the Bouncy Particle Sampler (BPS) [Bouchard-Côté et al., 2018], and the Randomised Hamiltonian
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

