Exploring Jacobian Inexactness in Second-Order
Methods for Variational Inequalities: Lower Bounds,
Optimal Algorithms and Quasi-Newton
Approximations

Artem Agafonov1, 2∗, Petr Ostroukhov1, 2 , Roman Mozhaev2 , Konstantin Yakovlev2 ,
Eduard Gorbunov1 , Martin Takáč1 , Alexander Gasnikov3,2,4 , Dmitry Kamzolov1

1

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE
2
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology (MIPT), Moscow, Russia
3
Innopolis University, Innopolis, Russia
4
Skoltech, Moscow, Russia

Abstract
Variational inequalities represent a broad class of problems, including minimization and min-max problems, commonly found in machine learning. Existing
second-order and high-order methods for variational inequalities require precise
computation of derivatives, often resulting in prohibitively high iteration costs. In
this work, we study the impact of Jacobian inaccuracy on second-order methods.
For the smooth and monotone case, we establish a lower bound with explicit dependence on the level of Jacobian inaccuracy and propose an optimal algorithm for
this key setting. When derivatives are exact, our method converges at the same rate
as exact optimal second-order methods. To reduce the cost of solving the auxiliary
problem, which arises in all high-order methods with global convergence, we
introduce several Quasi-Newton approximations. Our method with Quasi-Newton
updates achieves a global sublinear convergence rate. We extend our approach with
a tensor generalization for inexact high-order derivatives and support the theory
with experiments.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we primarily address the problem of solving the Minty Variational Inequality (MVI) [77,
17]. Given a continuous operator F : X → Rd , where X ⊆ Rd is a closed bounded convex subset
with a diameter D = maxx,y∈X ∥x − y∥, the objective is to find a point x∗ ∈ X such that
⟨F (x), x − x∗ ⟩ ≥ 0, for all x ∈ X .
(1)
The solution to (1) is referred to as a weak solution of the Variational Inequality (VI) [37]. In contrast,
the Stampacchia variational inequality problem [48] consists in finding a point x∗ ∈ X such that
⟨F (x∗ ), x − x∗ ⟩ ≥ 0, for all x ∈ X .
(2)
This solution is often called a strong solution to the variational inequality. When the operator F is
both continuous and monotone, the weak and strong solutions are equivalent [37].
∗
Contact details:
Artem Agafonov - agafonov.ad@phystech.edu; Petr Ostroukhov postroukhov12@gmail.com; Roman Mozhaev - mozhaev.rm@phystech.edu; Konstantin Yakovlev
- iakovlev.kd@phystech.edu; Eduard Gorbunov - eduard.gorbunov@mbzuai.ac.ae; Martin
Takáč - takac.MT@gmail.com; Alexander Gasnikov - gasnikov@yandex.ru; Dmitry Kamzolov kamzolov.opt@gmail.com.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

