FSP-L APLACE: Function-Space Priors for the
Laplace Approximation in Bayesian Deep Learning

Tristan Cinquin∗
Tübingen AI Center, University of Tübingen
tristan.cinquin@uni-tuebingen.de
Vincent Fortuin
Helmholtz AI, TU Munich
vincent.fortuin@tum.de

Marvin Pförtner∗
Tübingen AI Center, University of Tübingen
marvin.pfoertner@uni-tuebingen.de

Philipp Hennig
Tübingen AI Center, University of Tübingen
philipp.hennig@uni-tuebingen.de

Robert Bamler
Tübingen AI Center, University of Tübingen
robert.bamler@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
Laplace approximations are popular techniques for endowing deep networks with
epistemic uncertainty estimates as they can be applied without altering the predictions of the trained network, and they scale to large models and datasets. While
the choice of prior strongly affects the resulting posterior distribution, computational tractability and lack of interpretability of the weight space typically limit
the Laplace approximation to isotropic Gaussian priors, which are known to cause
pathological behavior as depth increases. As a remedy, we directly place a prior on
function space. More precisely, since Lebesgue densities do not exist on infinitedimensional function spaces, we recast training as finding the so-called weak mode
of the posterior measure under a Gaussian process (GP) prior restricted to the space
of functions representable by the neural network. Through the GP prior, one can
express structured and interpretable inductive biases, such as regularity or periodicity, directly in function space, while still exploiting the implicit inductive biases
that allow deep networks to generalize. After model linearization, the training
objective induces a negative log-posterior density to which we apply a Laplace
approximation, leveraging highly scalable methods from matrix-free linear algebra.
Our method provides improved results where prior knowledge is abundant (as is the
case in many scientific inference tasks). At the same time, it stays competitive for
black-box supervised learning problems, where neural networks typically excel.

1

Introduction

Neural networks (NNs) have become the workhorse for many machine learning tasks, but they do
not quantify the uncertainty arising from data scarcity—the epistemic uncertainty. NNs therefore
cannot estimate their confidence in their predictions, which is needed for safety-critical applications,
decision making, and scientific modeling [1–3]. As a solution, Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) cast
training as approximating the Bayesian posterior distribution over the weights (i.e., the distribution of
the model parameters given the training data), thus naturally capturing epistemic uncertainty. Various
methods exist for approximating the (intractable) posterior, either by a set of samples (e.g., MCMC) or
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

