Rethinking the Diffusion Models for Missing Data
Imputation: A Gradient Flow Perspective

Zhichao Chen1

Haoxuan Li2 Fangyikang Wang1 Odin Zhang3 Hu Xu1
Xiaoyu Jiang1 Zhihuan Song1,4 Hao Wang1∗
1
Zhejiang University 2 Peking University 3 University of Washington
4
Guangdong University of Petrochemical Technology
12032042@zju.edu.cn hxli@stu.pku.edu.cn wangfangyikang@zju.edu.cn
odinz@uw.edu hxu_zju@zju.edu.cn jiangxiaoyu@zju.edu.cn
songzhihuan@zju.edu.cn haohaow@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion models have demonstrated competitive performance in missing data
imputation (MDI) task. However, directly applying diffusion models to MDI
produces suboptimal performance due to two primary defects. First, the sample
diversity promoted by diffusion models hinders the accurate inference of missing
values. Second, data masking reduces observable indices for model training,
obstructing imputation performance. To address these challenges, we introduce
Negative Entropy-regularized Wasserstein gradient flow for Imputation (NewImp),
enhancing diffusion models for MDI from a gradient flow perspective. To handle
the first defect, we incorporate a negative entropy regularization term into the
cost functional to suppress diversity and improve accuracy. To handle the second
defect, we demonstrate that the imputation procedure of NewImp, induced by the
conditional distribution-related cost functional, can equivalently be replaced by that
induced by the joint distribution, thereby naturally eliminating the need for data
masking. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of our method. Code is
available at https://github.com/JustusvLiebig/NewImp.

1

Introduction

Missing data is a pervasive problem for data analytics in diverse scenarios, including e-commerce [29,
30, 57], healthcare [51, 56], and process industry [33, 58]. For instance, in healthcare, patient
monitoring devices may fail or lose connection, leading to missing vital signs data. Similarly, in
industrial processes, sensor signals may be incomplete due to inevitable mechanical shock. These
incompletenesses hamper data integrity and impede subsequent analysis. Therefore, accurate missing
data imputation (MDI) is critical for enabling reliable analysis and decision in real-world applications.
Recently, diffusion models (DMs) have emerged as a powerful tool for MDI [66]. Specifically, these
models first estimate the (Stein) score function of the missing data conditioned on the observed data,
subsequently reformulating the imputation problem as a generative task grounded in the learned score
function. These works are initiated from [51] and evolve to incorporate crafted model architecture [33]
and learning objectives [38, 73] for enhancing the accuracy of score estimation [41]. Celebrated
for their advantageous capability to model data distributions and generate high-quality synthetic
data [41, 50, 65], diffusion models have been a prevalent approach to MDI.
Despite the successes of diffusion models, we argue that directly applying diffusion models to MDI
results in suboptimal performance due to two primary limitations. First, diffusion models perform
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

