Sample-efficient Bayesian Optimisation
Using Known Invariances

Theodore Brown∗1,2

Alexandru Cioba∗3
Ilija Bogunovic1
Equal contribution
1
University College London 2 United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority 3 MediaTek Research
{theodore.brown.23, i.bogunovic}@ucl.ac.uk
alexandru.cioba@mtkresearch.com
∗

Abstract
Bayesian optimisation (BO) is a powerful framework for global optimisation
of costly functions, using predictions from Gaussian process models (GPs). In
this work, we apply BO to functions that exhibit invariance to a known group of
transformations. We show that vanilla and constrained BO algorithms are inefficient
when optimising such invariant objectives, and provide a method for incorporating
group invariances into the kernel of the GP to produce invariance-aware algorithms
that achieve significant improvements in sample efficiency. We derive a bound on
the maximum information gain of these invariant kernels, and provide novel upper
and lower bounds on the number of observations required for invariance-aware
BO algorithms to achieve ϵ-optimality. We demonstrate our method’s improved
performance on a range of synthetic invariant and quasi-invariant functions. We
also apply our method in the case where only some of the invariance is incorporated
into the kernel, and find that these kernels achieve similar gains in sample efficiency
at significantly reduced computational cost. Finally, we use invariant BO to design
a current drive system for a nuclear fusion reactor, finding a high-performance
solution where non-invariant methods failed.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimisation (BO) has been applied to many global optimisation tasks in science and
engineering, such as improving the performance of web servers [30], reducing the losses in particle
accelerators [26], or maximising the potency of a drug [1]. The most challenging real-world tasks
tend to have large or continuous input domains, as well as target functions that are costly to evaluate.
One particular example of interest is the design and operation of nuclear fusion reactors, which
promise to deliver huge amounts of energy with zero greenhouse gas emissions. However, the development of high-performance fusion power plant scenarios is a difficult optimisation task, involving
expensive simulations and physical experiments [39, 11]. For tasks like this, it is desirable to develop
sample efficient algorithms that only require a small number of evaluations to find the optimal solution.
Crucially, the physical world is characterized by underlying structures that can be leveraged to
significantly improve sample efficiency. The concept of invariance, which describes properties that
remain constant under various transformations, is one of the most fundamental structures in nature. A
prime example of invariance is found in image classification tasks: a classifier should consistently
identify a cat as a cat, regardless of its orientation, position, or size. The central question we answer
is the extent to which the sample efficiency of BO can be improved by exploiting these invariances.
We study a general approach for incorporating invariances into any BO algorithm. We represent
invariant objective functions as elements of a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), and produce
invariance-aware versions of existing Gaussian process (GP) bandit optimisation algorithms by using
the kernel of this RKHS. We apply these algorithms to synthetic and nuclear fusion optimisation
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

