Stochastic Optimization Schemes for Performative
Prediction with Nonconvex Loss
Qiang Li

Hoi-To Wai

Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR of China
{liqiang, htwai}@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
This paper studies a risk minimization problem with decision dependent data distribution. The problem pertains to the performative prediction setting in which a
trained model can affect the outcome estimated by the model. Such dependency
creates a feedback loop that influences the stability of optimization algorithms such
as stochastic gradient descent (SGD). We present the first study on performative
prediction with smooth but possibly non-convex loss. We analyze a greedy deployment scheme with SGD (SGD-GD). Note that in the literature, SGD-GD is often
studied with strongly convex loss. We first propose the definition of stationary
performative stable (SPS) solutions through relaxing the popular performative stable condition. We then prove that SGD-GD converges to a biased SPS solution in
expectation. We consider two conditions of sensitivity on the distribution shifts: (i)
the sensitivity is characterized by Wasserstein-1 distance and the loss is Lipschitz
w.r.t. data samples, or (ii) the sensitivity is characterized by total variation (TV)
divergence and the loss is bounded. In both conditions, the bias levels are proportional to the stochastic gradient’s variance and sensitivity level. Our analysis is
extended to a lazy deployment scheme where models are deployed once per several
SGD updates, and we show that it converges to an SPS solution with reduced bias.
Numerical experiments corroborate our theories.

1

Introduction

When trained models are deployed in social contexts, the outcomes these models aim to predict can
be influenced by the models themselves. Taking email spam detection as an example. On one hand,
email service providers design filters to protect their users by identifying spam emails. On the other
hand, spammers aim to circumvent these filters to distribute malware and advertisements. Each time
a new classifier is deployed, spammers who are interspersed within the general population may alter
the characteristics of their messages to evade detection. The above example pertains to the strategic
classification problem [Dalvi et al., 2004, Cai et al., 2015, Hardt et al., 2016, Björkegren et al., 2020]
and can be modelled by dataset shifts [Quiñonero-Candela et al., 2022].
The scenarios described can be captured by the recently proposed performative prediction problem,
which called the above dataset shift phenomena as the ‘performative’ effect. Perdomo et al. [2020]
proposed to study the risk minimization problem with a decision-dependent data distribution:
minθ∈Rd V (θ) := EZ∼D(θ) [ℓ(θ; Z)],

(1)

where ℓ(θ; z) is a loss function that is continuously differentiable with respect to (w.r.t.) θ for any
given data sample z ∈ Z, and Z ⊆ Rp is the sample space. The dependence on θ in D(θ) explicitly
captures the distribution shift effect of prediction models on data samples. The objective function
V (θ) is also known as the performative risk.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

