LoCo: Learning 3D Location-Consistent Image
Features with a Memory-Efficient Ranking Loss

Dominik A. Kloepfer
Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford
dominik@robots.ox.ac.uk

João Henriques
Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford
joao@robots.ox.ac.uk

Dylan Campbell
School of Computing
Australian National University
dylan.campbell@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Image feature extractors are rendered substantially more useful if different views
of the same 3D location yield similar features while still being distinct from
other locations. A feature extractor that achieves this goal even under significant
viewpoint changes must recognise not just semantic categories in a scene, but also
understand how different objects relate to each other in three dimensions. Existing
work addresses this task by posing it as a patch retrieval problem, training the
extracted features to facilitate retrieval of all image patches that project from the
same 3D location. However, this approach uses a loss formulation that requires
substantial memory and computation resources, limiting its applicability for largescale training. We present a method for memory-efficient learning of locationconsistent features that reformulates and approximates the smooth average precision
objective. This novel loss function enables improvements in memory efficiency by
three orders of magnitude, mitigating a key bottleneck of previous methods and
allowing much larger models to be trained with the same computational resources.
We showcase the improved location consistency of our trained feature extractor
directly on a multi-view consistency task, as well as the downstream task of scenestable panoptic segmentation, significantly outperforming previous state-of-the-art.

Figure 1: Our approach—LoCo—offers memory-efficient learning of location-consistent (LoCo)
features. That is, features that backproject to nearby 3D locations are encouraged to have similar
image patch features (illustrated here by the pair of blue stacked cubes and the pair of red stacked
cubes), while those that backproject to well-separated points are trained to have more dissimilar
features (here, the blue vs. red cube stacks). This is achieved via a novel ranking loss that reformulates
and corrects the smooth average precision loss proposed in previous work [4, 26]. This facilitates
the derivation of a close approximation to the loss that is significantly more efficient to compute,
allowing the method to scale to much larger models with the same computational resources.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

