UMB: Understanding Model Behavior for
Open-World Object Detection

Xing Xi

Yangyang Huang
Zhijie Zhong
Ronghua Luo∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering
South China University of Technology
GuangZhou, China 510006

Abstract
Open-World Object Detection (OWOD) is a challenging task that requires the
detector to identify unlabeled objects and continuously demands the detector to
learn new knowledge based on existing ones. Existing methods primarily focus
on recalling unknown objects, neglecting to explore the reasons behind them.
This paper aims to understand the model’s behavior in predicting the unknown
category. First, we model the text attribute and the positive sample probability,
obtaining their empirical probability, which can be seen as the detector’s estimation
of the likelihood of the target with certain known attributes being predicted as
the foreground. Then, we jointly decide whether the current object should be
categorized in the unknown category based on the empirical, the in-distribution,
and the out-of-distribution probability. Finally, based on the decision-making
process, we can infer the similarity of an unknown object to known classes and
identify the attribute with the most significant impact on the decision-making
process. This additional information can help us understand the behavior of the
model’s prediction in the unknown class. The evaluation results on the Real-World
Object Detection (RWD) benchmark, which consists of five real-world application
datasets, show that we surpassed the previous state-of-the-art (SOTA) with an
absolute gain of 5.3 mAP for unknown classes, reaching 20.5 mAP. Our code is
available at https://github.com/xxyzll/UMB.

1

Introduction

As a fundamental task in computer vision, object detection has always been the focus of extensive
attention[1, 2, 3]. Traditional object detection methods are trained on closed datasets, assuming all detected objects have already been annotated in the training set. However, the real-world environment’s
complexity means it is impossible to annotate all objects. As a result, the application of traditional
detection methods is limited. Open World Object Detection (OWOD) has been introduced to address
the issue. OWOD can be divided into two subtasks: mining potential objects and incremental learning.
The former requires the model to detect categories in the test set that have not been annotated in
the training set. These newly discovered objects are then handed over to annotators, who select the
categories of interest. Subsequently, the model is required to fine-tune its existing knowledge to
detect these newly added categories (incremental learning).
Existing works primarily focus on generating pseudo-labels for potential objects in the training set,
treating these pseudo-labels as annotations for unknown categories. For instance, ORE[4] labels
samples with high objectness predicted as background as potential objects. CAT[5] and RE-OWOD[6]
utilize selective search to provide annotations for unknown categories. OW-DETR[7] proposes an
attention-driven pseudo-label strategy to mine potential positive samples. However, despite these
∗

Corresponding author: rhluo@scut.edu.cn.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

