Pre-Trained Multi-Goal Transformers with Prompt
Optimization for Efficient Online Adaptation

Haoqi Yuan1
1

Yuhui Fu1

Feiyang Xie2

Zongqing Lu1,3∗

School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Yuanpei College, Peking University
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
Efficiently solving unseen tasks remains a challenge in reinforcement learning (RL),
especially for long-horizon tasks composed of multiple subtasks. Pre-training policies from task-agnostic datasets has emerged as a promising approach, yet existing
methods still necessitate substantial interactions via RL to learn new tasks. We
introduce MGPO, a method that leverages the power of Transformer-based policies
to model sequences of goals, enabling efficient online adaptation through prompt
optimization. In its pre-training phase, MGPO utilizes hindsight multi-goal relabeling and behavior cloning. This combination equips the policy to model diverse
long-horizon behaviors that align with varying goal sequences. During online
adaptation, the goal sequence, conceptualized as a prompt, is optimized to improve
task performance. We adopt a multi-armed bandit framework for this process,
enhancing prompt selection based on the returns from online trajectories. Our
experiments across various environments demonstrate that MGPO holds substantial
advantages in sample efficiency, online adaptation performance, robustness, and
interpretability compared with existing methods.

1

Introduction

In the evolving landscape of deep learning, the paradigm of pre-training followed by fine-tuning has
become a dominant approach for improving learning downstream tasks, particularly in the domain
of computer vision [20, 62, 41] and natural language processing (NLP) [30, 32]. This paradigm
has recently been explored in deep reinforcement learning (RL) [3, 4], addressing the issue of
sample efficiency in RL when solving unseen tasks by leveraging the acquired knowledge during
pre-training. For example, offline meta-RL (OMRL) [33, 59, 56] studies pre-training a policy on
multi-task datasets, which adapts to a new task with limited interactions in this task. However, these
approaches typically require extensive data collection for each specific task. In contrast, given the
relative ease of acquiring large, task-agnostic datasets that contain diverse behaviors, other studies
focus on pre-training policies [4, 54] and skills [38, 47] on task-agnostic datasets and adapt to unseen
tasks with RL finetuning.
Most works [56, 55], especially in the context of OMRL, primarily focus on short-term tasks with
shaped rewards, where information of the unknown task can be inferred within a few steps of online
interactions (e.g., MuJoCo [50] and MetaWorld [58]). These approaches often fall short of tackling
long-horizon tasks which are characterized by a sequence of sub-processes. In our study, we consider
this challenging yet realistic scenario: given a task-agnostic dataset characterized by diverse behaviors
of the agent, we aim to pre-train a policy to facilitate efficient online adaptation to new, long-horizon
tasks.
∗

Correspondence to Zongqing Lu <zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

