Doing Experiments and Revising Rules
with Natural Language and Probabilistic Reasoning

Wasu Top Piriyakulkij1∗

Cassidy Langenfeld1
Tuan Anh Le2
1
Cornell University
Google2

Kevin Ellis1

Abstract
We give a model of how to infer natural language rules by doing experiments. The
model integrates Large Language Models (LLMs) with Monte Carlo algorithms for
probabilistic inference, interleaving online belief updates with experiment design
under information-theoretic criteria. We conduct a human-model comparison on a
Zendo-style task, finding that a critical ingredient for modeling the human data is to
assume that humans also consider fuzzy, probabilistic rules, in addition to assuming
that humans perform approximately-Bayesian belief updates. We also compare
with recent algorithms for using LLMs to generate and revise hypotheses, finding
that our online inference method yields higher accuracy at recovering the true
underlying rule, and provides better support for designing optimal experiments.

1

Introduction

An important way that humans grow their knowledge of the world is by experimentation and other
forms of active learning. This process is most clearly present in the experimental sciences, but similar
processes of active inference begin in infancy through early childhood [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Within everyday
adult cognition, active experimentation helps us quickly learn to use new devices and tools.
A basic framework for modeling experimentation is to alternate between conducting a good experiment, and updating one’s beliefs based on those experimental results [6]. These beliefs concern a
latent hypothesis about the regularity or trend the experimenter is investigating. This leaves open at
least two computational questions. First, we need to define a hypothesis space. Second, we need
efficient algorithms for belief updates and experiment generation. Such algorithms should reason
about probabilistic beliefs—considering many hypotheses and their associated probabilities—in order
to find experiments that optimally resolve different competing hypothesis.
Here we will introduce a model that represents hypotheses in natural language—even for problems
that do not intrinsically involve human language. We do this for two reasons. First, natural language
can index many human concepts, and can recursively combine them, giving an expressive hypothesis
space. Second, it allows using Large Language Models (LLMs) to aid the inference task of updating
beliefs after each experiment, giving tractable, approximate probabilistic inference when we view the
LLM as a proposal distribution for a Monte Carlo estimator.
We are especially interested in comparing our model to human behavior, given the long legacy of
probabilistic modeling within cognitive science [7, 8]. We find a nuanced picture: vanilla LLMs are
not humanlike on our active learning tasks (and underperform humans); our full model outperforms
humans; but a simple change—switching from deterministic to probabilistic hypotheses—allows
matching humans in overall performance, and agreement with humans on more fine-grained metrics.
From a technical perspective, our work needs to infer natural-language hypotheses in an online setting,
so that it can cycle between experimentation and hypothesis formation. This differs from recent
∗

Corresponding author: wp237@cornell.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

