Long-form factuality in large language models

Jerry Wei∗1

Chengrun Yang∗1

Xinying Song∗1

Yifeng Lu∗1

Nathan Hu1,2

Jie Huang1,3

Dustin Tran1

Daiyi Peng1

Ruibo Liu1

Da Huang1

Cosmo Du1
1

Google DeepMind

2

Quoc V. Le1

Stanford University

3

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) often generate content that contains factual errors
when responding to fact-seeking prompts on open-ended topics. To benchmark
a model’s long-form factuality in open domains, we first use GPT-4 to generate
LongFact, a prompt set comprising thousands of questions spanning 38 topics.
We then propose that LLM agents can be used as automated evaluators for longform factuality through a method which we call Search-Augmented Factuality
Evaluator (SAFE). SAFE utilizes an LLM to break down a long-form response
into a set of individual facts and to evaluate the accuracy of each fact using a
multi-step reasoning process comprising sending search queries to Google Search
and determining whether a fact is supported by the search results. Furthermore, we
propose extending F1 score as an aggregated metric for long-form factuality. To
do so, we balance the percentage of supported facts in a response (precision) with
the percentage of provided facts relative to a hyperparameter representing a user’s
preferred response length (recall).
Empirically, we demonstrate that LLM agents can outperform crowdsourced human
annotators—on a set of ∼16k individual facts, SAFE agrees with crowdsourced
human annotators 72% of the time, and on a random subset of 100 disagreement
cases, SAFE wins 76% of the time. At the same time, SAFE is more than 20 times
cheaper than human annotators. We also benchmark thirteen language models
on LongFact across four model families (Gemini, GPT, Claude, and PaLM-2),
finding that larger language models generally achieve better long-form factuality.
LongFact, SAFE, and all experimental code are available at https://github.
com/google-deepmind/long-form-factuality.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have significantly improved in recent years (Brown et al., 2020;
Chowdhery et al., 2022; Google, 2023; OpenAI, 2023; Gemini Team, 2023, inter alia) but still
lack reliability in responding to in-depth factuality questions. In particular, they often produce
factual errors in which a claim contradicts established ground-truth knowledge (Huang et al., 2023;
Zhang et al., 2023, inter-alia).2 For example, models may respond with incorrect information about
established facts such as dates, statistics, or even a celebrity’s occupation (Li et al., 2023; Min et al.,
2023; Muhlgay et al., 2023). These factual errors weaken a language model’s factuality, making the
model unreliable in many real-world settings where a factually-accurate response is expected.
∗

Lead contributors. Author contributions listed at the end of the paper.
We focus on factuality and factual errors, not hallucination, as our proposed evaluation method focuses on
determining whether a response is factual with respect to external established knowledge (factuality) rather than
whether the response is consistent with the model’s internal knowledge (hallucination).
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

