Zipper: Addressing Degeneracy in Algorithm-Agnostic
Inference
Geng Chen∗
Yinxu Jia∗
Guanghui Wang∗†
Changliang Zou∗†
NITFID, School of Statistics and Data Science, LPMC, KLMDASR, and LEBPS, Nankai University
gengchen.stat@gmail.com, yxjia@mail.nankai.edu.cn,
ghwang.nk@gmail.com, zoucl@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
The widespread use of black box prediction methods has sparked an increasing
interest in algorithm/model-agnostic approaches for quantifying goodness-of-fit,
with direct ties to specification testing, model selection and variable importance
assessment. A commonly used framework involves defining a predictiveness
criterion, applying a cross-fitting procedure to estimate the predictiveness, and
utilizing the difference in estimated predictiveness between two models as the
test statistic. However, even after standardization, the test statistic typically fails
to converge to a non-degenerate distribution under the null hypothesis of equal
goodness, leading to what is known as the degeneracy issue. To addresses this
degeneracy issue, we present a simple yet effective device, Zipper. It draws
inspiration from the strategy of additional splitting of testing data, but encourages
an overlap between two testing data splits in predictiveness evaluation. Zipper
binds together the two overlapping splits using a slider parameter that controls the
proportion of overlap. Our proposed test statistic follows an asymptotically normal
distribution under the null hypothesis for any fixed slider value, guaranteeing
valid size control while enhancing power by effective data reuse. Finite-sample
experiments demonstrate that our procedure, with a simple choice of the slider,
works well across a wide range of settings.

1

Introduction

Consider predicting response Y ∈ R from covariates X ∈ Rp . Due to the popularity of black
box prediction methods like random forests and deep neural networks, there has been a growing
interest in the so-called “algorithm (or model)-agnostic” inference on the goodness-of-fit (GoF) in
regression [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. This framework aims to assess the appropriateness of a given model for
prediction compared to a potentially more complex (often higher-dimensional) model. A common
approach involves defining a predictiveness criterion, employing either the sample-splitting or crossfitting strategy to estimate the predictiveness of the two models, and examining the difference in
predictiveness. The main focus of this work is to address the issue of degeneracy encountered in
predictiveness-comparison-based test statistics.
1.1

Goodness-of-Fit Testing via Predictiveness Comparison

Let P represent the joint distribution of (Y, X) and consider a class F of prediction functions that
effectively map the covariates to the response. Define a criterion C(f˜, P ), which quantifies the
predictive capability of a prediction function f˜ ∈ F. Larger values of C(f˜, P ) indicate stronger
∗

†

All authors contributed equally to this work and are listed in alphabetical order.
Guanghui Wang and Changliang Zou are corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

