MoE Jetpack: From Dense Checkpoints to
Adaptive Mixture of Experts for Vision Tasks

Xingkui Zhu∗

Yiran Guan∗ Dingkang Liang Yuchao Chen
Yuliang Liu† Xiang Bai
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{adlith, yiranguan, dkliang, ylliu, xbai}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
The sparsely activated mixture of experts (MoE) model presents an effective alternative to densely activated (dense) models, combining improved accuracy with
computational efficiency. However, training MoE models from scratch requires
extensive data and computational resources, a challenge that limits their widespread
adoption. To address this, we introduce MoE Jetpack, a framework designed to
fine-tune the abundant and easily accessible dense checkpoints into MoE models.
MoE Jetpack incorporates two key techniques: (1) checkpoint recycling, which
initializes MoE models with dense checkpoints to accelerate convergence and
enhance accuracy, minimizing the need for extensive pre-training; (2) the hyperspherical adaptive MoE (SpheroMoE) layer, which optimizes the MoE architecture
to enhance fine-tuning performance and efficiency. Experimental results indicate
that MoE Jetpack doubles the convergence speed and enhances accuracy by 2.8%
on ImageNet-1K. On smaller datasets, it achieves up to 8-fold faster convergence
and over 30% accuracy gains, highlighting its efficiency. The code is available at
https://github.com/Adlith/MoE-Jetpack.

1

Introduction

Increasing model scale is a key factor in boosting deep learning performance [1, 2, 3]. However,
as models expand in size, their computational demands surge, resulting in considerable slowdowns
during both training and inference phases. A promising approach that decouples model size from
computational costs is the sparsely activated mixture of experts (MoE) [4, 5, 6]. Unlike densely
activated models (referred to as dense models hereafter) [7, 8] that apply all network parameters
to each input, MoE dynamically activates distinct parts of the model based on the input tokens.
This allows for model scaling without substantially increasing the FLOPs2 , thereby maintaining
training and inference speeds during model upscaling. Recent advancements have seen successful
implementations of MoE across various domains [11, 12, 13].
Despite their potential, MoE models face significant adoption challenges primarily due to the
lack of pre-trained models. Unlike dense models, which benefit from a vast collection of pretrained resources available through platforms such as Hugging Face [14] and Timm [15], most MoE
models must be trained from scratch with randomly initialized weights. This process demands
substantial computational power and large datasets, limiting MoE research to a select few teams
with the necessary resources. Consequently, our research aims to reduce the training time and data
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.
FLOPs means the floating point operations per second. The vanilla design of MoE does not inherently
provide runtime advantages and requires additional parallelization strategies [9, 10] for acceleration. In our
implementation, we offer an effective matrix multiplication method for parallelization, detailed in Appendix C.
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

