Soft ascent-descent as a stable and flexible
alternative to flooding

Matthew J. Holland∗
Osaka University

Kosuke Nakatani
Osaka University

Abstract
As a heuristic for improving test accuracy in classification, the “flooding” method
proposed by Ishida et al. (2020) sets a threshold for the average surrogate loss at
training time; above the threshold, gradient descent is run as usual, but below the
threshold, a switch to gradient ascent is made. While setting the threshold is nontrivial and is usually done with validation data, this simple technique has proved
remarkably effective in terms of accuracy. On the other hand, what if we are also
interested in other metrics such as model complexity or average surrogate loss at
test time? As an attempt to achieve better overall performance with less fine-tuning,
we propose a softened, pointwise mechanism called SoftAD (soft ascent-descent)
that downweights points on the borderline, limits the effects of outliers, and retains
the ascent-descent effect of flooding, with no additional computational overhead.
We contrast formal stationarity guarantees with those for flooding, and empirically
demonstrate how SoftAD can realize classification accuracy competitive with
flooding (and the more expensive alternative SAM) while enjoying a much smaller
loss generalization gap and model norm.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning makes use of sophisticated models that are trained through optimization of
non-convex objective functions, which typically admit numerous local minima that make for natural
candidates when taken at face value. While many such candidates are indeed essentially “optimal”
from the viewpoint of classification error rates or other average losses incurred at training time,
these often turn out to be highly sub-optimal in terms of performance at test time. It goes without
saying that understanding and closing this gap is the problem of “generalization” that underlies most
machine learning research (Jiang et al., 2020; Dziugaite et al., 2020; Johnson and Zhang, 2023).
When we are faced with multiple candidates which are essentially optimal and thus indistinguishable
in terms of some “base” objective function (e.g., the average loss) at training time, one of best-known
heuristics for identifying good candidates is that of the “landscape” or “geometry” of the base
objective in a neighborhood around each candidate. Roughly speaking, one expects that candidates
in regions which are in some sense “flat” (often said to be less “sharp”) tend to perform better at
test time. Strictly speaking, flatness is not necessary for generalization (Dinh et al., 2017), but our
intuition can often be empirically verified to be correct, as good generalization is regularly observed
in flat regions where the eigenvalues of the Hessian are mostly concentrated near zero (Chaudhari
et al., 2017). The spectral density of the Hessian can in principle be used to evaluate sharpness, and
has well-known links to norms that can be used for explicit regularization (Karakida et al., 2019),
but for large-scale neural network training in practice, first-order approximations have shown the
greatest utility. In particular, the sharpness-aware minimization (SAM) algorithm of Foret et al.
(2021), extended for scale invariance by Kwon et al. (2021) and later captured as a special case
of the gradient norm penalization (GNP) scheme of Zhao et al. (2022), has shown state-of-the-art
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

