A generalized neural tangent kernel
for surrogate gradient learning

Luke Eilers∗
Department of Physiology, University of Bern, Switzerland
Institute for Applied Mathematics, University of Bonn, Germany
luke.eilers@unibe.ch
Raoul-Martin Memmesheimer
Institute of Genetics, University of Bonn, Germany
rm.memmesheimer@uni-bonn.de
Sven Goedeke
Bernstein Center Freiburg, University of Freiburg, Germany
Institute of Genetics, University of Bonn, Germany
sven.goedeke@bcf.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
State-of-the-art neural network training methods depend on the gradient of the
network function. Therefore, they cannot be applied to networks whose activation
functions do not have useful derivatives, such as binary and discrete-time spiking
neural networks. To overcome this problem, the activation function’s derivative is
commonly substituted with a surrogate derivative, giving rise to surrogate gradient
learning (SGL). This method works well in practice but lacks theoretical foundation.
The neural tangent kernel (NTK) has proven successful in the analysis of gradient
descent. Here, we provide a generalization of the NTK, which we call the surrogate
gradient NTK, that enables the analysis of SGL. First, we study a naive extension
of the NTK to activation functions with jumps, demonstrating that gradient descent
for such activation functions is also ill-posed in the infinite-width limit. To address
this problem, we generalize the NTK to gradient descent with surrogate derivatives,
i.e., SGL. We carefully define this generalization and expand the existing key
theorems on the NTK with mathematical rigor. Further, we illustrate our findings
with numerical experiments. Finally, we numerically compare SGL in networks
with sign activation function and finite width to kernel regression with the surrogate
gradient NTK; the results confirm that the surrogate gradient NTK provides a good
characterization of SGL.

1

Introduction

Artificial neural networks (ANNs) originate from the biologically inspired perceptron [Rosenblatt,
1958]. While the perceptron has a binary output that is faithful to the all-or-none behavior of spiking
neurons in the nervous system, most activation functions considered nowadays for ANNs are smooth
(like the logistic function) or at least semi-differentiable (like the ReLU function). Differentiable
network functions enable the learning of network weights with methods that leverage the gradient
of the network function with respect to the network weights like backpropagation [Rumelhart et al.,
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

