Continuous Partitioning for Graph-Based
Semi-Supervised Learning

Chester Holtz
Halicioǧlu Data Science Institute
University of California San Diego
La Jolla, CA
chholtz@ucsd.edu

Pengwen Chen
Department of Applied Mathematics
National Chung Hsing University
South District, Taichung, Taiwan
pengwen@email.nchu.edu.tw

Zhengchao Wan
Department of Mathematics
University of Missouri
Columbia, MO
zwan@missouri.edu

Chung-Kuan Cheng
Department of Computer Science
University of California San Diego
La Jolla, CA
ckcheng@ucsd.edu

Gal Mishne
Halicioǧlu Data Science Institute
University of California San Diego
La Jolla, CA
gmishne@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Laplace learning algorithms for graph-based semi-supervised learning have been
shown to suffer from degeneracy at low label rates and in imbalanced class regimes.
Here, we propose CutSSL: a framework for graph-based semi-supervised learning
based on continuous nonconvex quadratic programming, which provably obtains
integer solutions. Our framework is naturally motivated by an exact quadratic
relaxation of a cardinality-constrained minimum-cut graph partitioning problem.
Furthermore, we show our formulation is related to an optimization problem whose
approximate solution is the mean-shifted Laplace learning heuristic, thus providing
new insight into the performance of this heuristic. We demonstrate that CutSSL
significantly surpasses the current state-of-the-art on k-nearest neighbor graphs and
large real-world graph benchmarks across a variety of label rates, class imbalance,
and label imbalance regimes. Our implementation is available on github1 .

1

Introduction

In semi-supervised learning (SSL), a learner is given access to a partially-labeled training set
consisting of labeled examples and unlabeled examples. The goal in this setting is to learn a predictor
that is superior to a predictor that is trained using the labeled examples alone. This framework is
motivated by the high cost of obtaining annotated data on practical problems. For problems where
very few labels are available, the geometry of the unlabeled data can be used to significantly improve
the performance of classic machine learning models. A seminal work in graph-based semi-supervised
learning is Laplace learning [38], which seeks a harmonic function that extends provided labels over
1

https://github.com/Mishne-Lab/CutSSL

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

