Federated Graph Learning for Cross-Domain
Recommendation
Ziqi Yang1,2 , Zhaopeng Peng1,2 , Zihui Wang1,2 , Jianzhong Qi3 , Chaochao Chen4 ,
Weike Pan5 , Chenglu Wen1,2 , Cheng Wang1,2 , Xiaoliang Fan1,2 ∗
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University, China
2
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China
3
School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, Australia
4
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University Hangzhou, China
5
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University Shenzhen, China
{yangziqi,pengzhaopeng,wangziwei}@stu.xmu.edu.cn
{clwen,cwang,fanxiaoliang}@xmu.edu.cn
jianzhong.qi@unimelb.edu.au, zjuccc@zju.edu.cn, panweike@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
Cross-domain recommendation (CDR) offers a promising solution to the data sparsity problem by enabling knowledge transfer between source and target domains.
However, many recent CDR models overlook crucial issues such as privacy as well
as the risk of negative transfer (which negatively impact model performance), especially in multi-domain settings. To address these challenges, we propose FedGCDR,
a novel federated graph learning framework that securely and effectively leverages
positive knowledge from multiple source domains. First, we design a positive
knowledge transfer module that ensures privacy during inter-domain knowledge
transmission. This module employs differential privacy-based knowledge extraction combined with a feature mapping mechanism, transforming source domain embeddings from federated graph attention networks into reliable domain knowledge.
Second, we design a knowledge activation module to filter out potential harmful
or conflicting knowledge from source domains, addressing the issues of negative
transfer. This module enhances target domain training by expanding the graph of
the target domain to generate reliable domain attentions and fine-tunes the target
model for improved negative knowledge filtering and more accurate predictions.
We conduct extensive experiments on 16 popular domains of the Amazon dataset,
demonstrating that FedGCDR significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods.
We open source the code at https://github.com/LafinHana/FedGCDR.

1

Introduction

Cross-domain recommendation (CDR) has emerged as an effective solution for mitigating data
sparsity in recommender systems [1; 2; 3; 4; 5]. CDR operates by integrating auxiliary information
from source domains, thereby enhancing recommendation relevance in the target domain. Recently,
to address data privacy constraints, many privacy-preserving CDR frameworks have been proposed
[6; 7; 8; 9], which achieve strong performance under the assumptions of data sparsity and a
dual-domain model (i.e., typically involving a single source domain and a single target domain).
In this paper, we focus on a more generic scenario of Broader-Source Cross-Domain Recommendation (BS-CDR), which integrates knowledge from more than two source domains while
∗

The corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

