Meta 3D AssetGen: Text-to-Mesh Generation with
High-Quality Geometry, Texture, and PBR Materials

Yawar Siddiqui† Tom Monnier* Filippos Kokkinos* Mahendra Kariya
Yanir Kleiman Emilien Garreau Oran Gafni Natalia Neverova
Andrea Vedaldi Roman Shapovalov* David Novotny*
†
GenAI, Meta
TU Munich; intern with Meta *core technical contributors

Figure 1: We present Meta 3D AssetGen, a novel text- or image-conditioned generator of 3D meshes
with physically-based rendering materials (top). Meta 3D AssetGen produces meshes with detailed
geometry and high-quality textures, and decomposes materials into albedo, metalness, and roughness
(bottom left), which allows to realistically relight objects in new environments (bottom right).

Abstract
We present Meta 3D AssetGen (AssetGen), a significant advancement in text-to-3D
generation which produces faithful, high-quality meshes with texture and material
control. Compared to works that bake shading in the 3D object’s appearance,
AssetGen outputs physically-based rendering (PBR) materials, supporting realistic
relighting. AssetGen generates first several views of the object with separate
shaded and albedo appearance channels, and then reconstructs colours, metalness
and roughness in 3D, using a deferred shading loss for efficient supervision. It also
uses a sign-distance function to represent 3D shape more reliably and introduces a
corresponding loss for direct shape supervision. This is implemented using fused
kernels for high memory efficiency. After mesh extraction, a texture refinement
transformer operating in UV space significantly improves sharpness and details.
AssetGen achieves 17% improvement in Chamfer Distance and 40% in LPIPS over
the best concurrent work for few-view reconstruction, and a human preference of
72% over the best industry competitors of comparable speed, including those that
support PBR. Project page with generated assets: https://assetgen.github.io

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

