InversionView: A General-Purpose Method for
Reading Information from Neural Activations

Xinting Huang
Saarland University
xhuang@lst.uni-saarland.de
Navin Goyal
Microsoft Research India
navingo@microsoft.com

Madhur Panwar
EPFL
madhur.panwar@epfl.ch
Michael Hahn
Saarland University
mhahn@lst.uni-saarland.de

Abstract
The inner workings of neural networks can be better understood if we can fully
decipher the information encoded in neural activations. In this paper, we argue
that this information is embodied by the subset of inputs that give rise to similar
activations. We propose InversionView, which allows us to practically inspect
this subset by sampling from a trained decoder model conditioned on activations.
This helps uncover the information content of activation vectors, and facilitates
understanding of the algorithms implemented by transformer models. We present
four case studies where we investigate models ranging from small transformers to
GPT-2. In these studies, we show that InversionView can reveal clear information
contained in activations, including basic information about tokens appearing in the
context, as well as more complex information, such as the count of certain tokens,
their relative positions, and abstract knowledge about the subject. We also provide
causally verified circuits to confirm the decoded information.1

1

Introduction

Despite their huge success, neural networks are still widely considered black boxes. One of the most
important reasons is that the continuous vector representations in these models pose a significant
challenge for interpretation. If we could understand what information is encoded in the activations of
a neural model, significant progress might be achieved in fully deciphering the inner workings of
neural networks, which would make modern AI systems safer and more controllable. Toward this
goal, various methods have been proposed for understanding the inner activations of neural language
models. They range from supervised probes [2, 5, 4, 55] to projecting to model’s vocabulary space
[42, 7] to causal intervention [21, 54, 26, 13] on model’s inner states. However, to this date, decoding
the information present in neural network activations in human-understandable form remains a major
challenge. Supervised probing classifiers require the researcher to decide which specific information
to probe for, and does not scale when the space of possible outputs is very large. Projecting to the
vocabulary space is restricted in scope, as it only produces individual tokens. Causal interventions
uncover information flow, but do not provide direct insight into the information present in activations.
Here, we introduce InversionView as a principled general-purpose method for generating hypotheses
about the information present in activations in neural models on language and discrete sequences,
which in turn helps us identify how the information flows through the model—crucial for obtaining
the algorithm implemented by the model. InversionView aims at providing a direct way of reading out
1

Code is available at https://github.com/huangxt39/InversionView

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

