Test-Time Adaptation Induces
Stronger Accuracy and Agreement-on-the-Line

Eungyeup Kim1

Mingjie Sun1 Christina Baek1 Aditi Raghunathan1 J. Zico Kolter1,2
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Bosch Center for AI
{eungyeuk, mingjies, kbaek, raditi, zkolter}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Recently, Miller et al. [32] and Baek et al. [3] empirically demonstrated strong
linear correlations between in-distribution (ID) versus out-of-distribution (OOD)
accuracy and agreement. These trends, coined accuracy-on-the-line (ACL) and
agreement-on-the-line (AGL), enable OOD model selection and performance estimation without labeled data. However, these phenomena also break for certain
shifts, such as CIFAR10-C Gaussian Noise, posing a critical bottleneck. In this paper, we make a key finding that recent test-time adaptation (TTA) methods not only
improve OOD performance, but drastically strengthen the ACL and AGL trends in
models, even in shifts where models showed very weak correlations before. To analyze this, we revisit the theoretical conditions from Miller et al. [32] that outline the
types of distribution shifts needed for perfect ACL in linear models. Surprisingly,
these conditions are satisfied after applying TTA to deep models in the penultimate
feature embedding space. In particular, TTA causes the data distribution to collapse
complex shifts into those can be expressed by a singular “scaling” variable in the
feature space. Our results show that by combining TTA with AGL-based estimation
methods, we can estimate the OOD performance of models with high precision for
a broader set of distribution shifts. This lends us a simple system for selecting the
best hyperparameters and adaptation strategy without any OOD labeled data. Code
is available at https://github.com/EungyeupKim/TTALine.

1

Introduction

Neural networks often fail to generalize to out-of-distribution (OOD) data that differs from the indistribution (ID) data seen at train-time [1, 11, 41]. Thus, characterizing the behaviors of these models
under distribution shift becomes crucial for reliable deployment. However, it is often extremely
challenging to reliably estimate their performances because in many practical applications, OOD
labeled data is scarce. Interestingly, recent studies [32, 3] have found a set of simple empirical
laws that describe the behavior of models across many distribution shift benchmarks. In particular,
across numerous distribution shift benchmarks, the models’ ID versus OOD accuracies, under probit
scaling, tend to observe a strong linear correlation across numerous distribution shift benchmarks.
Additionally, when accuracy is strongly correlated, the ID and OOD agreement rates between pairs of
these models are also strongly correlated with nearly identical slopes and biases. These phenomena,
respectively referred to as “accuracy-on-the-line” (ACL) [32] and “agreement-on-the-line” (AGL)
[3], can be leveraged for precise OOD accuracy estimation without access to OOD labels: one could
estimate the slope and bias of the ID vs OOD accuracy trend using agreement rates, then linearly
transform ID accuracy using this approximate linear fit1 .
1

Throughout this paper, we use AGL as comprehensive term for indicate when models show strong linear
trends in both accuracy and agreement, and the slopes and biases of these trends are identical.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

