Detecting Brittle Decisions for Free: Leveraging
Margin Consistency in Deep Robust Classifiers

Jonas Ngnawé
IID-Université Laval and Mila
jonas.ngnawe.1@ulaval.ca
Yann Pequignot
IID-Université Laval
yann.pequignot@iid.ulaval.ca

Sabyasachi Sahoo
IID-Université Laval and Mila
sabyasachi.sahoo.1@ulaval.ca
Frédéric Precioso
Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, INRIA, I3S, Maasai
frederic.precioso@univ-cotedazur.fr

Christian Gagné
IID-Université Laval, Mila and Canada CIFAR AI Chair
christian.gagne@gel.ulaval.ca

Abstract
Despite extensive research on adversarial training strategies to improve robustness,
the decisions of even the most robust deep learning models can still be quite
sensitive to imperceptible perturbations, creating serious risks when deploying
them for high-stakes real-world applications. While detecting such cases may be
critical, evaluating a model’s vulnerability at a per-instance level using adversarial
attacks is computationally too intensive and unsuitable for real-time deployment
scenarios. The input space margin is the exact score to detect non-robust samples
and is intractable for deep neural networks. This paper introduces the concept of
margin consistency – a property that links the input space margins and the logit
margins in robust models – for efficient detection of vulnerable samples. First,
we establish that margin consistency is a necessary and sufficient condition to
use a model’s logit margin as a score for identifying non-robust samples. Next,
through comprehensive empirical analysis of various robustly trained models
on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 datasets, we show that they indicate high margin
consistency with a strong correlation between their input space margins and the
logit margins. Then, we show that we can effectively and confidently use the logit
margin to detect brittle decisions with such models. Finally, we address cases
where the model is not sufficiently margin-consistent by learning a pseudo-margin
from the feature representation. Our findings highlight the potential of leveraging
deep representations to assess adversarial vulnerability in deployment scenarios
efficiently.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are known to be vulnerable to adversarial perturbations, visually insignificant
changes in the input resulting in the so-called adversarial examples that alter the model’s prediction
(Biggio et al., 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2015). They constitute actual threats in real-world scenarios
(Evtimov et al., 2017; Gnanasambandam et al., 2021), jeopardizing their deployment in sensitive
and safety-critical systems such as autonomous driving, aeronautics, and health care. Research in
the field has been intense and produced various adversarial training strategies to defend against
the vulnerability to adversarial perturbations with bounded ℓp norm (e.g., p = 2, p = ∞) through
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

