Understanding the Expressivity and Trainability of
Fourier Neural Operator: A Mean-Field Perspective

Takeshi Koshizuka
Department of Computer Science
The University of Tokyo
koshizuka-takeshi938444@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Yusuke Tanaka
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
ysk.tanaka@ntt.com

Masahiro Fujisawa
RIKEN AIP
masahiro.fujisawa@riken.jp

Issei Sato
Department of Computer Science
The University of Tokyo
sato@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
In this paper, we explores the expressivity and trainability of the Fourier Neural
Operator (FNO). We establish a mean-field theory for the FNO, analyzing the
behavior of the random FNO from an edge of chaos perspective. Our investigation
into the expressivity of a random FNO involves examining the ordered-chaos phase
transition of the network based on the weight distribution. This phase transition
demonstrates characteristics unique to the FNO, induced by mode truncation, while
also showcasing similarities to those of densely connected networks. Furthermore,
we identify a connection between expressivity and trainability: the ordered and
chaotic phases correspond to regions of vanishing and exploding gradients, respectively. This finding provides a practical prerequisite for the stable training of the
FNO. Our experimental results corroborate our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

The recent surge in interest in solving partial differential equations (PDEs) has led to the use of neural
network (NN)-based surrogate models. One promising line of work is the neural operator (NO),
which learns the solution operator of PDEs, thereby bypassing the need for mesh dependency. Among
the variants of NO, the Fourier neural operator (FNO) (Li et al., 2020c) has gained popularity because
of its advantageous cost/accuracy trade-off. The FNO can capture long-distance spatial interactions
using the Fourier transform, whereas convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Wen et al., 2019; Jiang
et al., 2021b) and message-passing graph neural networks (GNNs) (Li et al., 2020a,b) are limited to
operating solely on local variables. From a computational cost perspective, the Fourier transform is
performed in quasi-linear time by the fast Fourier transform (FFT), making it significantly faster than
the Transformer (Li et al., 2023).
Despite the widespread use of FNO as an architecture, there is a lack of comprehensive theoretical
analysis on its expressivity and trainability. The universal approximation property (Kovachki et al.,
2021), recognized as the basic expressivity of the FNO, is well-known; however, the exponential
expressivity depending on the weight distribution, which are known for the densely connected
network (DCN) (Schoenholz et al., 2016), a.k.a. fully connected network, and CNN (Xiao et al.,
2018), remains unexplored. Regarding the trainability of FNO, the training instability in deep FNO
has been experimentally reported by Tran et al. (2022), but the causes and conditions of the difficulty
have not been clarified either theoretically or experimentally.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

