Catastrophic Goodhart: regularizing RLHF with KL
divergence does not mitigate heavy-tailed reward
misspecification

Thomas Kwa
Independent / FAR Labs
kwathomas0@gmail.com

Drake Thomas∗
Anthropic
drake@anthropic.com

Adrià Garriga-Alonso
FAR AI
adria@far.ai

Abstract
When applying reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), the reward
is learned from data and, therefore, always has some error. It is common to mitigate
this by regularizing the policy with KL divergence from a base model, with the
hope that balancing reward with regularization will achieve desirable outcomes
despite this reward misspecification. We show that when the reward function
has light-tailed error, optimal policies under less restrictive KL penalties achieve
arbitrarily high utility. However, if error is heavy-tailed, some policies obtain
arbitrarily high reward despite achieving no more utility than the base model–a
phenomenon we call catastrophic Goodhart. We adapt a discrete optimization
method to measure the tails of reward models, finding that they are consistent
with light-tailed error. However, the pervasiveness of heavy-tailed distributions
in many real-world applications indicates that future sources of RL reward could
have heavy-tailed error, increasing the likelihood of reward hacking even with KL
regularization.

1

Introduction

Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence constraints in reinforcement learning (RL) are employed to stay in
regimes where the objective is accurate enough. Some on-policy (Schulman et al., 2015, 2017) and
many off-policy (Abdolmaleki et al., 2018; Jaques et al., 2019) policy gradient algorithms employ
KL constraints or penalties during optimization to prevent the policy from deviating too much from
the data collection distribution. This ensures that estimates of each action’s advantage are reliable
enough to update the policy in a helpful way.
Reinforcement learning from human feedback (Christiano et al., 2017; Ziegler et al., 2020, RLHF) is
a very popular method to induce desirable behavior in language models. RLHF starts with a base
pre-trained model, then learns a reward function from human annotator data. Next, it trains an RL
policy to maximize this reward, while penalizing high KL divergence from the policy to the base
model. RLHF uses an on-policy algorithm and has accurate advantages, but the reward function is
always somewhat misspecified compared to desired behavior, due to insufficient data, human biases,
and other factors.
The main purpose of the KL penalty in RLHF is to limit the consequence of reward modeling errors
by keeping the policy within a distribution similar to that on which it was trained. Ideally, in the
low-KL regime the reward model’s errors are small enough that it provides correct updates to the base
model. Gao et al. (2023) empirically supports this view: if the KL divergence in RLHF is allowed
to grow too much, with a misspecified reward, the model’s performance on the true utility starts to
decrease.
∗

Work was done while not at Anthropic

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

