Articulate your NeRF: Unsupervised articulated object
modeling via conditional view synthesis

Jianning Deng Kartic Subr Hakan Bilen
University of Edinburgh
https://github.com/VICO-UoE/ArticulateYourNerf/

Abstract
We propose a novel unsupervised method to learn pose and part-segmentation of
articulated objects with rigid parts. Given two observations of an object in different
articulation states, our method learns the geometry and appearance of object parts
by fitting an implicit model on the first observation and renders the latter observation
by distilling the part segmentation and articulation. Additionally, to tackle the
challenging joint optimization of part segmentation and articulation, we propose
a voxel grid based initialization strategy and a decoupled optimization procedure.
Compared to the prior unsupervised work, our model obtains significantly better
performance, generalizes to objects with arbitrary number of parts while it can be
efficiently learned from few views only for the latter observation.

1

Introduction

Articulated objects, composed of multiple rigid parts connected by joints allowing rotational or
translational motion, such as doors, cupboards and spectacles are ubiquitous in our daily lives.
Automatically understanding the shape, structure and motion of these objects is crucial for numerous
applications in robotic manipulation [12, 43] and character animation [1, 32]. Many works [10, 30,
34] that focused on this problem use groundtruth 3D shape, articulation information, and/or part
segmentation to learn articulated object models but acquiring accurate 3D observations and manual
annotations is typically complex and too expensive for building real large-scale datasets.
In this paper, we introduce a novel unsupervised technique that learns part segmentation and articulation (i.e., axis of movement, and translation/rotation of each movable part) from two sets of
observations without requiring groundtruth shape, part segmentation or articulation. Two sets contain
images of the same object from multiple viewpoints in two different articulation states. Our key idea
is that articulation changes only the poses of the object parts but not their geometry or texture. Hence,
once the geometry and appearance are learned, one can transform to another articulation state given
the part locations and target articulation parameters.
Building on this idea, we frame the learning problem as a conditional novel articulation (and view)
synthesis task (see Fig. 1(a)). Given a source observation, multiple views of an object in one
articulation state, we first learn the object’s shape and appearance by using an implicit model [21]
and then freeze its weights. Next we pass the target observation, multi-view images of the same
object in a different articulation state, to a tight bottleneck that distills part locations and articulations.
We constrain our model to assign each 3D coordinate that is occupied by the object to a part and to
apply a valid geometric transformation to the 3D coordinates of each part through ray geometry. The
predictions of part segmentation and articulation, along with the target camera viewpoint, are passed
to the implicit function and its differential renderer to reproduce the target observations (see Fig. 1(b)).
Minimizing the photometric error between the rendered and target view provides supervision for
learning part segmentation and articulation. However, joint optimization of these intertwined tasks is
challenging and very sensitive to their initialization.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

