Tetrahedron Splatting for 3D Generation

Chun Gu1 Zeyu Yang1 Zijie Pan1 Xiatian Zhu2 Li Zhang1∗
1
School of Data Science, Fudan University 2 University of Surrey
https://fudan-zvg.github.io/tet-splatting

“a DSLR photo of the Imperial State
Crown of England”

“a DSLR photo of a candelabra with
many candles on a red velvet tablecloth”

“an erupting volcano, aerial view”

“a zoomed out DSLR photo of an
origami crane”

“a zoomed out DSLR photo of a recliner chair” “a bald eagle carved out of wood”

“a DSLR photo of a roast turkey on a
platter”

“a DSLR photo of a steaming basket
full of dumplings”

“a zoomed out DSLR photo of a 3d model “Wedding dress made of tentacles”
of an adorable cottage with a thatched roof”

“a DSLR photo of a pigeon reading a book”

“a ceramic lion”

Figure 1: 3D assets generated by our proposed TeT-Splatting.

Abstract
3D representation is essential to the significant advance of 3D generation with 2D
diffusion priors. As a flexible representation, NeRF has been first adopted for 3D
representation. With density-based volumetric rendering, it however suffers both
intensive computational overhead and inaccurate mesh extraction. Using a signed
distance field and Marching Tetrahedra, DMTet allows for precise mesh extraction
and real-time rendering but is limited in handling large topological changes in
meshes, leading to optimization challenges. Alternatively, 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS) is favored in both training and rendering efficiency while falling short in
mesh extraction. In this work, we introduce a novel 3D representation, Tetrahedron
Splatting (TeT-Splatting), that supports easy convergence during optimization,
precise mesh extraction, and real-time rendering simultaneously. This is achieved
by integrating surface-based volumetric rendering within a structured tetrahedral
grid while preserving the desired ability of precise mesh extraction, and a tile-based
differentiable tetrahedron rasterizer. Furthermore, we incorporate eikonal and
normal consistency regularization terms for the signed distance field to improve
∗

Li Zhang (lizhangfd@fudan.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

