Reasons and Solutions for the Decline in Model
Performance after Editing

Xiusheng Huang∗ 1,2,3 , Jiaxiang Liu∗ 1,2 , Yequan Wang† 3
Kang Liu† 1,2
1
The Key Laboratory of Cognition and Decision Intelligence for Complex Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China
huangxiusheng2020@ia.ac.cn, liujiaxiang21@mails.ucas.ac.cn,
tshwangyequan@gmail.com, kliu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Knowledge editing technology has received widespread attention for low-cost updates of incorrect or outdated knowledge in large-scale language models. However,
recent research has found that edited models often exhibit varying degrees of performance degradation. The reasons behind this phenomenon and potential solutions
have not yet been provided. In order to investigate the reasons for the performance
decline of the edited model and optimize the editing method, this work explores the
underlying reasons from both data and model perspectives. Specifically, 1) from a
data perspective, to clarify the impact of data on the performance of editing models,
this paper first constructs a Multi-Question Dataset (MQD) to evaluate the impact
of different types of editing data on model performance. The performance of the
editing model is mainly affected by the diversity of editing targets and sequence
length, as determined through experiments. 2) From a model perspective, this
article explores the factors that affect the performance of editing models. The
results indicate a strong correlation between the L1-norm of the editing model layer
and the editing accuracy, and clarify that this is an important factor leading to the
bottleneck of editing performance. Finally, in order to improve the performance of
the editing model, this paper further proposes a Dump for Sequence (D4S) method,
which successfully overcomes the previous editing bottleneck by reducing the
L1-norm of the editing layer, allowing users to perform multiple effective edits and
minimizing model damage. Our code is available at https://github.com/nlpkeg/D4S.

1

Introduction

Large-scale language models (LLMs) have demonstrated exceptional performance in NLP tasks
[Huang et al., 2021, 2022]. However, as knowledge continues to evolve, LLMs inevitably contain
incorrect or outdated information. Due to their vast number of parameters, directly fine-tuning the
model would require a substantial amount of computational resources [Gupta et al., 2023]. As a
result, knowledge editing techniques have emerged as a low-cost and effective method for updating a
model’s knowledge [Yao et al., 2023]. These techniques involve modifying a small number of the
model’s parameters to update its internal knowledge [Ding et al., 2023]. However, growing evidence
suggests that altering model parameters can have a negative impact on the model’s performance. The
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

