Hypothesis Testing the Circuit Hypothesis in LLMs

Claudia Shi∗1
Nicolas Beltran-Velez∗ 1
Achille Nazaret∗ 1
∗1
3
Carolina Zheng
Adrià Garriga-Alonso
Andrew Jesson1
2
Maggie Makar
David M. Blei1

2

1
Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, USA
Computer Science and Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA
3
FAR AI, USA

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) demonstrate surprising capabilities, but we do
not understand how they are implemented. One hypothesis suggests that these
capabilities are primarily executed by small subnetworks within the LLM, known
as circuits. But how can we evaluate this hypothesis? In this paper, we formalize
a set of criteria that a circuit is hypothesized to meet and develop a suite of
hypothesis tests to evaluate how well circuits satisfy them. The criteria focus on
the extent to which the LLM’s behavior is preserved, the degree of localization
of this behavior, and whether the circuit is minimal. We apply these tests to
six circuits described in the research literature. We find that synthetic circuits
– circuits that are hard-coded in the model – align with the idealized properties.
Circuits discovered in Transformer models satisfy the criteria to varying degrees.
To facilitate future empirical studies of circuits, we created the circuitry package,
a wrapper around the TransformerLens library, which abstracts away lower-level
manipulations of hooks and activations. The software is available at https:
//github.com/blei-lab/circuitry.

1

Introduction

The field of mechanistic interpretability aims to explain the inner workings of large language models
(LLMs) through reverse engineering. One promising direction is to identify “circuits” that correspond
to different tasks. Examples include circuits that perform context repetition [Olsson et al., 2022],
identify indirect objects [Wang et al., 2023], and complete docstrings [Heimersheim and Janiak, 2023].
Such research is motivated by the circuit hypothesis, which posits that LLMs implement their
capabilities via small subnetworks within the model. If the circuit hypothesis holds, it would be
scientifically interesting and practically useful. For example, it could lead to valuable insights about
the emergence of properties such as in-context learning [Olsson et al., 2022] and grokking during
training [Stander et al., 2023, Nanda et al., 2023b]. Moreover, identifying these circuits could aid in
explaining model performance and controlling model output, such as improving truthfulness.
In this work, we empirically study the circuit hypothesis to assess its validity in practice. We begin
by defining the ideal properties of circuits, which we posit to be: 1. Mechanism Preservation:
The performance of an idealized circuit should match that of the original model. 2. Mechanism
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

