WikiContradict: A Benchmark for Evaluating LLMs
on Real-World Knowledge Conflicts from Wikipedia

Yufang Hou1,2 , Alessandra Pascale1 , Javier Carnerero-Cano1 , Tigran Tchrakian1
Radu Marinescu1 , Elizabeth Daly1 , Inkit Padhi3 , Prasanna Sattigeri3
1
IBM Research Europe - Ireland
2
IT:U Interdisciplinary Transformation University Austria
3
IBM Research, Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, USA
{yhou|apascale|tigran|radu.marinescu|elizabeth.daly}@ie.ibm.com
{javier.cano|inkpad}@ibm.com, psattig@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) has emerged as a promising solution to mitigate the limitations of large language models (LLMs), such as hallucinations and
outdated information. However, it remains unclear how LLMs handle knowledge
conflicts arising from different augmented retrieved passages, especially when these
passages originate from the same source and have equal trustworthiness. In this
work, we conduct a comprehensive evaluation of LLM-generated answers to questions that have varying answers based on contradictory passages from Wikipedia,
a dataset widely regarded as a high-quality pre-training resource for most LLMs.
Specifically, we introduce WikiContradict, a benchmark consisting of 253 highquality, human-annotated instances designed to assess the performance of LLMs in
providing a complete perspective on conflicts from the retrieved documents, rather
than choosing one answer over another, when augmented with retrieved passages
containing real-world knowledge conflicts. We benchmark a diverse range of both
closed and open-source LLMs under different QA scenarios, including RAG with a
single passage, and RAG with 2 contradictory passages. Through rigorous human
evaluations on a subset of WikiContradict instances involving 5 LLMs and over
3,500 judgements, we shed light on the behaviour and limitations of these models.
For instance, when provided with two passages containing contradictory facts, all
models struggle to generate answers that accurately reflect the conflicting nature
of the context, especially for implicit conflicts requiring reasoning. Since human
evaluation is costly, we also introduce an automated model that estimates LLM
performance using a strong open-source language model, achieving an F-score of
0.8. Using this automated metric, we evaluate more than 1,500 answers from seven
LLMs across all WikiContradict instances. To facilitate future work, we release
WikiContradict at https://ibm.biz/wikicontradict.

1

Introduction

The advent of large language models (LLMs) [Brown et al., 2020] has revolutionized the field of
Natural Language Processing (NLP), enabling unprecedented capabilities in text understanding and
generation. However, static LLMs often suffer from outdated information and hallucinations. To
mitigate these shortcomings, retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) techniques [Lewis et al., 2020]
have been developed, which combine the strengths of LLMs with retrieved up-to-date information
from external sources. While RAG frameworks have shown significant promise, it remains unclear
how LLMs handle knowledge conflicts from different sources, including “context-memory conflicts”,
which refers to the retrieved context knowledge being in conflict with the parametric knowledge
(memory) encapsulated within the LLM’s parameters, and “inter-context conflicts”, which refers to the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

