Contrastive dimension reduction: when and how?
Sam Hawke
Department of Biostatistics
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
shawke@unc.edu

YueEn Ma
Department of Statistics & Operations Research
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
myueen@unc.edu

Didong Li
Department of Biostatistics
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
didongli@unc.edu

Abstract
Dimension reduction (DR) is an important and widely studied technique in exploratory data analysis. However, traditional DR methods are not applicable to
datasets with a contrastive structure, where data are split into a foreground group
of interest (case or treatment group), and a background group (control group). This
type of data, common in biomedical studies, necessitates contrastive dimension reduction (CDR) methods to effectively capture information unique to or enriched in
the foreground group relative to the background group. Despite the development of
various CDR methods, two critical questions remain underexplored: when should
these methods be applied, and how can the information unique to the foreground
group be quantified? In this work, we address these gaps by proposing a hypothesis test to determine the existence of contrastive information, and introducing a
contrastive dimension estimator (CDE) to quantify the unique components in the
foreground group. We provide theoretical support for our methods and validate their
effectiveness through extensive simulated, semi-simulated, and real experiments
involving images, gene expressions, protein expressions, and medical sensors,
demonstrating their ability to identify the unique information in the foreground
group.1

1

Introduction

High-dimensional datasets are ubiquitous in the era of big data, arising from applications such as
image data (Shorten and Khoshgoftaar, 2019), gene/protein expressions (Bhola and Singh, 2018), and
medical data from wearable devices (Cho et al., 2021; Banaee et al., 2013), to name a few. Dimension
reduction (DR) is crucial in these contexts for various reasons (Fan et al., 2014): improving data
visualization, reducing computational cost for downstream analysis (Fan and Li, 2006), minimizing
noise (Thudumu et al., 2020), and enhancing interpretability (Johnstone and Titterington, 2009).
DR has been a vibrant research area for several decades, leading to the development of numerous
methods (Ayesha et al., 2020). Principal component analysis (PCA, Hotelling (1933)), for instance,
maximizes the variance in the reduced space and is widely applied across different domains (Jirsa
et al., 1994; Novembre and Stephens, 2008; Pasini, 2017). Other methods, such as Multi-Dimensional
Scaling (MDS, Torgerson (1952)) and Isomap (Tenenbaum et al., 2000), focus on preserving pairwise
Euclidean and geodesic distances between samples, respectively. Probabilistic PCA (PPCA, Tipping
and Bishop (1999)) incorporates uncertainty quantification through a probablistic model. Additionally,
1

All code available at https://github.com/myueen/contrastive-dimension-estimation

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

