Decompose, Analyze and Rethink:
Solving Intricate Problems with Human-like
Reasoning Cycle

Shangzi Xue1

Zhenya Huang1,2∗ Jiayu Liu1 Xin lin1 Yuting Ning1
Binbin Jin1 Xin Li1 Qi Liu1,2
1: State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, University of Science and Technology of China
2: Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{xueshangzi,jy251198,linx,ningyt,bb0725}@mail.ustc.edu.cn;
{huangzhy,leexin,qiliuql}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce DeAR (Decompose-Analyze-Rethink), a framework that
iteratively builds a reasoning tree to tackle intricate problems within a single large
language model (LLM). Unlike approaches that extend or search for rationales,
DeAR is featured by 1) adopting a tree-based question decomposition manner to
plan the organization of rationales, which mimics the logical planning inherent
in human cognition; 2) globally updating the rationales at each reasoning step
through natural language feedback. Specifically, the Decompose stage decomposes the question into simpler sub-questions, storing them as new nodes; the
Analyze stage generates and self-checks rationales for sub-questions at each node
level; and the Rethink stage updates parent-node rationales based on feedback
from their child nodes. By generating and updating the reasoning process from
a more global perspective, DeAR constructs more adaptive and accurate logical
structures for complex problems, facilitating timely error correction compared to
rationale-extension and search-based approaches such as Tree-of-Thoughts (ToT)
and Graph-of-Thoughts (GoT). We conduct extensive experiments on three reasoning benchmarks, including ScienceQA, StrategyQA, and GSM8K, which cover a
variety of reasoning tasks, demonstrating that our approach significantly reduces
logical errors and enhances performance across various LLMs. Furthermore, we
validate that DeAR is an efficient method that achieves a superior trade-off between
accuracy and reasoning time compared to ToT and GoT.

1

Introduction

Learning to perform intricate reasoning, including commonsense reasoning [23], knowledge reasoning [28], and mathematical reasoning [8], is a crucial step towards achieving general artificial intelligence [49, 20, 25, 26, 21, 24]. The tasks always present a significant challenge as they require many
human-like intricate problem-solving abilities, such as abstract thinking and logical inference, which
could consolidate many decision-making applications in real-world scenarios [38, 36, 15, 34, 53, 55].
Recent advances have witnessed remarkable performances of scaled-up large language models
(LLMs) in various reasoning tasks, including GPT [5], LLaMA [40], and ChatGLM [9]. They
could enable several state-of-the-art prompting approaches like Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [45], Treeof-Thoughts (ToT) [49], Graph-of-Thoughts (GoT) [3], etc., to enhancing reasoning capabilities.
They not only improve problem-solving performance but also reveal their intrinsic reasoning steps
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

