B ERTAQA: How Much Do Language Models Know
About Local Culture?
Julen Etxaniz Gorka Azkune Aitor Soroa Oier Lopez de Lacalle Mikel Artetxe
HiTZ Center – Ixa, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU)
julen.etxaniz@ehu.eus

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) exhibit extensive knowledge about the world, but
most evaluations have been limited to global or anglocentric subjects. This raises
the question of how well these models perform on topics relevant to other cultures,
whose presence on the web is not that prominent. To address this gap, we introduce
B ERTAQA, a multiple-choice trivia dataset that is parallel in English and Basque.
The dataset consists of a local subset with questions pertinent to the Basque culture,
and a global subset with questions of broader interest. We find that state-of-the-art
LLMs struggle with local cultural knowledge, even as they excel on global topics.
However, we show that continued pre-training in Basque significantly improves
the models’ performance on Basque culture, even when queried in English. To
our knowledge, this is the first solid evidence of knowledge transfer from a lowresource to a high-resource language. Our analysis sheds light on the complex
interplay between language and knowledge, and reveals that some prior findings
do not fully hold when reassessed on local topics. Our dataset and evaluation code
are available under open licenses at https://github.com/juletx/BertaQA.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have obtained impressive results on a wide range of tasks, with
many benchmarks being solved soon after being released [Team et al., 2023, OpenAI et al., 2024].
Nevertheless, the majority of language model research is conducted in English, and the evaluation
of these models has predominantly focused on anglocentric or global subjects. For instance, GPT-4
was reported to obtain human-level performance on a wide range of professional and academic
exams [OpenAI et al., 2024], but the majority of these exams belong to US programs.1 Furthermore,
multilingual benchmarks tend to suffer from the same issue, as most of them are created by translating
English datasets into other languages [Conneau et al., 2018, Artetxe et al., 2019, Bandarkar et al.,
2023]. As such, the current evaluation of LLMs barely covers topics that are idiosyncratic to other
cultures, falling short at measuring the true usefulness of LLMs for users from these communities.
To better assess how LLMs perform on local topics from a minority culture in comparison with global
topics, we introduce B ERTAQA.2 B ERTAQA is a multiple-choice trivia dataset with 4,756 questions
divided into two subsets: local questions about the Basque Country and its culture,3 and global
questions about subjects of broader interest. These questions were originally authored in Basque and
professionally translated into English, making the dataset fully parallel in these two languages. The
questions cover 8 diverse categories, and are labeled as easy, medium or hard. As shown in Table
1

In particular, 33 out of 34 exams correspond to programs or organizations from the US or Canada, such as
UBE, GRE or AP, and the remaining one corresponds to coding exercises.
2
BertaQA is pronounced similarly to the Basque word bertakoa, which means local.
3
Located on the western edge of the Pyrenees, straddling northern Spain and southwestern France, the Basque
Country is a region with a distinctive culture and language—Basque or Euskara, a low-resource language isolate.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

