Prospective Learning: Learning for a Dynamic Future

Ashwin De Silva∗,1
Siyu Yu1

Rahul Ramesh∗,2
Joshua T. Vogelstein†,1

Rubing Yang∗,2
Pratik Chaudhari†,2

∗,†

Equal Contribution
Email: {ldesilv2, syu80, jovo}@jhu.edu, {rahulram, rubingy, pratikac}@upenn.edu

Abstract
In real-world applications, the distribution of the data, and our goals, evolve
over time. The prevailing theoretical framework for studying machine learning,
namely probably approximately correct (PAC) learning, largely ignores time. As a
consequence, existing strategies to address the dynamic nature of data and goals
exhibit poor real-world performance. This paper develops a theoretical framework
called “Prospective Learning” that is tailored for situations when the optimal
hypothesis changes over time. In PAC learning, empirical risk minimization (ERM)
is known to be consistent. We develop a learner called Prospective ERM, which
returns a sequence of predictors that make predictions on future data. We prove that
the risk of prospective ERM converges to the Bayes risk under certain assumptions
on the stochastic process generating the data. Prospective ERM, roughly speaking,
incorporates time as an input in addition to the data. We show that standard ERM
as done in PAC learning, without incorporating time, can result in failure to learn
when distributions are dynamic. Numerical experiments illustrate that prospective
ERM can learn synthetic and visual recognition problems constructed from MNIST
and CIFAR-10. Code at https://github.com/neurodata/prolearn.

1

Introduction

All learning is for the future. Learning involves updating decision rules or policies, based on past
experiences, to improve future performance. Probably approximately correct (PAC) learning has been
extremely useful to develop algorithms that minimize the risk—typically defined as the expected
loss—on unseen samples under certain assumptions. The assumption, that samples are independent
and identically distributed (IID) within the training dataset and at test time, has served us well. But it
is neither testable nor believed to be true in practice. The future is always different from the past:
both distributions of data and goals of the learner may change over time. Moreover, those changes
may cause the optimal hypothesis to change over time as well. There are numerous mathematical
and empirical approaches that have been developed to address this issue, e.g., techniques for being
invariant to [1], or adapting to, distribution shift [2], modeling the future as a different task, etc. But
we lack a first-principles framework to address problems where data distributions and goals may
change over time in such a way that the optimal hypothesis is time-dependent. And as a consequence,
machine learning-based AI today is brittle to changes in distribution and goals.
This paper develops a theoretical framework called “Prospective Learning” (PL). Instead of data
arising from an unknown probability distribution like in PAC learning, prospective learning assumes
that data comes from an unknown stochastic process, that the loss considers the future, and that
the optimal hypothesis may change over time. A prospective learner uses samples received up to
some time t ∈ N to output an infinite sequence of predictors, which it uses for making predictions on
data at all future times t′ > t. We discuss how prospective learning is related to existing problem
formulations in the literature in Section 3 and Appendix A.
Why should one care about prospective learning? Imagine a deployed machine learning system.
The designer of this system desires to optimize—not the risk upon the past training data, or the risk
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

