Unified Domain Generalization and Adaptation for
Multi-View 3D Object Detection

Gyusam Chang1∗
Dongwook Lee2

Jiwon Lee2∗
Donghyun Kim1
Jinkyu Kim1
2
2†
Daehyun Ji
Sujin Jang
Sangpil Kim1†
1
Korea University
2
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology
{gsjang95, d_kim, jinkyukim, spk7}@korea.ac.kr
{ji1.lee, dw12.lee, derek.ji, s.steve.jang}@samsung.com

Abstract
Recent advances in 3D object detection leveraging multi-view cameras have demonstrated their practical and economical value in various challenging vision tasks.
However, typical supervised learning approaches face challenges in achieving satisfactory adaptation toward unseen and unlabeled target datasets (i.e., direct transfer)
due to the inevitable geometric misalignment between the source and target domains. In practice, we also encounter constraints on resources for training models
and collecting annotations for the successful deployment of 3D object detectors. In
this paper, we propose Unified Domain Generalization and Adaptation (UDGA),
a practical solution to mitigate those drawbacks. We first propose Multi-view
Overlap Depth Constraint that leverages the strong association between multi-view,
significantly alleviating geometric gaps due to perspective view changes. Then, we
present a Label-Efficient Domain Adaptation approach to handle unfamiliar targets
with significantly fewer amounts of labels (i.e., 1% and 5%), while preserving
well-defined source knowledge for training efficiency. Overall, UDGA framework
enables stable detection performance in both source and target domains, effectively
bridging inevitable domain gaps, while demanding fewer annotations. We demonstrate the robustness of UDGA with large-scale benchmarks: nuScenes, Lyft, and
Waymo, where our framework outperforms the current state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

3D Object Detection (3DOD) is a pivotal computer vision task in various real-world applications such
as autonomous driving and robotics. Recent progress in 3DOD [1–4] have showcased remarkable
advancements, primarily due to the large-scale benchmark datasets [5–7] and the introduction of
multiple computer vision sensors (e.g., LiDAR, multi-view cameras, and RADAR). Among these,
camera-based multi-view 3DOD [8–12] has drawn significant attention for its cost-efficiency and
rich semantic information. However, a significant challenge remains largely unexplored: accurately
detecting the location and category of objects in the presence of distributional shifts between the
source and target domains (i.e., data distributional gaps between the training and the testing datasets).
To successfully develop and deploy Multi-view 3DOD models, we need to solve two practical
problems: (1) the geometric distributional shift across different sensor configurations, and (2) the
limited amount of resources (e.g., insufficient computing resources, expensive data annotations). The
first problem poses a challenge in learning transferable knowledge for robust generalization in novel
∗
†

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

