Deep Learning Through A Telescoping Lens:
A Simple Model Provides Empirical Insights On
Grokking, Gradient Boosting & Beyond

Alan Jeffares∗
University of Cambridge
aj659@cam.ac.uk

Alicia Curth∗
University of Cambridge
amc253@cam.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Deep learning sometimes appears to work in unexpected ways. In pursuit of a
deeper understanding of its surprising behaviors, we investigate the utility of a
simple yet accurate model of a trained neural network consisting of a sequence of
first-order approximations telescoping out into a single empirically operational tool
for practical analysis. Across three case studies, we illustrate how it can be applied
to derive new empirical insights on a diverse range of prominent phenomena in the
literature – including double descent, grokking, linear mode connectivity, and the
challenges of applying deep learning on tabular data – highlighting that this model
allows us to construct and extract metrics that help predict and understand the a
priori unexpected performance of neural networks. We also demonstrate that this
model presents a pedagogical formalism allowing us to isolate components of the
training process even in complex contemporary settings, providing a lens to reason
about the effects of design choices such as architecture & optimization strategy, and
reveals surprising parallels between neural network learning and gradient boosting.

1

Introduction

Deep learning works, but it sometimes works in mysterious ways. Despite the remarkable recent
success of deep learning in applications ranging from image recognition [KSH12] to text generation
[BMR+ 20], there remain many contexts in which it performs in apparently unpredictable ways: neural
networks sometimes exhibit surprisingly non-monotonic generalization performance [BHMM19,
PBE+ 22], continue to be outperformed by gradient boosted trees on tabular tasks despite successes
elsewhere [GOV22], and sometimes behave surprisingly similarly to linear models [FDRC20]. The
pursuit of a deeper understanding of deep learning and its phenomena has since motivated many
subfields, and progress on fundamental questions has been distributed across many distinct yet
complementary perspectives that range from purely theoretical to predominantly empirical research.
Outlook. In this work, we take a hybrid approach and investigate how we can apply ideas primarily
used in theoretical research to investigate the behavior of a simple yet accurate model of a neural
network empirically. Building upon previous work that studies linear approximations to learning in
neural networks through tangent kernels (e.g. [JGH18, COB19], see Sec. 2), we consider a model
that uses first-order approximations for the functional updates made during training. However, unlike
most previous work, we define this model incrementally by simply telescoping out approximations
to individual updates made during training (Sec. 3) such that it more closely approximates the true
behavior of a fully trained neural network in practical settings. This provides us with a pedagogical
lens through which we can view modern optimization strategies and other design choices (Sec. 5), and
a mechanism with which we can conduct empirical investigations into several prominent deep learning
phenomena that showcase how neural networks sometimes generalize seemingly unpredictably.
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

