Leveraging partial stragglers within gradient coding

Aditya Ramamoorthy Ruoyu Meng Vrinda S. Girimaji
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Iowa State University
Ames, IA 50010.
{adityar, rmeng, vrindasg}@iastate.edu

Abstract
Within distributed learning, workers typically compute gradients on their assigned
dataset chunks and send them to the parameter server (PS), which aggregates
them to compute either an exact or approximate version of ∇L (gradient of the
loss function L). However, in large-scale clusters, many workers are slower than
their promised speed or even failure-prone. A gradient coding solution introduces
redundancy within the assignment of chunks to the workers and uses coding theoretic ideas to allow the PS to recover ∇L (exactly or approximately), even in the
presence of stragglers. Unfortunately, most existing gradient coding protocols are
inefficient from a computation perspective as they coarsely classify workers as
operational or failed; the potentially valuable work performed by slow workers (partial stragglers) is ignored. In this work, we present novel gradient coding protocols
that judiciously leverage the work performed by partial stragglers. Our protocols
are efficient from a computation and communication perspective and numerically
stable. For an important class of chunk assignments, we present efficient algorithms
for optimizing the relative ordering of chunks within the workers; this ordering
affects the overall execution time. For exact gradient reconstruction, our protocol is
around 2× faster than the original class of protocols and for approximate gradient
reconstruction, the mean-squared-error of our reconstructed gradient is several
orders of magnitude better.

1

Introduction

Large scale distributed learning is the workhorse of modern day machine learning (ML) algorithms.
The sheer size of the data and the corresponding computation needs, necessitate the usage of huge
clusters for the purpose of parameter fitting in most ML problems of practical interest: deep learning
[1], low-rank matrix completion [2] etc. A typical scenario consists of a dataset D = {(xi , yi )}Ñ
i=1
of Ñ data points, where xi ’s and yi ’s are the features and labels respectively. We wish to minimize a
PÑ
loss function L = Ñ1 i=1 l(xi , yi , w) with respect to w ∈ Rd (w: parameter vector, l: prediction
error). When D is large, we can perform the learning task in a distributed manner [3].

Background: We partition D into N equal-sized chunks denoted Di , i ∈ [N ] ([n] denotes the set
{1, . . . , n}), where a chunk is a subset of the data points and distinct chunks are disjoint. Within
each chunk, the assignment of the data points to the workers is identical. Suppose that there are m
workers W1 , . . . , Wm and a parameter server (PS). We distribute the chunks to the different workers
and let them compute the gradients on the data points assigned to them. The PS coordinates the
training by aggregating the (partial) gradients from the workers and transmitting an updated parameter
vector to theP
workers at each iteration. In the “baseline” scheme, N = m, Wj is assigned Dj and
it computes i∈Dj ∇l(xi , yi , wt ) (a vector of length-d) and sends it to the PS. Using these, the
PÑ
PS computes the desired gradient ∇L = Ñ1 i=1 ∇l(xi , yi , wt ) and the updated parameter wt+1
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

