Provably Optimal Memory Capacity for Modern
Hopfield Models: Transformer-Compatible Dense
Associative Memories as Spherical Codes
Jerry Yao-Chieh Hu∗†‡
†

Dennis Wu∗‡

Han Liu†‡§

Center for Foundation Models and Generative AI, ‡ Department of Computer Science, § Department of
Statistics and Data Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA
{jhu,hibb}@u.northwestern.edu, hanliu@northwestern.edu

Abstract
We study the optimal memorization capacity of modern Hopfield models and
Kernelized Hopfield Models (KHMs), a transformer-compatible class of Dense
Associative Memories. We present a tight analysis by establishing a connection
between the memory configuration of KHMs and spherical codes from information
theory. Specifically, we treat the stored memory set as a specialized spherical code.
This enables us to cast the memorization problem in KHMs into a point arrangement problem on a hypersphere. We show that the optimal capacity of KHMs
occurs when the feature space allows memories to form an optimal spherical code.
This unique perspective leads to: (i) An analysis of how KHMs achieve optimal
memory capacity, and identify corresponding necessary conditions. Importantly,
we establish an upper capacity bound that matches the well-known exponential
lower bound in the literature. This provides the first tight and optimal asymptotic
memory capacity for modern Hopfield models. (ii) A sub-linear time algorithm
U-Hop+ to reach KHMs’ optimal capacity. (iii) An analysis of the scaling behavior
of the required feature dimension relative to the number of stored memories. These
efforts improve both the retrieval capability of KHMs and the representation learning of corresponding transformers. Experimentally, we provide thorough numerical
results to back up theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

We study the optimal memorization capacity of Kernelized modern Hopfield Models (KHMs) [Wu
et al., 2024a], propose a sublinear-time algorithm to achieve it, and analyze parameter selection for
these models. KHMs belong to a class of transformer-compatible Dense Associative Memory [Krotov
and Hopfield, 2021, 2016] known as Modern Hopfield Models (MHMs) [Wu et al., 2024a,b, Hu
et al., 2024a, 2023, Ramsauer et al., 2020]. The defining characteristics of these models include their
super-linear memory capacity and strong connection to transformer attention mechanisms [Vaswani
et al., 2017]. The former makes them interesting models for associative memory, and the latter makes
them versatile transformer-compatible backbones with diverse empirical successes [Burns, 2024,
Burns and Fukai, 2023, Hu et al., 2024a,c, Xu et al., 2024, Wu et al., 2024a,b, Hoover et al., 2024b,
Seidl et al., 2022, Fürst et al., 2022]. However, one major limitation of MHMs is their reliance on the
quality of memory distribution for effective pattern storage and retrieval [Wu et al., 2024a, Sec. 1].
Studying this limitation in these models is fundamental and of practical importance. One one hand, it
prevents MHMs from functioning as full-fledged content-addressable memory models. On the other
hand, it implies that the representation learning ability of current transformer attention [Vaswani et al.,
2017] is suboptimal [Wu et al., 2024a, Thm. 3.1]. Addressing this issue benefits both computational
∗

Equal contribution. Code is available at GitHub. Latest version is on arXiv.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

