e-COP : Episodic Constrained Optimization of Policies

Akhil Agnihotri
University of Southern California
agnihotri.akhil@gmail.com

Rahul Jain
Google DeepMind and USC
rahulajain@google.com

Deepak Ramachandran
Google DeepMind
ramachandrand@google.com

Sahil Singla
Google DeepMind
sasingla@google.com

Abstract
In this paper, we present the e-COP algorithm, the first policy optimization algorithm
for constrained Reinforcement Learning (RL) in episodic (finite horizon) settings. Such
formulations are applicable when there are separate sets of optimization criteria and
constraints on a system’s behavior. We approach this problem by first establishing a policy difference lemma for the episodic setting, which provides the theoretical foundation
for the algorithm. Then, we propose to combine a set of established and novel solution
ideas to yield the e-COP algorithm that is easy to implement and numerically stable,
and provide a theoretical guarantee on optimality under certain scaling assumptions.
Through extensive empirical analysis using benchmarks in the Safety Gym suite, we
show that our algorithm has similar or better performance than SoTA (non-episodic)
algorithms adapted for the episodic setting. The scalability of the algorithm opens
the door to its application in safety-constrained Reinforcement Learning from Human
Feedback for Large Language or Diffusion Models.

1

Introduction

RL problems may be formulated in order to satisfy multiple simultaneous objectives. These can include
performance objectives that we want to maximize, and physical, operational or other objectives that
we wish to constrain rather than maximize. For example, in robotics, we often want to optimize a task
completion objective while obeying physical safety constraints. Similarly, in generative AI models, we
want to optimize for human preferences while ensuring that the output generations remain safe (expressed
perhaps as a threshold on an automatic safety score that penalizes violent or other undesirable content).
Scalable policy optimization algorithms such as TRPO [31], PPO [33], etc have been central to the
achievements of RL over the last decade [34, 38, 7]. In particular, these have found utility in generative
models, e.g., in the training of Large Language Models (LLMs) to be aligned to human preferences through
the RL with Human Feedback (RLHF) paradigm [2]. But these algorithms are designed primarily for the
unconstrained infinite-horizon discounted setting: Their use for constrained problems via optimization of
the Lagrangian often gives unsatisfactory constraint satisfaction results. This has prompted development
of a number of constrained policy optimization algorithms for the infinite-horizon discounted setting
[3, 39, 43, 41, 19, 6, 5], and for the average setting [4].
However, many RL problems are more accurately formulated as episodic, i.e., having a finite time horizon.
For instance, in image diffusion models [10, 21], the denoising sequence is really a finite step trajectory
optimization problem, better suited to be solved via RL algorithms for the episodic setting. When existing
algorithms for infinite horizon discounted setting are used for such problem, they exhibit sub-optimal
performance or fail to satisfy task-specific constraints by prioritizing short-term constraint satisfaction
over episodic goals [11, 28, 17]. Furthermore, the episodic setting allows for objective functions to be
time-dependent which the infinite-horizon formulations do not. Even when the objective functions are
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

