Predictor-Corrector Enhanced Transformers with
Exponential Moving Average Coefficient Learning

Bei Li1,2∗ Tong Zheng1 Rui Wang3 Jiahao Liu2 Qingyan Guo4 Junliang Guo3
Xu Tan3 Tong Xiao1† Jingbo Zhu1 Jingang Wang2† Xunliang Cai2
1
Northeastern University 2 Meituan Inc. 3 Microsoft Research 4 Tsinghua University
{libei17,liujiahao12,wangjingang02,caixunliang}@meituan.com
tzheng24@umd.edu {ruiwa,junliangguo,xuta}@microsoft.com
gqy22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn {xiaotong,zhujingbo}@mail.neu.edu.cn

Abstract
Residual networks, as discrete approximations of Ordinary Differential Equations
(ODEs), have inspired significant advancements in neural network design, including
multistep methods, high-order methods, and multi-particle dynamical systems. The
precision of the solution to ODEs significantly affects parameter optimization,
thereby impacting model performance. In this work, we present a series of advanced
explorations of Transformer architecture design to minimize the error compared to
the true “solution.” First, we introduce a predictor-corrector learning framework to
minimize truncation errors, which consists of a high-order predictor and a multistep
corrector. Second, we propose an exponential moving average-based coefficient
learning method to strengthen our higher-order predictor. Extensive experiments
on large-scale machine translation, abstractive summarization, language modeling,
and natural language understanding benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of
our approach. On the WMT’14 English-German and English-French tasks, our
model achieved BLEU scores of 30.95 and 44.27, respectively. Furthermore, on
the OPUS multilingual machine translation task, our model surpasses a robust 3.8B
DeepNet by an average of 2.9 SacreBLEU, using only 1/3 parameters. Notably, it
also beats LLama models by 5.7 accuracy points on the LM Harness Evaluation.

1

Introduction

Residual networks [16], formally yt+1 = yt + F(yt , θt ), represent a cornerstone in the development
of deep neural networks [59, 10], primarily due to their capacity to facilitate the flow of information
across multiple layers. Beyond their pivotal role in convolutional networks, residual connections have
become an essential element in the architecture of more complex models, including the Transformer
[59] and its various derivatives. This concept can be likened to the discretization process in the Euler
method [63, 37, 15, 7, 51, 29], which serves as a first-order solver for ordinary differential equations
(ODEs), where dy(t)
dt = F(y(t), θ(t)). In both cases, the new state (be it the next layer’s output in
ResNets or the solution at the next time step in the Euler method) is computed by taking the current
state and adding an adjustment term.
Given this analogy with ODEs, there has been a surge of interest in improving residual network
architectures by using more powerful numerical methods for ODEs. For instance, the linear multistep
method [62, 37, 71, 24] has been employed to bolster the optimization of deep models. Other efforts
have included redesigning the Transformer architecture from a multi-particle dynamical system
∗
†

Part of work was done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia
Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

