AED: Adaptable Error Detection
for Few-shot Imitation Policy

Jia-Fong Yeh1 Kuo-Han Hung1,∗ Pang-Chi Lo1,∗ Chi-Ming Chung1
Tsung-Han Wu2 Hung-Ting Su1 Yi-Ting Chen3 Winston H. Hsu1,4
1
National Taiwan University 2 University of California, Berkeley
3
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University 4 MobileDrive

Abstract
We introduce a new task called Adaptable Error Detection (AED), which aims
to identify behavior errors in few-shot imitation (FSI) policies based on visual
observations in novel environments. The potential to cause serious damage to
surrounding areas limits the application of FSI policies in real-world scenarios.
Thus, a robust system is necessary to notify operators when FSI policies are
inconsistent with the intent of demonstrations. This task introduces three challenges:
(1) detecting behavior errors in novel environments, (2) identifying behavior errors
that occur without revealing notable changes, and (3) lacking complete temporal
information of the rollout due to the necessity of online detection. However, the
existing benchmarks cannot support the development of AED because their tasks
do not present all these challenges. To this end, we develop a cross-domain AED
benchmark, consisting of 322 base and 153 novel environments. Additionally, we
propose Pattern Observer (PrObe) to address these challenges. PrObe is equipped
with a powerful pattern extractor and guided by novel learning objectives to parse
discernible patterns in the policy feature representations of normal or error states.
Through our comprehensive evaluation, PrObe demonstrates superior capability
to detect errors arising from a wide range of FSI policies, consistently surpassing
strong baselines. Moreover, we conduct detailed ablations and a pilot study on
error correction to validate the effectiveness of the proposed architecture design
and the practicality of the AED task, respectively. The AED project page can be
found at https://aed-neurips.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Few-shot imitation (FSI), a framework that learns a policy in novel (unseen) environments from a few
demonstrations, has recently drawn significant attention in the community [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. Notably,
the framework, as exemplified by [7, 8, 9, 10, 1, 11, 2], has demonstrated its efficacy across a range of
robotic manipulation tasks. This framework shows significant potential to adapt to a new task based
on just a few demonstrations from their owners [1, 2]. However, a major barrier that still limits their
ability to infiltrate our everyday lives is the ability to detect behavior errors in novel environments.
We propose a challenging and crucial task called adaptable error detection (AED), aiming to monitor
FSI policies from visual observations and report their behavior errors, along with the corresponding
benchmark. In this work, behavior errors refer to states that deviate from the demonstrated behavior,
necessitating the timely termination of the policy upon their occurrence. Unlike existing few-shot
visual perception tasks [12], failures can result in significant disruptions to surrounding objects and
humans in the real world. This nature often restricts real-world experiments to simple tasks. Our
AED benchmark is built within Coppeliasim [13] and Pyrep [14], encompassing six indoor tasks and
one factory task. This comprehensive benchmark comprises 322 base and 153 new environments,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

