Replicable Uniformity Testing

Sihan Liu
University of California San Diego
La Jolla, CA
sil046@ucsd.edu

Christopher Ye
University of California San Diego
La Jolla, CA
czye@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Uniformity testing is arguably one of the most fundamental distribution testing
problems. Given sample access to an unknown distribution p on [n], one must
decide if p is uniform or ε-far from uniform (in total variation distance).√A long
line of work established that uniformity testing has sample complexity Θ( nε−2 ).
However, when the input distribution is neither uniform nor far from uniform,
known algorithms may have highly non-replicable behavior. Consequently, if these
algorithms are applied in scientific studies, they may lead to contradictory results
that erode public trust in science.
In this work, we revisit uniformity testing under the framework of algorithmic
replicability [STOC ’22], requiring the algorithm to be replicable under arbitrary
distributions. While replicability typically incurs a ρ−2 factor overhead in sample
√
complexity, we obtain a replicable uniformity tester using only Õ( nε−2 ρ−1 )
samples. To our knowledge, this is the first replicable learning algorithm with
(nearly) linear dependence on ρ.
Lastly, we consider a class of “symmetric" algorithms [FOCS ’00] whose outputs
are invariant under relabeling of the domain [n], which includes all existing uniformity testers (including ours). For this natural class of algorithms, we prove a nearly
matching sample complexity lower bound for replicable uniformity testing.

1

Introduction

Distribution property testing (see [43, 9, 12] for surveys of the field), originated from statistical
hypothesis testing [39, 36], aims at testing whether an unknown distribution satisfies a certain
property or is significantly “far” from satisfying the property given sample access to the distribution.
After the pioneering early works that formulate the field from a TCS perspective [5, 4], a number of
works have achieved progress on testing a wide range of properties [6, 21, 11, 22, 10, 19]. Within the
field, uniformity testing [28] is arguably one of the most fundamental distribution testing problems:
Given sample access to some unknown distribution p on [n] = {1, · · · , n}, one tries to decide
whether p is uniform or far from being uniform.
When the unknown distribution is promised to be either uniform or at least ε-far from being uniform
in total variation (TV) distance, a line of work in the field [28, 40, 47, 20, 1, 16] √
has led to efficient
testers that achieve information theoretically optimal sample complexity, i.e., Θ( n/ε2 ). However,
the testers are only guaranteed to provide reliable answers when p fulfills the input promise —
p is either Un or far from it. In practical scenarios, due to a number of reasons such as model
misspecification, or inaccurate measurements, such promises are rarely guaranteed [13]. Since the
tester no longer has a correctness constraint to adhere to, it may have arbitrarily volatile behavior.
Ideally, we hope for algorithmic stability for all distributions, not only on those fulfilling the promises.
Consider the scenario where two group of scientists, as an intermediate step of some scientific study,
are trying to independently test the uniformity of some ground-truth distribution p∗ . If the groups
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

