Diffusion-Inspired Truncated Sampler
for Text-Video Retrieval
Jiamian Wang1† , Pichao Wang2∗, Dongfang Liu1 , Qiang Guan3 , Sohail Dianat1 ,
Majid Rabbani1 , Raghuveer Rao4 , Zhiqiang Tao1†
1
Rochester Institute of Technology, 2 Amazon,
3
Kent State University, 4 DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory

Abstract
Prevalent text-to-video retrieval methods represent multimodal text-video data in a
joint embedding space, aiming at bridging the relevant text-video pairs and pulling
away irrelevant ones. One main challenge in state-of-the-art retrieval methods lies
in the modality gap, which stems from the substantial disparities between text and
video and can persist in the joint space. In this work, we leverage the potential of
Diffusion models to address the text-video modality gap by progressively aligning
text and video embeddings in a unified space. However, we identify two key
limitations of existing Diffusion models in retrieval tasks: The L2 loss does not
fit the ranking problem inherent in text-video retrieval, and the generation quality
heavily depends on the varied initial point drawn from the isotropic Gaussian,
causing inaccurate retrieval. To this end, we introduce a new Diffusion-Inspired
Truncated Sampler (DITS) that jointly performs progressive alignment and modality
gap modeling in the joint embedding space. The key innovation of DITS is to
leverage the inherent proximity of text and video embeddings, defining a truncated
diffusion flow from the fixed text embedding to the video embedding, enhancing
controllability compared to adopting the isotropic Gaussian. Moreover, DITS
adopts the contrastive loss to jointly consider the relevant and irrelevant pairs,
not only facilitating alignment but also yielding a discriminatively structured
embedding. Experiments on five benchmark datasets suggest the state-of-the-art
performance of DITS. We empirically find that DITS can also improve the structure
of the CLIP embedding space. Code is available at https://github.com/JiamianWang/DITS-text-video-retrieval

1

Introduction

Text-video retrieval aims to match textual descriptions with relevant video content and vice versa,
utilizing both modalities to improve ranking accuracy [Zhu et al., 2023]. This task is challenging due
to the multi-modality gap, which represents the inherent differences between textual and visual data
representations [Yang et al., 2021, Huang et al., 2023b, Sun et al., 2024, Wang et al., 2021]. Bridging
this gap effectively requires advanced methodologies to extract and align semantic information from
both modalities into a joint embedding space [Cheng et al., 2023, Xu et al., 2021, Pei et al., 2023].
Current state-of-the-art approaches have explored various strategies to narrow this gap. Advanced
feature extraction techniques focus on capturing fine-grained details through temporal modeling [Liu
et al., 2022b] and multi-granularity matching strategies, such as frame-level, patch-level, word-level,
and token-level representations [Li et al., 2023b, Guan et al., 2023]. Additionally, leveraging largescale data augmentation has been shown to enhance the capabilities of visual-language models [Wu
∗
†

The work does not relate to author’s position at Amazon.
Corresponding authors: Jiamian Wang (jw4905@rit.edu) & Zhiqiang Tao (zhiqiang.tao@rit.edu)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

