Asymptotics of Alpha-Divergence Variational
Inference Algorithms with Exponential Families

François Bertholom
SAMOVAR, Télécom Sud-Paris
Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
francois.bertholom@telecom-sudparis.eu

Randal Douc
SAMOVAR, Télécom Sud-Paris
Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
randal.douc@telecom-sudparis.eu

François Roueff
LTCI, Télécom Paris
Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
francois.roueff@telecom-paris.fr

Abstract
Recent works in Variational Inference have examined alternative criteria to the
commonly used exclusive Kullback-Leibler divergence. Encouraging empirical
results have been obtained with the family of alpha-divergences, but few works
have focused on the asymptotic properties of the proposed algorithms, especially
as the number of iterations goes to infinity. In this paper, we study a procedure
that ensures a monotonic decrease in the alpha-divergence. We provide sufficient
conditions to guarantee its convergence to a local minimizer of the alpha-divergence
at a geometric rate when the variational family belongs to the class of exponential
models. The sample-based version of this ideal procedure involves biased gradient
estimators, thus hindering any theoretical study. We propose an alternative unbiased
algorithm, we prove its almost sure convergence to a local minimizer of the alphadivergence, and a law of the iterated logarithm. Our results are exemplified with
toy and real-data experiments.

1

Introduction

Many statistical inference problems involve computing or sampling from intractable probability
densities. Variational Inference [3, 19] is a broad class of methods that turn this kind of inference
problems into optimization programs. Given a family of tractable densities Q, the goal is to find,
within that family, a fine approximation q of the targeted density p according to a given criterion.
The discrepancy between p and q is usually measured by the exclusive Kullback-Leibler divergence
DKL (q ∥ p), for it is quite convenient to use from a computational standpoint. However, it may
lead to approximations that tend to underestimate the variance of the target [27], a behavior known
as zero-forcing, or mode-seeking when the variational density is unimodal. This can be highly
detrimental to the quality of the posterior approximation, for instance when the target is multimodal.
To overcome this difficulty, recent research has experimented with other divergence measures, such
as the inclusive KL divergence DKL (p ∥ q) [28], or the more general alpha-divergence family [1], for
instance in [9, 15, 25]. Specifically, in [9], the authors introduced a family of iterative algorithms
that perform monotonic alpha-divergence minimization, meaning that the criterion is guaranteed to
decrease at each new iteration. Although numerical experiments suggested a strong potential for their
method, the convergence properties of the proposed algorithm remained to be determined.
After briefly giving some background on alpha-divergence Variational Inference (Section 2), we study
the convergence properties of the monotonic alpha-divergence minimization algorithm introduced in
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

