LogiCity: Advancing Neuro-Symbolic AI with
Abstract Urban Simulation
Bowen Li1 Zhaoyu Li2 Qiwei Du3 Jinqi Luo4 Wenshan Wang1 Yaqi Xie1
Simon Stepputtis1 Chen Wang3 Katia Sycara1 Pradeep Ravikumar1
Alexander Gray5 Xujie Si2,6 Sebastian Scherer1 ∗
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of Toronto 3 University at Buffalo
4
University of Pennsylvania 5 Centaur AI Institute 6 CIFAR AI Chair, Mila
{bowenli2, basti}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of Neuro-Symbolic (NeSy) AI
systems, which integrate symbolic reasoning into deep neural networks. However,
most of the existing benchmarks for NeSy AI fail to provide long-horizon reasoning tasks with complex multi-agent interactions. Furthermore, they are usually
constrained by fixed and simplistic logical rules over limited entities, making them
far from real-world complexities. To address these crucial gaps, we introduce
LogiCity, the first simulator based on customizable first-order logic (FOL) for an
urban-like environment with multiple dynamic agents. LogiCity models diverse
urban elements using semantic and spatial concepts, such as IsAmbulance(X)
and IsClose(X, Y). These concepts are used to define FOL rules that govern the
behavior of various agents. Since the concepts and rules are abstractions, they
can be universally applied to cities with any agent compositions, facilitating the
instantiation of diverse scenarios. Besides, a key feature of LogiCity is its support
for user-configurable abstractions, enabling customizable simulation complexities
for logical reasoning. To explore various aspects of NeSy AI, LogiCity introduces
two tasks, one features long-horizon sequential decision-making, and the other
focuses on one-step visual reasoning, varying in difficulty and agent behaviors.
Our extensive evaluation reveals the advantage of NeSy frameworks in abstract
reasoning. Moreover, we highlight the significant challenges of handling more complex abstractions in long-horizon multi-agent scenarios or under high-dimensional,
imbalanced data. With its flexible design, various features, and newly raised challenges, we believe LogiCity represents a pivotal step forward in advancing the next
generation of NeSy AI. All the code and data are open-sourced at our website.

1

Introduction

Unlike most existing deep neural networks [1, 2], humans are not making predictions and decisions
in a relatively black-box way [3]. Instead, when we learn to drive a vehicle, play sports, or solve
math problems, we naturally leverage and explore the underlying symbolic representations and
structure [3–5]. Such capability enables us to swiftly and robustly reason over complex situations and
to adapt to new scenarios. To emulate human-like learning and reasoning, the Neuro-Symbolic (NeSy)
AI community [6] has introduced various hybrid systems [7–19], integrating symbolic reasoning into
deep neural networks to achieve higher data efficiency, interpretability, and robustness1 .
Despite their rapid advancement, many NeSy AI systems are designed and tested only in very
simplified and limited environments, such as visual sudoku [20], handwritten formula recogni1

This work mainly focuses on logical reasoning within the broad NeSy community.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

