Is Function Similarity Over-Engineered?
Building a Benchmark

Rebecca Saul1 , Chang Liu2 , Noah Fleischmann1 , Richard Zak1,3 ,
Kristopher Micinski2 , Edward Raff1,3 , James Holt4
1
Booz Allen Hamilton,2 Syracuse University,
3
University of Maryland, Baltimore County, 4 Laboratory for Physical Sciences
Saul_Rebecca@bah.com, cliu57@syr.edu,
Fleischmann_Noah@bah.com, Zak_Richard@bah.com,
kkmicins@syr.edu, Raff_Edward@bah.com, holt@lps.umd.edu

Abstract
Binary analysis is a core component of many critical security tasks, including
reverse engineering, malware analysis, and vulnerability detection. Manual analysis is often time-consuming, but identifying commonly-used or previously-seen
functions can reduce the time it takes to understand a new file. However, given the
complexity of assembly, and the NP-hard nature of determining function equivalence, this task is extremely difficult. Common approaches often use sophisticated
disassembly and decompilation tools, graph analysis, and other expensive preprocessing steps to perform function similarity searches over some corpus. In
this work, we identify a number of discrepancies between the current research
environment and the underlying application need. To remedy this, we build a new
benchmark, REF U S E -B ENCH, for binary function similarity detection consisting
of high-quality datasets and tests that better reflect real-world use cases. In doing so,
we address issues like data duplication and accurate labeling, experiment with real
malware, and perform the first serious evaluation of ML binary function similarity
models on Windows data. Our benchmark reveals that a new, simple baseline —
one which looks at only the raw bytes of a function, and requires no disassembly or other pre-processing — is able to achieve state-of-the-art performance in
multiple settings. Our findings challenge conventional assumptions that complex
models with highly-engineered features are being used to their full potential, and
demonstrate that simpler approaches can provide significant value.

1

Introduction

Binary function similarity detection (BFSD) is the problem of determining whether two binary
functions are similar in the absence of source code. BFSD plays a central role in many binary analysis
tasks, with downstream applications to reverse engineering [11], malware analysis [8; 27; 29],
software component analysis [12; 61], and vulnerability detection [14; 62]. Given its extensive use
cases, there has been great interest in finding automated solutions to BFSD, particularly from the
security community. However, developing such solutions has proven to be quite challenging; even
when the source codes of functions are identical, an unrealistic assumption in real-world scenarios,
semantically equivalent functions can have drastically different binary representations due to changes
in target architecture, build toolchains, compiler flags, and optimization levels.
BFSD has been studied in systems security, programming languages, and most recently, machine
learning [39]. Significant research effort has been spent exploring different function representations,
including raw bytes [60], assembly [40; 12], intermediate representations [9], control flow graphs [61;
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

