CuMo: Scaling Multimodal LLM with Co-Upcycled
Mixture-of-Experts

Jiachen Li1* Xinyao Wang2†‡ Sijie Zhu2 Chia-Wen Kuo2 Lu Xu2
Fan Chen2 Jitesh Jain1 Humphrey Shi1‡ Longyin Wen2
1
SHI Labs @ Georgia Tech & UIUC 2 ByteDance Inc., San Jose
https://github.com/SHI-Labs/CuMo

Abstract
Recent advancements in Multimodal Large Language Models (LLMs) have focused
primarily on scaling by increasing text-image pair data and enhancing LLMs to
improve performance on multimodal tasks. However, these scaling approaches are
computationally expensive and overlook the significance of efficiently improving
model capabilities from the vision side. Inspired by the successful applications
of Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) in LLMs, which improves model scalability during
training while keeping inference costs similar to those of smaller models, we
propose CuMo, which incorporates Co-upcycled Top-K sparsely-gated Mixtureof-experts blocks into both the vision encoder and the MLP connector, thereby
enhancing the multimodal LLMs with neglectable additional activated parameters
during inference. CuMo first pre-trains the MLP blocks and then initializes each
expert in the MoE block from the pre-trained MLP block during the visual instruction tuning stage, with auxiliary losses to ensure a balanced loading of experts.
CuMo outperforms state-of-the-art multimodal LLMs across various VQA and
visual-instruction-following benchmarks within each model size group, all while
training exclusively on open-sourced datasets.

1

Introduction

The advent of GPT-4V [53] has sparked excitement within open-source communities to transform
large language models (LLM) into multimodal LLMs. Recent multimodal LLMs [11, 46, 2] typically
integrate pre-trained vision encoders with MLP connectors to LLMs, with visual instruction tuning
data to fine-tune the pre-trained LLMs, enhancing their visual understanding capabilities. To further
scale up multimodal LLMs, previous efforts [44, 45, 39, 51, 7, 42] primarily focus on training the
model with a more extensive collection of text-image paired data and employing stronger LLMs,
significantly increasing training efforts. On the vision side, recent work concentrates on leveraging
multiple vision encoders [43, 18] to enrich visual content, employing larger vision encoders [9],
and using advanced vision-language connectors [5] to improve performance on multimodal tasks.
However, these techniques result in an increased number of additional parameters and generate extra
visual tokens for LLMs to process, making it inefficient to scale.
In terms of efficiently scaling up models, Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) has become the de-facto
framework in modern large-scale neural networks, particularly in natural language processing (NLP).
Most large language models (LLM) are built upon the transformer [64] architecture, wherein sparse
*

Work done during an internship at ByteDance San Jose, CA.
Work done at ByteDance.
‡
Corresponding authors.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

