M ULTI T RUST: A Comprehensive Benchmark Towards
Trustworthy Multimodal Large Language Models

Yichi Zhang1,4∗, Yao Huang2∗ , Yitong Sun2 , Chang Liu3 , Zhe Zhao4
Zhengwei Fang1 , Yifan Wang1 , Huanran Chen1 , Xiao Yang1
Xingxing Wei2 , Hang Su1,5 , Yinpeng Dong1,4†, Jun Zhu1,4†
1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center,
THBI Lab, BNRist Center, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
3
Institute of Image Communication and Networks Engineering in the Department of
Electronic Engineering (EE), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
4
5
RealAI
Pazhou Lab (Huangpu), Guangzhou, China
Warning: This paper may contain some offensive contents in data and model outputs.

Abstract
Despite the superior capabilities of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs)
across diverse tasks, they still face significant trustworthiness challenges. Yet, current literature on the assessment of trustworthy MLLMs remains limited, lacking
a holistic evaluation to offer thorough insights into future improvements. In this
work, we establish MultiTrust, the first comprehensive and unified benchmark on
the trustworthiness of MLLMs across five primary aspects: truthfulness, safety,
robustness, fairness, and privacy. Our benchmark employs a rigorous evaluation
strategy that addresses both multimodal risks and cross-modal impacts, encompassing 32 diverse tasks with self-curated datasets. Extensive experiments with
21 modern MLLMs reveal some previously unexplored trustworthiness issues and
risks, highlighting the complexities introduced by the multimodality and underscoring the necessity for advanced methodologies to enhance their reliability. For
instance, typical proprietary models still struggle with the perception of visually
confusing images and are vulnerable to multimodal jailbreaking and adversarial
attacks; MLLMs are more inclined to disclose privacy in text and reveal ideological
and cultural biases even when paired with irrelevant images in inference, indicating
that the multimodality amplifies the internal risks from base LLMs. Additionally,
we release a scalable toolbox for standardized trustworthiness research, aiming
to facilitate future advancements in this important field. Code and resources are
publicly available at: https://multi-trust.github.io/.

1

Introduction

The era towards Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) [48] has witnessed the emergence of the groundbreaking Large Language Models (LLMs) [4, 7, 63, 142]. With their strong language understanding
and reasoning capabilities, recent studies [35, 85, 106, 137, 181] have seamlessly integrated other
modalities (e.g., vision) into LLMs to understand different inputs. The resultant Multimodal Large
Language Models (MLLMs) have manifested versatile proficiency in both traditional vision tasks [28,
51, 54, 170] and more complex multimodal problems [43, 90, 173]. However, despite their remarkable
performance and the efforts in aligning with human preferences [109, 116], these cutting-edge models
∗
†

Equal Contributions
Corresponding Authors (

: {dongyinpeng, dcszj}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

