Smoke and Mirrors in Causal Downstream Tasks
Riccardo Cadei1 , Lukas Lindorfer1 , Sylvia Cremer1 , Cordelia Schmid2 , and Francesco
Locatello1
2

1
Institute of Science and Technology Austria
Inria, Ecole normale supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University

Abstract
Machine Learning and AI have the potential to transform data-driven scientific discovery,
enabling accurate predictions for several scientific phenomena. As many scientific questions
are inherently causal, this paper looks at the causal inference task of treatment effect
estimation, where the outcome of interest is recorded in high-dimensional observations
in a Randomized Controlled Trial (RCT). Despite being the simplest possible causal setting
and a perfect fit for deep learning, we theoretically find that many common choices in the
literature may lead to biased estimates. To test the practical impact of these considerations,
we recorded ISTAnt, the first real-world benchmark for causal inference downstream tasks
on high-dimensional observations as an RCT studying how garden ants (Lasius neglectus)
respond to microparticles applied onto their colony members by hygienic grooming.
Comparing 6 480 models fine-tuned from state-of-the-art visual backbones, we find that
the sampling and modeling choices significantly affect the accuracy of the causal estimate,
and that classification accuracy is not a proxy thereof. We further validated the analysis,
repeating it on a synthetically generated visual data set controlling the causal model. Our
results suggest that future benchmarks should carefully consider real downstream scientific
questions, especially causal ones. Further, we highlight guidelines for representation
learning methods to help answer causal questions in the sciences.
Code: https://github.com/CausalLearningAI/ISTAnt
Data: https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.26484934.v2

1

Introduction

Uncovering the answer to many scientific questions requires analyzing massive amounts of data
that humans simply cannot process on their own. For this reason, leveraging machine learning and
AI to help answer scientific questions is one of the most promising frontiers for AI research. As
a result, AI is now predicting how proteins fold [Jumper et al., 2021], new materials [Merchant et al.,
2023], precipitation forecasts [Espeholt et al., 2022], and animal behaviors [Sun et al., 2023]. Even
predicting counterfactual outcomes for treatment effect estimation appears to be possible [Feuerriegel
et al., 2024]. In scientific applications, these predictions are often incorporated into broader analyses
to draw new physical insights. In this paper, we focus on the problem of estimating the strength
of the causal effect of some variable on another, which is a common type of question across
disciplines [Robins et al., 2000, Samet et al., 2000, Van Nes et al., 2015, Runge, 2023].
While our discussion and conclusions are general, we follow a simple real-world example throughout
the paper: behavioral ecologists want to study the social hygienic behavior in ants and, thereby, the
ability of the insects to remove small particles from the body surface of exposed colony members.
Such grooming behavior performed by nestmates plays an important role in restoring a clean body
surface of the contaminated individual, which, in case of infectious particles being groomed off,
assures the health of the individual and prevents disease spread through the colony’s [Rosengaus et al.,
1998, Hughes et al., 2002, Konrad et al., 2012]. To study whether different microparticles differ systematically in their induction of grooming behavior, the biologists thus perform an experiment under
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

