Higher-Order Causal Message Passing for
Experimentation with Complex Interference

Mohsen Bayati1

Yuwei Luo1
1

William Overman1

Stanford Graduate School of Business

Sadegh Shirani1
2

{bayati, yuweiluo, wpo, sshirani}@stanford.edu,

Ruoxuan Xiong2

Emory University
ruoxuan.xiong@emory.edu

Abstract
Accurate estimation of treatment effects is essential for decision-making across
various scientific fields. This task, however, becomes challenging in areas like
social sciences and online marketplaces, where treating one experimental unit
can influence outcomes for others through direct or indirect interactions. Such
interference can lead to biased treatment effect estimates, particularly when the
structure of these interactions is unknown. We address this challenge by introducing
a new class of estimators based on causal message-passing, specifically designed for
settings with pervasive, unknown interference. Our estimator draws on information
from the sample mean and variance of unit outcomes and treatments over time,
enabling efficient use of observed data to estimate the evolution of the system state.
Concretely, we construct non-linear features from the moments of unit outcomes
and treatments and then learn a function that maps these features to future mean
and variance of unit outcomes. This allows for the estimation of the treatment effect
over time. Extensive simulations across multiple domains, using synthetic and real
network data, demonstrate the efficacy of our approach in estimating total treatment
effect dynamics, even in cases where interference exhibits non-monotonic behavior
in the probability of treatment.

1

Introduction

Randomized experiments are widely recognized as a reliable method in data-driven decision-making
for determining the causal effects of new interventions, such as medical treatments or upgrades of
market products. The conventional approach involves administering the new treatment to a randomly
selected subset of the observation units (e.g., patients, products, or geographical areas), referred to
as the treatment group, and comparing their outcomes with those units who received no treatment,
the control group. However, the validity of these methods substantially relies on the assumption that
treating a group of units does not interfere with the outcomes of the control units, known as the Stable
Unit Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA) [Cox, 1958, Rubin, 1978, Manski, 1990, Imbens and
Rubin, 2015, Sussman and Airoldi, 2017].
In many social science and online marketplace scenarios, treating one unit impacts not only its
outcome but also the outcomes of units that directly or indirectly interact with the treated unit
[Bond et al., 2012, Blake and Coey, 2014, Holtz et al., 2020, Johari et al., 2022, Bright et al.,
2022]. This interference of treatments and outcomes makes estimating the causal effect of the
treatment particularly challenging. Considering the network of interactions, when a unit is treated, its
interactions with neighboring units lead to subsequent changes in their outcomes. These interactions
continue over the experimental time horizon and may display complex behaviors. For example, as
the treatment is expanded to a larger population, the interference effect may intensify or diminish.
This necessitates efficient data usage and robust estimators to capture and adapt to such intricacies.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

