Reconstruction Attacks on Machine Unlearning:
Simple Models are Vulnerable

Martin Bertran ⋆
Amazon AWS AI/ML

Jamie Morgenstern
University of Washington
Amazon AWS AI/ML

Shuai Tang ⋆
Jump Trading

Aaron Roth
University of Pennsylvania
Amazon AWS AI/ML

Michael Kearns
University of Pennsylvania
Amazon AWS AI/ML
Zhiwei Steven Wu
Carnegie Mellon University
Amazon AWS AI/ML

Abstract
Machine unlearning is motivated by desire for data autonomy: a person can
request to have their data’s influence removed from deployed models, and those
models should be updated as if they were retrained without the person’s data. We
show that, counter-intuitively, these updates expose individuals to high-accuracy
reconstruction attacks which allow the attacker to recover their data in its entirety,
even when the original models are so simple that privacy risk might not otherwise
have been a concern. We show how to mount a near-perfect attack on the deleted
data point from linear regression models. We then generalize our attack to other
loss functions and architectures, and empirically demonstrate the effectiveness
of our attacks across a wide range of datasets (capturing both tabular and image
data). Our work highlights that privacy risk is significant even for extremely simple
model classes when individuals can request deletion of their data from the model.

1

Introduction

As model training on personal data becomes commonplace, there has been a growing literature on
data protection in machine learning (ML), which includes at least two aspects:
Data Privacy The primary concern regarding data privacy in machine learning (ML) applications
is that models might inadvertently reveal details about the individual data points used in their
training. This type of privacy risk can manifest in various ways, ranging from membership inference
attacks (Shokri et al., 2017)—which only seek to confirm whether a specific individual’s data was used
in the training—to more severe reconstruction attacks (Dick et al., 2023) that attempt to recover entire
data records of numerous individuals. To address these risks, algorithms that adhere to differential
privacy standards (Dwork et al., 2006) provide proven safeguards, specifically limiting the ability to
infer information about individual training data.
Machine Unlearning Proponents of data autonomy have advocated for individuals to have the right to
decide how their data is used, including the right to retroactively ask that their data and its influences
be removed from any model trained on it. Data deletion, or machine unlearning, refer to technical
approaches which allow such removal of influence (Ginart et al., 2019; Cao & Yang, 2015). The idea
is that, after an individual’s data is deleted, the resulting model should be in the state it would have
been had the model originally been trained without the individual in question’s data. The primary
0
Martin and Shuai are the lead authors, and other authors are ordered alphabetically. Work done while Shuai
was employed by Amazon.{maberlop AT amazon.com}

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

