Conjugate Bayesian Two-step Change Point Detection
for Hawkes Process
Zeyue Zhang1,2 , Xiaoling Lu1,2 , Feng Zhou1,3∗
Center for Applied Statistics and School of Statistics, Renmin University of China
2
Innovation Platform, Renmin University of China
3
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Future Blockchain and Privacy Computing
{zhangzeyue, xiaolinglu, feng.zhou}@ruc.edu.cn
1

Abstract
The Bayesian two-step change point detection method is popular for the Hawkes
process due to its simplicity and intuitiveness. However, the non-conjugacy between the point process likelihood and the prior requires most existing Bayesian
two-step change point detection methods to rely on non-conjugate inference methods. These methods lack analytical expressions, leading to low computational
efficiency and impeding timely change point detection. To address this issue, this
work employs data augmentation to propose a conjugate Bayesian two-step change
point detection method for the Hawkes process, which proves to be more accurate
and efficient. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real data demonstrate
the superior effectiveness and efficiency of our method compared to baseline methods. Additionally, we conduct ablation studies to explore the robustness of our
method concerning various hyperparameters. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/Aurora2050/CoBay-CPD.

1

Introduction

Point process data, characterized by a series of discrete events occurring over time, finds extensive
applications in various domains, including finance [1], neuroscience [29], and social networks [20].
Hawkes processes [8], a subclass of point processes, have gained attention due to their ability to
model self-exciting and clustering behaviors. However, traditional modeling of Hawkes processes
relies on the assumption that the parameters of the process, i.e., the distribution of the process, remain
invariant over time. In practice, this assumption often fails to hold, as the underlying dynamics of
point process data can change over time [23; 27].
The violation of the time-invariant parameter assumption poses a significant challenge in accurately
modeling Hawkes process data. Real-world processes are inherently dynamic and subject to various
influences, leading to fluctuations in process distribution. For instance, in a social media platform, the
intensity of user interactions may change due to a sudden surge in activity during an emergency event
or a significant drop in user engagement during a service outage. To address this issue, the change
point detection (CPD) has emerged as a pivotal task in analyzing point process data. CPD aims to
identify the locations where the parameters (distribution) of the process undergo a significant change.
In this work, our focus is on CPD within Hawkes process. Previous studies have tackled this issue,
offering diverse methodologies for this purpose [2; 4; 23; 27]. Among these, the two-step estimationprediction method [4] has gained widespread application due to its simplicity and intuitiveness. This
method involves using historical data to estimate model parameters and then utilizing these estimated
parameters to estimate the distribution of the next event point. If the observed point aligns closely
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

