Fast Iterative Hard Thresholding Methods
with Pruning Gradient Computations

Yasutoshi Ida1∗

Sekitoshi Kanai1

Atsutoshi Kumagai1

Tomoharu Iwata2

Yasuhiro Fujiwara2
1

NTT Computer and Data Science Laboratories
2
NTT Communication Science Laboratories

Abstract
We accelerate the iterative hard thresholding (IHT) method, which finds k important
elements from a parameter vector in a linear regression model. Although the plain
IHT repeatedly updates the parameter vector during the optimization, computing
gradients is the main bottleneck. Our method safely prunes unnecessary gradient
computations to reduce the processing time. The main idea is to efficiently construct
a candidate set, which contains k important elements in the parameter vector, for
each iteration. Specifically, before computing the gradients, we prune unnecessary
elements in the parameter vector for the candidate set by utilizing upper bounds on
absolute values of the parameters. Our method guarantees the same optimization
results as the plain IHT because our pruning is safe. Experiments show that our
method is up to 73 times faster than the plain IHT without degrading accuracy.

1

Introduction

The optimization problem of finding sparse parameter vectors in linear regression models is a
crucial problem that crosses a wide range of fields, including feature selection [20, 35], sparse
coding [32], dictionary learning [33], and compressed sensing [6]. To obtain the sparse parameter
vector, the parameter vector is often constrained to have k nonzero elements. Among a huge number
of algorithms that have been developed for this problem [25, 29, 14, 27, 10, 19, 11, 20], iterative hard
thresholding (IHT) methods [6] are practical methods based on gradient descent methods because
they have almost no overhead over the plain gradient descent method [2].
A procedure of IHT consists of two main parts in an iteration. First, it updates the parameter vector
in accordance with the gradient descent method. Then, the parameter vector is projected onto a
feasible set being a set of sparse parameter vectors. In the projection, IHT uses a hard thresholding
operator that selects the k-largest elements in terms of magnitude of the parameter vector, and the
other elements are set to zero. IHT repeats this procedure until the stopping criterion is satisfied.
When a design matrix of the linear regression model is an m-by-n matrix, the length of the parameter
vector is n, and gradient computations of IHT require O(mn) or O(n2 ) time for each iteration.
Specifically, IHT suffers from the increase in processing time for large m and n. Taking feature
selection as an example, IHT slows down for large datasets because m and n correspond to the
numbers of samples and features in the dataset, respectively. The gradient computations are much
more computationally expensive than the projection of the parameter vector because the projection
only requires O(n log k) time if it uses a heap. Therefore, the gradient computations are dominant in
the overall procedure of IHT, and we need to reduce the cost to raise the efficiency of IHT.
∗

Corresponding author: yasutoshi.ida@ieee.org

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

