Mixture of Demonstrations for In-Context Learning

Song Wang∗
University of Virginia
sw3wv@virginia.edu

Zihan Chen∗
University of Virginia
brf3rx@virginia.edu

Cong Shen
University of Virginia
cong@virginia.edu

Chengshuai Shi
University of Virginia
cs7ync@virginia.edu

Jundong Li
University of Virginia
jundong@virginia.edu

Abstract
In-Context Learning (ICL) empowers Large Language Models (LLMs) to tackle
various tasks by providing input-output examples as additional inputs, referred to as
demonstrations. Nevertheless, the performance of ICL could be easily impacted by
the quality of selected demonstrations. Existing efforts generally learn a retriever
model to score each demonstration for selecting suitable demonstrations, however,
the effect is suboptimal due to the large search space and the noise from unhelpful
demonstrations. In this study, we introduce MoD (Mixture of Demonstrations),
which partitions the demonstration pool into groups, each governed by an expert to
reduce search space. We further design an expert-wise training strategy to alleviate the impact of unhelpful demonstrations when optimizing the retriever model.
During inference, experts collaboratively retrieve demonstrations for the input
query to enhance the ICL performance. We validate MoD via experiments across
a range of NLP datasets and tasks, demonstrating its state-of-the-art performance
and shedding new light on the future design of retrieval methods for ICL.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable potential across various natural
language processing (NLP) tasks [62, 43, 6], such as semantic parsing [22, 53] and commonsense
reasoning [42, 61]. However, the large parameter size of these models often comes with significant
costs for retraining or fine-tuning when they are applied to novel tasks [16, 25, 59]. Fortunately, as
LLMs increase in size, they acquire the In-Context Learning (ICL) capability [50, 47], wherein the
model can achieve significant performance improvements when provided with a limited number of
demonstration examples during inference, without updating model parameters [5].
Although ICL has exhibited promising performance in various tasks, this capability also introduces a
challenge related to robustness [5, 15, 36, 29]: ICL is highly sensitive to the selection of in-context
demonstrations, and suboptimal selections could even lead to worse performance than random
selections [34, 27, 26]. Recently, extensive research efforts have been dedicated to improving
the selection of in-context demonstrations [47, 35]. For example, learning-free methods directly
select demonstrations according to the similarity of demonstration embeddings from a pre-trained
encoder [55]. Learning-based methods generally optimize a retriever based on feedback or supervision
signals (e.g., output probabilities) from LLMs, and demonstrate superior performance compared to
learning-free methods [34, 57].
However, the performance of these approaches is limited by two crucial challenges. (1) Large
Search Space. As ICL requires the retrieval of multiple demonstrations from a sample pool, it is
∗

indicates equal contributions, random order.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

