Physics-informed Neural Networks for Functional
Differential Equations: Cylindrical Approximation
and Its Convergence Guarantees

Taiki Miyagawa*
Independent Researcher
chopin.grande.valse.brillatnte@gmail.com
Takeru Yokota*
Interdisciplinary Theoretical and Mathematical Sciences Program (iTHEMS), RIKEN
Center for Quantum Computing, RIKEN
takeru.yokota@riken.jp

Abstract
We propose the first learning scheme for functional differential equations (FDEs).
FDEs play a fundamental role in physics, mathematics, and optimal control. However, the numerical analysis of FDEs has faced challenges due to its unrealistic
computational costs and has been a long standing problem over decades. Thus, numerical approximations of FDEs have been developed, but they often oversimplify
the solutions. To tackle these two issues, we propose a hybrid approach combining
physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) with the cylindrical approximation.
The cylindrical approximation expands functions and functional derivatives with an
orthonormal basis and transforms FDEs into high-dimensional PDEs. To validate
the reliability of the cylindrical approximation for FDE applications, we prove
the convergence theorems of approximated functional derivatives and solutions.
Then, the derived high-dimensional PDEs are numerically solved with PINNs.
Through the capabilities of PINNs, our approach can handle a broader class of
functional derivatives more efficiently than conventional discretization-based methods, improving the scalability of the cylindrical approximation. As a proof of
concept, we conduct experiments on two FDEs and demonstrate that our model can
successfully achieve typical L1 relative error orders of PINNs ∼ 10−3 . Overall,
our work provides a strong backbone for physicists, mathematicians, and machine
learning experts to analyze previously challenging FDEs, thereby democratizing
their numerical analysis, which has received limited attention. Code is available at
https://github.com/TaikiMiyagawa/FunctionalPINN.

1

Introduction

Functional differential equations (FDEs) appear in a wide variety of research areas [91, 92, 79].
FDEs are partial differential equations (PDEs) involving functional derivatives, where a functional
F is a function of an input function θ(x) to a real number, i.e., F : θ 7→ F ([θ]) ∈ R, and a
functional derivative is defined as the derivative of functional w.r.t. the input function at x, denoted
by δF ([θ])/δθ(x). FDEs play a fundamental role in Fokker-Planck systems [27], turbulence theory
[67], quantum field theory [71], mean-field games [16], mean-field optimal control [18, 81], and
unnormalized optimal transport [32]. Major examples of FDEs include the Hopf functional equation
*

These authors contributed equally to this work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

