Persistent Homology for High-dimensional Data
Based on Spectral Methods

Sebastian Damrich†
Philipp Berens†‡
Dmitry Kobak†§
Hertie Institute for AI in Brain Health, University of Tübingen, Germany
‡
Tübingen AI Center, Germany
§
IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany
{sebastian.damrich,philipp.berens,dmitry.kobak}@uni-tuebingen.de
†

Abstract
Persistent homology is a popular computational tool for analyzing the topology of
point clouds, such as the presence of loops or voids. However, many real-world
datasets with low intrinsic dimensionality reside in an ambient space of much
higher dimensionality. We show that in this case traditional persistent homology
becomes very sensitive to noise and fails to detect the correct topology. The same
holds true for existing refinements of persistent homology. As a remedy, we find
that spectral distances on the k-nearest-neighbor graph of the data, such as diffusion
distance and effective resistance, allow to detect the correct topology even in the
presence of high-dimensional noise. Moreover, we derive a novel closed-form
formula for effective resistance, and describe its relation to diffusion distances.
Finally, we apply these methods to high-dimensional single-cell RNA-sequencing
data and show that spectral distances allow robust detection of cell cycle loops.

1

Introduction

Algebraic topology can describe the shape of a continuous manifold. In particular, it can detect if
a manifold has holes, using its so-called homology groups [39]. For example, a cup has a single
one-dimensional hole, or loop (its handle), whereas a football has a single two-dimensional hole, or
void (its hollow interior). These global topological properties are often helpful for understanding an
object’s overall structure. However, real-world datasets are typically given as point clouds, a discrete
set of points sampled from an underlying manifold. In this setting, true homologies are trivial, as there
is one connected component per point and no holes whatsoever; instead, persistent homology can be
used to find holes in point clouds and to assign an importance score called persistence to each [25, 90].
Holes with high persistence are indicative of holes in the underlying manifold. Persistence homology
has been successfully applied in machine learning pipelines, for instance for gait recognition [48],
instance segmentation [44], and protein binding [84], as well as for neural network analysis [67].
Persistent homology works well for low-dimensional data [78] but we find that it has difficulties in
high dimensionality. If data points are sampled from a low-dimensional manifold embedded in a
high-dimensional ambient space (manifold hypothesis), then the measurement noise typically affects
all ambient dimensions. In this setting, traditional persistent homology is not robust against even low
levels of noise. On a dataset as simple as a circle in R50 , persistent homology based on the Euclidean
distance between noisy points can fail to identify the correct loop as a clear outlier in the persistence
diagram (Figure 1). The aim of our work is to find alternatives to traditional persistent homology that
can robustly detect the correct topology despite high-dimensional noise.
We were inspired by visualization methods t-SNE [79] and UMAP [53] that are able to depict the loop
in the same noisy dataset (Figure 1d,e). They approximate the data manifold by the k-nearest-neighbor
(kNN) graph [76, 70, 5, 41, 56]. Therefore, we suggest to use persistent homology with spectral
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

