Feedback control guides credit assignment in
recurrent neural networks
Klara Kaleb
Department of Bioengineering
Imperial College London
London, UK
klara.kaleb18@imperial.ac.uk
Juan A. Gallego
Department of Bioengineering
Imperial College London
London, UK

Barbara Feulner
Department of Bioengineering
Imperial College London
London, UK

Claudia Clopath
Department of Bioengineering
Imperial College London
London, UK

Abstract
How do brain circuits learn to generate behaviour? While significant strides have
been made in understanding learning in artificial neural networks, applying this
knowledge to biological networks remains challenging. For instance, while backpropagation is known to perform accurate credit assignment of error in artificial
neural networks, how a similarly powerful process can be realized within the constraints of biological circuits remains largely unclear. One of the major challenges
is that the brain’s extensive recurrent connectivity requires the propagation of error
through both space and time, a problem that is notoriously difficult to solve in
vanilla recurrent neural networks. Moreover, the extensive feedback connections
in the brain are known to influence forward network activity, but the interaction
between feedback-driven activity changes and local, synaptic plasticity-based
learning is not fully understood. Building on our previous work modelling motor
learning, this work investigates the mechanistic properties of pre-trained networks
with feedback control on a standard motor task. We show that feedback control
of the ongoing recurrent network dynamics approximates the optimal first-order
gradient with respect to the network activities, allowing for rapid, ongoing movement correction. Moreover, we show that trial-by-trial adaptation to a persistent
perturbation using a local, biologically plausible learning rule that integrates recent
activity and error feedback is both more accurate and more efficient with feedback
control during learning, due to the decoupling of the recurrent network dynamics
and the injection of an adaptive, second-order gradient into the network dynamics.
Thus, our results suggest that feedback control may guide credit assignment in
biological recurrent neural networks, enabling both rapid and efficient learning in
the brain.

1

Introduction

Despite the “unreasonable effectiveness” of the backpropagation (BP) algorithm (Rumelhart et al.,
1986), learning in the brain must leverage a different solution (Lillicrap & Santoro, 2019; Lillicrap
et al., 2020). For instance, the brain’s extensive recurrent connectivity (Felleman & Van Essen,
1991; Douglas & Martin, 2004) requires propagation of error through both space and time. Learning
in vanilla recurrent neural networks (RNNs) with Backpropagation through time (BPTT) (Werbos,
1990; Mozer et al., 1995; Robinson & Fallside, 1987) is known to be difficult due to the vanishing
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

