iVideoGPT: Interactive VideoGPTs are Scalable
World Models
Jialong Wu1∗, Shaofeng Yin1,2∗, Ningya Feng1 , Xu He3 , Dong Li3 , Jianye Hao3,4 ,
Mingsheng Long1
1
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, 2 Zhili College, Tsinghua University
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 4 College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
wujialong0229@gmail.com, ysf22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
World models empower model-based agents to interactively explore, reason, and
plan within imagined environments for real-world decision-making. However, the
high demand for interactivity poses challenges in harnessing recent advancements
in video generative models for developing world models at scale. This work introduces Interactive VideoGPT (iVideoGPT), a scalable autoregressive transformer
framework that integrates multimodal signals—visual observations, actions, and rewards—into a sequence of tokens, facilitating an interactive experience of agents via
next-token prediction. iVideoGPT features a novel compressive tokenization technique that efficiently discretizes high-dimensional visual observations. Leveraging
its scalable architecture, we are able to pre-train iVideoGPT on millions of human
and robotic manipulation trajectories, establishing a versatile foundation that is
adaptable to serve as interactive world models for a wide range of downstream tasks.
These include action-conditioned video prediction, visual planning, and modelbased reinforcement learning, where iVideoGPT achieves competitive performance
compared with state-of-the-art methods. Our work advances the development
of interactive general world models, bridging the gap between generative video
models and practical model-based reinforcement learning applications. Code and
pre-trained models are available at https://thuml.github.io/iVideoGPT.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed remarkable advancements in generative models of multimodal contents,
including text [1], audio [9], and images [22], with video generation now emerging as a new
frontier [11]. A particularly significant application of these generative video models, learned in an
unsupervised way on diverse Internet-scale data, is to construct predictive world models [53, 28]
at scale. These world models are expected to accumulate commonsense knowledge about how the
world works, enabling the prediction of potential future outcomes (e.g., visual observations and
reward signals) based on the actions of agents. By leveraging these world models, agents employing
model-based reinforcement learning (RL) can imagine, reason, and plan inside world models [20, 29],
thus acquiring new skills more safely and efficiently with a handful of trials in the real world.
Despite the fundamental connection, significant gaps remain between generative models for video
generation and visual world models for agent learning. One primary challenge is achieving the
best of both interactivity and scalability. In model-based RL, world models predominantly utilize
recurrent network architecture. This design naturally allows the transition of observations or latent
states conditioned on actions in each step, facilitating interactive behavior learning [29, 80, 34].
However, these recurrent models mostly focus on games or simulated environments with simple
∗

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

