Transferable Boltzmann Generators
Leon Klein
Freie Universität Berlin
leon.klein@fu-berlin.de

Frank Noé
Microsoft Research AI4Science
Freie Universität Berlin
Rice University
franknoe@microsoft.com

Abstract
The generation of equilibrium samples of molecular systems has been a longstanding problem in statistical physics. Boltzmann Generators are a generative
machine learning method that addresses this issue by learning a transformation via
a normalizing flow from a simple prior distribution to the target Boltzmann distribution of interest. Recently, flow matching has been employed to train Boltzmann
Generators for small molecular systems in Cartesian coordinates. We extend this
work and propose a first framework for Boltzmann Generators that are transferable
across chemical space, such that they predict zero-shot Boltzmann distributions
for test molecules without being retrained for these systems. These transferable
Boltzmann Generators allow approximate sampling from the target distribution
of unseen systems, as well as efficient reweighting to the target Boltzmann distribution. The transferability of the proposed framework is evaluated on dipeptides,
where we show that it generalizes efficiently to unseen systems. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that our proposed architecture enhances the efficiency of Boltzmann
Generators trained on single molecular systems.

1

Introduction

Generative models have demonstrated remarkable success in the physical sciences, including protein
structure prediction [1, 2, 3], generation of de novo molecules [4, 5, 6, 7], and efficiently generating
samples from the Boltzmann distribution [8, 9, 10]. In this work, we will focus on the latter for
molecular systems, which represents a promising avenue for addressing the sampling problem. The
sampling problem refers to the long-standing challenge in statistical physics to generate samples
from equilibrium Boltzmann distributions µ(x) ∝ exp (−U (x)/kB T ), where U (x) is the potential
energy of the system, kB the Boltzmann constant, and T the temperature. Traditionally, samples are
generated with sequential sampling algorithms such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo and Molecular
Dynamics (MD) simulations. However, these algorithms require a significant amount of time to
generate uncorrelated samples from the target distribution. This is due to the necessity of performing
small update steps, in the order of femtoseconds, for stability. This is especially challenging in
the presence of well-separated metastable states, where transitions are unlikely due to high energy
barriers. In recent years, numerous machine learning methods have emerged to address this challenge
[8, 11]. One such method is the Boltzmann Generators (BG) [8]. In this work, we refer to BGs
as a model that allows for the approximate sampling of the Boltzmann distribution of interest and
the subsequent reweighting to the unbiased target distribution. If the model is only capable of
generating approximate samples, which may stem from a subset of the Boltzmann distribution,
we refer to them as Boltzmann Emulators1 . Boltzmann Generators transform a typically simple
prior distribution into an approximation of the target Boltzmann distribution through a normalizing
flow [12, 13, 14, 15]. Once generated, samples can be reweighted to align with the unbiased target
1

To the best of our knowledge Bowen Jing introduced the name first.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

