AV-Cloud: Spatial Audio Rendering Through
Audio-Visual Cloud Splatting

Mingfei Chen ∗

Eli Shlizerman †∗‡

Abstract
We propose a novel approach for rendering high-quality spatial audio for 3D
scenes that is in synchrony with the visual stream but does not rely or explicitly
conditioned on the visual rendering. We demonstrate that such an approach enables
the experience of immersive virtual tourism - performing a real-time dynamic
navigation within the scene, experiencing both audio and visual content. Current
audio-visual rendering approaches typically rely on visual cues, such as images, and
thus visual artifacts could cause inconsistency in the audio quality. Furthermore,
when such approaches are incorporated with visual rendering, audio generation
at each viewpoint occurs after the rendering of the image of the viewpoint and
thus could lead to audio lag that affects the integration of audio and visual streams.
Our proposed approach, AV-Cloud, overcomes these challenges by learning the
representation of the audio-visual scene based on a set of sparse AV anchor points,
that constitute the Audio-Visual Cloud, and are derived from the camera calibration.
The Audio-Visual Cloud serves as an audio-visual representation from which
the generation of spatial audio for arbitrary listener location can be generated.
In particular, we propose a novel module Audio-Visual Cloud Splatting which
decodes AV anchor points into a spatial audio transfer function for the arbitrary
viewpoint of the target listener. This function, applied through the Spatial Audio
Render Head module, transforms monaural input into viewpoint-specific spatial
audio. As a result, AV-Cloud efficiently renders the spatial audio aligned with
any visual viewpoint and eliminates the need for pre-rendered images. We show
that AV-Cloud surpasses current state-of-the-art accuracy on audio reconstruction,
perceptive quality, and acoustic effects on two real-world datasets. AV-Cloud also
outperforms previous methods when tested on scenes “in the wild”.

1

Introduction

With the advent of visual rendering for 3D scenes, it is now possible to reconstruct a scene as a set of
cloud points from a collection of real-world images or videos [1, 2, 3]. It is then possible to embark on
virtual tourism through the scene, which would traverse it through novel paths and various viewpoints
in real-time, where in each frame, the scene is rendered with remarkable photo realism. While visual
realism and visual perception of current virtual tourism methods are striking [3, 4, 5, 6, 7], additional
modalities such as sound could enhance and contribute to a fuller, more dynamic, and more immersive
experience. Imagine attending a virtual tour of the Trevi Fountain in Rome, where you can not only
view the fountain from different locations but also hear its magical sounds. Furthermore, these sounds
would adapt based on your view perspectives while exploring the scene.
Indeed, as visual rendering creates 3D scenes, audio rendering produces dynamic spatial sounds,
adding the natural auditory perception to the perception of the scene. Combined together, visual and
∗

Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, USA
Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Washington, Seattle, USA
‡
Corresponding author: shlizee@uw.edu
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

