Harnessing small projectors and multiple views for
efficient vision pretraining

Arna Ghosh ∗ 1

Kumar Krishna Agrawal ∗ 2

Adam M. Oberman† 3

Shagun Sodhani 3

Blake A. Richards † 1 4 5

Abstract
Recent progress in self-supervised (SSL) visual representation learning has led to
the development of several different proposed frameworks that rely on augmentations of images but use different loss functions. However, there are few theoretically
grounded principles to guide practice, so practical implementation of each SSL
framework requires several heuristics to achieve competitive performance. In this
work, we build on recent analytical results to design practical recommendations
for competitive and efficient SSL that are grounded in theory. Specifically, recent
theory tells us that existing SSL frameworks are actually minimizing the same
idealized loss, which is to learn features that best match the data similarity kernel defined by the augmentations used. We show how this idealized loss can be
reformulated to a functionally equivalent loss that is more efficient to compute.
We study the implicit bias of using gradient descent to minimize our reformulated
loss function, and find that using a stronger orthogonalization constraint with a
reduced projector dimensionality should yield good representations. Furthermore,
the theory tells us that approximating the reformulated loss should be improved
by increasing the number of augmentations, and as such using multiple augmentations should lead to improved convergence. We empirically verify our findings on
CIFAR, STL and Imagenet datasets, wherein we demonstrate an improved linear
readout performance when training a ResNet-backbone using our theoretically
grounded recommendations. Remarkably, we also demonstrate that by leveraging
these insights, we can reduce the pretraining dataset size by up to 2× while maintaining downstream accuracy simply by using more data augmentations. Taken
together, our work provides theoretically grounded recommendations that can be
used to improve SSL convergence and efficiency.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised representation learning, i.e., learning features without human-annotated labels, is
critical for progress in computer vision. Modern approaches, grouped under the self-supervised
learning (SSL) umbrella, build on the core insight that similar images should map to nearby points in
the learned feature space – often termed as the invariance criterion. Current SSL methods can be
broadly categorized into contrastive and non-contrastive algorithms, based on whether they formulate
their loss functions using negative samples or not, respectively.
∗

Equal Contribution, † Co-senior authorship, Correspondence: blake.richards@mcgill.ca
Mila - Quebec AI Institute & Computer Science, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada
2
UC Berkeley, CA, USA, 3 Meta FAIR, Toronto, ON, Canada
3
Mila - Quebec AI Institute & Mathematics and Statistics, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada
4
Neurology & Neurosurgery and Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada
5
CIFAR Learning in Machines & Brains Program, Toronto, ON, Canada
1

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

