Lever LM: Configuring In-Context Sequence to Lever
Large Vision Language Models

Xu Yang1,2∗, Yingzhe Peng1,2 , Haoxuan Ma1,2 , Shuo Xu1,2 ,
Chi Zhang3 , Yucheng Han4 , Hanwang Zhang4
1
Southeast University
2
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology &
Its Interdisciplinary Applications, (Southeast University),Ministry of Education
3
Westlake University
4
Nanyang Technological University
{xuyang_palm, yingzhe.peng, haoxuan-ma, xushuo}@seu.edu.cn
chizhang@westlake.edu.cn, yucheng002@e.ntu.edu.sg, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
As Archimedes famously said, “Give me a lever long enough and a fulcrum on
which to place it, and I shall move the world”, in this study, we propose to use
a tiny Language Model (LM), e.g., a Transformer with 67M parameters, to lever
much larger Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) with 9B parameters. Specifically,
we use this tiny Lever-LM to configure effective in-context demonstration (ICD)
sequences to improve the In-Context Learinng (ICL) performance of LVLMs.
Previous studies show that diverse ICD configurations like the selection and ordering of the demonstrations heavily affect the ICL performance, highlighting the
significance of configuring effective ICD sequences. Motivated by this and by
re-considering the the process of configuring ICD sequence, we find this is a mirror
process of human sentence composition and further assume that effective ICD configurations may contain internal statistical patterns that can be captured by LeverLM. Then a dataset with effective ICD sequences is constructed to train Lever-LM.
After training, given novel queries, new ICD sequences are configured by the trained
Lever-LM to solve vision-language tasks through ICL. Experiments show that these
ICD sequences can improve the ICL performance of two LVLMs compared with
some strong baselines in Visual Question Answering and Image Captioning, validating that Lever-LM can really capture the statistical patterns for levering LVLMs.
The code is available at https://github.com/ForJadeForest/Lever-LM.

1

Introduction

With the escalation in model size and training data [1–6], Large Language Models (LLMs) emerge
the ability of In-Context Learning (ICL) [7–9]. ICL, akin to few-shot learning [10–12], utilizes a few
exemplary In-Context Demonstrations (ICDs) to adapt LLMs to new tasks without gradient updates.
This achievement in NLP has inspired researchers to similarly enhance Large Vision-Language
Models (LVLMs) with ICL capabilities [13, 14]. However, just as in NLP, the effectiveness of
ICL in LVLMs is significantly influenced by the configurations of ICDs, such as their selection
and ordering [15–23]. Recent studies [24–26] have shown that this sensitivity in LVLMs is further
exacerbated by the multimodal combinatorial complexity of vision and language data.
In NLP, researchers employ various strategies to optimize in-context sequences to improve ICL
performance, including retrieving representative examples as the ICDs [15, 27, 28] and re-ordering
these ICDs based on specific principles [29, 21]. While these methods have shown improvements,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

