Physics-Constrained Comprehensive Optical Neural
Networks
Yanbing Liu1,*
ybliu@bupt.edu.cn

Jianwei Qin2,*
qinjw3@sjtu.edu.cn

Yan Liu2
liu_yan@sjtu.edu.cn

Xi Yue1
yuexi@bupt.edu.cn

Xun Liu3
liuxun_laby@163.com

Guoqing Wang4
gqwang0420@hotmail.com

Tianyu Li4
cosmos.yu@hotmail.com

Fangwei Ye2,†
fangweiye@sjtu.edu.cn

Wei Li3,†
wei_li_bj@163.com

1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing,100876,China
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
3
Beijing Institute of Space Mechanics and Electricity,Beijing,100094,China
4
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, 611731, China
2

Abstract
With the advantages of low latency, low power consumption, and high parallelism,
optical neural networks (ONN) offer a promising solution for time-sensitive and
resource-limited artificial intelligence applications. However, the performance of
the ONN model is often diminished by the gap between the ideal simulated system
and the actual physical system. To bridge the gap, this work conducts extensive
experiments to investigate systematic errors in the optical physical system within
the context of image classification tasks. Through our investigation, two quantifiable errors—light source instability and exposure time mismatches—significantly
impact the prediction performance of ONN. To address these systematic errors,
a physics-constrained ONN learning framework is constructed, including a welldesigned loss function to mitigate the effect of light fluctuations, a CCD adjustment
strategy to alleviate the effects of exposure time mismatches and a ’physics-priorbased’ error compensation network to manage other systematic errors, ensuring
consistent light intensity across experimental results and simulations. In our experiments, the proposed method achieved a test classification accuracy of 96.5%
on the MNIST dataset, a substantial improvement over the 61.6% achieved with
the original ONN. For the more challenging QuickDraw16 and Fashion MNIST
datasets, experimental accuracy improved from 63.0% to 85.7% and from 56.2%
to 77.5%, respectively. Moreover, the comparison results further demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed physics-constrained ONN learning framework over
state-of-the-art ONN approaches. This lays the groundwork for more robust and
precise optical computing applications.

1

Introduction

In recent years, optical neural networks (ONNs) have garnered significant research attention for inference tasks such as object detection and object classification[1, 2, 3, 4], attributed to their advantages
* Equal contribution
†

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

