Grounding Multimodal Large Language Models
in Actions
Andrew Szot1,2

Bogdan Mazoure1 Harsh Agrawal1
Zsolt Kira2 Alexander Toshev1
1
Apple, 2 Georgia Tech, 3 Mila
a.szot@apple.com, toshev@apple.com

Devon Hjelm1,3

Abstract
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have demonstrated a wide range
of capabilities across many domains, including Embodied AI. In this work, we
study how to best ground a MLLM into different embodiments and their associated
action spaces, with the goal of leveraging the multimodal world knowledge of the
MLLM. We first generalize a number of methods through a unified architecture and
the lens of action space adaptors. For continuous actions, we show that a learned
tokenization allows for sufficient modeling precision, yielding the best performance
on downstream tasks. For discrete actions, we demonstrate that semantically
aligning these actions with the native output token space of the MLLM leads to
the strongest performance. We arrive at these lessons via a thorough study of
seven action space adapters on five different environments, encompassing over 114
embodied tasks.

1

Introduction

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs), defined as Large Foundation Models that take as input
text and images and generate text, have recently seen rapid progress and impressive performance [1–
13]. These models are important as they solve a large range of useful yet difficult natural language
and image tasks, such as describing images, answering visual and textual questions, reasoning, and
learning from a small number of examples. They have only recently improved to the point of being
usable enough for general deployment with human non-experts [14–16].
While MLLMs are capable of describing real-world embodied concepts, their capabilities in embodied
tasks are limited to using text for actions through generating code [17, 18], representing actions
as text [19], or extracting actions from internal representations [20, 21]. Grounding [22] MLLMs
to generate actions extends their capabilities to embodied tasks, such as robot manipulation and
navigation, and is of tremendous value for practical problems, potentially overcoming the high cost
of training tabula rasa. Extending MLLMs to multimodal image generation enables object detection
and segmentation, and image and video generation [3, 23–27]. In embodied settings, grounding
MLLMs via predicting agent affordances and generating actions yields effective policies capable of
generalizing to new tasks [19, 21, 28, 29].
A key and open challenge in grounding MLLMs, which limits their capabilities in embodied tasks,
is the gap between the native output space, natural language, and the action space of embodied
agents. This problem is particularly acute in continuous action spaces, where low-level controllers
may require a high degree of precision. Across the literature, a number of architectures and ways
of handling action spaces have been proposed, but there has not been a systematic study of these
designs. Our contributions generalize prior attempts to adapt MLLMs to generate actions through an
empirical study on which principles and strategies are necessary to effectively close the gap between
the action spaces of MLLMs and embodied agents. We study various grounding re-parameterization
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

