Protecting Your LLMs with Information Bottleneck

Zichuan Liu1,2∗ , Zefan Wang3∗ , Linjie Xu2,4 , Jinyu Wang2 ,
Lei Song2† , Tianchun Wang5 , Chunlin Chen1 , Wei Cheng6 , Jiang Bian2
1
Nanjing University, 2 Microsoft Research Asia,
3
Tsinghua University, 4 Queen Mary University of London,
5
Pennsylvania State University, 6 NEC Laboratories America
zichuanliu@smail.nju.edu.cn, wang-zf20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
linjie.xu@qmul.ac.uk, {wang.jinyu, lei.song, jiang.bian}@microsoft.com,
tkw5356@psu.edu, clchen@nju.edu.cn, weicheng@nec-labs.com

Abstract
The advent of large language models (LLMs) has revolutionized the field of natural language processing, yet they might be attacked to produce harmful content.
Despite efforts to ethically align LLMs, these are often fragile and can be circumvented by jailbreaking attacks through optimized or manual adversarial prompts.
To address this, we introduce the Information Bottleneck Protector (IBProtector),
a defense mechanism grounded in the information bottleneck principle, and we
modify the objective to avoid trivial solutions. The IBProtector selectively compresses and perturbs prompts, facilitated by a lightweight and trainable extractor,
preserving only essential information for the target LLMs to respond with the
expected answer. Moreover, we further consider a situation where the gradient is
not visible to be compatible with any LLM. Our empirical evaluations show that
IBProtector outperforms current defense methods in mitigating jailbreak attempts,
without overly affecting response quality or inference speed. Its effectiveness
and adaptability across various attack methods and target LLMs underscore the
potential of IBProtector as a novel, transferable defense that bolsters the security
of LLMs without requiring modifications to the underlying models.
WARNING: This paper contains AI-generated text that is offensive in nature.

1

Introduction

The recent advancement of large language models (LLMs) has positioned them as the pivotal
foundation in the computational understanding and generation of human language. Trained on
extensive and diverse corpora, LLMs exhibit unparalleled proficiency in widespread applications [1].
However, the vast pre-training datasets inherently introduce the risk of objectionable responses,
including misinformation, hate speech, and other forms of harmful communication [2, 3]. Despite
tremendous efforts to align LLMs [4] with societal norms and ethical guidelines, the jailbreak
scenarios [2, 5, 6] still raise critical concerns. These jailbreak attacks, intending to bypass LLMs’
safety alignment, not only compromise the integrity of LLM applications but also pose significant
risks to users and society at large, undermining trust in generative AI technologies.
As a result, there is a growing imperative for the development of defense mechanisms that can
neutralize jailbreaks. A typical strategy for this task is applying token-level random perturbations to
∗ Authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

