Multistable Shape from Shading
Emerges from Patch Diffusion

Xinran Nicole Han
Harvard University
xinranhan@g.harvard.edu

Todd Zickler
Harvard University
zickler@seas.harvard.edu

Ko Nishino
Kyoto University
kon@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Models for inferring monocular shape of surfaces with diffuse reflection—shape
from shading—ought to produce distributions of outputs, because there are fundamental mathematical ambiguities of both continuous (e.g., bas-relief) and discrete
(e.g., convex/concave) types that are also experienced by humans. Yet, the outputs
of current models are limited to point estimates or tight distributions around single
modes, which prevent them from capturing these effects. We introduce a model
that reconstructs a multimodal distribution of shapes from a single shading image,
which aligns with the human experience of multistable perception. We train a small
denoising diffusion process to generate surface normal fields from 16 × 16 patches
of synthetic images of everyday 3D objects. We deploy this model patch-wise
at multiple scales, with guidance from inter-patch shape consistency constraints.
Despite its relatively small parameter count and predominantly bottom-up structure,
we show that multistable shape explanations emerge from this model for ambiguous test images that humans experience as being multistable. At the same time,
the model produces veridical shape estimates for object-like images that include
distinctive occluding contours and appear less ambiguous. This may inspire new
architectures for stochastic 3D shape perception that are more efficient and better
aligned with human experience.

1

Introduction

From chiaroscuro in Renaissance paintings to the interplay of light and dark in Ansel Adams’
photographs, humans are masters at perceiving three-dimensional shape from variations of image
intensity—shading—from a single image alone. Even though our visual experience is dominated by
everyday objects, our perception of shape from shading generalizes to many synthetic “non-ecological”
images invented by vision scientists. Some of these images have ambiguous (e.g., convex/concave)
interpretations and lead to multistable perceptions, where one’s impression of 3D shape alternates
between two or more competing explanations. Figure 1 shows an example adapted from [31], which
is alternately interpreted as an indentation or a protrusion. Both explanations are physically correct
because the same image can be generated from either shape under different lighting conditions.
How can a computational model acquire this human ability to capture multiple underlying shape
explanations? An algorithmic suggestion comes from Marr’s principle of least commitment [34, 35],
which requires not doing anything that may later have to be undone. But this is in contrast to many
computer vision methods for shape from shading, including SIRFS [4] and recent neural feed-forward
models [53, 56], which are deterministic and produce a single, best estimate of shape. These types of
models commit to one explanation based on priors that are either designed or learned from a dataset,
and they cannot express multiple interpretations of an ambiguous image. They are unlikely to be
good models for the mechanisms that underlie multistable perception.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

