Diffusion Actor-Critic with Entropy Regulator

Yinuo Wang1 Likun Wang1 Yuxuan Jiang1 Wenjun Zou1 Tong Liu1
Xujie Song1 Wenxuan Wang1 Liming Xiao2 Jiang Wu2
Jingliang Duan1,2∗ Shengbo Eben Li1∗
1

2

School of Vehicle and Mobility, Tsinghua University
School of Mechanical Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) has proven highly effective in addressing complex
decision-making and control tasks. However, in most traditional RL algorithms, the
policy is typically parameterized as a diagonal Gaussian distribution with learned
mean and variance, which constrains their capability to acquire complex policies.
In response to this problem, we propose an online RL algorithm termed diffusion
actor-critic with entropy regulator (DACER). This algorithm conceptualizes the
reverse process of the diffusion model as a novel policy function and leverages the
capability of the diffusion model to fit multimodal distributions, thereby enhancing
the representational capacity of the policy. Since the distribution of the diffusion
policy lacks an analytical expression, its entropy cannot be determined analytically.
To mitigate this, we propose a method to estimate the entropy of the diffusion
policy utilizing Gaussian mixture model. Building on the estimated entropy, we
can learn a parameter α that modulates the degree of exploration and exploitation.
Parameter α will be employed to adaptively regulate the variance of the added
noise, which is applied to the action output by the diffusion model. Experimental
trials on MuJoCo benchmarks and a multimodal task demonstrate that the DACER
algorithm achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance in most MuJoCo control
tasks while exhibiting a stronger representational capacity of the diffusion policy.

1

Introduction

Recently, deep reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as an effective method for solving optimal
control problems in the physical world [14, 29, 22, 25]. In most existing RL algorithms, the
policy is parameterized as a deterministic function or a diagonal Gaussian distribution with the
learned mean and variance [31, 32, 16, 10]. However, the theoretically optimal policy may exhibit
strong multimodality, which cannot be well modeled by deterministic or diagonal Gaussian policies
[43, 21, 45]. Restricted policy representation capabilities can make algorithms prone to local optimal
solutions, damaging policy performance. For instance, in situations where two distinct actions in the
same state yield approximately the same Q-value, the Gaussian policy approximates the bimodal
action by maximizing the Q-value. This results in the policy displaying mode-covering behavior,
concentrating high density in the intermediate region between the two patterns, which is inherently
a low-density region with a lower Q-value. Consequently, modeling the policy with a unimodal
Gaussian distribution is likely to significantly impair policy learning.
Lately, the diffusion model has become widely known as a generative model for its powerful ability
to fit multimodal distributions [18, 35, 8]. It learns the original data distribution through the idea of
stepwise addition and removal of noise and has excellent performance in the fields of image [46, 28]
and video generation [9, 3]. The policy network in RL can be seen as a state-conditional generative
∗

Corresponding author <duanjl15@163.com> <lishbo@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

