Provably and Practically Efficient Adversarial
Imitation Learning with General Function
Approximation
Tian Xu∗1,2,3 , Zhilong Zhang∗1,2,3 , Ruishuo Chen†1,2 , Yihao Sun1,2 , and Yang Yu‡1,2,3
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
3
Polixir.ai

Abstract
As a prominent category of imitation learning methods, adversarial imitation learning (AIL) has garnered significant practical success powered by neural network
approximation. However, existing theoretical studies on AIL are primarily limited to simplified scenarios such as tabular and linear function approximation
and involve complex algorithmic designs that hinder practical implementation,
highlighting a gap between theory and practice. In this paper, we explore the
theoretical underpinnings of online AIL with general function approximation. We
introduce a new method called optimization-based AIL (OPT-AIL), which centers
on performing online optimization for reward functions and optimism-regularized
Bellman error minimization for Q-value functions. Theoretically, we prove that
OPT-AIL achieves polynomial expert sample complexity and interaction complexity for learning near-expert policies. To our best knowledge, OPT-AIL is the first
provably efficient AIL method with general function approximation. Practically,
OPT-AIL only requires the approximate optimization of two objectives, thereby
facilitating practical implementation. Empirical studies demonstrate that OPT-AIL
outperforms previous state-of-the-art deep AIL methods in several challenging
tasks. 1

1

Introduction

Sequential decision-making tasks are prevalent in real-world applications, where agents seek policies
that maximize long-term returns. Reinforcement learning (RL) [49] provides a well-known framework
for developing effective policies through trial and error. However, RL often necessitates carefully
designed reward functions and typically requires millions of interactions with the environment to
achieve satisfactory performance [36, 20]. In contrast, imitation learning (IL) offers a more sampleefficient approach to learning effective policies by mimicking expert demonstrations, bypassing the
need for explicit reward functions. As a result, IL has gained popularity and demonstrated success
in a wide range of real-world applications such as recommendation systems [11, 46] and generalist
robot learning [10, 35].
IL encompasses two main categories of methods: behavioral cloning (BC) and adversarial imitation
learning (AIL). BC employs supervised learning to directly infer expert policies from demonstration
∗: Equal contribution. Emails: xut@lamda.nju.edu.cn and zhangzl@lamda.nju.edu.cn.
†: Joined this work as an undergraduate student of School of Mathematics, Nanjing University.
‡: Corresponding author. Email: yuy@nju.edu.cn.
1
The code is available at https://github.com/LAMDA-RL/OPT-AIL.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

