Learning-Augmented Dynamic Submodular
Maximization
Arpit Agarwal
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
aarpit@iitb.ac.in

Eric Balkanski
Columbia University
eb3224@columbia.edu

Abstract
In dynamic submodular maximization, the goal is to maintain a high-value solution over a sequence of element insertions and deletions with a fast update time.
Motivated by large-scale applications and the fact that dynamic data often exhibits
patterns, we ask the following question: can predictions be used to accelerate the
update time of dynamic submodular maximization algorithms?
We consider the model for dynamic algorithms with predictions where predictions
regarding the insertion and deletion times of elements can be used for preprocessing.
Our main result is an algorithm with an O(poly(log η, log w, log k)) amortized
update time over the sequence of updates that achieves a 1/2 − ϵ approximation
for dynamic monotone submodular maximization under a cardinality constraint
k, where the prediction error η is the number of elements that are not inserted
and deleted within w time steps of their predicted insertion and deletion times.
This amortized update time is independent of the length of the stream and instead
depends on the prediction error.

1

Introduction

Submodular functions are a well-studied family of functions that satisfy a natural diminishing returns
property. Since many fundamental objectives are submodular, including coverage, diversity, and
entropy, submodular optimization algorithms play an important role in machine learning [18, 8],
network analysis [17], and mechanism design [31]. For the canonical problem of maximizing
a monotone submodular function under a cardinality constraint, the celebrated greedy algorithm
achieves a 1−1/e approximation guarantee [27], which is the best approximation guarantee achievable
by any polynomial-time algorithm [26]. Motivated by the highly dynamic nature of applications such
as influence maximization in social networks and recommender systems on streaming platforms, a
recent line of work has studied the problem of dynamic submodular maximization [20, 25, 28, 10, 11,
6, 7]. In the dynamic setting, the input consists of a stream of elements that are inserted or deleted
from the set of active elements, and the goal is to maintain, throughout the stream, a subset of the
active elements that maximizes a submodular function.
The standard worst-case approach to analyzing the update time of a dynamic algorithm is to measure
its update time over the worst sequence of updates possible. However, in many application domains,
dynamic data is not arbitrary and often exhibits patterns that can be learned from historical data.
Very recent work has studied dynamic problems in settings where the algorithm is given as input
predictions regarding the stream of updates [14, 22, 9]. This recent work is part of a broader research
area called learning-augmented algorithms (or algorithms with predictions). In learning-augmented
algorithms, the goal is to design algorithms that achieve an improved performance guarantee when the
error of the prediction is small and a bounded guarantee even when the prediction error is arbitrarily
large. A lot of the effort in this area has been focused on using predictions to improve the competitive
ratio of online algorithms (see, e.g., [23, 30, 32, 24, 12, 3, 4, 19, 15, 5]), and more generally to
improve the solution quality of algorithms.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

