Self-Supervised Adversarial Training via Diverse
Augmented Queries and Self-Supervised Double
Perturbation
Ruize Zhang
Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China
zhangruize21b@ict.ac.cn

Sheng Tang∗
Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China
ts@ict.ac.cn

Juan Cao
Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China
caojuan@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Recently, there have been some works studying self-supervised adversarial training,
a learning paradigm that learns robust features without labels. While those works
have narrowed the performance gap between self-supervised adversarial training
(SAT) and supervised adversarial training (supervised AT), a well-established formulation of SAT and its connections with supervised AT are under-explored. Based
on a simple SAT benchmark, we find that SAT still faces the problem of large
robust generalization gap and degradation on natural samples. We hypothesize
this is due to the lack of data complexity and model regularization and propose a
method named as DAQ-SDP (Diverse Augmented Queries Self-supervised Double Perturbation). We first challenge the previous conclusion that complex data
augmentations degrade robustness in SAT by using diversely augmented samples
as queries to guide adversarial training. Inspired by previous works in supervised
AT, we then incorporate a self-supervised double perturbation scheme to selfsupervised learning (SSL), which promotes robustness transferable to downstream
classification. Our work can be seamlessly combined with models pretrained
by different SSL frameworks without revising the learning objectives and helps
to bridge the gap between SAT and AT. Our method also improves both robust
and natural accuracies across different SSL frameworks. Our code is available at
https://github.com/rzzhang222/DAQ-SDP.

1

Introduction

Deep neural network has shown its power in various machine learning tasks. In spite of its beneficial
properties in optimization and generalization, deep neural network is vulnerable to adversarial attack
as samples with carefully designed tiny perturbations may cause significant deviations of model
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

