KptLLM: Unveiling the Power of Large Language
Model for Keypoint Comprehension

Jie Yang1,2,5 Wang Zeng4,5 Sheng Jin3,5 Lumin Xu4 Wentao Liu5∗ Chen Qian5 Ruimao Zhang1∗
1
Sun Yat-sen University 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
The University of Hong Kong 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
5
SenseTime Research and Tetras.AI
https://kptllm.github.io

Abstract
Recent advancements in Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have
greatly improved their abilities in image understanding. However, these models
often struggle with grasping pixel-level semantic details, e.g., the keypoints of
an object. To bridge this gap, we introduce the novel challenge of Semantic
Keypoint Comprehension, which aims to comprehend keypoints across different
task scenarios, including keypoint semantic understanding, visual prompt-based
keypoint detection, and textual prompt-based keypoint detection. Moreover, we
introduce KptLLM, a unified multimodal model that utilizes an identify-then-detect
strategy to effectively address these challenges. KptLLM underscores the initial
discernment of semantics in keypoints, followed by the precise determination
of their positions through a chain-of-thought process. With several carefully
designed modules, KptLLM adeptly handles various modality inputs, facilitating
the interpretation of both semantic contents and keypoint locations. Our extensive
experiments demonstrate KptLLM’s superiority in various keypoint detection
benchmarks and its unique semantic capabilities in interpreting keypoints.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in deep learning and natural language processing have facilitated the rise
of Large Language Models (LLMs) that display human-like fluency in text comprehension and
generation [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. By incorporating visual information, researchers have developed
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [8, 9, 10, 11, 12], specifically designed for visuallanguage tasks, showcasing remarkable abilities in image understanding. However, these models
encounter difficulties in capturing fine-grained semantic details, particularly at the point level,
which are crucial for various real-world applications. The exploration of MLLMs for keypoint
comprehension remains under-explored in the literature.
Keypoint detection is a fundamental aspect of computer vision that supports various applications such
as controllable image/video generation [13, 14, 15], human-centric perception [16, 17], and AR/VR
systems [18, 19, 20]. Initially, research in this field focused on closed-set problems, aiming to predict
the locations of predefined semantic keypoints of a certain object category (e.g. human body). As
the demand for generalization grew, researchers started investigating the detection of keypoints for
novel objects by providing visual prompts (i.e., a support image of a novel object with its keypoint
definitions) [21, 22] or utilizing textual prompts (i.e., keypoint names) [23]. Despite significant
progress in these areas, existing models still fall short of achieving genuine semantic comprehension
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

