The Feature Speed Formula: a flexible approach to
scale hyper-parameters of deep neural networks

Lénaïc Chizat
Institute of Mathematics, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
lenaic.chizat@epfl.ch

Praneeth Netrapalli
Google DeepMind
pnetrapalli@google.com

Abstract
Deep learning succeeds by doing hierarchical feature learning, yet tuning hyperparameters (HP) such as initialization scales, learning rates etc., only give indirect
control over this behavior. In this paper, we introduce a key notion to predict and
control feature learning: the angle θ` between the feature updates and the backward
pass (at layer index `). We show that the magnitude of feature updates after one
GD step, at any training time, can be expressed via a simple and general feature
speed formula in terms of this angle θ` , the loss decay, and the magnitude of the
backward pass. This angle θ` is controlled by the conditioning of the layer-tolayer Jacobians and at random initialization, it is determined by the spectrum of a
certain kernel, which coincides with the Neural Tangent Kernel when ` = depth.
Given θ` , the feature speed formula provides us with rules to adjust HPs (scales
and learning rates) so as to satisfy certain dynamical properties, such as feature
learning and loss decay. We investigate the implications of our approach for ReLU
MLPs and ResNets in the large width-then-depth limit. Relying on prior work, we
show that in ReLU MLPs
with iid initialization, the angle degenerates with depth
√
√
as cos(θ` ) = Θ(1/ `). In contrast, ResNets with branch scale O(1/ depth)
maintain a non-degenerate angle cos(θ` ) = Θ(1). We use these insights to recover
key properties of known HP scalings (such as µP), and also introduce a new HP
scaling for large depth ReLU MLPs with favorable theoretical properties.

1

Introduction

The ability of deep Neural Networks (NNs) to learn hierarchical representations of their inputs has
been argued to be behind their strong performance in data-intensive machine learning tasks [LeCun
et al., 2015]. Yet, the process via which gradient-based training leads to feature learning remains
mysterious and defies our intuition; some architectures can even reach zero loss without feature
learning at all [Jacot et al., 2018]. This limited understanding makes it difficult to design NNs
architectures and hyper-parameters (HP) scalings, and begs the development of tools to quantify
feature learning.
In this paper, we demonstrate that the backward-feature angle (BFA) θ` between the feature updates
and the backward pass (at layer index `) is a central object in this quest. Indeed, we show that the
magnitude of feature updates after one GD step, at any training time, can be expressed via a simple
feature speed formula in terms of this angle, the loss decay and the magnitude of the backward pass.
Given the knowledge of θ` , this leads to a general approach to quantify key dynamical properties
of the training dynamics of NNs – such as the speed of feature learning and loss decay – and to
characterize the HP scalings satisfying these properties.
Contributions Our contributions are the following:
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

