Persistence Homology Distillation for Semi-supervised
Continual Learning

Yan Fan, Yu Wang∗, Pengfei Zhu, Dongyue Chen, Qinghua Hu
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
Haihe Laboratory of Information Technology Application Innovation, China
fyan_0411@tju.edu.cn, wang.yu@tju.edu.cn, zhupengfei@tju.edu.cn
dyuechen@tju.edu.cn,huqinghua@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Semi-supervised continual learning (SSCL) has attracted significant attention for
addressing catastrophic forgetting in semi-supervised data. Knowledge distillation,
which leverages data representation and pair-wise similarity, has shown significant
potential in preserving information in SSCL. However, traditional distillation strategies often fail in unlabeled data with inaccurate or noisy information, limiting their
efficiency in feature spaces undergoing substantial changes during continual learning. To address these limitations, we propose Persistence Homology Distillation
(PsHD) to preserve intrinsic structural information that is insensitive to noise in
semi-supervised continual learning. First, we capture the structural features using
persistence homology by homological evolution across different scales in vision
data, where the multi-scale characteristic established its stability under noise interference. Next, we propose a persistence homology distillation loss in SSCL and
design an acceleration algorithm to reduce the computational cost of persistence
homology in our module. Furthermore, we demonstrate the superior stability of
PsHD compared to sample representation and pair-wise similarity distillation methods theoretically and experimentally. Finally, experimental results on three widely
used datasets validate that the new PsHD outperforms state-of-the-art with 3.9%
improvements on average, and also achieves 1.5% improvements while reducing
60% memory buffer size, highlighting the potential of utilizing unlabeled data in
SSCL. Our code is available: https://github.com/fanyan0411/PsHD.

1

Introduction

Continual learning involves developing practical approaches for incrementally training models,
enabling them to learn new concepts while effectively retaining previously acquired knowledge [1].
The problem of catastrophic forgetting in continual learning impacts the model’s performance on
previously learned tasks. Numerous efforts have been dedicated to addressing this issue in continual
learning [2–8]. However, most state-of-the-art methods are trained under the assumption of fully
labeled data, neglecting the vast amounts of unlabeled data.
Semi-supervised continual learning introduces unlabeled data in CL by partially annotating the trained
data in each task and aims to alleviate catastrophic forgetting by exploiting these unlabeled data[9–14].
Learning from unlabeled data to improve model generalizability across tasks is a natural approach,
but its performance significantly relies on the size of the memory buffer [12, 15]. Generative replay
methods reduce the need for a memory buffer but incur prohibitive costs for higher resolution images
and are limited to relatively simple datasets [11, 12]. Knowledge distillation methods are proposed to
preserve valuable information in the unlabeled data of the previous model [13, 14].
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

