Beyond Optimism:
Exploration With Partially Observable Rewards

Simone Parisi
University of Alberta; Amii
parisi@ualberta.ca

Alireza Kazemipour
University of Alberta
kazemipo@ualberta.ca

Michael Bowling
University of Alberta; Amii
mbowling@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Exploration in reinforcement learning (RL) remains an open challenge. RL algorithms rely on observing rewards to train the agent, and if informative rewards are
sparse the agent learns slowly or may not learn at all. To improve exploration and
reward discovery, popular algorithms rely on optimism. But what if sometimes
rewards are unobservable, e.g., situations of partial monitoring in bandits and the
recent formalism of monitored Markov decision process? In this case, optimism
can lead to suboptimal behavior that does not explore further to collapse uncertainty. With this paper, we present a novel exploration strategy that overcomes the
limitations of existing methods and guarantees convergence to an optimal policy
even when rewards are not always observable. We further propose a collection
of tabular environments for benchmarking exploration in RL (with and without
unobservable rewards) and show that our method outperforms existing ones.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has developed into a powerful paradigm where agents can tackle a
variety of tasks, including games [67], robotics [31], and medical applications [82]. Agents trained
with RL learn by trial-and-error interactions with an environment: the agent tries different actions,
the environment returns a numerical reward, and the agent adapts its behavior to maximize future
rewards. This setting poses a well-known dilemma: how and for how long should the agent explore,
i.e., try new actions and visit new states in search for rewards? If the agent does not explore enough
it may miss important rewards. However, prolonged exploration can be expensive, especially in
real-world problems where instrumentation (e.g., cameras or sensors) or a human expert may be
needed to provide rewards. Classic dithering exploration [39, 47] is known to be inefficient [34],
especially when informative rewards are sparse [54, 60]. Among the many exploration strategies
that have been proposed to improve RL efficiency, perhaps the most well-known and grounded
is optimism. With optimism, the agent assigns to each state-action pair an optimistically biased
estimate of future value and selects the action with the highest estimate [50]. This way, the agent
is encouraged to explore unvisited states and perform different actions, where either its optimistic
expectation holds — the observed reward matches the optimistic estimate — or not. If not, the agent
adjusts its estimate and looks for rewards elsewhere. Optimistic algorithms range from count-based
exploration bonuses [4, 16, 24, 25], to model-based planning [3, 20, 21], bootstrapping [15, 52], and
posterior sampling [50]. Nonetheless, optimism can fail when the agent has limited observability of
the outcome of its actions. Consider the example in Figure 1b, where the agent observes rewards
only under some condition and upon paying a cost. To fully explore the environment and learn an
optimal policy the agent must first take a suboptimal action (to push the button and pay a cost) to learn
about the rewards. However, optimistic algorithms would never select suboptimal actions, thus never
pushing the button and never learning how to accumulate positive rewards [36]. While alternatives to
optimism exist, such as intrinsic motivation [66], they often lack guarantees of convergence and their
efficacy strongly depends on the intrinsic reward used, the environment, and the task [7].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

