EEG2Video: Towards Decoding Dynamic Visual
Perception from EEG Signals

Xuan-Hao Liu1∗ † , Yan-Kai Liu1∗ , Yansen Wang2‡ , Kan Ren3‡ , Hanwen Shi1 ,
Zilong Wang2 , Dongsheng Li2 , Bao-Liang Lu1 , Wei-Long Zheng1‡
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Microsoft Research Asia 3 ShanghaiTech University

https://bcmi.sjtu.edu.cn/home/eeg2video

Abstract
Our visual experience in daily life are dominated by dynamic change. Decoding
such dynamic information from brain activity can enhance the understanding of the
brain’s visual processing system. However, previous studies predominately focus
on reconstructing static visual stimuli. In this paper, we explore to decode dynamic
visual perception from electroencephalography (EEG), a neuroimaging technique
able to record brain activity with high temporal resolution (1000 Hz) for capturing
rapid changes in brains. Our contributions are threefold: Firstly, we develop a large
dataset recording signals from 20 subjects while they were watching 1400 dynamic
video clips of 40 concepts. This dataset fills the gap in the lack of EEG-video pairs.
Secondly, we annotate each video clip to investigate the potential for decoding
some specific meta information (e.g., color, dynamic, human or not) from EEG.
Thirdly, we propose a novel baseline EEG2Video for video reconstruction from
EEG signals that better aligns dynamic movements with high temporal resolution
brain signals by Seq2Seq architecture. EEG2Video achieves a 2-way accuracy
of 79.8% in semantic classification tasks and 0.256 in structural similarity index
(SSIM). Overall, our works takes an important step towards decoding dynamic
visual perception from EEG signals.

1

Introduction

Our visual experience are composed of continuously evolving scenes caused by the movement
of objects and viewing perspective [1]. The intricate and complex visual system in our brains
which enables us to explore the wonderful and ever-changing visual world has been appealing
interests from philosophers and scientists for centuries [2–6]. To investigate the mechanism of
our visual system, various neuroimaging techniques have been used to analyze brain activities,
especially non-invasive methods like functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) [2, 7, 8],
magnetoencephalography(MEG) [9–11], and electroencephalography(EEG) [12, 13].
Compared to fMRI and MEG which need to be recorded by large and expensive medical devices,
EEG is relatively low-cost and portable and thus has been applied across many human visual studies
[14–18]. For instance, a recent work achieved an accuracy of 15.6% in 200-way zero-shot tasks on
an EEG-image dataset [19], demonstrating the rich visual information in EEG signals. However,
these studies adopt either artificial strobe (SSVEP) [14, 15] or static image [16–18] as stimulation,
which is far different from the dynamic visual world and not suitable for studying brain activities in
naturalistic paradigm. As far as we know, there is currently no research on decoding video from EEG
* Xuan-Hao Liu and Yan-Kai Liu contribute equally.
†
‡

The work was conducted during Xuan-Hao Liu’s internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
Corresponding authors: yansenwang@microsoft.com, renkan@shanghaitech.edu.cn, weilong@sjtu.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

