Gradients of Functions of Large Matrices
Nicholas Krämer, Pablo Moreno-Muñoz, Hrittik Roy, Søren Hauberg
Technical University of Denmark
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
{pekra, pabmo, hroy, sohau}@dtu.dk

Abstract
Tuning scientific and probabilistic machine learning models – for example, partial differential equations, Gaussian processes, or Bayesian neural networks –
often relies on evaluating functions of matrices whose size grows with the data
set or the number of parameters. While the state-of-the-art for evaluating these
quantities is almost always based on Lanczos and Arnoldi iterations, the present
work is the first to explain how to differentiate these workhorses of numerical linear algebra efficiently. To get there, we derive previously unknown adjoint systems for Lanczos and Arnoldi iterations, implement them in JAX, and
show that the resulting code can compete with Diffrax when it comes to differentiating PDEs, GPyTorch for selecting Gaussian process models and beats
standard factorisation methods for calibrating Bayesian neural networks. All
this is achieved without any problem-specific code optimisation. Find the code
at https://github.com/pnkraemer/experiments-lanczos-adjoints and
install the library with pip install matfree.

1

Introduction

Automatic differentiation has dramatically altered the development of machine learning models by
allowing us to forego laborious, application-dependent gradient derivations. The essence of this
automation is to evaluate Jacobian-vector and vector-Jacobian products without ever instantiating
the full Jacobian matrix, whose column count would match the number of parameters of the neural
network. Nowadays, everyone can build algorithms around matrices of unprecedented sizes by
exploiting this matrix-free implementation. However, differentiable linear algebra for Jacobian-vector
products and similar operations has remained largely unexplored to this day. We introduce a new
matrix-free method for automatically differentiating functions of matrices. Our algorithm yields the
exact gradients of the forward pass, all gradients are obtained with the same code, and said code runs
in linear time- and memory-complexity.
For a parametrised matrix A = A(θ) ∈ RN ×N and an analytic function f : R → R, we call f (A) a
function of the matrix (different properties of A imply different definitions of f (A); one of them is
applying f to each eigenvalue of A if A is diagonalisable; see [1]). However, we assume that A is the
Jacobian of a large neural network or a matrix of similar size and never materialise f (A). Instead, we
only care about the values and gradients of the matrix-function-vector product
(θ, v) 7→ f [A(θ)]v

(1)

assuming that A is only accessed via differentiable matrix-vector products. Table 1 lists examples.
Evaluating Equation 1 is crucial for building large machine learning models, e.g., Bayesian neural
networks: A common hyperparameter-calibration loss of a (Laplace-approximated) Bayesian neural
network involves the log-determinant of the generalised Gauss–Newton matrix [13]
X
A(α) :=
[Dθ g](xi )⊤ [Dg2 ρ](yi , g(xi ))[Dθ g](xi ) + α2 I,
(2)
(xi ,yi )∈data

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

