Reflective Multi-Agent Collaboration based on Large
Language Models

Xiaohe Bo1 , Zeyu Zhang1 , Quanyu Dai2 , Xueyang Feng1 ,
Lei Wang1 , Rui Li1 , Xu Chen1∗, Ji-Rong Wen1
1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{xiaohe,zeyuzhang,xueyangfeng,wanglei154,lirui121200,xu.chen,jrwen}@ruc.edu.cn,
daiquanyu@huawei.com

Abstract
Benefiting from the powerful language expression and planning capabilities of
Large Language Models (LLMs), LLM-based autonomous agents have achieved
promising performance in various downstream tasks. Recently, based on the
development of single-agent systems, researchers propose to construct LLM-based
multi-agent systems to tackle more complicated tasks. In this paper, we propose a
novel framework, named COPPER, to enhance the collaborative capabilities of
LLM-based agents with the self-reflection mechanism. To improve the quality of
reflections, we propose to fine-tune a shared reflector, which automatically tunes
the prompts of actor models using our counterfactual PPO mechanism. On the
one hand, we propose counterfactual rewards to assess the contribution of a single
agent’s reflection within the system, alleviating the credit assignment problem. On
the other hand, we propose to train a shared reflector, which enables the reflector
to generate personalized reflections according to agent roles, while reducing the
computational resource requirements and improving training stability. We conduct
experiments on three datasets to evaluate the performance of our model in multihop question answering, mathematics, and chess scenarios. Experimental results
show that COPPER possesses stronger reflection capabilities and exhibits excellent
generalization performance across different actor models.

1

Introduction

With the emergence of Large Language Models, LLM-based autonomous agents are becoming
a research hotspot in the field of artificial intelligence. Leveraging the impressive planning and
reasoning ability of LLMs, these agents can understand and generate human-like instructions, engage
in sophisticated interactions, and make decisions in a wide range of contexts, leading to remarkable
success in various downstream tasks [26, 24, 25, 5, 22]. Recently, based on the development of
single-agent systems, researchers propose to construct multi-agent systems in response to the growing
task complexity. Prior works [31, 12, 8] suggest that multiple agents can help improve factuality and
reasoning, encourage divergent thinking, and effectively facilitate task completion.
To improve the collaborative performance of multi-agent systems, various cooperation frameworks [31, 4, 23, 39] have been developed, which generally encode intricately crafted agent profiles
and cooperation mechanisms into prompts. However, hindered by the contextual understanding ability
of LLMs, such frameworks fall short of fully exploiting the collaborative capacities of agents. To
tackle this challenge, one natural idea is to gather extensive collaborative data for agents’ fine-tuning.
Yet this strategy risks diminishing the model’s general abilities [35], contradicting the aspiration to
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

