Paths to Equilibrium in Games

Bora Yongacoglu
University of Toronto
bora.yongacoglu@utoronto.ca

Gürdal Arslan
University of Hawaii at Manoa
gurdal@hawaii.edu

Lacra Pavel
University of Toronto
pavel@control.toronto.edu

Serdar Yüksel
Queen’s University
yuksel@queensu.ca

Abstract
In multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) and game theory, agents repeatedly
interact and revise their strategies as new data arrives, producing a sequence of
strategy profiles. This paper studies sequences of strategies satisfying a pairwise
constraint inspired by policy updating in reinforcement learning, where an agent
who is best responding in one period does not switch its strategy in the next period.
This constraint merely requires that optimizing agents do not switch strategies,
but does not constrain the non-optimizing agents in any way, and thus allows for
exploration. Sequences with this property are called satisficing paths, and arise
naturally in many MARL algorithms. A fundamental question about strategic
dynamics is such: for a given game and initial strategy profile, is it always possible
to construct a satisficing path that terminates at an equilibrium? The resolution
of this question has implications about the capabilities or limitations of a class of
MARL algorithms. We answer this question in the affirmative for normal-form
games. Our analysis reveals a counterintuitive insight that reward deteriorating
strategic updates are key to driving play to equilibrium along a satisficing path.

1

Introduction

Game theory is a mathematical framework for studying strategic interaction between self-interested
agents, called players. In an n-player normal-form game, each player i = 1, · · · , n, selects a strategy
xi ∈ X i and receives a reward Ri (x1 , . . . , xn ), which depends on the collective strategy profile
x = (x1 , . . . , xn ) =: (xi , x−i ). Player i’s optimization problem is to best respond to the strategy
x−i of its counterparts, choosing xi ∈ X i to maximize Ri (xi , x−i ). Game theoretic models are
pervasive in machine learning, appearing in fields such as multi-agent systems [21], multi-objective
reinforcement learning [24], and adversarial model training [7], among many others.
In multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL), players use learning algorithms to revise their
strategies in response to the observed history of play, producing a sequence {b
xt }t≥1 in the set of
strategy profiles X := X 1 × · · · × X n . Due to the coupled reward structure of multi-agent systems,
each player’s learning problem involves a moving target: since an individual’s reward function
depends on the strategies of the others, strategy revision by one agent prompts other agents to revise
their own strategies. Convergence analysis of MARL algorithms can therefore be difficult, and the
development of tools for such analysis is an important aspect of multi-agent learning theory.
A strategy profile (xi∗ )ni=1 is called a Nash equilibrium if all players simultaneously best respond
to one another. Nash equilibrium is a concept of central importance in game theory, and the tasks
of computing, approximating, and learning Nash equilibrium have attracted enduring attention in
theoretical machine learning [47, 27, 14, 42, 17, 26, 31]. Convergence to equilibrium strategies
has long been a predominant, but not unique, design goal in MARL [53]. In this paper, we study
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

