Kernel PCA for Out-of-Distribution Detection
Kun Fang1

Qinghua Tao2
1

Kexin Lv3

Mingzhen He1

Xiaolin Huang1

Jie Yang1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 ESAT-STADIUS, KU Leuven
3
China Mobile Shanghai ICT Co., Ltd

{fanghenshao,mingzhen_he,xiaolinhuang,jieyang}@sjtu.edu.cn
qinghua.tao@esat.kuleuven.be
lvkexin@cmsr.chinamobile.com

Abstract
Out-of-Distribution (OoD) detection is vital for the reliability of Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs). Existing works have shown the insufficiency of Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) straightforwardly applied on the features of DNNs in
detecting OoD data from In-Distribution (InD) data. The failure of PCA suggests
that the network features residing in OoD and InD are not well separated by simply
proceeding in a linear subspace, which instead can be resolved through proper
non-linear mappings. In this work, we leverage the framework of Kernel PCA
(KPCA) for OoD detection, and seek suitable non-linear kernels that advocate the
separability between InD and OoD data in the subspace spanned by the principal
components. Besides, explicit feature mappings induced from the devoted taskspecific kernels are adopted so that the KPCA reconstruction error for new test
samples can be efficiently obtained with large-scale data. Extensive theoretical
and empirical results on multiple OoD data sets and network structures verify the
superiority of our KPCA detector in efficiency and efficacy with state-of-the-art
detection performance.

1

Introduction

With the rapid advancement of the powerful learning abilities of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)
[1, 2], the trustworthiness of DNNs in security-sensitive scenarios has attracted considerable attention
in recent years [3]. Generally, samples from the training and test sets of DNNs are viewed as data
from some In Distribution (InD) Pin , while samples from other data sets are regarded as coming
from a different distribution Pout , i.e., out-of-distribution (OoD) data. In the practical deployment,
DNNs trained on InD data would inevitably encounter OoD data and thus yield unreliable results with
potential risks. Therefore, detecting whether a new sample is from Pin or Pout has been a valuable
research topic of trustworthy deep learning, namely OoD detection [4].
Existing OoD detection methods exploit different outputs from DNNs to unveil the hidden disparities
between InD and OoD data, e.g., logits [5], gradients [6] and features [7, 8]. In this work, we address
OoD detection from a perspective of utilizing the feature spaces learned by the backbone of DNNs.
To be specific, given a DNN f : Rd → Rc , f takes x ∈ Rd as inputs and learns penultimate layer
features z ∈ Rm before the last linear layer. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is investigated
in [8] to calculate the reconstruction error in the z-space as the OoD detection score. That is,
PCA is executed on the penultimate features of InD training samples and learns a linear subspace
spanned by the principal components in the z-space. Then, given features ẑ of an unknown sample
x̂, one can obtain the reconstructed counterpart of ẑ by projecting ẑ to the linear subspace and
re-projecting it back. The reconstruction error is computed as the Euclidean distance between ẑ and
the reconstructed counterpart. In [9], similar ideas are adopted with energy-based models using an
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

