AMAGO-2: Breaking the Multi-Task Barrier in
Meta-Reinforcement Learning with Transformers

Jake Grigsby Justin Sasek† Samyak Parajuli† Daniel Adebi† Amy Zhang Yuke Zhu
The University of Texas at Austin
† Equal contribution
{grigsby,yukez}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Language models trained on diverse datasets unlock generalization by in-context
learning. Reinforcement Learning (RL) policies can achieve a similar effect by
meta-learning within the memory of a sequence model. However, meta-RL research
primarily focuses on adapting to minor variations of a single task. It is difficult to
scale towards more general behavior without confronting challenges in multi-task
optimization, and few solutions are compatible with meta-RL’s goal of learning
from large training sets of unlabeled tasks. To address this challenge, we revisit the
idea that multi-task RL is bottlenecked by imbalanced training losses created by
uneven return scales across different tasks. We build upon recent advancements in
Transformer-based (in-context) meta-RL and evaluate a simple yet scalable solution
where both an agent’s actor and critic objectives are converted to classification
terms that decouple optimization from the current scale of returns. Large-scale
comparisons in Meta-World ML45, Multi-Game Procgen, Multi-Task POPGym,
Multi-Game Atari, and BabyAI find that this design unlocks significant progress in
online multi-task adaptation and memory problems without explicit task labels.

1

Introduction

Billion-parameter generative models trained to imitate human language and behaviors from web
datasets have unlocked unprecedented generality in machine learning [1, 2]. While evaluations of
these large language models (LLMs) are organized into discrete benchmarks [3] with specific themes
like competitive mathematics [4] or reading comprehension [5], their knowledge transfers to countless
problems. LLMs’ flexibility is largely due to an “in-context learning” effect that emerges when
input sequences grow long enough to resemble a dataset of examples for a new task [6, 7]. However,
predicting the most likely continuation of a sequence is misaligned with optimal control and limits us
to tasks where high-quality demonstrations are available.
Online Reinforcement Learning (RL) lets models continuously self-improve and directly optimizes
performance. The RL equivalent of in-context learning is a subset of meta-RL techniques that use
sequence models for memory and adaptation [8, 9, 10]. Meta-RL can be viewed as a task inference
problem in which an agent explores its new surroundings to discover information that it can use
to improve decision-making [11, 12, 13]. In theory, meta-RL can adapt to a wide range of control
problems. However, current applications are quite narrow — usually focusing on minor variations
of what could be considered a single task. For example, imagine a platformer video game with
procedurally generated levels. The game has a consistent theme and controls, but each level introduces
a slightly different reward function, physics, and layout. A meta-learning policy trained on this game
would learn to identify the relevant changes in a new level in order to maximize returns. By most
formal definitions, any two levels from this game would be considered two different “tasks,” but it
seems unlikely that anyone outside the field would refer to the resulting policy as a “multi-task" agent.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

