Hybrid Generative AI for De Novo Design of
Co-Crystals with Enhanced Tabletability

Nina Gubina1
Lyubov Yamshchikova1
Grigorii Kirgizov1

Andrei Dmitrenko1,2 Gleb Solovev1
Oleg Petrov1 Ivan Lebedev3 Nikita Serov1
Nikolay Nikitin1 Vladimir Vinogradov1

1

ITMO University, St. Petersburg, Russia
2
D ONE AG, Zurich, Switzerland
3
Ivanovo State University of Chemistry and Technology, Ivanovo, Russia
dmitrenko@scamt-itmo.ru

Abstract
Co-crystallization is an accessible way to control physicochemical characteristics
of organic crystals, which finds many biomedical applications. In this work, we
present Generative Method for Co-crystal Design (GEMCODE) 1 , a novel pipeline
for automated co-crystal screening based on the hybridization of deep generative models and evolutionary optimization for broader exploration of the target
chemical space. GEMCODE enables fast de novo co-crystal design with target
tabletability profiles, which is crucial for the development of pharmaceuticals. With
a series of experimental studies highlighting validation and discovery cases, we
show that GEMCODE is effective even under realistic computational constraints.
Furthermore, we explore the potential of language models in generating co-crystals.
Finally, we present numerous previously unknown co-crystals predicted by GEMCODE and discuss its potential in accelerating drug development.

1

Introduction

The use of multi-component molecular crystals, specifically co-crystals, have become increasingly
popular in various industries including energy [1], electronics [2, 3], optoelectronics [4, 5], food [6],
and especially in pharmaceuticals [7–9]. Pharmaceutical co-crystals are defined as solids that are
crystalline singlephase materials composed of a drug molecule and an additional pharmaceutically
acceptable molecule (coformer) [10]. Co-crystals have a different crystal structure from the original
components, leading to unique physicochemical properties. They are appealing because the resulting
solid can exhibit better physicochemical properties compared to either of the pure molecules [11].
The formation of co-crystals has been shown to enhance characteristics such as bioavailability
[12, 13], solubility [14–16], stability [17–19], pharmacokinetics [20, 21], and mechanical properties
[14, 22, 23]. Plasticity is a mechanical property that is particularly important for the pharmaceutical
industry. It is known that highly plastic materials tend to produce stronger tablets compared to those
exhibiting elastic behavior [24]. In other words, it possesses improved tabletability, defined as the
capacity of a powdered material to be transformed into a tablet of specified strength under the effect
of compaction pressure [25]. Therefore, it is essential to control for tabletability as it allows direct
pressing with minimal addition of excipients to form a stable compact tablet.
Despite all the robustness and versatility of co-crystals, determining the combination of a coformer
and parent component with the desired property modification is an extremely non-trivial task, usually
1

https://github.com/ai-chem/GEMCODE

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

