Zero-Shot Scene Reconstruction from Single Images
with Deep Prior Assembly

Junsheng Zhou1
Yu-Shen Liu1†
Zhizhong Han2
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China1
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA2
zhou-js24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn h312h@wayne.edu

Abstract
Large language and vision models have been leading a revolution in visual computing. By greatly scaling up sizes of data and model parameters, the large models
learn deep priors which lead to remarkable performance in various tasks. In this
work, we present deep prior assembly, a novel framework that assembles diverse
deep priors from large models for scene reconstruction from single images in a
zero-shot manner. We show that this challenging task can be done without extra
knowledge but just simply generalizing one deep prior in one sub-task. To this
end, we introduce novel methods related to poses, scales, and occlusion parsing
which are keys to enable deep priors to work together in a robust way. Deep
prior assembly does not require any 3D or 2D data-driven training in the task and
demonstrates superior performance in generalizing priors to open-world scenes.
We conduct evaluations on various datasets, and report analysis, numerical and
visual comparisons with the latest methods to show our superiority. Project page:
https://junshengzhou.github.io/DeepPriorAssembly.

1

Introduction

Reconstructing scenes from images is a vital task in 3D computer vision and computer graphics. It
bridges the gap between the 2D images that can be easily captured by phone cameras and the 3D
geometries of scenes for various real-world applications, e.g., autonomous driving, augmented/virtual
reality and robotics. Reconstructing scenes from multi-view images [60, 67] is well-explored to
recover 3D geometries with multi-view consistency and camera poses. However, reconstructing a
scene from a single RGB image is still challenging, which is extremely difficult due to inadequate
information. Recent works [10, 42] try to solve this task as a reconstruction problem which leverages
neural networks with an encoder-decoder architecture to draw supervisions from pairs of images and
3D ground truth geometries and layouts. Nevertheless, due to the limited amount of image-scene
pairs, these methods struggle to generalize to out-of-distribution images in open world.
Large language and vision models have been extensively studied in the past few years, which
revolutionized neural language processing [58, 6], 2D/3D representation learning [15, 77] and content
generation [51, 26], etc. By greatly scaling up sizes of training samples and model parameters,
large models show brilliant capabilities and remarkable performance. However, they are limited in a
specific task, which limits their capability in high level perception tasks. Driven by the observation,
we raise an interesting question: can we assemble series of deep priors from large models, which are
experts with different modalities in different tasks, to solve an extremely challenging task that none
of them can accomplish alone?
†

The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

