In-Trajectory Inverse Reinforcement Learning: Learn
Incrementally Before an Ongoing Trajectory
Terminates
Shicheng Liu & Minghui Zhu
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802, USA
{sfl5539,muz16}@psu.edu

Abstract
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) aims to learn a reward function and a corresponding policy that best fit the demonstrated trajectories of an expert. However,
current IRL works cannot learn incrementally from an ongoing trajectory because
they have to wait to collect at least one complete trajectory to learn. To bridge
the gap, this paper considers the problem of learning a reward function and a
corresponding policy while observing the initial state-action pair of an ongoing
trajectory and keeping updating the learned reward and policy when new stateaction pairs of the ongoing trajectory are observed. We formulate this problem as
an online bi-level optimization problem where the upper level dynamically adjusts
the learned reward according to the newly observed state-action pairs with the
help of a meta-regularization term, and the lower level learns the corresponding
policy. We propose a novel algorithm to solve √
this problem and
√ guarantee that
the algorithm achieves sub-linear local regret O( T + log T + T log T ). If the
reward function is linear, we prove that the proposed algorithm achieves sub-linear
regret O(log T ). Experiments are used to validate the proposed algorithm.

1

Introduction

Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) aims to learn a reward function and a corresponding policy
that are consistent with the demonstrated trajectories of an expert. In recent years, several IRL
methods are proposed to help learn the reward and policy, including maximum margin methods [1, 2],
maximum entropy methods [3, 4], maximum likelihood methods [5, 6], and Bayesian methods [7, 8].
The aforementioned IRL works learn from pre-collected demonstration sets and do not improve
the learned model during deployment. Online IRL [9, 10, 11] instead can learn from sequentially
arrived demonstrated trajectories and continuously improve the learned reward and policy from the
newly observed complete trajectories. However, recent applications of IRL motivate the need to
learn incrementally from an ongoing trajectory before it terminates. For example, inferring a moving
shooter’s intention from its ongoing movement in order to evacuate the hiding victims [12] before the
shooter finds them. In this case, we need to quickly update the inference about the shooter’s intention
once a new movement of the shooter is observed, so that we can use the latest inference to plan a
rescue strategy as soon as possible. We cannot wait until the shooter trajectory ends, in case the
shooter has found the victims. Another example is learning a target customer’s investment preference
from its daily updated investment trajectory in a stock market [13] in order to recommend appropriate
stocks [14, 15] before other competitors get this customer. However, current IRL works cannot learn
from an ongoing trajectory because they have to wait to collect at least one complete trajectory to
learn from. To bridge the gap, this paper proposes in-trajectory IRL, a new type of IRL that learns a
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

