Fairness in Social Influence Maximization
via Optimal Transport

Shubham Chowdhary
ETH Zürich
schowdhary@ethz.ch

Giulia De Pasquale∗
Eindhoven University of Technology
g.de.pasquale@tue.nl

Ana-Andreea Stoica
Max Planck Institute, Tübingen
ana-andreea.stoica@tuebingen.mpg.de

Nicolas Lanzetti∗
ETH Zürich
lnicolas@ethz.ch

Florian Dörfler
ETH Zürich
dorfler@ethz.ch

Abstract
We study fairness in social influence maximization, whereby one seeks to select
seeds that spread a given information throughout a network, ensuring balanced
outreach among different communities (e.g. demographic groups). In the literature,
fairness is often quantified in terms of the expected outreach within individual
communities. In this paper, we demonstrate that such fairness metrics can be
misleading since they overlook the stochastic nature of information diffusion
processes. When information diffusion occurs in a probabilistic manner, multiple
outreach scenarios can occur. As such, outcomes such as “In 50% of the cases, no
one in group 1 gets the information, while everyone in group 2 does, and in the
other 50%, it is the opposite”, which always results in largely unfair outcomes,
are classified as fair by a variety of fairness metrics in the literature. We tackle
this problem by designing a new fairness metric, mutual fairness, that captures
variability in outreach through optimal transport theory. We propose a new seedselection algorithm that optimizes both outreach and mutual fairness, and we show
its efficacy on several real datasets. We find that our algorithm increases fairness
with only a minor decrease (and at times, even an increase) in efficiency.

1

Introduction

Problem Description. Social networks play a fundamental role in the spread of information, as in
the context of commercial products endorsement [17], job vacancy advertisements [3], public health
awareness [27], etc. Information, ideas, or new products can either go viral and potentially bring
significant changes in a community or die out quickly. In this context, a fundamental algorithmic problem arises, known as Social Influence Maximization (SIM) [11, 12]. SIM studies how to strategically
select a pre-specified small proportion of nodes in the social network – the early adopters or seeds –
so that the outreach generated by a diffusion process that starts at these early adopters is maximized.
Consider, for example, a product endorsement campaign: the early adopters are strategically selected
users who receive the product first to promote it to their friends, who in turn may or may not adopt
it. The optimal selection of early adopters is known to be an NP-hard problem [11]. Thus, many
heuristic strategies have been proposed, based on iterative processes such as greedy algorithms or on
network centrality measures. However, all these algorithms purely rely on the graph topology and are
agnostic to users’ demographics, which raises significant fairness concerns, especially in contexts
of health awareness campaigns, education, and job advertisements, where one wants to ensure an
∗

Authors contributed equally.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

