Diffusion Policy Attacker: Crafting Adversarial
Attacks for Diffusion-based Policies
Yipu Chen*
Georgia Institute of Technology
ychen3302@gatech.edu

Haotian Xue*
Georgia Institute of Technology
htxue.ai@gatech.edu

Yongxin Chen
Georgia Institute of Technology
yongchen@gatech.edu

Abstract
Diffusion models (DMs) have emerged as a promising approach for behavior
cloning (BC). Diffusion policies (DP) based on DMs have elevated BC performance to new heights, demonstrating robust efficacy across diverse tasks, coupled
with their inherent flexibility and ease of implementation. Despite the increasing adoption of DP as a foundation for policy generation, the critical issue of
safety remains largely unexplored. While previous attack attempts have targeted
deep policy networks, DP used diffusion models as the policy network, making it ineffective to be attacked using previous methods because of its chained
structure and randomness injected. In this paper, we undertake a comprehensive examination of DP safety concerns by introducing adversarial scenarios,
encompassing offline and online attacks, and global and patch-based attacks. We
propose DP-Attacker, a suite of algorithms that can craft effective adversarial
attacks across all aforementioned scenarios. We conduct attacks on pre-trained
diffusion policies across various manipulation tasks. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that DP-Attacker has the capability to significantly decrease
the performance of DP for all scenarios. Particularly in offline scenarios, DPAttacker can generate highly transferable perturbations applicable to all frames.
Furthermore, we illustrate the creation of adversarial physical patches that, when
applied to the environment, effectively deceive the model. Video results are put in:
https://sites.google.com/view/diffusion-policy-attacker.

1

Introduction

Behavior Cloning (BC) [40] is a pivotal area in robot learning: given an expert demonstration dataset,
it aims to train a policy network in a supervised approach. Recently, diffusion models [16, 49]
have become dominant in BC, primarily due to their strong capability in modeling multi-modal
distribution. The resulting policy learner, termed Diffusion Policy (DP) [9, 18], can generate the
action trajectory from a pure Gaussian noise conditioned on the input image(s). An increasing
number of works are adopting DP as an action decoder for BC across various domains such as robot
manipulation [12, 58, 7], long-horizon planning [35, 26] and autonomous driving [29].
Adversarial attack [31, 14] has been haunting deep neural networks (DNN) for a long time: a
small perturbation on the input image will fool the DNN into making wrong decisions. Despite the
remarkable success of diffusion policies in BC, their robustness under adversarial attacks [31, 14]
∗

indicates equal contribution. Correspondence to: ychen3302@gatech.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

