PSL: Rethinking and Improving Softmax Loss from
Pairwise Perspective for Recommendation

Weiqin Yang † ‡
Zhejiang University
tinysnow@zju.edu.cn

Jiawei Chen ∗ † ‡ §
Zhejiang University
sleepyhunt@zju.edu.cn

Xin Xin
Shandong University
xinxin@sdu.edu.cn

Binbin Hu
Ant Group
bin.hbb@antfin.com

Yan Feng † ‡
Zhejiang University
fengyan@zju.edu.cn

Sheng Zhou
Zhejiang University
zhousheng_zju@zju.edu.cn
Chun Chen † ‡
Zhejiang University
chenc@zju.edu.cn

Can Wang † §
Zhejiang University
wcan@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Softmax Loss (SL) is widely applied in recommender systems (RS) and has demonstrated effectiveness. This work analyzes SL from a pairwise perspective, revealing
two significant limitations: 1) the relationship between SL and conventional ranking metrics like DCG is not sufficiently tight; 2) SL is highly sensitive to false
negative instances. Our analysis indicates that these limitations are primarily
due to the use of the exponential function. To address these issues, this work
extends SL to a new family of loss functions, termed Pairwise Softmax Loss (PSL),
which replaces the exponential function in SL with other appropriate activation
functions. While the revision is minimal, we highlight three merits of PSL: 1)
it serves as a tighter surrogate for DCG with suitable activation functions; 2) it
better balances data contributions; and 3) it acts as a specific BPR loss enhanced by
Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO). We further validate the effectiveness
and robustness of PSL through empirical experiments. The code is available at
https://github.com/Tiny-Snow/IR-Benchmark.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, recommender systems (RS) have permeated various personalized services [1–4]. What
sets recommendation apart from other machine learning tasks is its distinctive emphasis on ranking
[5]. Specifically, RS aims to retrieve positive items in higher ranking positions (i.e., giving larger
prediction scores) over others and adopts specific ranking metrics (e.g., DCG [6] and MRR [7]) to
evaluate its performance.
The emphasis on ranking inspires a surge of research on loss functions in RS. Initial studies treated
recommendation primarily as a classification problem, utilizing pointwise loss functions (e.g., BCE
[8], MSE [9]) to optimize models. Recognizing the inherent ranking nature of RS, pairwise loss
* Corresponding author.
†

State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University.
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University.
§
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security.
‡

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

