HEST-1k: A Dataset for Spatial Transcriptomics and
Histology Image Analysis

Guillaume Jaume1,2,∗
Paul Doucet1,3,∗
Andrew H. Song1,2
Ming Y. Lu1,2,4
1,2
1,6,7
Cristina Almagro-Pérez
Sophia J. Wagner
Anurag J. Vaidya1,2,5
Richard J. Chen1,2
Drew F.K. Williamson8
Ahrong Kim1,9
Faisal Mahmood1,2
1
2
Mass General Brigham, Boston, USA
Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA
3
ETH Zurich, Switzerland 4 EECS MIT, Cambridge, USA
5
HST MIT, Cambridge, USA 6 TUM, Munich, Germany
7
Helmholtz Munich, Munich, Germany 8 Emory School of Medicine, Atlanta, USA
9
Pusan National University, South Korea
gjaume@bwh.harvard.edu faisalmahmood@bwh.harvard.edu

Abstract
Spatial transcriptomics enables interrogating the molecular composition of tissue
with ever-increasing resolution and sensitivity. However, costs, rapidly evolving
technology, and lack of standards have constrained computational methods in ST
to narrow tasks and small cohorts. In addition, the underlying tissue morphology,
as reflected by H&E-stained whole slide images (WSIs), encodes rich information
often overlooked in ST studies. Here, we introduce HEST-1k, a collection of
1,229 spatial transcriptomic profiles, each linked to a WSI and extensive metadata.
HEST-1k was assembled from 153 public and internal cohorts encompassing 26
organs, two species (Homo Sapiens and Mus Musculus), and 367 cancer samples from 25 cancer types. HEST-1k processing enabled the identification of 2.1
million expression–morphology pairs and over 76 million nuclei. To support its
development, we additionally introduce the HEST-Library, a Python package designed to perform a range of actions with HEST samples. We test HEST-1k and
Library on three use cases: (1) benchmarking foundation models for pathology
(HEST-Benchmark), (2) biomarker exploration, and (3) multimodal representation
learning. HEST-1k, HEST-Library, and HEST-Benchmark can be freely accessed
at https://github.com/mahmoodlab/hest.

1

Introduction

Advances in molecular profiling enable spatially-resolved gene expression analysis with increasingly
large gene panels, enhanced spatial resolution, and greater sensitivity [9, 122]. From the early days of
bulk RNA sequencing constrained by its coarse resolution and limited gene panels, spatially-resolved
technologies have progressed to achieve whole-transcriptome sequencing at sub-cellular resolution [81]. In cancer research, spatial transcriptomics (ST) holds particular promise for characterizing
the tumor microenvironment, a key element in understanding disease progression and treatment
response [133, 97, 140, 151]. With the large amount of transcriptomics data generated by a single
ST sample (e.g., >10 million transcripts are detected in a typical 10x Genomics Xenium assay),
computational methods are often used to uncover promising biomarkers, such as employing clustering
methods for cell phenotyping [122].
However, high costs and rapidly evolving technology have constrained computational methods to
narrow tasks and data cohorts of only a few patients [103, 63, 135]. Consequently, we observe a lack
*

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

