Uncertainty of Thoughts: Uncertainty-Aware Planning
Enhances Information Seeking in LLMs

Zhiyuan Hu1∗ Chumin Liu2 Xidong Feng3 Yilun Zhao4
See-Kiong Ng1 Anh Tuan Luu2 Junxian He5 Pang Wei Koh6 Bryan Hooi1
1
National University of Singapore 2 Nanyang Technological University
3
University College London 4 Yale University
5
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 6 University of Washington

Abstract
In the face of uncertainty, the ability to seek information is of fundamental importance. In many practical applications, such as medical diagnosis and troubleshooting, the information needed to solve the task is not initially given, and
has to be actively sought by asking follow-up questions (for example, a doctor
asking a patient for more details about their symptoms). In this work, we introduce
Uncertainty of Thoughts (UoT), an algorithm to augment large language models
with the ability to actively seek information by asking effective questions. UoT
combines 1) an uncertainty-aware simulation approach which enables the model to
simulate possible future scenarios and how likely they are to occur, 2) uncertaintybased rewards motivated by information gain which incentivizes the model to seek
information, and 3) a reward propagation scheme to select the optimal question
to ask in a way that maximizes the expected reward. In experiments on medical
diagnosis, troubleshooting and the ‘20 Questions’ game, UoT achieves an average
performance improvement of 38.1% in the rate of successful task completion across
multiple LLMs compared with direct prompting, and also improves efficiency (i.e.,
the number of questions needed to complete the task). Our code are released2 .

1

Introduction

As the capabilities of large language models
(LLMs) grow, they are being increasingly deployed
in challenging real-world settings involving uncertainty and ambiguity. In particular, recent work
aims to develop LLM agents or assistants [36, 26]
that effectively complete tasks in interactive environments, leading to a growing need for LLMs that
can actively seek the information they need to solve
a task by asking questions in conversational settings. For example, in medical diagnosis, patients
often do not initially report their symptoms in full
detail. In such situations, a doctor’s ability to ask
effective questions is crucial, as a successful diagnosis often depends on revealing important details
that the patient did not initially provide (Figure 1).
∗
2

I've been having a bad headache since yesterday
Have you observed any vision changes, or
sensitivity to light?

Patient

Oh, now you mention it, I have been more
sensitive to light recently.

Doctor

Have you injured your head recently?
Ah, I did hit my head a few days ago, but it
didn’t seem serious.
You may have post-concussion syndrome.

Figure 1: The importance of information seeking in medical diagnosis. The patient initially
only complains of a headache, but by asking
the right questions, the doctor uncovers the critical information needed for a correct diagnosis.

Corresponding to: Zhiyuan Hu. Email: zhiyuan_hu@u.nus.edu
https://github.com/zhiyuanhubj/UoT

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

