How Molecules Impact Cells:
Unlocking Contrastive PhenoMolecular Retrieval

Philip Fradkin1,2,∗ , Puria Azadi1,3,∗ ,
Karush Suri1 , Frederik Wenkel1 , Ali Bashashati3 ,
Maciej Sypetkowski1†, Dominique Beaini1,4,†
1

3

Valence Labs, 2 University of Toronto, Vector Institute,
University of British Columbia, 4 Université de Montréal, Mila- Quebec AI Institute
dominique@valencelabs.com

Abstract
Predicting molecular impact on cellular function is a core challenge in therapeutic
design. Phenomic experiments, designed to capture cellular morphology, utilize
microscopy based techniques and demonstrate a high throughput solution for uncovering molecular impact on the cell. In this work, we learn a joint latent space
between molecular structures and microscopy phenomic experiments, aligning
paired samples with contrastive learning. Specifically, we study the problem of
Contrastive PhenoMolecular Retrieval, which consists of zero-shot molecular structure identification conditioned on phenomic experiments. We assess challenges
in multi-modal learning of phenomics and molecular modalities such as experimental batch effect, inactive molecule perturbations, and encoding perturbation
concentration. We demonstrate improved multi-modal learner retrieval through
(1) a uni-modal pre-trained phenomics model, (2) a novel inter sample similarity
aware loss, and (3) models conditioned on a representation of molecular concentration. Following this recipe, we propose MolPhenix, a molecular phenomics model.
MolPhenix leverages a pre-trained phenomics model to demonstrate significant
performance gains across perturbation concentrations, molecular scaffolds, and
activity thresholds. In particular, we demonstrate an 8.1× improvement in zero shot
molecular retrieval of active molecules over the previous state-of-the-art, reaching
77.33% in top-1% accuracy. These results open the door for machine learning to
be applied in virtual phenomics screening, which can significantly benefit drug
discovery applications.

1

Introduction

Quantifying cellular responses elicited by genetic and molecular perturbations represents a core
challenge in medicinal research [4, 57]. Out of an approximate 1060 druglike molecule designs,
a small number are able to alter cellular properties to reverse the course of diseases [5, 27]. In
recent years, microscopy-based cell morphology screening techniques, demonstrated potential for
quantitative understanding of a molecule’s biological effects. Experimental techniques such as
cell-painting are used to capture cellular morphology, which correspond to physical and structural
properties of the cell [6, 7]. Cells treated with molecular perturbations can change morphology,
which is captured by staining and high throughput microscopy techniques. Perturbations with similar
cellular impact induce analogous morphological changes, allowing to capture underlying biological
∗
†

These two authors contributed equally (ordered alphabetically) and reserve the right to swap their order.
Equal advising.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

