Diffusion Imitation from Observation
Bo-Ruei Huang Chun-Kai Yang Chun-Mao Lai Dai-Jie Wu Shao-Hua Sun
Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University

Abstract
Learning from observation (LfO) aims to imitate experts by learning from stateonly demonstrations without requiring action labels. Existing adversarial imitation
learning approaches learn a generator agent policy to produce state transitions that
are indistinguishable to a discriminator that learns to classify agent and expert state
transitions. Despite its simplicity in formulation, these methods are often sensitive
to hyperparameters and brittle to train. Motivated by the recent success of diffusion
models in generative modeling, we propose to integrate a diffusion model into
the adversarial imitation learning from observation framework. Specifically, we
employ a diffusion model to capture expert and agent transitions by generating
the next state, given the current state. Then, we reformulate the learning objective
to train the diffusion model as a binary classifier and use it to provide “realness”
rewards for policy learning. Our proposed framework, Diffusion Imitation from
Observation (DIFO), demonstrates superior performance in various continuous
control domains, including navigation, locomotion, manipulation, and games.
Project page: https://nturobotlearninglab.github.io/DIFO

1

Introduction

Learning from demonstration (LfD) [26, 46, 51, 63, 86] aims to acquire policies that can perform
desired skills by imitating expert trajectories represented as sequences of state-action pairs, eliminating the necessity of reward functions. Recent advancements in LfD have enabled the deployment
of reliable and robust learned policies in various domains, such as robot learning [17, 20, 28, 30],
strategy games [22, 47, 71], and self-driving [7, 8, 62, 64]. LfD’s dependence on accurately labeled
actions remains a substantial limitation, particularly in scenarios where obtaining expert actions is
challenging or costly. Moreover, most LfD methods assume that the demonstrator and imitator share
the same embodiment, inherently preventing cross-embodiment imitation.
To address these issues, learning from observation (LfO) methods [66, 76, 85] seek to imitate experts
from state-only sequences, thereby removing the need for action labels and allowing learning from
experts with different embodiments. Schmidt and Jiang [66], Torabi et al. [75], Yang et al. [82]
proposed learning inverse dynamic models (IDMs) that can infer action labels from state sequences
and subsequently reformulate LfO as LfD. Nevertheless, acquiring sufficiently aligned data with
the expert’s data distribution to train IDMs remains an unresolved challenge. On the other hand,
adversarial imitation learning (AIL) [32, 76, 81] employs a generator policy learning to imitate an
expert, while a discriminator differentiates between the data produced by the policy and the actual
expert data. Despite its simplicity in formulation, AIL methods can be brittle to learn and are often
sensitive to hyperparameters [2, 13].
Recent works have explored leveraging diffusion models’ ability in generative modeling and achieved
encouraging results in imitation learning and planning [29, 31, 44]. For example, diffusion policies [6,
49] learn to denoise actions with injected noises conditioned on states, allowing for modeling
multimodal expert behaviors. Moreover, Chen et al. [5] proposed to model expert state-action pairs
with a diffusion model and then provide gradients to train a behavioral cloning policy to improve
Correspondence to: Shao-Hua Sun <shaohuas@ntu.edu.tw>
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

