If You Want to Be Robust, Be Wary of Initialization

Sofiane Ennadir∗
KTH
Stockholm, Sweden

Johannes F. Lutzeyer
LIX, Ecole Polytechnique
IP Paris, France

Michalis Vazirgiannis
KTH & Ecole Polytechnique
Stockholm, Sweden

El Houcine Bergou
UM6P
Benguerir, Morocco

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have demonstrated remarkable performance across
a spectrum of graph-related tasks, however concerns persist regarding their vulnerability to adversarial perturbations. While prevailing defense strategies focus
primarily on pre-processing techniques and adaptive message-passing schemes, this
study delves into an under-explored dimension: the impact of weight initialization
and associated hyper-parameters, such as training epochs, on a model’s robustness.
We introduce a theoretical framework bridging the connection between initialization strategies and a network’s resilience to adversarial perturbations. Our analysis
reveals a direct relationship between initial weights, number of training epochs and
the model’s vulnerability, offering new insights into adversarial robustness beyond
conventional defense mechanisms. While our primary focus is on GNNs, we extend
our theoretical framework, providing a general upper-bound applicable to Deep
Neural Networks. Extensive experiments, spanning diverse models and real-world
datasets subjected to various adversarial attacks, validate our findings. We illustrate
that selecting appropriate initialization not only ensures performance on clean
datasets but also enhances model robustness against adversarial perturbations, with
observed gaps of up to 50% compared to alternative initialization approaches.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have demonstrated remarkable prowess across various domains, ranging from
computer vision [8] to natural language processing [29], proving their ability to model and extract
complex insights from real-world datasets. Recently, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [21, 36, 30]
have emerged as a powerful extension of neural networks specifically tailored to tackle graphstructured data. These models have led to rapid progress in solving tasks such as node and graph
classification where their application have spanned from drug design [20], protein resistance analysis [24], session-based recommendations [33] to tabular data [2]. Concurrently with their success,
deep learning architectures have been shown to be unstable when subject to adversarial perturbations
[15], resulting in unreliable predictions, consequently questioning these models’ applicability in
critical domains. While most adversarial robustness studies focus on the domain of computer vision,
recent work [16] studying the robustness of GNNs has emerged. Given their rich nature, graphs
allow different attack schemes, where the attacker can either choose to edit the graph structure (by
adding/deleting edges) or edit the node/edge features. In parallel, recent studies have been devoted
to studying approaches to defend against these attacks and enhance GNN robustness, such as input
pre-processing techniques [32], low-rank approximation [11], edge-pruning [38] or adapting the
message-passing schemes [1].
∗

Corresponding Author: ennadir@kth.se

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

