PageRank Bandits for Link Prediction

Yikun Ban1∗, Jiaru Zou1∗ , Zihao Li1 , Yunzhe Qi1 , Dongqi Fu2 , Jian Kang3 ,
Hanghang Tong1 , Jingrui He1
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 2 Meta AI, 3 University of Rochester
1
{yikunb2, jiaruz2, zihaoli5, yunzheq2, htong, jingrui}@illinois.edu
2
dongqifu@meta.com, 3 jian.kang@rochester.edu

Abstract
Link prediction is a critical problem in graph learning with broad applications such
as recommender systems and knowledge graph completion. Numerous research
efforts have been directed at solving this problem, including approaches based on
similarity metrics and Graph Neural Networks (GNN). However, most existing
solutions are still rooted in conventional supervised learning, which makes it
challenging to adapt over time to changing customer interests and to address
the inherent dilemma of exploitation versus exploration in link prediction. To
tackle these challenges, this paper reformulates link prediction as a sequential
decision-making process, where each link prediction interaction occurs sequentially.
We propose a novel fusion algorithm, PRB (PageRank Bandits), which is the
first to combine contextual bandits with PageRank for collaborative exploitation
and exploration. We also introduce a new reward formulation and provide a
theoretical performance guarantee for PRB. Finally, we extensively evaluate PRB
in both online and offline settings, comparing it with bandit-based and graph-based
methods. The empirical success of PRB demonstrates the value of the proposed
fusion approach. Our code is released at https://github.com/jiaruzouu/PRB

1

Introduction

Link prediction is an essential problem in graph machine learning, focusing on predicting whether a
link will exist between two nodes. Given the ubiquitous graph data in real-world applications, link
prediction has become a powerful tool in domains such as recommender systems [72] and knowledge
graph completion [49, 41]. Considerable research efforts have been dedicated to solving this problem.
One type of classic research approaches is heuristic-based methods, which infer the likelihood of
links based on node similarity metrics [43, 46]. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been widely
utilized for link prediction. For example, Graph Autoencoders leverage Message Passing Neural
Network (MPNN) representations to predict links [29]. Recently, MPNNs have been combined with
structural features to better explore pairwise relations between target nodes [73, 70, 18, 61].
Existing supervised-learning-based methods for link prediction are designed for either the static
[73, 70, 18, 61] or relatively dynamic environment [64, 55, 62, 58, 69, 19, 27, 26, 75], they (chronologically) split the dataset into training and testing sets. Due to the dynamic and evolving nature of
many real-world graphs, ideal link prediction methods should adapt over time to consistently meet
the contexts and goals of the serving nodes. For instance, in short-video recommender systems, both
video content and user preferences change dynamically over time [28]. Another significant challenge
is the dilemma of exploitation and exploration in link prediction. The learner must not only exploit
past collected data to predict links with high likelihood but also explore lower-confidence target
nodes to acquire new knowledge for long-term benefits. For example, in social recommendations, it
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

