Any2Graph: Deep End-To-End Supervised Graph
Prediction With An Optimal Transport Loss

Paul Krzakala
LTCI & CMAP , Télécom paris, IP Paris

Junjie Yang
LTCI, Télécom paris, IP Paris

Rémi Flamary
CMAP, Ecole polytechnique, IP Paris

Florence d’Alché-Buc
LTCI, Télécom paris, IP Paris

Charlotte Laclau
LTCI, Télécom paris, IP Paris

Matthieu Labeau
LTCI, Télécom paris, IP Paris

Abstract
We propose Any2Graph, a generic framework for end-to-end Supervised Graph
Prediction (SGP) i.e. a deep learning model that predicts an entire graph for any
kind of input. The framework is built on a novel Optimal Transport loss, the
Partially-Masked Fused Gromov-Wasserstein, that exhibits all necessary properties (permutation invariance, differentiability) and is designed to handle any-sized
graphs. Numerical experiments showcase the versatility of the approach that outperforms existing competitors on a novel challenging synthetic dataset and a variety
of real-world tasks such as map construction from satellite image (Sat2Graph) or
molecule prediction from fingerprint (Fingerprint2Graph). 1

1

Introduction

This work focuses on the problem of Supervised Graph Prediction (SGP), at the crossroads of
Graph-based Learning and Structured Prediction. In contrast to node and graph classification or
link prediction widely covered in recent literature by graph neural networks, the target variable
in SGP is a graph and no particular assumption is made about the input variable. Emblematic
applications of SGP include knowledge graph extraction [28] or dependency parsing [17] in natural
language processing, conditional graph scene generation in computer vision [53], [12], or molecule
identification in chemistry [10, 55, 49], to name but a few. Moreover, close to SGP is the unsupervised
task of graph generation notably motivated by de novo drug design [8, 15, 41].
SGP raises some specific issues related to the complexity of the output space and the absence of
widely accepted loss functions. First, the non-Euclidean nature of the output to be predicted makes
both inference and learning challenging while the size of the output space is extremely large. Second,
the arbitrary size of the output variable to predict requires a model with a flexible expressive power in
the output space. Third, graphs are characterized by the absence of natural or ground-truth ordering
of their nodes, making comparison and prediction difficult. This particular issue calls for a node
permutation invariant distance to predict graphs. Scrutinizing the literature through the lens of these
issues, we note that existing methodologies circumvent the difficulty of handling output graphs in
various ways. A first body of work avoids end-to-end learning by relying on some relaxations. For
instance, energy-based models (see for instance [38]) convert the problem into the learning of an
1

All code is available at https://github.com/KrzakalaPaul/Any2Graph.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

