FreeLong: Training-Free Long Video Generation with
SpectralBlend Temporal Attention
Yu Lu1 , Yuanzhi Liang2 , Linchao Zhu1 , Yi Yang1∗
1

The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University
2
University of Technology Sydney

Abstract
Video diffusion models have made substantial progress in various video generation
applications. However, training models for long video generation tasks require
significant computational and data resources, posing a challenge to developing long
video diffusion models. This paper investigates a straightforward and training-free
approach to extend an existing short video diffusion model (e.g., pre-trained on
16-frame videos) for consistent long video generation (e.g., 128 frames). Our
preliminary observation has found that directly applying the short video diffusion
model to generate long videos can lead to severe video quality degradation. Further
investigation reveals that this degradation is primarily due to the distortion of
high-frequency components in long videos, characterized by a decrease in spatial
high-frequency components and an increase in temporal high-frequency components. Motivated by this, we propose a novel solution named FreeLong to balance
the frequency distribution of long video features during the denoising process.
FreeLong blends the low-frequency components of global video features, which
encapsulate the entire video sequence, with the high-frequency components of
local video features that focus on shorter subsequences of frames. This approach
maintains global consistency while incorporating diverse and high-quality spatiotemporal details from local videos, enhancing both the consistency and fidelity
of long video generation. We evaluated FreeLong on multiple base video diffusion
models and observed significant improvements. Additionally, our method supports
coherent multi-prompt generation, ensuring both visual coherence and seamless
transitions between scenes. Our project page is at: https://yulu.net.cn/freelong.

1

Introduction

Video diffusion models [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] trained on vast video-text datasets [8, 9] have demonstrated
impressive capabilities in generating high-quality videos. Inspired by Sora [10], multiple studies [11,
12, 13] have concentrated on training these models to create longer videos using extensive, long
video-text datasets [14, 15, 16, 17, 18]. However, these methods demand significant computational
resources and data annotations.
A more practical approach involves adapting pre-trained short video models to generate consistent
longer video sequences without retraining. Recent research [19, 20] has explored sliding window
temporal attention to ensure smooth transitions between video clips in the generation of long videos.
Nonetheless, these techniques often struggle to maintain global temporal consistency across extended
sequences and require multiple passes of temporal attention.
In this study, we propose a simple, training-free method to adapt existing short video diffusion models
(e.g., pretrained on 16 frames) for generating consistent long videos (e.g., 128 frames). Initially,
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024)

