Nuclear Fusion Diamond Polishing Dataset

Antonios Alexos1 Junze Liu1 Shashank Galla2 Sean Hayes3
Kshitij Bhardwaj3 Alexander Schwartz3 Monika Biener3
Pierre Baldi1 Satish Bukkapatnam2 Suhas Bhandarkar3
1
University of California, Irvine
2
Texas A&M University
3
Lawrence Livermore National Lab

Abstract
In the Inertial Confinement Fusion (ICF) process, roughly a 2mm spherical shell
made of high-density carbon is used as a target for laser beams, which compress
and heat it to energy levels needed for high fusion yield in nuclear fusion. These
shells are polished meticulously to meet the standards for a fusion shot. However,
the polishing of these shells involves multiple stages, with each stage taking several
hours. To make sure that the polishing process is advancing in the right direction,
we are able to measure the shell surface roughness. This measurement, however,
is very labor-intensive, time-consuming, and requires a human operator. To help
improve the polishing process we have released the first dataset to the public
that consists of raw vibration signals with the corresponding polishing surface
roughness changes. We show that this dataset can be used with a variety of
neural network based methods for prediction of the change of polishing surface
roughness, hence eliminating the need for the time-consuming manual process.
This is the first dataset of its kind to be released in public and its use will allow the
operator to make any necessary changes to the ICF polishing process for optimal
results. This dataset contains the raw vibration data of multiple polishing runs
with their extracted statistical features and the corresponding surface roughness
values. Additionally, to generalize the prediction models to different polishing
conditions, we also apply domain adaptation techniques to improve prediction
accuracy for conditions unseen by the trained model. The dataset is available in
https://junzeliu.github.io/Diamond-Polishing-Dataset/.

1

Introduction

In the wake of significant breakthroughs in achieving ignition as highlighted by [Abu-Shawareb et al.,
2024, Moses, 2010], the Inertial Confinement Fusion (ICF) program at the National Ignition Facility
(NIF) has shifted its focus towards establishing a viable, high yield fusion platform. The series of
successful experiments, achieving gains greater than one subsequent to the initial demonstration of
ignition, signal the onset of a robust research phase. This advancement underscores the importance
of enhancing the energy output, which not only facilitates exploration within the realms of high
energy density physics previously beyond reach but also lays down the foundational principles for
conceptualizing high gain (significantly greater than 10) strategies essential for the efficacious harness
of energy through nuclear fusion.
Achieving an optimized laser energy output from the apparatus at the NIF is crucial for the amelioration of net energy yield from the experiments conducted therein. This necessitates continuous
improvements in both the design and manufacturing technology of the targets – the experimental
entities subjected to laser irradiation for fusion. The construction quality of these ICF targets, which
involves complex assemblies of numerous precision-engineered components, is imperative for ensur38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

