Imprecise Label Learning: A Unified Framework for
Learning with Various Imprecise Label Configurations
Hao Chen1∗, Ankit Shah1 , Jindong Wang2 , Ran Tao1 , Yidong Wang3 , Xiang Li1 ,
Xing Xie2 , Masashi Sugiyama4,5 , Rita Singh1 , Bhiksha Raj1,6
1

Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Microsoft Research,3 Peking University,
4
RIKEN AIP, 5 The University of Tokyo, 6 MBZUAI

Abstract
Learning with reduced labeling standards, such as noisy label, partial label, and
supplementary unlabeled data, which we generically refer to as imprecise label,
is a commonplace challenge in machine learning tasks. Previous methods tend
to propose specific designs for every emerging imprecise label configuration,
which is usually unsustainable when multiple configurations of imprecision coexist. In this paper, we introduce imprecise label learning (ILL), a framework
for the unification of learning with various imprecise label configurations. ILL
leverages expectation-maximization (EM) for modeling the imprecise label information, treating the precise labels as latent variables. Instead of approximating
the correct labels for training, it considers the entire distribution of all possible
labeling entailed by the imprecise information. We demonstrate that ILL can
seamlessly adapt to partial label learning, semi-supervised learning, noisy label
learning, and, more importantly, a mixture of these settings, with closed-form
learning objectives derived from the unified EM modeling. Notably, ILL surpasses
the existing specified techniques for handling imprecise labels, marking the first
practical and unified framework with robust and effective performance across
various challenging settings. We hope our work will inspire further research on
this topic, unleashing the full potential of ILL in wider scenarios where precise
labels are expensive and complicated to obtain. Code is available at: https:
//github.com/Hhhhhhao/General-Framework-Weak-Supervision.

1

Introduction

One of the critical challenges in machine learning is the collection of annotated data for model
training [1–6]. Ideally, every data instance would be fully annotated with precise labels. However,
collecting such data can be expensive, time-consuming, and error-prone. Often, the labels can be
intrinsically difficult to ascertain precisely. Factors such as a lack of annotator expertise and privacy
concerns can also negatively affect the quality and completeness of the annotations.
In an attempt to circumvent this limitation, several methods have been proposed to permit model
learning from the data annotated with reduced labeling standards, which are generally easier to
obtain. We will refer to such labels as imprecise. Fig. 1 illustrates some typical mechanisms of label
imprecision that are commonly addressed in the literature. Label imprecision requires a modification
of the standard supervised training mechanism to build models for each specific case. For instance,
partial label learning (PLL) [7–13] allows instances to have a set of candidate labels, instead of a
single definitive one. Semi-supervised Learning (SSL) [14–23] seeks to enhance the generalization
ability when only a small set of labeled data is available, supplemented by a larger unlabeled set.
∗

haoc3@andrew.cmu.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

