Uni-Med: A Unified Medical Generalist Foundation
Model For Multi-Task Learning Via Connector-MoE

Xun Zhu1 Ying Hu1 Fanbin Mo2 Miao Li1, ✉ Ji Wu1, 3, 4
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 3 College of AI, Tsinghua University
4
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
{zhu-x24, yinghu_yh}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
mofanbin@bupt.edu.cn
{miao-li, wuji_ee}@tsinghua.edu.cn
✉ corresponding author

Abstract
Multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) have shown impressive capabilities
as a general-purpose interface for various visual and linguistic tasks. However,
building a unified MLLM for multi-task learning in the medical field remains
a thorny challenge. To mitigate the tug-of-war problem of multi-modal multitask optimization in MLLMs, recent advances primarily focus on improving the
LLM components, while neglecting the connector that bridges the gap between
modalities. In this paper, we introduce Uni-Med, a novel medical generalist foundation model which consists of a universal visual feature extraction module, a
connector mixture-of-experts (CMoE) module, and an LLM. Benefiting from the
proposed CMoE that leverages a well-designed router with a mixture of projection
experts at the connector, Uni-Med achieves efficient solution to the tug-of-war
problem and can perform six different medical tasks including question answering,
visual question answering, report generation, referring expression comprehension,
referring expression generation and image classification. To the best of our knowledge, Uni-Med is the first effort to tackle multi-task interference at the connector
in MLLMs. Extensive ablation experiments validate the effectiveness of introducing CMoE under any configuration, with up to an average 8% performance
gains. We further provide interpretation analysis of the tug-of-war problem from
the perspective of gradient optimization and parameter statistics. Compared to
previous state-of-the-art medical MLLMs, Uni-Med achieves competitive or superior evaluation metrics on diverse tasks. Code and resources are available at
https://github.com/MSIIP/Uni-Med.

1

Introduction

Driven by the growth of datasets, the increase in model size, and advances in generative language
foundation models [Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023], multi-modal large language models
(MLLMs) now offer unprecedented abilities as general-purpose interfaces. These advancements are
spurring innovation across various visual and linguistic tasks [Chen et al., 2023a; Lyu et al., 2023;
Su et al., 2023]. While significant strides have been made in building a unified foundation model
for natural scenery [Chen et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2022, 2023], the development of generalist medical
artificial intelligence is still in its early stages [Moor et al., 2023a].
The goal of a unified and generalist medical foundation model is to enable joint training on massive
medical datasets. This model aims to handle multiple tasks and modalities within a single architecture
with shared parameters [Zhang et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024]. It seeks to eliminate the need for
task-specific modules and further fine-tuning, thereby revolutionizing the traditional task-specific
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

