DynaMITE-RL: A Dynamic Model for
Improved Temporal Meta-Reinforcement Learning

Anthony Liang
University of Southern California
aliang80@usc.edu
Chih-Wei Hsu
Google Research
cwhsu@google.com

Yinlam Chow
Google Deepmind
yinlamchow@google.com

Guy Tennenholtz
Google Research
guytenn@google.com
Erdem Biyik
University of Southern California
erdem.biyik@usc.edu

Craig Boutilier
Google Research
cboutilier@google.com

Abstract
We introduce DynaMITE-RL, a meta-reinforcement learning (meta-RL) approach
to approximate inference in environments where the latent state evolves at varying
rates. We model episode sessions—parts of the episode where the latent state
is fixed—and propose three key modifications to existing meta-RL methods: (i)
consistency of latent information within sessions, (ii) session masking, and (iii)
prior latent conditioning. We demonstrate the importance of these modifications
in various domains, ranging from discrete Gridworld environments to continuouscontrol and simulated robot assistive tasks, illustrating the efficacy of DynaMITERL over state-of-the-art baselines in both online and offline RL settings.

1

Introduction

Markov decision processes (MDPs) [4] provide a general framework in reinforcement learning (RL),
and can be used to model sequential decision problems in a variety of domains, e.g., recommender
systems (RSs), robot and autonomous vehicle control, and healthcare [22, 21, 7, 46, 31, 5]. MDPs
assume a static environment with fixed transition probabilities and rewards [3]. In many real-world
systems, however, the dynamics of the environment are intrinsically tied to latent factors subject to
temporal variation. While nonstationary MDPs are special instances of partially observable MDPs
(POMDPs) [24], in many applications these latent variables change infrequently, i.e. the latent
variable remains fixed for some duration before changing. One class of problems exhibiting this latent
transition structure is recommender systems, where a user’s preferences are a latent variable which
gradually evolves over time [23, 26]. For instance, a user may initially have a strong affinity for a
particular genre (e.g., action movies), but their viewing habits could change over time, influenced by
external factors such as trending movies, mood, etc. A robust system should adapt to these evolving
tastes to provide suitable recommendations. Another example is in manufacturing settings, where
industrial robots may experience unobserved gradual deterioration of their mechanical components
affecting the overall functionality of the system. Accurately modelling such latent transitions caused
by hardware degradation can help manufacturers optimize performance, cost, and equipment lifespan.
Our goal in this work is to leverage such a temporal structure to obviate the need to solve a fully general
POMDP. To this end, we propose Dynamic Model for Improved Temporal Meta Reinforcement
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

