A Phase Transition between Positional and Semantic
Learning in a Solvable Model of Dot-Product Attention

Hugo Cui
Statistical Physics of Computation laboratory
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland

Freya Behrens
Statistical Physics of Computation laboratory
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland

Florent Krzakala
Information, Learning and Physics laboratory
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland

Lenka Zdeborová
Statistical Physics of Computation laboratory
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland

Abstract
Many empirical studies have provided evidence for the emergence of algorithmic
mechanisms (abilities) in the learning of language models, that lead to qualitative
improvements of the model capabilities. Yet, a theoretical characterization of how
such mechanisms emerge remains elusive. In this paper, we take a step in this
direction by providing a tight theoretical analysis of the emergence of semantic
attention in a solvable model of dot-product attention. More precisely, we consider
a non-linear self-attention layer with trainable tied and low-rank query and key
matrices. In the asymptotic limit of high-dimensional data and a comparably large
number of training samples we provide a tight closed-form characterization of
the global minimum of the non-convex empirical loss landscape. We show that
this minimum corresponds to either a positional attention mechanism (with tokens
attending to each other based on their respective positions) or a semantic attention
mechanism (with tokens attending to each other based on their meaning), and
evidence an emergent phase transition from the former to the latter with increasing
sample complexity. Finally, we compare the dot-product attention layer to a linear
positional baseline, and show that it outperforms the latter using the semantic
mechanism provided it has access to sufficient data.

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen an upheaval in our ability to learn and implement complex tasks from textual
data. Instrumental in these advances is the use of self-attention layers [1], which provide an efficient
method of extracting information from sentences – both the information encoded in the ordering
(i.e. positions) of the words, and that encoded in the meaning (i.e. semantics) of the words. In
theory, attention layers can learn to leverage both types of information, by having tokens attend
to each other based on their respective positions (a mechanism called positional attention in [2])
and/or respective meanings (henceforth referred to as semantic attention). In this paper, we aim at a
theoretical understanding of the emergence of these different mechanisms in attention layers, and the
transitions therebetween.
Many empirical studies have provided evidence for the emergence of specific algorithmic mechanisms
(abilities) in the learning of language models that lead to qualitative improvements of the model
capabilities [3, 4, 5]. By reverse-engineering trained models into human-interpretable components [6,
7, 8] a growing body of work on mechanistic interpretability aims to empirically understand which
precise algorithmic mechanisms a neural network learns. Such investigations have demonstrated
that attention layers are able to implement a wide range of different algorithms, even for the same
task, using both positional and semantic attributes of the inputs. We offer a particularly simple
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

