IQA-E VAL: Automatic Evaluation of Human-Model
Interactive Question Answering

Ruosen Li1 , Ruochen Li1 , Barry Wang∗ 2 , and Xinya Du1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Dallas
Department of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
1
{ruosen.li, ruochen.li, xinya.du}@utdallas.edu
2
barryw@cs.cmu.edu
2

Abstract
To evaluate Large Language Models (LLMs) for question answering (QA), traditional methods typically focus on assessing single-turn responses to given questions.
However, this approach doesn’t capture the dynamic nature of human-AI interactions, where humans actively seek information through conversation.2 . Recent
works in human-computer interaction (HCI) have employed human evaluators to
conduct interactions and evaluations, but they are often prohibitively expensive
and time-consuming to scale. We introduce an automatic evaluation framework
IQA-E VAL to achieve Interactive Question Answering Evaluations3 , more specifically, we introduce a LLM-based Evaluation Agent (LEA) that can: (1) simulate
human behaviors to generate interactions with IQA models; (2) automatically
evaluate the generated interactions. Moreover, we propose assigning personas to
LEAs to better simulate groups of real human evaluators. We show that: (1) our
evaluation framework with GPT-4 (or Claude) as the backbone model achieves a
high correlation with human evaluations on the IQA task; (2) assigning personas
to LEA to better represent the crowd further significantly improves correlations.
Finally, we use our automatic metric to evaluate five recent representative LLMs
with over 1000 questions from complex and ambiguous question answering tasks,
which comes with a substantial cost of $5k if evaluated by humans.

1

Introduction

The advent of Large Language Models (LLMs) has significantly advanced the field of natural language
processing (NLP), enabling systems to perform a wide range of tasks with remarkable proficiency
[Zhao et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2022a; Yang et al., 2024; Du, 2024b; Jing et al., 2024]. Among these
tasks, question answering (QA) has emerged as a critical and representative goal-oriented application,
demonstrating the potential of LLMs to generate informative responses as an assistant [Biancofiore
et al., 2024]. Multiple methods have been proposed to enhance the faithfulness and explainability
of generated information [Wei et al., 2022b; Long, 2023; Li and Du, 2023; Du, 2024a]. Beyond
developing these methods, rigorous evaluation of the generated outputs is also crucial.
Accurate and consistent evaluation helps researchers understand existing LLM’s capacities and
emerging human-LLM QA interactions [Chang et al., 2023; Lin and Chen, 2023; Chang et al., 2023].
Traditionally, automatic metrics such as accuracy have been used to evaluate models based on the
∗

Work done while at the Department of Computer Science, Cornell University.
Details are in Appendix F
3
https://github.com/du-nlp-lab/IQA-Eval
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

