Can Large Language Models Analyze Graphs like
Professionals? A Benchmark, Datasets and Models

Xin Li1∗, Weize Chen2∗ , Qizhi Chu1 , Haopeng Li3 , Zhaojun Sun3 , Ran Li2 , Chen Qian2
Yiwei Wei4 , Zhiyuan Liu2,5 , Chuan Shi1 , Maosong Sun2,5 , Cheng Yang1†
1

School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University,
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
4
College of Petroleum Engineering, China University of Petroleum (Beijing) at Karamay,
5
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University
lixin4sky@bupt.edu.cn, chenwz21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,

yangcheng@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
The need to analyze graphs is ubiquitous across various fields, from social networks to biological research and recommendation systems. Therefore, enabling
the ability of large language models (LLMs) to process graphs is an important step
toward more advanced general intelligence. However, current LLM benchmarks on
graph analysis require models to directly reason over the prompts describing graph
topology, and are thus limited to small graphs with only a few dozens of nodes. In
contrast, human experts typically write programs based on popular libraries for task
solving, and can thus handle graphs with different scales. To this end, a question
naturally arises: can LLMs analyze graphs like professionals? In this paper, we
introduce ProGraph, a manually crafted benchmark containing 3 categories of
graph tasks. The benchmark expects solutions based on programming instead of
directly reasoning over raw inputs. Our findings reveal that the performance of
current LLMs is unsatisfactory, with the best model achieving only 36% accuracy.
To bridge this gap, we propose LLM4Graph datasets, which include crawled documents and auto-generated codes based on 6 widely used graph libraries. By augmenting closed-source LLMs with document retrieval and fine-tuning open-source
ones on the codes, we show 11-32% absolute improvements in their accuracies. Our
results underscore that the capabilities of LLMs in handling structured data are still
under-explored, and show the effectiveness of LLM4Graph in enhancing LLMs’
proficiency of graph analysis. The benchmark, datasets and enhanced open-source
models are available at https://github.com/BUPT-GAMMA/ProGraph.

1

Introduction

Background. Large language models (LLMs) [6, 52, 3] are parameter-rich neural networks trained
on a vast amount of text data to understand and generate human language. LLMs can not only handle
classical natural language processing tasks like translation, but also benefit task solving in various
domains such as code generation [41], logical reasoning [39], and mathematical calculation [43].
Previous LLM Benchmarks for Graph Analysis. Recently, many researchers have proposed
extending LLMs to scenarios that require graph understanding and analysis [25, 48]. As graph is
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

