LG-VQ: Language-Guided Codebook Learning

Guotao Liang1,2 , Baoquan Zhang∗ 1 , Yaowei Wang2 , Xutao Li1 , Yunming Ye1 , Huaibin Wang1
Chuyao Luo1 , Kola Ye3 , Linfeng Luo3
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, 3 SiFar Company
{lianggt, wangyw}@pcl.ac.cn
{23B951062, 22S051022}@stu.hit.edu.cn
{baoquanzhang, lixutao, yeyunming}@hit.edu.cn
{luochuyao.dalian, kolaygm, llf10811020205}@gmail.com

Abstract
Vector quantization (VQ) is a key technique in high-resolution and high-fidelity
image synthesis, which aims to learn a codebook to encode an image with a
sequence of discrete codes and then generate an image in an auto-regression manner.
Although existing methods have shown superior performance, most methods prefer
to learn a single-modal codebook (e.g., image), resulting in suboptimal performance
when the codebook is applied to multi-modal downstream tasks (e.g., text-toimage, image captioning) due to the existence of modal gaps. In this paper, we
propose a novel language-guided codebook learning framework, called LG-VQ,
which aims to learn a codebook that can be aligned with the text to improve the
performance of multi-modal downstream tasks. Specifically, we first introduce
pre-trained text semantics as prior knowledge, then design two novel alignment
modules (i.e., Semantic Alignment Module, and Relationship Alignment Module)
to transfer such prior knowledge into codes for achieving codebook text alignment.
In particular, our LG-VQ method is model-agnostic, which can be easily integrated
into existing VQ models. Experimental results show that our method achieves
superior performance on reconstruction and various multi-modal downstream tasks.

1

Introduction

In recent years, with the growing development of various multi-modal task scenarios [37, 36, 38],
unified modeling of visuals and language has sparked considerable interest. Vector Quantization
(VQ)-based image modeling technique, exemplified by VQ-VAE [43] and VQ-GAN [9], has emerged
as a pivotal approach in the realm of unified modeling. The VQ methodology [43] typically follows
a two-stage generation paradigm. In the initial stage, a trainable discrete codebook is employed to
quantize continuous image features into a discrete token sequence to finish the reconstruction task.
Subsequently, the codebook is utilized for various downstream tasks by generative models [42, 37].
Learning a robust codebook during the initial stage is crucial for optimizing performance in downstream tasks. At present, lots of VQ methods have been proposed to achieve robust code representation [15, 14, 7, 12]. For instance, VQ-GAN [9] introduces an adversarial training loss to learn a
perceptually rich codebook. Some other works consider improving the codebook representation from
the perspective of addressing the problem of codebook collapse [53, 52].
Although existing methods have shown superior performance, most methods only focus on learning a
single-modal codebook contains more low-level information (e.g., image’s pixel, edge, and texture),
resulting in suboptimal performance when the codebook is applied to multi-modal downstream tasks
∗

Corresponding Authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

