Learning to Decouple the Lights for 3D Face Texture
Modeling

Tianxin Huang1
Zhenyu Zhang2
Ying Tai2
Gim Hee Lee1
1
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
2
Nanjing University
huangtx@nus.edu.sg, gimhee.lee@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Existing research has made impressive strides in reconstructing human facial
shapes and textures from images with well-illuminated faces and minimal external
occlusions. Nevertheless, it remains challenging to recover accurate facial textures
from scenarios with complicated illumination affected by external occlusions, e.g.
a face that is partially obscured by items such as a hat. Existing works based on
the assumption of single and uniform illumination cannot correctly process these
data. In this work, we introduce a novel approach to model 3D facial textures
under such unnatural illumination. Instead of assuming single illumination, our
framework learns to imitate the unnatural illumination as a composition of multiple
separate light conditions combined with learned neural representations, named
Light Decoupling. According to experiments on both single images and video
sequences, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in modeling facial
textures under challenging illumination affected by occlusions. Our codes would
be open sourced at https://github.com/Tianxinhuang/DeFace.git.

1

Introduction

Recently, 3D face reconstruction has made significant progress [4, 12, 13, 2, 30, 22] with the rapid
development of digital human and meta-universe technologies. These techniques have become
increasingly proficient in recovering details of face shapes and textures from single images or video
sequences. Their performances have been particularly commendable on well-illuminated faces.
Despite the advancements, the real world presents more complex scenarios. As shown in the blue and
red rectangled regions of input images in Fig. 1, self occlusions from facial parts such as the nose,
or external occlusions such as hats or hairs introduce illumination changes and produce shadows
in certain regions. Although recent works [16, 2, 21, 23, 22] replace the linear models [6, 4] with
non-linear GAN-inversion-based textured models to greatly enhance the quality of textures and
complete occluded facial areas, they still rely on the assumption that the environment illumination
is single and uniform. As the illumination affected by self and external occlusions is unnatural, it
may deviate drastically from the single and uniform illumination assumption, which would bring
unexpected influence to the textures modelled with existing methods.
As shown in Fig. 1-a, methods [16, 10, 2] based on the diffuse-only texture and mesh render [10]
bake both shadows caused by self occlusion of the nose and external occlusion of the hat onto the
texture, where the re-rendered output also appears unrealistic and lacks authenticity. Recent works
proposed by Dib et al. [12, 13, 11] combine local reflectance texture model incorporating diffuse,
specular, and roughness albedos with ray-tracing render [26] to implicitly model influence of the self
occlusion. As shown in Fig. 1-b, these methods can create more realistic rendered output and avoid
the shadows of self occlusion on the recovered texture in the blue rectangle, while the influence from
external occlusion in the red rectangle remains unresolved.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

