Graph Edit Distance with General Costs
Using Neural Set Divergence

Eeshaan Jain∗† Indradyumna Roy∗‡
Saswat Meher‡ Soumen Chakrabarti‡ Abir De‡
†
EPFL ‡ IIT Bombay
eeshaan.jain@epfl.ch
{saswatmeher,soumen,indraroy15,abir}@cse.iitb.ac.in

Abstract
Graph Edit Distance (GED) measures the (dis-)similarity between two given graphs,
in terms of the minimum-cost edit sequence that transforms one graph to the
other. However, the exact computation of GED is NP-Hard, which has recently
motivated the design of neural methods for GED estimation. However, they do not
explicitly account for edit operations with different costs. In response, we propose
G RAPH E D X, a neural GED estimator that can work with general costs specified
for the four edit operations, viz., edge deletion, edge addition, node deletion and
node addition. We first present GED as a quadratic assignment problem (QAP)
that incorporates these four costs. Then, we represent each graph as a set of node
and edge embeddings and use them to design a family of neural set divergence
surrogates. We replace the QAP terms corresponding to each operation with their
surrogates. Computing such neural set divergence require aligning nodes and
edges of the two graphs. We learn these alignments using a Gumbel-Sinkhorn
permutation generator, additionally ensuring that the node and edge alignments
are consistent with each other. Moreover, these alignments are cognizant of both
the presence and absence of edges between node-pairs. Experiments on several
datasets, under a variety of edit cost settings, show that G RAPH E D X consistently
outperforms state-of-the-art methods and heuristics in terms of prediction error.
The code is available at https://github.com/structlearning/GraphEdX.

1

Introduction

The Graph Edit Distance (GED) between a source graph, G, and a target graph, G′ , quantifies the
minimum cost required to transform G into a graph isomorphic to G′ . This transformation involves a
sequence of edit operations, which can include node and edge insertions, deletions and substitutions.
Each type of edit operation may incur a different and distinctive cost, allowing the GED framework
to incorporate domain-specific knowledge. Its flexibility has led to the widespread use of GED for
comparing graphs across diverse applications including graph retrieval [5, 6], pattern recognition [47],
image and video indexing [51, 49] and chemoinformatics [21]. Because costs for addition and deletion
may differ, GED is not necessarily symmetric, i.e., GED(G, G′ ) ̸= GED(G′ , G). This flexibility
allows GED to model a variety of graph comparison scenarios, such as finding the Maximum
Common Subgraph [43] and checking for Subgraph Isomorphism [13]. In general, it is hard to
even approximate GED [32]. Recent work [5, 6, 19, 56, 39] has leveraged graph neural networks
(GNNs) to build neural models for GED computation, but many of these approaches cannot account
for edit operations with different costs. Moreover, several approaches [40, 31, 56, 6] cast GED as
the Euclidean distance between graph embeddings, leading to models that are overly attuned to
cost-invariant edit sequences.
* Equal contribution. Eeshaan Jain did this work while at IIT Bombay.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

