SeeA∗: Efficient Exploration-Enhanced A∗ Search by
Selective Sampling

1

Dengwei Zhao1 , Shikui Tu1∗, Lei Xu1,2∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Guangdong Institute of Intelligence Science and Technology
{zdwccc, tushikui, leixu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS) and reinforcement learning contributed crucially
to the success of AlphaGo and AlphaZero, and A∗ is a tree search algorithm
among the most well-known ones in the classical AI literature. MCTS and A∗
both perform heuristic search and are mutually beneficial. Efforts have been made
to the renaissance of A∗ from three possible aspects, two of which have been
confirmed by studies in recent years, while the third is about the OPEN list that
consists of open nodes of A∗ search, but still lacks deep investigation. This paper
aims at the third, i.e., developing the Sampling-exploration enhanced A∗ (SeeA∗ )
search by constructing a dynamic subset of OPEN through a selective sampling
process, such that the node with the best heuristic value in this subset instead
of in the OPEN is expanded. Nodes with the best heuristic values in OPEN are
most probably picked into this subset, but sometimes may not be included, which
enables SeeA∗ to explore other promising branches. Three sampling techniques
are presented for comparative investigations. Moreover, under the assumption
about the distribution of prediction errors, we have theoretically shown the superior
efficiency of SeeA∗ over A∗ search, particularly when the accuracy of the guiding
heuristic function is insufficient. Experimental results on retrosynthetic planning
in organic chemistry, logic synthesis in integrated circuit design, and the classical
Sokoban game empirically demonstrate the efficiency of SeeA∗ , in comparison
with the state-of-the-art heuristic search algorithms.

1

Introduction

In recent years, combining heuristic search algorithms with deep neural networks has demonstrated
remarkable performance across a wide range of practical applications, such as board games [48, 50,
49, 66], video games [46, 64, 67], traveling salesman problem [8, 59], de novo drug design [42],
retrosynthetic planning [6, 47, 68], logic synthesis [9], and so on. The search algorithm is a slow
reasoning process, and heuristic functions serve as counselors to narrow down the search space [2].
Therefore, the effectiveness of search algorithms is significantly influenced by the quality of the
guiding functions.
Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS) is a widely-used, effective algorithm for combinatorial problems.
However, if the backup value in MCTS is provided by a heuristic estimator rather than actual
rewards, the convergence to the true state value is not guaranteed, leading to compromised search
performance. In single-agent problems such as combinatorial puzzles, neural-guided MCTS tends
to have a relatively long runtime and often generates solutions that are considerably longer than the
shortest path [1].
∗

Correspondence authors are Shikui Tu and Lei Xu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

