M3LEO: A Multi-Modal, Multi-Label Earth
Observation Dataset Integrating Interferometric SAR
and Multispectral Data

Matt Allen
University of Cambridge, UK
mja78@cam.ac.uk

Francisco Dorr
Independent, Argentina
fran.dorr@gmail.com

Laura Martínez-Ferrer
Universitat de València, Spain
laura.martinez-ferrer@uv.es

Joseph A. Gallego-Mejia
Drexel University, USA
jagallegom@unal.edu.co

Anna Jungbluth
European Space Agency, Climate Office, UK
anna.jungbluth@esa.int

Freddie Kalaitzis
University of Oxford, UK
freddie.kalaitzis@cs.ox.ac.uk

Raúl Ramos-Pollán
Universidad de Antioquia, Colombia
raul.ramos@udea.edu.co

Abstract
Satellite-based remote sensing has revolutionised the way we address global challenges in a rapidly evolving world. Huge quantities of Earth Observation (EO)
data are generated by satellite sensors daily, but processing these large datasets
for use in ML pipelines is technically and computationally challenging. Specifically, different types of EO data are often hosted on a variety of platforms, with
differing degrees of availability for Python preprocessing tools. In addition, spatial alignment across data sources and data tiling for easier handling can present
significant technical hurdles for novice users. While some preprocessed Earth
observation datasets exist, their content is often limited to optical or near-optical
wavelength data, which is ineffective at night or in adverse weather conditions.
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR), an active sensing technique based on microwave
length radiation, offers a viable alternative. However, the application of machine
learning to SAR has been limited due to a lack of ML-ready data and pipelines,
particularly for the full diversity of SAR data, including polarimetry, coherence
and interferometry. In this work, we introduce M3LEO, a multi-modal, multi-label
Earth observation dataset that includes polarimetric, interferometric, and coherence
SAR data derived from Sentinel-1, alongside multispectral Sentinel-2 imagery and
a suite of auxiliary data describing terrain properties such as land use. M3LEO
spans approximately 17M data chips, each measuring 4x4 km, across six diverse
geographic regions. The dataset is complemented by a flexible PyTorch Lightning
framework, with configuration management using Hydra, to accommodate its use
across diverse ML applications in Earth observation. Additionally, we provide tools
to process any dataset available on popular platforms such as Google Earth Engine
for seamless integration with our framework. We show that the distribution shift in
self-supervised embeddings is substantial across geographic regions, even when
controlling for terrain properties. Data is available at huggingface.co/M3LEO,
and code at github.com/spaceml-org/M3LEO.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

