On Neural Networks as Infinite Tree-Structured
Probabilistic Graphical Models

Boyao Li∗
Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics
Duke University
boyao.li@duke.edu
Houssam Nassif
Meta Inc.
houssamn@meta.com

Alexander J. Thomson∗
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
alexander.thomson@duke.edu

Matthew M. Engelhard†
Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics
Duke University
m.engelhard@duke.edu

David Page†
Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics
Duke University
david.page@duke.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) lack the precise semantics and definitive probabilistic interpretation of probabilistic graphical models (PGMs). In this paper, we
propose an innovative solution by constructing infinite tree-structured PGMs that
correspond exactly to neural networks. Our research reveals that DNNs, during
forward propagation, indeed perform approximations of PGM inference that are
precise in this alternative PGM structure. Not only does our research complement
existing studies that describe neural networks as kernel machines or infinite-sized
Gaussian processes, it also elucidates a more direct approximation that DNNs make
to exact inference in PGMs. Potential benefits include improved pedagogy and
interpretation of DNNs, and algorithms that can merge the strengths of PGMs and
DNNs.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs), including large language models, offer state-of-the-art performance
on many tasks, but they are difficult to interpret due to their complex structure, large number of
latent variables, and the presence of nonlinear activation functions [Buhrmester et al., 2021]. To
gain a precise statistical interpretation for DNNs, much progress has been made in linking them to
probabilistic graphical models (PGMs). Variational autoencoders (VAEs) [Kingma and Welling, 2014]
are an early example; more recent examples include probabilistic dependency graphs [Richardson,
2022] as well as work that relates recurrent neural networks (RNNs) with hidden Markov models
(HMMs) [Choe et al., 2017] and convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with Gaussian processes
(GPs) [Garriga-Alonso et al., 2018]. When such a connection is possible, potential benefits include:
∗
†

Boyao Li and Alexander J. Thomson contributed equally to this work.
Matthew M. Engelhard and David Page jointly supervised this work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

