InterDreamer: Zero-Shot Text to 3D Dynamic
Human-Object Interaction

Sirui Xu†

Ziyin Wang† Yu-Xiong Wang‡ Liang-Yan Gui‡
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
†
Equal Contribution ‡ Equal Advising

{siruixu2, ziyin, yxw, lgui}@illinois.edu

https://sirui-xu.github.io/InterDreamer/

Abstract
Text-conditioned human motion generation has experienced significant advancements with diffusion models trained on extensive motion capture data and corresponding textual annotations. However, extending such success to 3D dynamic
human-object interaction (HOI) generation faces notable challenges, primarily due
to the lack of large-scale interaction data and comprehensive descriptions that align
with these interactions. This paper takes the initiative and showcases the potential
of generating human-object interactions without direct training on text-interaction
pair data. Our key insight in achieving this is that interaction semantics and dynamics can be decoupled. Being unable to learn interaction semantics through
supervised training, we instead leverage pre-trained large models, synergizing
knowledge from a large language model and a text-to-motion model. While such
knowledge offers high-level control over interaction semantics, it cannot grasp the
intricacies of low-level interaction dynamics. To overcome this issue, we introduce
a world model designed to comprehend simple physics, modeling how human
actions influence object motion. By integrating these components, our novel framework, InterDreamer, is able to generate text-aligned 3D HOI sequences without
relying on paired text-interaction data. We apply InterDreamer to the BEHAVE,
OMOMO, and CHAIRS datasets, and our comprehensive experimental analysis
demonstrates its capability to generate realistic and coherent interaction sequences
that seamlessly align with the text directives.

1

Introduction

Text-guided human motion generation has made unprecedented progress through advancements in
diffusion models [41, 105, 106, 131], leading to synthesis outcomes that are realistic, diverse, and
controllable. This progress has ignited an increased interest in exploring expanded tasks related to textguided human interaction generation, such as social interaction [69] and human-scene interaction [44].
However, many of these explorations are limited in that the dynamics of objects is not involved or
text-guided. Aiming to bridge such a gap, this paper tackles a more challenging task – generating
versatile 3D human-object interactions (HOIs) through language guidance, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Although a direct solution, as suggested by the concurrent work [28, 65, 91, 107, 136, 140], would
be replicating the success observed in human motion generation and adopting a similar supervised
approach for learning text-driven HOIs, it is not scalable. As can be observed, generating social or
scene interactions is heavily dependent on extensive collections of text-interaction pair data [34, 69,
83, 130], and scaling these methods to address more complex HOIs outlined in our study could require
datasets of comparable magnitude. Achieving this goal appears unattainable by merely annotating
existing 3D HOI datasets [7, 30, 45, 47, 53, 66, 169, 170, 177, 180], which are relatively limited in
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

