ChaosBench: A Multi-Channel, Physics-Based
Benchmark for Subseasonal-to-Seasonal Climate
Prediction
Juan Nathaniel1,* , Yongquan Qu1 , Tung Nguyen2 , Sungduk Yu3,5 , Julius Busecke1,4 ,
Aditya Grover2 , Pierre Gentine1
1
Columbia University, 2 UCLA, 3 UCI, 4 LDEO, 5 Intel Labs

Abstract
Accurate prediction of climate in the subseasonal-to-seasonal scale is crucial for
disaster preparedness and robust decision making amidst climate change. Yet,
forecasting beyond the weather timescale is challenging because it deals with
problems other than initial condition, including boundary interaction, butterfly
effect, and our inherent lack of physical understanding. At present, existing
benchmarks tend to have shorter forecasting range of up-to 15 days, do not include
a wide range of operational baselines, and lack physics-based constraints for
explainability. Thus, we propose ChaosBench, a challenging benchmark to extend
the predictability range of data-driven weather emulators to S2S timescale. First,
ChaosBench is comprised of variables beyond the typical surface-atmospheric
ERA5 to also include ocean, ice, and land reanalysis products that span over 45
years to allow for full Earth system emulation that respects boundary conditions.
We also propose physics-based, in addition to deterministic and probabilistic
metrics, to ensure a physically-consistent ensemble that accounts for butterfly
effect. Furthermore, we evaluate on a diverse set of physics-based forecasts from
four national weather agencies as baselines to our data-driven counterpart such
as ViT/ClimaX, PanguWeather, GraphCast, and FourCastNetV2. Overall, we
find methods originally developed for weather-scale applications fail on S2S task:
their performance simply collapse to an unskilled climatology. Nonetheless, we
outline and demonstrate several strategies that can extend the predictability range of
existing weather emulators, including the use of ensembles, robust control of error
propagation, and the use of physics-informed models. Our benchmark, datasets,
and instructions are available at https://leap-stc.github.io/ChaosBench.

1

Introduction

Although critical for economic planning, disaster preparedness, and policy-making, subseasonal-toseasonal (S2S) prediction is lagging behind the more established field of short/medium-range weather,
or long-range climate predictions. For instance, many natural hazards tend to manifest in the S2S
scale, including the slow-onset of droughts that lead to wildfire [1, 2], heavy precipitations that lead to
flooding [3], and persistent weather anomalies that lead to extremes [4]. So far, current approaches to
weather and climate prediction are heavily reliant on physics-based models in the form of Numerical
Weather Prediction (NWP). Many NWPs are based on the discretization of governing equations that
describe thermodynamics, fluid flows, etc. However, these models are expensive to run especially
in high-resolution setting. For example, there are massive computational overheads to perform
numerical integration at fine spatiotemporal resolutions that are operationally useful [5]. Furthermore,
* Corresponding author: jn2808@columbia.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

