Goal-Conditioned On-Policy Reinforcement Learning

Xudong Gong1,2,†
Dawei Feng1,2,†
Kele Xu1,2,∗
Bo Ding1,2∗ Huaimin Wang1,2
College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software Environment, Changsha, Hunan, China
1

Abstract
Existing Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning (GCRL) algorithms are built
upon Hindsight Experience Replay (HER), which densifies rewards through hindsight replay and leverages historical goal-achieving information to construct a
learning curriculum. However, when the task is characterized by a non-Markovian
reward (NMR), whose computation depends on multiple steps of states and actions,
HER can no longer densify rewards by treating a single encountered state as the
hindsight goal. The lack of informative rewards hinders policy learning, resulting
in rolling out failed trajectories. Consequently, the replay buffer is overwhelmed
with failed trajectories, impeding the establishment of an applicable curriculum.
To circumvent these limitations, we deviate from existing HER-based methods
and propose an on-policy GCRL framework, GCPO, which is applicable to both
multi-goal Markovian reward (MR) and NMR problems. GCPO consists of (1)
Pre-training from Demonstrations, which pre-trains the policy to possess an initial
goal-achieving capability, thereby diminishing the difficulty of subsequent online
learning. (2) Online Self-Curriculum Learning, which first estimates the policy’s
goal-achieving capability based on historical evaluation information and then selects progressively challenging goals for learning based on its current capability.
We evaluate GCPO on a challenging multi-goal long-horizon task: fixed-wing UAV
velocity vector control. Experimental results demonstrate that GCPO is capable of
effectively addressing both multi-goal MR and NMR problems.

1

Introduction

Multi-goal problems are ubiquitous in real-world applications, such as controlling robotic arms to
grasp objects at any location on a table [13, 16], and operating fixed-wing Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
(UAVs) to navigate towards any specified velocity vector [8, 34], etc. To address the challenge of
automatically learning policies capable of achieving and generalizing across a range of diverse goals
[47], Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning (GCRL) [48, 37] has emerged as a prominent area
of research. Serving as a generalization of standard Reinforcement Learning (RL) [61], GCRL learns
goal-conditioned policies [55] through interactions within multi-goal environments [48].
In existing GCRL algorithms, Hindsight Experience Replay (HER) [3] plays a pivotal role in facilitating the learning of goal-conditioned policies. First, HER enhances sample efficiency by replacing
the desired goals of failed trajectories with achieved states, thereby providing more informative
rewards for policy learning [70, 11]. Second, HER contributes to creating a curriculum that enables
the policy to progressively master challenging goals [40, 69, 47]. This process involves fitting the
current policy’s goal-achieving capability with historical goal-achieving information and selecting
goals of appropriate difficulty for the current policy learning. Due to the reliance on replay buffers
[72], current research on GCRL predominantly focuses on off-policy RL approaches [51, 25].
∗

Co-corresponding authors: kelele.xu@gmail.com, dingbo@nudt.edu.cn. † Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

