A Modular Conditional Diffusion Framework for
Image Reconstruction

Magauiya Zhussip∗‡
MTS AI
m.zhussip@mts.ai

Iaroslav Koshelev∗
AI Foundation and Algorithm Lab
ys.koshelev@gmail.com

Stamatis Lefkimmiatis‡
MTS AI
s.lefkimmiatis@mts.ai

Abstract
Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPMs) have been recently utilized to deal
with various blind image restoration (IR) tasks, where they have demonstrated
outstanding performance in terms of perceptual quality. However, the task-specific
nature of existing solutions and the excessive computational costs related to their
training, make such models impractical and challenging to use for different IR
tasks than those that were initially trained for. This hinders their wider adoption,
especially by those who lack access to powerful computational resources and vast
amount of training data. In this work we aim to address the above issues and enable
the successful adoption of DPMs in practical IR-related applications. Towards
this goal, we propose a modular diffusion probabilistic IR framework (DP-IR),
which allows us to combine the performance benefits of existing pre-trained stateof-the-art IR networks and generative DPMs, while it requires only the additional
training of a relatively small module (0.7M params) related to the particular IR
task of interest. Moreover, the architecture of the proposed framework allows for
a sampling strategy that leads to at least four times reduction of neural function
evaluations without suffering any performance loss, while it can also be combined
with existing acceleration techniques such as DDIM. We evaluate our model on four
benchmarks for the tasks of burst JDD-SR, dynamic scene deblurring, and superresolution. Our method outperforms existing approaches in terms of perceptual
quality while it retains a competitive performance with respect to fidelity metrics.

1

Introduction

With the advent of deep learning we have witnessed outstanding results in a wide range of computer
vision tasks [89], including many challenging blind image restoration (IR) problems [84] such as
burst imaging [40], super-resolution (SR) [9], deconvolution [58], etc. The standard approach for
supervised learning in a blind IR setting involves training a feed-forward network that should estimate
the latent image based on the available low-quality measurements. Such models are usually trained
to maximize fidelity metrics like PSNR or SSIM, but the visual quality of the resulting images is
sub-optimal [6]. The inclusion of perceptual losses [30] to the objective can improve the visual
results, but fails to convincingly address the problem.
A promising direction towards IR results of high visual quality is to consider such problems within a
generative framework. Several generative models have been recently proposed including Variational
Autoencoders (VAEs) [33], Generative Adversarial Neural Networks (GANs) [22], Normalizing
Flows (NFs) [16] and Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPMs) [65]. Due to their impressive results
in image generation, they have been further utilized to perform conditional sampling of highquality images, with their low-quality or distorted counterparts playing the role of the conditional
∗
‡

Equal contribution
Work performed while at AI Foundation and Algorithm Lab

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

