Single-Loop Stochastic Algorithms for Difference of
Max-Structured Weakly Convex Functions

Quanqi Hu 1

Qi Qi 2

Zhaosong Lu 3

Tianbao Yang 1

1

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Texas A&M University
2
Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa
3
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of Minnesota
{quanqi-hu, tianbao-yang}@tamu.edu qi-qi@uiowa.edu zhaosong@umn.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study a class of non-smooth non-convex problems in the form of
minx [maxy∈Y ϕ(x, y) − maxz∈Z ψ(x, z)], where both Φ(x) = maxy∈Y ϕ(x, y)
and Ψ(x) = maxz∈Z ψ(x, z) are weakly convex functions, and ϕ(x, y), ψ(x, z)
are strongly concave functions in terms of y and z, respectively. It covers two
families of problems that have been studied but are missing single-loop stochastic
algorithms, i.e., difference of weakly convex functions and weakly convex stronglyconcave min-max problems. We propose a stochastic Moreau envelope approximate
gradient method dubbed SMAG, the first single-loop algorithm for solving these
problems, and provide a state-of-the-art non-asymptotic convergence rate. The key
idea of the design is to compute an approximate gradient of the Moreau envelopes
of Φ, Ψ using only one step of stochastic gradient update of the primal and dual
variables. Empirically, we conduct experiments on positive-unlabeled (PU) learning
and partial area under ROC curve (pAUC) optimization with an adversarial fairness
regularizer to validate the effectiveness of our proposed algorithms.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider a class of non-convex, non-smooth problems in the following form

min F (x) := max ϕ(x, y) − max ψ(x, z) ,
y∈Y

x∈Rdx

z∈Z

(1)

where the sets Y ⊂ Rdy , Z ⊂ Rdz are convex and compact, and the two component functions
ϕ(x, y) and ψ(x, z) are weakly-convex in terms of x and strongly-concave in the terms of y and z,
respectively. Both component functions are in expectation forms, i.e., ϕ(x, y) = Eξ∼Dϕ [ϕ(x, y; ξ)]
and ψ(x, z) = Eζ∼Dψ [ψ(x, z; ζ)]. We refer to this class of problems as the Difference of MaxStructured Weakly Convex Functions (DMax) Optimization. DMax optimization unifies two emerging
families of problems in optimization field, difference-of-weakly-convex (DWC) optimization
min {F (x) := ϕ(x) − ψ(x)},

x∈Rdx

and weakly-convex-strongly-concave (WCSC) min-max optimization

min F (x) := max ϕ(x, y) .
x∈Rdx

y∈Y

(2)

(3)

Thus, DMax optimization has a wide range of applications in machine learning and AI, including applications of DWC optimization (e.g., positive-unlabeled (PU) Learning [39], non-convex
Correspondence to: Tianbao Yang <tianbao-yang@tamu.edu>.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

