Confident Natural Policy Gradient for Local Planning
in qπ -realizable Constrained MDPs

Tian Tian
University of Alberta, Edmonton
ttian@ualberta.ca

Lin F. Yang ∗
University of California, Los Angeles
linyang@ee.ucla.edu

Csaba Szepesvári ∗
University of Alberta, Google DeepMind, Edmonton
szepesva@ualberta.ca

Abstract
The constrained Markov decision process (CMDP) framework emerges as an important reinforcement learning approach for imposing safety or other critical objectives
while maximizing cumulative reward. However, the current understanding of how
to learn efficiently in a CMDP environment with a potentially infinite number of
states remains under investigation, particularly when function approximation is
applied to the value functions. In this paper, we address the learning problem given
linear function approximation with qπ -realizability, where the value functions of
all policies are linearly representable with a known feature map, a setting known
to be more general and challenging than other linear settings. Utilizing a localaccess model, we propose a novel primal-dual algorithm that, after Õ(poly(d)ϵ−3 )1
queries, outputs with high probability a policy that strictly satisfies the constraints
while nearly optimizing the value with respect to a reward function. Here, d is the
feature dimension and ϵ > 0 is a given error. The algorithm relies on a carefully
crafted off-policy evaluation procedure to evaluate the policy using historical data,
which informs policy updates through policy gradients and conserves samples. To
our knowledge, this is the first result achieving polynomial sample complexity for
CMDP in the qπ -realizable setting.

1

Introduction

In the classical reinforcement learning (RL) framework, optimizing a single objective above all
else can be challenging for safety-critical applications like autonomous driving, robotics, and Large
Language Models (LLMs). For example, it may be difficult for an LLM agent to optimize a single
reward that fulfills the objective of generating helpful responses while ensuring that the messages
are harmless (Dai et al., 2024). In autonomous driving, designing a single reward often requires
reliance on complex parameters and hard-coded knowledge, making the agent less efficient and
adaptive (Kamran et al., 2022). Optimizing a single objective in motion planning involves combining
heterogeneous quantities like path length and risks, which depend on conversion factors that are not
necessarily straightforward to determine (Feyzabadi and Carpin, 2014).
The constrained Markov decision process (CMDP) framework (Altman, 2021) emerges as an important RL approach for imposing safety or other critical objectives while maximizing cumulative
* Corresponding author.
1

Here Õ(·) hides log factors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

