Understanding Multi-Granularity
for Open-Vocabulary Part Segmentation

Jiho Choi1∗, Seonho Lee1∗, Seungho Lee2 , Minhyun Lee2 , Hyunjung Shim1†
1
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence, KAIST, Republic of Korea
2
School of Integrated Technology, Yonsei University, Republic of Korea
{jihochoi, glanceyes, kateshim}@kaist.ac.kr, {seungholee, lmh315}@yonsei.ac.kr

(a) Ground-truth

(e) “head”

(b) Object-level Pred.

(f) “torso”

(c) Generalized Parts Pred.

(g) “ear”

(h) “nose”

(d) Final Pred.

(i) “paw”

Figure 1: Prediction results of our PartCLIPSeg for unseen categories in the Pascal-Part-116 [7, 46]
validation set. A “dog” is unseen during training. The final prediction of PartCLIPSeg utilizes (b)
object-level context and (c) generalized parts, incorporating disjoint activation among (e)–(i) parts,
and enhancing activation for smaller parts (e.g., (h) “nose”).

Abstract
Open-vocabulary part segmentation (OVPS) is an emerging research area focused
on segmenting fine-grained entities using diverse and previously unseen vocabularies. Our study highlights the inherent complexities of part segmentation due to
intricate boundaries and diverse granularity, reflecting the knowledge-based nature
of part identification. To address these challenges, we propose PartCLIPSeg, a
novel framework utilizing generalized parts and object-level contexts to mitigate
the lack of generalization in fine-grained parts. PartCLIPSeg integrates competitive
part relationships and attention control, alleviating ambiguous boundaries and
underrepresented parts. Experimental results demonstrate that PartCLIPSeg outperforms existing state-of-the-art OVPS methods, offering refined segmentation and an
advanced understanding of part relationships within images. Through extensive experiments, our model demonstrated a significant improvement over the state-of-theart models on the Pascal-Part-116, ADE20K-Part-234, and PartImageNet datasets.
Our code is available at https://github.com/kaist-cvml/part-clipseg.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

