Right this way: Can VLMs Guide Us to See More to
Answer Questions?
Li Liu∗

Diji Yang∗ Sijia Zhong Kalyana Suma Sree Tholeti
Lei Ding Yi Zhang Leilani H. Gilpin †
University of California, Santa Cruz
{lliu112,dyang39,szhong16,ktholeti,lding25,yiz,lgilpin}@ucsc.edu

Abstract
In question-answering scenarios, humans can assess whether the available information is sufficient and seek additional information if necessary, rather than
providing a forced answer. In contrast, Vision Language Models (VLMs) typically generate direct, one-shot responses without evaluating the sufficiency of the
information. To investigate this gap, we identify a critical and challenging task
in the Visual Question Answering (VQA) scenario: can VLMs indicate how to
adjust an image when the visual information is insufficient to answer a question?
This capability is especially valuable for assisting visually impaired individuals
who often need guidance to capture images correctly. To evaluate this capability of current VLMs, we introduce a human-labeled dataset as a benchmark
for this task. Additionally, we present an automated framework that generates
synthetic training data by simulating “where to know” scenarios. Our empirical results show significant performance improvements in mainstream VLMs
when fine-tuned with this synthetic data. This study demonstrates the potential to
narrow the gap between information assessment and acquisition in VLMs, bringing their performance closer to humans. Our dataset and code are available at:
https://github.com/LeoLee7/Directional_guidance.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have made significant strides in general multimodal
tasks such as visual recognition and Visual Question Answering (VQA) [1, 49]. This progress has
opened up a vast potential for various applications, including enhancing visual accessibility for
visually impaired individuals [4, 20], supporting decision-making in autonomous systems [50, 32],
enabling interactive technologies [39], etc. Despite these advances, VLMs still fall short of human
capabilities. Humans can intuitively assess whether the available information is sufficient to answer a
question and seek additional details when necessary [36, 11]. In contrast, VLMs typically tend to
provide direct, single-response outputs even when information is insufficient to answer the question
accurately. This limitation reduces their effectiveness in real-world applications [13]. To address this
issue, recent studies have explored ways to teach VLMs to assess information sufficiency [42]. These
studies aim to have VLMs either provide concrete answers or label questions as unanswerable, using
benchmark datasets from real user questions like VizWiz [20].
However, a significant gap remains in handling unanswerable cases: deciding what actions to take
when VLMs identify a question to be unanswerable. Humans naturally possesses the ability to
seek additional details when faced with unanswerable questions — a challenge often encountered in
real-world VQA tasks due to poor image quality, ambiguous questions, or loss of context [3, 9]. To
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author: lgilpin@ucsc.edu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

