Bridging The Gap between Low-rank and Orthogonal
Adaptation via Householder Reflection Adaptation

Shen Yuan1
Haotian Liu1∗
Hongteng Xu1,2†
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
{shenyuan721, haotianliu, hongtengxu}@ruc.edu.cn
1

Abstract
While following different technical routes, both low-rank and orthogonal adaptation
techniques can efficiently adapt large-scale pre-training models in specific tasks or
domains based on a small piece of trainable parameters. In this study, we bridge
the gap between these two techniques, proposing a simple but effective adaptation
method based on Householder reflections. Given a pre-trained model, our method
fine-tunes its layers by multiplying each frozen weight matrix with an orthogonal
matrix constructed by a chain of learnable Householder reflections (HRs). This
HR-based orthogonal fine-tuning is equivalent to an adaptive low-rank adaptation.
Moreover, we show that the orthogonality of the reflection planes corresponding
to the HRs impacts the model capacity and regularity. The analysis motivates us
to regularize the orthogonality of the HRs, leading to different implementations
of the proposed Householder reflection adaptation (HRA) method. Compared
with state-of-the-art methods, HRA achieves superior performance with fewer
learnable parameters when adapting large language models and conditional image
generators. The code of the experiments is available at https://github.com/
DaShenZi721/HRA, and the method has been merged into the PEFT package.

1

Introduction

In recent large foundation model competitions, “Scaling Laws” [22, 18, 39] motivate researchers
to increase model size continuously, which brings significantly improved model capabilities in
understanding, generation, reasoning, and generalization but with more and more unbearable model
adaptation costs. For instance, the GPU memory for fine-tuning a LLaMA-65B model with 16bit
precision exceeds 780GB [9]. The adaptation of image generative models (like the ControlNet
in [60] did) may suffer the same issue when applying large vision foundation models as backbones.
Consequently, fine-tuning large foundation models efficiently for adapting various downstream tasks
has become a challenge in practice.
To overcome the above challenge, Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) methods [53] provide
promising solutions, which aim to reduce the trainable parameters and memory consumption of
fine-tuning while maintaining even improving model adaptation performance. Among various PEFT
methods, the adapter-based fine-tuning [20, 37] attracts a lot because it only inserts limited trainable
parameters into existing models during fine-tuning but without adding extra complexity or overhead
in the inference phase. Currently, given a parameter matrix of a pre-trained model, i.e., W ∈ Rdout ×d ,
there are roughly two strategies implementing the adapter-based fine-tuning. The mainstream strategy
is applying Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [20] and its variants [9, 21, 25, 31, 33, 35, 48, 54, 60,
∗
†

A part of this work was done when Haotian Liu was affiliated with the Beijing Institute of Technology.
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

