BECAUSE:
Bilinear Causal Representation for Generalizable
Offline Model-based Reinforcement Learning

Haohong Lin1 , Wenhao Ding1 , Jian Chen1 , Laixi Shi2 , Jiacheng Zhu3 , Bo Li4 , Ding Zhao1
1
CMU, 2 Caltech, 3 MIT, 4 UChicago & UIUC
{haohongl, wenhaod}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Offline model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) enhances data efficiency by
utilizing pre-collected datasets to learn models and policies, especially in scenarios
where exploration is costly or infeasible. Nevertheless, its performance often
suffers from the objective mismatch between model and policy learning, resulting in
inferior performance despite accurate model predictions. This paper first identifies
the primary source of this mismatch comes from the underlying confounders
present in offline data for MBRL. Subsequently, we introduce BilinEar CAUSal
rEpresentation (BECAUSE), an algorithm to capture causal representation for both
states and actions to reduce the influence of the distribution shift, thus mitigating
the objective mismatch problem. Comprehensive evaluations on 18 tasks that vary
in data quality and environment context demonstrate the superior performance of
BECAUSE over existing offline RL algorithms. We show the generalizability and
robustness of BECAUSE under fewer samples or larger numbers of confounders.
Additionally, we offer theoretical analysis of BECAUSE to prove its error bound
and sample efficiency when integrating causal representation into offline MBRL.
See more details in our project page: https://sites.google.com/view/be-cause.

1

Introduction

Offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) has shown great promise in learning directly from pre-collected
datasets, especially in scenarios where active interaction is expensive or infeasible [1]. Specifically,
offline model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) [2, 3, 4], learning policies with an estimated
world model, generally perform better than their model-free counterparts in long-horizon tasks
such as self-driving vehicles [5], robotics [6], and healthcare [7]. However, offline RL suffers from
distribution shift because the rollout data is either sampled from some suboptimal behavior policies
or sampled from slightly different training environments compared to the deployment time [8].
Data collection with behavior policy
Although identifying distribution shift issues,
(Unknown)
many of the current offline MBRL works fail to
model the shift in environment dynamics, which
test Environment
Data Buffer
Model
Policy
𝜋(𝑎|𝑠)
𝑇((𝑠 ! |𝑠, 𝑎)
is ubiquitous and could cause catastrophic fail{𝑠, 𝑎, 𝑠 , 𝑟}
𝑇(𝑠′|𝑠, 𝑎)
ure of trained policy at a slightly different deObjective Mismatch
ployment stage. Furthermore, since the learnlow model loss ≠ success
low model loss ≈ success
ing objectives of the world models and poliOur method
Success
Failure
cies are isolated from each other, a significant
challenge in offline MBRL is objective misModel Loss
Model Loss
match [9, 10] problem (shown in Figure 1): modFigure 1: The objective mismatch problem.
els that achieve a lower training loss are not necessarily better for control performance. For example, a dynamics model achieve relatively low
!

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

