Meta-Controller: Few-Shot Imitation of Unseen
Embodiments and Tasks in Continuous Control
Seongwoong Cho∗ Donggyun Kim∗ Jinwoo Lee Seunghoon Hong
School of Computing, KAIST
{seongwoongjo, kdgyun425, bestgenius10, seunghoon.hong}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Generalizing across robot embodiments and tasks is crucial for adaptive robotic
systems. Modular policy learning approaches adapt to new embodiments but are
limited to specific tasks, while few-shot imitation learning (IL) approaches often
focus on a single embodiment. In this paper, we introduce a few-shot behavior
cloning framework to simultaneously generalize to unseen embodiments and tasks
using a few (e.g., five) reward-free demonstrations. Our framework leverages
a joint-level input-output representation to unify the state and action spaces of
heterogeneous embodiments and employs a novel structure-motion state encoder
that is parameterized to capture both shared knowledge across all embodiments and
embodiment-specific knowledge. A matching-based policy network then predicts
actions from a few demonstrations, producing an adaptive policy that is robust to
over-fitting. Evaluated in the DeepMind Control suite, our framework termed MetaController demonstrates superior few-shot generalization to unseen embodiments
and tasks over modular policy learning and few-shot IL approaches. Codes are
available at https://github.com/SeongwoongCho/meta-controller.

1

Introduction

Generalizing across different robot embodiments and tasks with only a few demonstrations is a
fundamental challenge in continuous control [6, 11, 40, 29, 33, 14]. This capability is crucial for
developing versatile and adaptive robotic systems that can operate effectively in diverse and dynamic
environments. The high diversity of embodiments and tasks, however, makes this particularly
challenging. Robot embodiments vary widely in their morphological (e.g., number and connectivity
of joints) and dynamic (e.g., motor gear ratios, damping coefficients) configurations, complicating
the design of a unified architecture capable of handling heterogeneous input states and output actions.
Furthermore, the variety of tasks—such as locomotion, object manipulation, and navigation—requires
the learning of transferable skills that can efficiently generalize across different tasks.
Despite significant advancements in reinforcement learning (RL) and imitation learning (IL), achieving simultaneous generalization across diverse embodiments and tasks with a few demonstrations
remains largely underexplored. Modular policy learning approaches [34, 18, 16, 12, 10] have shown
promise by learning modular policies that can be shared across embodiments with different morphologies. However, these methods primarily focus on specific task types such as locomotion, and lack the
flexibility to adapt to a wide range of control tasks, limiting their broader applicability. Conversely,
few-shot IL approaches [8, 7, 39, 13, 37, 36] aim to learn novel tasks from a few demonstrations.
These techniques excel in scenarios with sparse training data but typically concentrate on a single
embodiment with fixed morphological and dynamic structures, restricting their ability to generalize
across various embodiments and tasks. As a result, these two fields have developed independently,
and their integration remains an open area of research.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel framework that flexibly learns arbitrary control
tasks on unseen embodiments using a few (e.g., five) reward-free demonstrations. To handle hetero∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

