Predicting Ground State Properties:
Constant Sample Complexity and Deep Learning
Algorithms

Marc Wanner
Computer Science and Engineering
Chalmers University of Technology
and University of Gothenburg
wanner@chalmers.se

Laura Lewis
Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, United Kingdom
llewis@alumni.caltech.edu

Chiranjib Bhattacharyya
Computer Science and Automation
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore, India
chiru@iisc.ac.in

Devdatt Dubhashi
Computer Science and Engineering
Chalmers University of Technology
and University of Gothenburg
dubhashi@chalmers.se

Alexandru Gheorghiu
Computer Science and Engineering
Chalmers University of Technology
and University of Gothenburg
aleghe@chalmers.se

Abstract
A fundamental problem in quantum many-body physics is that of finding ground
states of local Hamiltonians. A number of recent works gave provably efficient
machine learning (ML) algorithms for learning ground states. Specifically, Huang
et al. in [1], introduced an approach for learning properties of the ground state of
an n-qubit gapped local Hamiltonian H from only nO(1) data points sampled from
Hamiltonians in the same phase of matter. This was subsequently improved by
Lewis et al. in [2], to O(log n) samples when the geometry of the n-qubit system is
known. In this work, we introduce two approaches that achieve a constant sample
complexity, independent of system size n, for learning ground state properties.
Our first algorithm consists of a simple modification of the ML model used by
Lewis et al. and applies to a property of interest known in advance. Our second
algorithm, which applies even if a description of the property is not known, is a
deep neural network model. While empirical results showing the performance of
neural networks have been demonstrated, to our knowledge, this is the first rigorous
sample complexity bound on a neural network model for predicting ground state
properties. We also perform numerical experiments on systems of up to 45 qubits
that confirm the improved scaling of our approach compared to [1, 2].

1

Introduction

One of the most important problems in quantum many-body physics is that of finding ground
states of quantum systems. This is due to the fact that the ground state describes the behavior of
electronic systems (e.g., metals, magnets, etc.) at room temperature well. Thus, understanding
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

