Semantics and Spatiality of Emergent Communication

Rotem Ben Zion1
Boaz Carmeli1
Orr Paradise2
Yonatan Belinkov1
1
2
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
UC Berkeley
rotm@campus.technion.ac.il boaz.carmeli@campus.technion.ac.il
orrp@eecs.berkeley.edu belinkov@technion.ac.il

Abstract
When artificial agents are jointly trained to perform collaborative tasks using
a communication channel, they develop opaque goal-oriented communication
protocols. Good task performance is often considered sufficient evidence that
meaningful communication is taking place, but existing empirical results show that
communication strategies induced by common objectives can be counterintuitive
whilst solving the task nearly perfectly. In this work, we identify a goal-agnostic
prerequisite to meaningful communication, which we term semantic consistency,
based on the idea that messages should have similar meanings across instances.
We provide a formal definition for this idea, and use it to compare the two most
common objectives in the field of emergent communication: discrimination and
reconstruction. We prove, under mild assumptions, that semantically inconsistent
communication protocols can be optimal solutions to the discrimination task, but
not to reconstruction. We further show that the reconstruction objective encourages
a stricter property, spatial meaningfulness, which also accounts for the distance
between messages. Experiments with emergent communication games validate our
theoretical results. These findings demonstrate an inherent advantage of distancebased communication goals, and contextualize previous empirical discoveries.

1

Introduction

Humans use language in multi-agent social interactions. Pressures of synchronization and collaboration play a central role in shaping the way we communicate. Motivated by this observation and
the goal of creating artificial agents capable of meaningful communication, the field of emergent
communication (EC) employs a multi-agent environment jointly trained to accomplish a task that
requires active transmission of information. The agents utilize a messaging channel that usually takes
the form of a discrete sequence of abstract symbols, resembling the structure of human language.
Successful optimization results in synchronized agents operating a newly developed communication
protocol tailored to the objective. We study a type of EC setup inspired by Lewis games [32] where a
sender agent describes a given input and a receiver agent makes a prediction based on that description.
The game objective is designed to make the receiver demonstrate knowledge of the original input,
which in turn compels the sender to encode relevant information in the message. There are two
common objectives used in this type of EC setup (illustrated in Figure 1):
Reconstruction In the reconstruction task [34, 44, 45], the original input is re-generated based solely
on the message. We are specifically interested in a reconstruction objective that quantifies
distance between prediction and target, forming a discrete version of autoencoding [18].
Discrimination In the discrimination task [17, 28, 33], the original input is retrieved from a set of
candidates, incentivized by negative log-likelihood.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

