Scale Equivariant Graph Metanetworks
Ioannis Kalogeropoulos1,2∗ Giorgos Bouritsas1,2∗ Yannis Panagakis1,2
1

National and Kapodistrian University of Athens

2

Archimedes/Athena RC, Greece

Abstract
This paper pertains to an emerging machine learning paradigm: learning higherorder functions, i.e. functions whose inputs are functions themselves, particularly
when these inputs are Neural Networks (NNs). With the growing interest in architectures that process NNs, a recurring design principle has permeated the field:
adhering to the permutation symmetries arising from the connectionist structure of
NNs. However, are these the sole symmetries present in NN parameterizations?
Zooming into most practical activation functions (e.g. sine, ReLU, tanh) answers
this question negatively and gives rise to intriguing new symmetries, which we
collectively refer to as scaling symmetries, that is, non-zero scalar multiplications
and divisions of weights and biases. In this work, we propose Scale Equivariant
Graph MetaNetworks - ScaleGMNs, a framework that adapts the Graph Metanetwork (message-passing) paradigm by incorporating scaling symmetries and thus
rendering neuron and edge representations equivariant to valid scalings. We introduce novel building blocks, of independent technical interest, that allow for
equivariance or invariance with respect to individual scalar multipliers or their
product and use them in all components of ScaleGMN. Furthermore, we prove
that, under certain expressivity conditions, ScaleGMN can simulate the forward
and backward pass of any input feedforward neural network. Experimental results
demonstrate that our method advances the state-of-the-art performance for several
datasets and activation functions, highlighting the power of scaling symmetries
as an inductive bias for NN processing. The source code is publicly available at
https://github.com/jkalogero/scalegmn.

1

Introduction

Neural networks are becoming the workhorse of problem-solving across various domains. To solve a
task, they acquire rich information which is stored in their learnable parameters throughout training.
Nonetheless, this information is often opaque and difficult to interpret. This begs the question: How
can we efficiently process and extract insights from the information stored in the parameters of
trained neural networks, and how to do so in a data-driven manner? In other words, can we devise
architectures that learn to process other neural architectures?
The need to address this question arises in diverse scenarios: NN post-processing, e.g. analysis/interpretation (i.e. inferring NN properties, such as generalisation and robustness [74, 19]), as well
as editing (e.g. model pruning [22], merging [75] or adaptation to new data) - or NN synthesis (e.g. for
optimisation [12] or more generally parameter prediction/generation [31, 67, 32, 58]). Furthermore,
with the advent of Implicit Neural Representations,1 [13, 52, 57, 70, 53] trained NN parameters
are increasingly used to represent datapoint signals, such as images or 3D shapes, replacing raw
representations, i.e., pixel grids or point clouds [18]. Consequently, many tasks involving such data,
∗
1

Equal contribution. Corrrespondence to ioakalogero@di.uoa.gr, g.bouritsas@athenarc.gr
INR: A coordinate-processing NN “overfitted” on a given signal, e.g. image, 3D shape, physical quantity.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

