BetterDepth: Plug-and-Play Diffusion Refiner for
Zero-Shot Monocular Depth Estimation

Xiang Zhang1,2 , Bingxin Ke1 , Hayko Riemenschneider2 , Nando Metzger1 ,
Anton Obukhov1 , Markus Gross1,2 , Konrad Schindler1 , Christopher Schroers2
1
ETH Zürich, 2 DisneyResearch|Studios

Abstract
By training over large-scale datasets, zero-shot monocular depth estimation (MDE)
methods show robust performance in the wild but often suffer from insufficient
detail. Although recent diffusion-based MDE approaches exhibit a superior ability
to extract details, they struggle in geometrically complex scenes that challenge their
geometry prior, trained on less diverse 3D data. To leverage the complementary
merits of both worlds, we propose BetterDepth to achieve geometrically correct
affine-invariant MDE while capturing fine details. Specifically, BetterDepth is a
conditional diffusion-based refiner that takes the prediction from pre-trained MDE
models as depth conditioning, in which the global depth layout is well-captured,
and iteratively refines details based on the input image. For the training of such
a refiner, we propose global pre-alignment and local patch masking methods to
ensure BetterDepth remains faithful to the depth conditioning while learning to
add fine-grained scene details. With efficient training on small-scale synthetic
datasets, BetterDepth achieves state-of-the-art zero-shot MDE performance on
diverse public datasets and on in-the-wild scenes. Moreover, BetterDepth can
improve the performance of other MDE models in a plug-and-play manner without
further re-training.

1

Introduction

As a fundamental task in computer vision, monocular depth estimation (MDE) aims to extract depth
information from single-view images, benefitting various real-world applications [46, 54, 48, 27].
Unlike traditional depth estimation techniques that utilize geometric relationships from stereo [21]
or structured light setups [42], MDE is a highly ill-posed task and relies on the geometric prior
knowledge learned from training datasets, where real data plays a pivotal role to ensure generalization
to in-the-wild applications [31, 30, 49]. However, due to the difficulty of collecting fine-grained
depth labels in real scenarios, real-world depth labels are often coarse, noisy, and incomplete,
resulting in a trade-off between the quality and generalization of MDE. Thus, although significant
progress in zero-shot MDE has been achieved with techniques like mixing diverse training datasets
[31] and unleashing large-scale unlabeled data [49], previous MDE approaches often suffer from
over-smoothing of details, as indicated by the red arrows in Fig. 1.
Recently, diffusion models have exhibited promising performance in a variety of computer vision
tasks [13, 44, 22, 47, 32], including MDE [39, 17, 12, 10]. Benefitting from the iterative refinement
scheme, diffusion-based MDE methods can produce impressive depth maps with fine granularity
as depicted in Fig. 1. However, training a diffusion-based MDE generally requires complete depth
labels [17, 10, 39], which is in practice achieved by rendering synthetic datasets. Compared to real
data, existing synthetic RGB-D datasets exhibit lower variety and contain fewer samples which
limits the generality of the learned prior. Despite several attempts to improve the generalization
of diffusion-based MDE, such as label infilling [39] and transferring 2D image priors [17], current
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

