LaSCal: Label-Shift Calibration without target labels

Teodora Popordanoska∗

Gorjan Radevski∗

Tinne Tuytelaars

Matthew B. Blaschko

ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven
firstname.lastname@kuleuven.be

Abstract
When machine learning systems face dataset shift, model calibration plays a pivotal
role in ensuring their reliability. Calibration error (CE) provides insights into the
alignment between the predicted confidence scores and the classifier accuracy.
While prior works have delved into the implications of dataset shift on calibration,
existing CE estimators either (i) assume access to labeled data from the target
domain, often unavailable in practice, or (ii) are derived under a covariate shift
assumption. In this work we propose a novel, label-free, consistent CE estimator
under label shift. Label shift is characterized by changes in the marginal label
distribution p(Y ), with a constant conditional p(X|Y ) distribution between the
source and target. We introduce a novel calibration method, called LaSCal, which
uses the estimator in conjunction with a post-hoc calibration strategy, to perform
unsupervised calibration on the target distribution. Our thorough empirical analysis
demonstrates the effectiveness and reliability of the proposed approach across
different modalities, model architectures and label shift intensities.

1

Introduction

Reliable uncertainty estimation is crucial for predictive models, particularly in safety-critical applications, where decisions based on predictions have significant consequences [Amodei et al., 2016,
Kompa et al., 2021]. The calibration error (CE) [Naeini et al., 2015, Guo et al., 2017, Vaicenavicius
et al., 2019] measures the discrepancy between predicted probabilities and observed class frequencies,
indicating the reliability of the model’s predictions. When a calibrated model predicts an 80% chance
of flu, we expect 80 out of 100 patients with similar symptoms to have the flu. Estimating CE and
addressing miscalibration typically requires i.i.d. labeled held-out data. However, real-world settings
often violate these assumptions: (i) the source (train) may differ from the target (test) distribution,
known as dataset shift [Quiñonero Candela et al., 2009], leading to a false sense of confidence in
the model and suboptimal decision-making [Park et al., 2020]; and (ii) obtaining labeled target data
for CE estimation is often unrealistic or prohibitively expensive, e.g., in medical diagnostics during
disease outbreaks acquiring labeled patient data is needed, but costly. Thus, traditional post-hoc
calibration methods (e.g., temperature scaling [Guo et al., 2017] or isotonic regression [Zadrozny and
Elkan, 2002]), which rely on labeled calibration sets in an i.i.d. setting, are not directly applicable.
The two most common types of dataset shift are: (i) covariate shift, where the feature distribution
changes between the source and target domains, denoted as ps (X) ̸= pt (X), but the conditional
label distribution remains the same, i.e., ps (Y |X) = pt (Y |X); and (ii) label shift, where the label
distribution differs, that is ps (Y ) ̸= pt (Y ), while the conditional feature distribution remains the
same, i.e., ps (X|Y ) = pt (X|Y ) [Moreno-Torres et al., 2012, Quiñonero Candela et al., 2009]2 .
∗

Equal contribution.
Label shift corresponds to anti-causal learning: predicting cause Y from effects X [Schölkopf et al., 2012]);
e.g., during a pneumonia outbreak p(Y ) (flu) rises but the symptoms p(X|Y ) (cough given flu) remain the same.
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

