Multi-Reward Best Policy Identification

Alessio Russo
Ericsson AB
Stockholm, Sweden

Filippo Vannella
Ericsson Research
Stockholm, Sweden

Abstract
Rewards are a critical aspect of formulating Reinforcement Learning (RL) problems; often, one may be interested in testing multiple reward functions, or the
problem may naturally involve multiple rewards. In this study, we investigate the
Multi-Reward Best Policy Identification (MR-BPI) problem, where the goal is to
determine the best policy for all rewards in a given set R with minimal sample
complexity and a prescribed confidence level. We derive a fundamental instancespecific lower bound on the sample complexity required by any Probably Correct
(PC) algorithm in this setting. This bound guides the design of an optimal exploration policy attaining minimal sample complexity. However, this lower bound
involves solving a hard non-convex optimization problem. We address this challenge by devising a convex approximation, enabling the design of sample-efficient
algorithms. We propose MR-NaS, a PC algorithm with competitive performance on
hard-exploration tabular environments. Extending this approach to Deep RL (DRL),
we also introduce DBMR-BPI, an efficient algorithm for model-free exploration in
multi-reward settings.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) provides a powerful framework for sequential decision-making, which
has achieved a number of breakthroughs in a wide range of applications, including mastering
video games [1, 2], accelerating algorithm design [3], optimizing fusion control systems [4, 5], and
enhancing autonomous robotic control [6, 7, 8].
Rewards are a critical aspect of formulating an RL problem. Yet, designing a reward function can
require numerous iterations of reward engineering [9]. Furthermore, in many practical scenarios, the
reward signal is not necessarily a scalar, and the agent may seek to optimize performance across a set
of reward functions [10, 11] (e.g., goal reaching applications in robotics [12], recommender systems
[13], intent-based radio network optimization tasks [14, 15], etc.).
In this work, we investigate how to efficiently identify optimal policies across multiple rewards in a
given set R, a setting we refer to as Multi-Reward Best Policy Identification (MR-BPI). This setting
is a variant of traditional Best Policy Identification (BPI) with fixed confidence [16, 17, 18, 19, 20],
where the goal is to identify optimal policies using the least number of samples and with a prescribed
confidence level. Exploration algorithms for BPI typically aim to find the optimal policy for a single
reward function, which is known and fixed in advance. However, as previously mentioned, the agent
may face uncertainty about which reward function is the most appropriate for a given task, or may
seek to optimize performance across a set of rewards.
This problem remains relatively unexplored in the current RL literature. Closely related settings
are reward-free RL [21, 22, 23], unsupervised RL [24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29], and multi-objective RL
[30, 31]. In reward-free RL, the goal of the agent is to estimate the optimal policy for any possible
Code repository: https://github.com/rssalessio/Multi-Reward-Best-Policy-Identification
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

