DiTFastAttn: Attention Compression for Diffusion
Transformer Models
Zhihang Yuan∗ 1,2

Hanling Zhang∗1,2

Tianchen Zhao1,2

Pu Lu∗1

Shengen Yan2

1 Tsinghua University

2 Infinigence AI

Xuefei Ning1 †

Linfeng Zhang3

Guohao Dai3,2

Yu Wang1

3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Diffusion Transformers (DiT) excel at image and video generation but face computational challenges due to the quadratic complexity of self-attention operators.
We propose DiTFastAttn, a post-training compression method to alleviate the computational bottleneck of DiT. We identify three key redundancies in the attention
computation during DiT inference: (1) spatial redundancy, where many attention
heads focus on local information; (2) temporal redundancy, with high similarity
between the attention outputs of neighboring steps; (3) conditional redundancy,
where conditional and unconditional inferences exhibit significant similarity. We
propose three techniques to reduce these redundancies: (1) Window Attention
with Residual Sharing to reduce spatial redundancy; (2) Attention Sharing across
Timesteps to exploit the similarity between steps; (3) Attention Sharing across
CFG to skip redundant computations during conditional generation. We apply
DiTFastAttn to DiT, PixArt-Sigma for image generation tasks, and OpenSora for
video generation tasks. Our results show that for image generation, our method
reduces up to 76% of the attention FLOPs and achieves up to 1.8× end-to-end
speedup at high-resolution (2k × 2k) generation.

1

Introduction

Recently, diffusion transformers (DiT) have gained increasing popularity in image (Peebles & Xie,
2023; Chen et al., 2024) and video generation (Brooks et al., 2024). However, a major challenge
with DiTs is their substantial computational demand, particularly noticeable when generating highresolution content. On the one hand, traditional transformer architectures, with their self-attention
mechanism, have an O(L2 ) complexity to the input token length L. This quadratic complexity leads
to significant computational costs as the resolution of images and videos escalates. As demonstrated
in Fig. 1, the attention computation becomes the primary computational bottleneck during the
inference process as image resolution increases. Specifically, if a 2K × 2K image is tokenized
into 16k tokens (Chen et al., 2024), this requires several seconds for attention computation, even
on high-end GPUs such as the Nvidia A100. On the other hand, the inference process of diffusion
requires a substantial number of neural network inferences due to the multiple denoising steps and
the classifier-free guidance (CFG) technique (Ho & Salimans, 2022).
Previous efforts to accelerate attention mechanisms, such as Local Attention, Swin Transformer (Liu
et al., 2021), and Group Query Attention (GQA) (Ainslie et al., 2023), mainly focused on designing
the attention mechanism or network architecture. While effective in reducing computational costs,
these approaches necessitate large retraining costs. Due to the substantial data and computational
requirements for training a DiT, there is a need for post-training compression methods.
In this work, we identify three types of redundancy in the attention computation of DiT inference and
propose a post-training model compression method, DiTFastAttn, to address these redundancies:
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author and project advisor: foxdoraame@gmail.com. Project Website:
http://nics-effalg.com/DiTFastAttn.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

