Efficient Availability Attacks against Supervised and
Contrastive Learning Simultaneously

Yihan Wang, Yifan Zhu, Xiao-Shan Gao∗
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{yihanwang, zhuyifan}@amss.ac.cn, xgao@mmrc.iss.ac.cn

Abstract
Availability attacks provide a tool to prevent the unauthorized use of private data
and commercial datasets by generating imperceptible noise and crafting unlearnable
examples before release. Ideally, the obtained unlearnability can prevent algorithms
from training usable models. When supervised learning (SL) algorithms have failed,
a malicious data collector possibly resorts to contrastive learning (CL) algorithms
to bypass the protection. Through evaluation, we have found that most existing
methods are unable to achieve both supervised and contrastive unlearnability, which
poses risks to data protection by availability attacks. Different from recent methods
based on contrastive learning, we employ contrastive-like data augmentations in
supervised learning frameworks to obtain attacks effective for both SL and CL. Our
proposed AUE and AAP attacks achieve state-of-the-art worst-case unlearnability
across SL and CL algorithms with less computation consumption, showcasing
prospects in real-world applications. The code is available at https://github.
com/EhanW/AUE-AAP.

1

Introduction

Availability attacks [2] add imperceptible perturbations to training data, making the subsequently
trained model unavailable. The motivations behind this kind of data poisoning attack involve
protecting private data and commercial datasets from unauthorized use [22]. For example, according
to a report [19], a tech company illegally obtained over 3B facial images as the training set to develop
a commercial facial recognition model. In this type of scenario, availability attacks provide tools
to process user images before release, preserving legibility but impeding subsequent training. In
particular, Huang et al. [22] reduces the accuracy of face recognition of 50 identities in WebFace
[54] from 86% to 16%. In recent years, various availability attacks against supervised learning (SL)
[11–13, 41, 56, 28] have been proposed.

Accuracy

Meanwhile, contrastive learning (CL) allows people to extract meanSL
100
SimCLR
ingful features from unlabeled data in a self-supervised way. Af80
ter subsequent linear probing or fine-tuning, CL algorithms have
60
achieved comparable accuracy or even surpassed the performance
40
of SL [5, 7, 15, 6]. However, most attacks designed for poisoning
20
SL are ineffective against CL, as shown in Figure 1. It sheds light
0
on a potential issue of using availability attacks to protect data: a
None DC UE AR NTGA SN OPS
Attacks
malicious data collector can traverse both supervised and contrastive
algorithms to effectively leverage collected data. Hence, we intro- Figure 1: Attacks against SL
duce worst-case unlearnability (see Section 3.1) as the evaluation and CL on CIFAR-10.
metric for availability attacks to emphasize the demand to deal with a trickier unauthorized data
∗

Corresponding author. Kaiyuan International Mathematical Sciences Institute

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

