HOPE: Shape Matching Via Aligning Different K-hop
Neighbourhoods

1

Barakeel Fanseu Kamhoua1 , Huamin Qu1∗,
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Accurate and smooth shape matching is very hard to achieve. This is because
for accuracy, one needs unique descriptors (signatures) on shapes that distinguish
different vertices on a mesh accurately while at the same time being invariant to
deformations. However, most existing unique shape descriptors are generally not
smooth on the shape and are not noise-robust thus leading to non-smooth matches.
On the other hand, for smoothness, one needs descriptors that are smooth and
continuous on the shape. However, existing smooth descriptors are generally not
unique and as such lose accuracy as they match neighborhoods (for smoothness)
rather than exact vertices (for accuracy). In this work, we propose to use different
k-hop neighborhoods of vertices as pairwise descriptors for shape matching. We
use these descriptors in conjunction with local map distortion (LMD) to refine an
initialized map for shape matching. We validate the effectiveness of our pipeline
on benchmark datasets such as SCAPE, TOSCA, TOPKIDS, and others.

1

Introduction

Shape matching is a very important task and has been increasingly so with the increase in the
availability and affordability of 3D scans [31]. It has important applications including but not limited
to shape registration [2, 37], comparison [1, 13], recognition [6], and retrieval [50].
Shapes can undergo different types of transformations which we will group as isometric and nonisometric transformations in this work. Nonrigid isometric transformations preserve most of the
geometric properties of the shape i.e., after the transformation, its angles, geodesic distances, scale,
connectivity, and other geometric properties are mostly preserved. On the other hand, most geometric
properties are not preserved under nonrigid non-isometric transformations. Examples of isometric
transformations are rotations and translations (though minute scaling may also be included in this
category for nonrigid cases). While examples of non-isometric transformations are splitting, scaling,
dilating, and others which change the geometric properties of the shapes.
Several works have been proposed to address shape matching. However, most of these methods will
either aim for smoothness [12, 17, 19, 13, 1, 34, 39, 37, 44, 31, 20] or for accuracy [45], but not both.
Moreover, most of these methods will focus on specific types of deformations undergone by the shape
either isometric [12, 19, 13, 1, 34, 39, 37, 44, 31, 20, 49] or non-isometric [14, 22, 52]. Some methods
such as 2D-GEM [22] have also tried to address both accuracy and smoothness in shapes undergoing
both isometric and non-isometric deformations. However, 2D-GEM is very parameter-dependent,
using different user-defined parameters for isometric shapes than for non-isometric shapes which
in real life is not practical as one usually does not know whether one is dealing with isometric or
non-isometric deformations.
Given these obsevations, there is a need for a pipeline that aims for accuracy and smoothness across
different settings without significantly changing the pipeline. In this light, we propose HOPE, a k-hop
∗

Corresponding author: huamin@cse.ust.hk

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

