2DQuant: Low-bit Post-Training Quantization for
Image Super-Resolution

Kai Liu1 , Haotong Qin2 , Yong Guo3 , Xin Yuan4 ,
Linghe Kong1∗ , Guihai Chen1 , Yulun Zhang1∗
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 ETH Zürich,
3
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, 4 Westlake University

Abstract
Low-bit quantization has become widespread for compressing image superresolution (SR) models for edge deployment, which allows advanced SR models
to enjoy compact low-bit parameters and efficient integer/bitwise constructions
for storage compression and inference acceleration, respectively. However, it is
notorious that low-bit quantization degrades the accuracy of SR models compared
to their full-precision (FP) counterparts. Despite several efforts to alleviate the
degradation, the transformer-based SR model still suffers severe degradation due
to its distinctive activation distribution. In this work, we present a dual-stage lowbit post-training quantization (PTQ) method for image super-resolution, namely
2DQuant, which achieves efficient and accurate SR under low-bit quantization.
The proposed method first investigates the weight and activation and finds that
the distribution is characterized by coexisting symmetry and asymmetry, long
tails. Specifically, we propose Distribution-Oriented Bound Initialization (DOBI),
using different searching strategies to search a coarse bound for quantizers. To
obtain refined quantizer parameters, we further propose Distillation Quantization
Calibration (DQC), which employs a distillation approach to make the quantized
model learn from its FP counterpart. Through extensive experiments on different
bits and scaling factors, the performance of DOBI can reach the state-of-the-art
(SOTA) while after stage two, our method surpasses existing PTQ in both metrics and visual effects. 2DQuant gains an increase in PSNR as high as 4.52dB
on Set5 (×2) compared with SOTA when quantized to 2-bit and enjoys a 3.60×
compression ratio and 5.08× speedup ratio. The code and models are available at
https://github.com/Kai-Liu001/2DQuant.

1

Introduction

As one of the most classical low-level computer vision tasks, image super-resolution (SR) has
been widely studied with the significant development of deep neural networks. With the ability to reconstruct high-resolution (HR) image from the corresponding low-resolution (LR) image,
SR has been widely used in many real-world scenarios, including medical imaging [13, 21, 19],
surveillance [46, 39], remote sensing [1], and mobile phone photography. With massive parameters,
DNN-based SR models always require expensive storage and computation in the actual application.
Some works have been proposed to reduce the demand for computational power of SE models, like
lightweight architecture design and compression. One kind of approach investigates lightweight
and efficient models as the backbone for image SR. This progression has moved from the earliest
convolutional neural network (CNNs) [10, 11, 25, 49] to Transformers [48, 32, 44, 42, 4, 3] and their
combinations. The parameter number significantly decreased while maintaining or even enhancing
performance. The other kind of approach is compression, which focuses on reducing the parameter
(e.g., pruning and distillation) or bit-width (quantization) of existing SR models.
Model quantization [7, 9, 20, 31] is a technology that compresses the floating-point parameters of
a neural network into lower bit-width. The discretized parameters are homogenized into restricted
∗

Corresponding authors: Yulun Zhang, yulun100@gmail.com, Linghe Kong, linghe.kong@sjtu.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

