Localize, Understand, Collaborate:
Semantic-Aware Dragging via Intention Reasoner

Xing Cui1 , Peipei Li1⋆ , Zekun Li2 , Xuannan Liu1 , Yueying Zou1 , Zhaofeng He1
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
University of California, Santa Barbara
{cuixing, lipeipei, liuxuannan, zouyueying2001, zhaofenghe}@bupt.edu.cn
zekunli@cs.ucsb.edu

Source prompt:
“Two horses.”
Target prompt:
“Two horses with
long necks.”

Diverse results generated by our LucidDrag.

Image & User Edit

Image & User Edit

Source prompt:
“Two horses far
away.”
Target prompt:
“Two horses close
to each other.”

Source prompt:
“Two horses.”
Target prompt:
“Two horses with
heads up.”

LucidDrag

Image & User Edit

LucidDrag

Image & User Edit

LucidDrag

Figure 1: Given an input image, the user draws a mask specifying the editable region and clicks
dragging points (handle points (red) and target points (blue)). Our LucidDrag considers the ill-posed
nature of drag-based editing and can produce diverse results (the first row). Besides, it achieves
outstanding performance in editing accuracy and image fidelity (the second row).

Abstract
Flexible and accurate drag-based editing is a challenging task that has recently
garnered significant attention. Current methods typically model this problem as
automatically learning "how to drag" through point dragging and often produce one
deterministic estimation, which presents two key limitations: 1) Overlooking the
inherently ill-posed nature of drag-based editing, where multiple results may correspond to a given input, as illustrated in Fig. 1; 2) Ignoring the constraint of image
quality, which may lead to unexpected distortion. To alleviate this, we propose LucidDrag, which shifts the focus from "how to drag" to "what-then-how" paradigm.
LucidDrag comprises an intention reasoner and a collaborative guidance sampling
mechanism. The former infers several optimal editing strategies, identifying what
content and what semantic direction to be edited. Based on the former, the latter
addresses "how to drag" by collaboratively integrating existing editing guidance
with the newly proposed semantic guidance and quality guidance. Specifically,
semantic guidance is derived by establishing a semantic editing direction based on
reasoned intentions, while quality guidance is achieved through classifier guidance
using an image fidelity discriminator. Both qualitative and quantitative comparisons
demonstrate the superiority of LucidDrag over previous methods. Code is available
at: https://github.com/cuixing100876/LucidDrag-NeurIPS2024.
⋆

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

