Stochastic Newton Proximal Extragradient Method

Ruichen Jiang
ECE Department
UT Austin
rjiang@utexas.edu

Michał Dereziński
EECS Department
University of Michigan
derezin@umich.edu

Aryan Mokhtari
ECE Department
UT Austin
mokhtari@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
Stochastic second-order methods achieve fast local convergence in strongly convex
optimization by using noisy Hessian estimates to precondition the gradient. However, these methods typically reach superlinear convergence only when the stochastic Hessian noise diminishes, increasing per-iteration costs over time. Recent work
in [1] addressed this with a Hessian averaging scheme that achieves superlinear
convergence without higher per-iteration costs. Nonetheless, the method has slow
global convergence, requiring up to Õ(κ2 ) iterations to reach the superlinear rate of
Õ((1/t)t/2 ), where κ is the problem’s condition number. In this paper, we propose
a novel stochastic Newton proximal extragradient method that improves these
bounds, achieving a faster global linear rate and reaching the same fast superlinear
rate in Õ(κ) iterations. We accomplish this by extending the Hybrid Proximal
Extragradient (HPE) framework, achieving fast global and local convergence rates
for strongly convex functions with access to a noisy Hessian oracle.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we focus on the use of second-order methods for solving the optimization problem
min f (x),

x∈Rd

(1)

where f : Rd → R is strongly convex and twice differentiable. There is an extensive literature
on second-order methods and their fast local convergence properties; e.g., [2–5]. However, these
results necessitate access to the exact Hessian, which can pose computational challenges. To address
this issue, several studies have explored scenarios where only the exact gradient can be queried,
while a stochastic estimate of the Hessian is available—similar to the setting we investigate in this
paper. This oracle model is commonly encountered in large-scale machine learning problems, as
computing the gradient is often much less expensive than computing the Hessian, and approximating
the Hessian
a more affordable approach. Specifically, consider a finite-sum minimization problem
Pis
n
minx∈Rd i=1 fi (x), where n denotes the number of data points and d denotes the dimension of
the problem. To achieve a fast convergence rate, standard first-order methods need to compute one
full gradient in each iteration, resulting in a per-iteration computational cost of O(nd). In contrast,
implementing a second-order method such as damped Newton’s method involves computing the
full Hessian, which costs O(nd2 ). An inexact Hessian estimate can be constructed efficiently at a
cost of O(sd2 ), where s is the sketch size or subsampling size [1, 6]. Hence, when the number of
samples n significantly exceeds d, the per-iteration cost of stochastic second-order methods becomes
comparable to that of first-order methods. Moreover, using second-order information often reduces
the number of iterations needed to converge, thereby lowering overall computational complexity.
A common template among stochastic second-order methods is to combine a deterministic secondorder method, such as Newton’s method or cubic regularized Newton method, with techniques such
as Hessian subsampling [7–12] or Hessian sketching [4, 6, 13] that only require a noisy estimate
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

