Trap-MID: Trapdoor-based Defense against Model
Inversion Attacks
Zhen-Ting Liu
National Taiwan University
r11922034@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Shang-Tse Chen
National Taiwan University
stchen@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Model Inversion (MI) attacks pose a significant threat to the privacy of Deep
Neural Networks by recovering training data distribution from well-trained models. While existing defenses often rely on regularization techniques to reduce
information leakage, they remain vulnerable to recent attacks. In this paper, we
propose the Trapdoor-based Model Inversion Defense (Trap-MID) to mislead MI
attacks. A trapdoor is integrated into the model to predict a specific label when
the input is injected with the corresponding trigger. Consequently, this trapdoor
information serves as the "shortcut" for MI attacks, leading them to extract trapdoor triggers rather than private data. We provide theoretical insights into the
impacts of trapdoor’s effectiveness and naturalness on deceiving MI attacks. In
addition, empirical experiments demonstrate the state-of-the-art defense performance of Trap-MID against various MI attacks without the requirements for extra
data or large computational overhead. Our source code is publicly available at
https://github.com/ntuaislab/Trap-MID.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been successfully applied in various domains. However, training
DNNs could involve sensitive data like facial recognition and medical diagnosis, which raises privacy
concerns. Model Inversion (MI) stands as one of the important privacy attacks aimed at reconstructing
private data within specific classes from a well-trained model. For example, an adversary may recover
the training images of specific identities from a facial recognition system.
MI attacks were first introduced by Fredrikson et al. [1, 2], reconstructing private attributes from
low-capacity models. After that, Zhang et al. [3] proposed Generative Model-Inversion (GMI) attacks
to reconstruct private images from DNNs, utilizing Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) as a
general prior. This GAN-based framework has been widely adopted by later attacks [4–11]. Among
them, PLG-MI [8] achieves state-of-the-art attack performance. Previous works also demonstrated
the efficacy of MI attacks under black-box [9, 10, 12] or label-only [11, 13] settings. In this paper,
we focus on defending against white-box attacks, which pose a more challenging scenario.
Most existing defenses focus on reducing the information leakage through Differential Privacy (DP)
[1, 3], dependency regularization [14, 15], or manipulating the loss landscape [16]. However, these
methods remain vulnerable to recent MI attacks [16]. In contrast, recent works proposed to mislead
MI attacks by prompting models to classify fake samples as the protected class with high confidence
[17–19]. Although effective, these misleading-based strategies face challenges, including additional
data requirements and substantial computational overhead. Furthermore, they typically protect only a
single or a limited set of classes, while other defenses aim to secure all classes simultaneously.
Sharing a similar idea, Shan et al. [20] introduced Trapdoor-enabled Adversarial Detection (TeD)
against targeted adversarial attacks, which aims to change the model behaviors by applying adversarial
perturbations to the input data. Instead of training a robust model against such perturbations, TeD
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

