Spiking Token Mixer:
An Event-Driven Friendly Former Structure for
Spiking Neural Networks

Shikuang Deng1∗ , Yuhang Wu1∗ , Kangrui Du1,2 , Shi Gu1,3B
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
3
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, UESTC
dengsk@uestc.edu.cn, gus@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Spiking neural networks (SNNs), inspired by biological processes, use spike
signals for inter-layer communication, presenting an energy-efficient alternative to
traditional neural networks. To realize the theoretical advantages of SNNs in energy
efficiency, it is essential to deploy them onto neuromorphic chips. On clock-driven
synchronous chips, employing shorter time steps can enhance energy efficiency
but reduce SNN performance. Compared to the clock-driven synchronous chip,
the event-driven asynchronous chip achieves much lower energy consumption
but only supports some specific network operations. Recently, a series of SNN
projects have achieved tremendous success, significantly improving the SNN’s
performance. However, event-driven asynchronous chips do not support some
of the proposed structures, making it impossible to integrate these SNNs into
asynchronous hardware. In response to these problems, we propose the Spiking
Token Mixer (STMixer) architecture, which consists exclusively of operations
supported by asynchronous scenarios, including convolutional, fully connected
layers and residual paths. Our series of experiments also demonstrates that STMixer
achieves performance on par with spiking transformers in synchronous scenarios
with very low timesteps. This indicates its ability to achieve the same level of
performance with lower power consumption in synchronous scenarios. The codes
are available at https://github.com/brain-intelligence-lab/STMixer_
demo.

1

Introduction

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are bio-inspired neural networks that use spike signals as a carrier
for inter-layer transmission. Because of the spiking mechanism, SNNs have the potential to turn
high-precision multiplication into addition, which makes them a better energy-saving infrastructure
[Maass, 1997, Roy et al., 2019]. However, such an advantage in efficiency is not guaranteed for
typical hardware [Kim et al., 2019] but for neuromorphic chips [Akopyan et al., 2015, Davies et al.,
2018b, Pei et al., 2019]. The computational energy of the synchronous neuromorphic hardware
is affected by the amount of calculation, the spike frequency, and the SNN time steps [Rathi and
Roy, 2020, Li et al., 2021]. And synchronous hardware provides support for nearly all matrix
operations, even allowing for the execution of mixed networks that combine the ANN and SNN.
In order to achieve low power consumption on synchronous hardware, SNNs must consider using
* Equal contribution
B Corresponding author
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

