Scaling Law for Time Series Forecasting

Jingzhe Shi1∗, Qinwei Ma1∗, Huan Ma2 , Lei Li3,4 B
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
2
Zhili College, Tsinghua University
3
University of Copenhagen 4 University of Washington
1,2
{shi-jz21,mqw21,mah21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, 3,4 lilei@di.ku.dk
1

Abstract
Scaling law that rewards large datasets, complex models and enhanced data granularity has been observed in various fields of deep learning. Yet, studies on time
series forecasting have cast doubt on scaling behaviors of deep learning methods
for time series forecasting: while more training data improves performance, more
capable models do not always outperform less capable models, and longer input
horizons may hurt performance for some models. We propose a theory for scaling
law for time series forecasting that can explain these seemingly abnormal behaviors.
We take into account the impact of dataset size and model complexity, as well as
time series data granularity, particularly focusing on the look-back horizon, an
aspect that has been unexplored in previous theories. Furthermore, we empirically
evaluate various models using a diverse set of time series forecasting datasets,
which (1) verifies the validity of scaling law on dataset size and model complexity within the realm of time series forecasting, and (2) validates our theoretical
framework, particularly regarding the influence of look back horizon. We hope
our findings may inspire new models targeting time series forecasting datasets
of limited size, as well as large foundational datasets and models for time series
forecasting in future work.2

1

Introduction

Because of the practical value of time series forecasting, past years have seen rapid development for
time series forecasting methods using the paradigm of neural network training. Neural Nets utilize
different model architectures, including FFN-based [1, 2, 3], Transformer-based [4, 5, 6, 7, 8] and
Convolution-based [9, 10] neural nets have been proposed. Starting from around 2022, some previous
work [1, 11, 7, 10] proposed that powerful models could be enhanced by extending the look-back
horizon because more historical information can be utilized. However, our experiments (Figure 3)
show that this claim may not hold for datasets in practice with a certain amount of training data:
optimal horizon does exist, and it will increase if the amount of available training data increases. This
calls for a more thorough understanding of the impact of horizon and dataset size on forecasting loss.
In Natural Language Processing (NLP) [12, 13], Computer Vision (CV) [14] and other fields in deep
learning, the impact of dataset size, model size and data granularity on performance is sometimes
summarized as the Scaling Law: larger dataset, larger models and more detailed data granularity
improves performance in these cases, and theories [15, 16] have been proposed to explain these
behaviors. However, these theories do not lay emphasis on the horizon of time series, hence
cannot be used directly to explain the impact of the horizon.
∗

Equal Contribution.
Code for our experiments has been made public at:
ScalingLawForTimeSeriesForecasting.
2

https://github.com/JingzheShi/

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

