Scaling White-Box Transformers for Vision

Jinrui Yang⋆1 Xianhang Li⋆1 Druv Pai2
Yuyin Zhou1 Yi Ma2 Yaodong Yu†2 Cihang Xie†1
⋆

equal technique contribution, † equal advising
1

UC Santa Cruz

2

UC Berkeley

Abstract
CRATE , a white-box transformer architecture designed to learn compressed and
sparse representations, offers an intriguing alternative to standard vision transformers (ViTs) due to its inherent mathematical interpretability. Despite extensive
investigations into the scaling behaviors of language and vision transformers, the
scalability of CRATE remains an open question which this paper aims to address.
Specifically, we propose CRATE-α, featuring strategic yet minimal modifications to
the sparse coding block in the CRATE architecture design, and a light training recipe
designed to improve the scalability of CRATE. Through extensive experiments, we
demonstrate that CRATE-α can effectively scale with larger model sizes and datasets.
For example, our CRATE-α-B substantially outperforms the prior best CRATE-B
model accuracy on ImageNet classification by 3.7%, achieving an accuracy of
83.2%. Meanwhile, when scaling further, our CRATE-α-L obtains an ImageNet
classification accuracy of 85.1%. More notably, these model performance improvements are achieved while preserving, and potentially even enhancing the
interpretability of learned CRATE models, as we demonstrate through showing that
the learned token representations of increasingly larger trained CRATE-α models
yield increasingly higher-quality unsupervised object segmentation of images. The
project page is https://rayjryang.github.io/CRATE-alpha/.

1

Introduction

Over the past several years, the Transformer architecture [42] has dominated deep representation
learning for natural language processing (NLP), image processing, and visual computing [8, 2, 9,
5, 12]. However, the design of the Transformer architecture and its many variants remains largely
empirical and lacks a rigorous mathematical interpretation. This has largely hindered the development
of new Transformer variants with improved efficiency or interpretability. The recent white-box
Transformer model CRATE [46] addresses this gap by deriving a simplified Transformer block via
unrolled optimization on the so-called sparse rate reduction representation learning objective.
More specifically, layers of the white-box CRATE architecture are mathematically derived and fully
explainable as unrolled gradient descent-like iterations for optimizing the sparse rate reduction. The
self-attention blocks of CRATE explicitly conduct compression via denoising features against learned
low-dimensional subspaces, and the MLP block is replaced by an incremental sparsification (via
ISTA [1, 11]) of the features. As shown in previous work [47], besides mathematical interpretability, the learned CRATE models and features also have much better semantic interpretability than
conventional transformers, i.e., visualizing features of an image naturally forms a zero-shot image
segmentation of that image, even when the model is only trained on classification.
Scaling model size is widely regarded as a pathway to improved performance and emergent properties [44, 40, 41, 14]. Until now, the deployment of CRATE has been limited to relatively modest scales.
The most extensive model described to date is the base model size encompasses 77.6M parameters
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

