A Generative Model of Symmetry Transformations

James Urquhart Allingham
University of Cambridge
jua23@cam.ac.uk

Bruno Kacper Mlodozeniec
University of Cambridge
MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
bkm28@cam.ac.uk

Shreyas Padhy
University of Cambridge
sp2058@cam.ac.uk

Javier Antorán
University of Cambridge
Ångstrom AI
ja666@cam.ac.uk

Richard E. Turner
University of Cambridge
ret26@cam.ac.uk

Eric Nalisnick
University of Amsterdam
e.t.nalisnick@uva.nl

David Krueger
University of Cambridge
david.scott.krueger@gmail.com

José Miguel Hernández-Lobato
University of Cambridge
jmh233@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Correctly capturing the symmetry transformations of data can lead to efficient
models with strong generalization capabilities, though methods incorporating
symmetries often require prior knowledge. While recent advancements have been
made in learning those symmetries directly from the dataset, most of this work has
focused on the discriminative setting. In this paper, we take inspiration from group
theoretic ideas to construct a generative model that explicitly aims to capture the
data’s approximate symmetries. This results in a model that, given a prespecified
broad set of possible symmetries, learns to what extent, if at all, those symmetries
are actually present. Our model can be seen as a generative process for data
augmentation. We provide a simple algorithm for learning our generative model
and empirically demonstrate its ability to capture symmetries under affine and
color transformations, in an interpretable way. Combining our symmetry model
with standard generative models results in higher marginal test-log-likelihoods and
improved data efficiency.

1

Introduction
Figure 1: Left: An example of a symmetry-aware
x
x̂
Tη (x̂)

p (η | x̂)
η

p (x | x̂)

generative process that we aim to model in this paper. A prototype x̂ ( ) is transformed by Tη into
an observation x ( , , ). The transformation—
e.g., rotation—is parameterized by η—e.g., an angle. Right: The corresponding orbit—i.e., the set
of all possible instances of x that can result from
applying Tη —with a few elements shown. Under
this generative process, the prototype is an arbitrary orbit element. Each element in the orbit has
a probability p (x | x̂) induced by p (η | x̂). E.g.,
for handwritten ‘3’s, we expect digits in an upright
orientation with some rotation around, say ±40◦ ,
corresponding to natural variations in handwriting.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

