Cascade Speculative Drafting for Even Faster LLM
Inference
Ziyi Chen

Xiaocong Yang Jiacheng Lin Chenkai Sun
Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang Jie Huang
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{ziyic2, kcchang, jeffhj}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Introduced to enhance the efficiency of large language model (LLM) inference,
speculative decoding operates by having a smaller model generate a draft. A larger
target model then reviews this draft to align with its output, and any acceptance by
the target model results in a reduction of the number of the target model runs, ultimately improving efficiency. However, the drafting process in speculative decoding
includes slow autoregressive generation and allocates equal time to generating
tokens, irrespective of their importance. These inefficiencies collectively contribute
to the suboptimal performance of speculative decoding. To further improve LLM
inference, we introduce Cascade Speculative Drafting (CS Drafting), a speculative
execution algorithm that incorporates two types of cascades. The Vertical Cascade
eliminates autoregressive generation from neural models, while the Horizontal
Cascade optimizes time allocation in drafting for improved efficiency. Combining
both cascades, CS Drafting achieves greater speedup compared to the baselines in
our experiments, while preserving the same output distribution as the target model.1

1

Introduction

The advent of Large Language Models (LLMs), like GPT-4 [17], has marked a significant milestone
in the field of natural language processing (NLP). These models have not only excelled in various
NLP tasks but have also found widespread applications in user-interactive settings, such as chatbots
and virtual assistants. However, these applications involve an extremely high number of users, up
to hundreds of millions daily. To serve in real-time at this scale, a low-latency system is not only
cost-saving but also crucial for keeping the service running. In addition, the sheer scale of the service
means that even a slight improvement in the latency of LLMs can greatly contribute to both the
service provider and the community. Consequently, optimizing the latency of LLMs has become a
critical area of research.
Unfortunately, the ever-growing size of LLMs significantly increases the latency, especially in
long-form generation, as autoregressive LLMs generate tokens one by one. An emerging solution,
known as speculative decoding [14, 4, 25], shows potential to mitigate this issue. In speculative
decoding, a draft model (which is smaller and faster) generates k tokens in each step (with k being
a hyperparameter) autoregressively, and these tokens are then reviewed by a target model (which
is larger and slower) in parallel. In one single run, the target model will accept any tokens aligned
with its output and further generate one token. The drafting process in speculative decoding enables
the target model to generate multiple tokens in a single run while maintaining its output distribution
unchanged. With a properly sized draft model, speculative decoding achieves a speedup of 2 to 3
times, making it a potential method for solving high latency issues.
1

Code is publicly available at https://github.com/lfsszd/CS-Drafting.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

