Full-Atom Peptide Design
with Geometric Latent Diffusion
Xiangzhe Kong1,2 Yinjun Jia3 Wenbing Huang4∗ Yang Liu1,2,5∗
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Tsinghua University
2
Institute for AIR, Tsinghua University 3 School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University
4
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
5
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China

Abstract
Peptide design plays a pivotal role in therapeutics, allowing brand new possibility
to leverage target binding sites that are previously undruggable. Most existing
methods are either inefficient or only concerned with the target-agnostic design of
1D sequences. In this paper, we propose a generative model for full-atom Peptide
design with Geometric LAtent Diffusion (PepGLAD) given the binding site. We
first establish a benchmark consisting of both 1D sequences and 3D structures from
Protein Data Bank (PDB) and literature for systematic evaluation. We then identify
two major challenges of leveraging current diffusion-based models for peptide
design: the full-atom geometry and the variable binding geometry. To tackle the
first challenge, PepGLAD derives a variational autoencoder that first encodes fullatom residues of variable size into fixed-dimensional latent representations, and
then decodes back to the residue space after conducting the diffusion process in the
latent space. For the second issue, PepGLAD explores a receptor-specific affine
transformation to convert the 3D coordinates into a shared standard space, enabling
better generalization ability across different binding shapes. Experimental Results
show that our method not only improves diversity and binding affinity significantly
in the task of sequence-structure co-design, but also excels at recovering reference
structures for binding conformation generation.

1

Introduction

Peptides are short chains of amino acids and acts as vital mediators of many protein-protein interactions in human cells. Designing functional peptides has attracted increasing attention in biological
research and therapeutics, since the highly-flexible conformation space of peptides allows brand new
possibility to target binding sites previously undruggable with antibodies or small molecules [17, 35].
The key of peptide design is to generate peptides that interact compactly with target proteins (see
Figure 1), since they mostly exhibit flexible conformations [20] unless bound to these receptors [60].
Conventional simulation or searching algorithms rely on frequent calculations of physical energy
functions [6, 9], which are inefficient and prone to poor local optimum. Recent advances illuminate
the remarkable success of exploiting geometric deep generative models, particularly the equivariant
diffusion models [45, 72], for molecule design [21, 39], antibody design [29, 44, 34] and protein
design [64, 28], as well as latent diffusion models further enhancing the performance [71, 18].
Inspired by these successes, a natural idea is leveraging diffusion models for peptide design as well,
which, yet, is challenging in two aspects. From the dataset aspect, existing databases (PepBDB [65],
Propedia [46]) merely collect data from Protein Data Bank (PDB) [5], neither performing filters
according to practical relevance [49] and redundancy, nor providing an adequate split for evaluation.
∗

Correspondence to Wenbing Huang <hwenbing@126.com>, Yang Liu <liuyang2011@tsinghua.edu.cn>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

