SceneCraft: Layout-Guided 3D Scene Generation

Xiuyu Yang∗1
1

Yunze Man∗2

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Jun-Kun Chen2
2

Yu-Xiong Wang2

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

https://orangesodahub.github.io/SceneCraft

Abstract
The creation of complex 3D scenes tailored to user specifications has been a tedious
and challenging task with traditional 3D modeling tools. Although some pioneering methods have achieved automatic text-to-3D generation, they are generally
limited to small-scale scenes with restricted control over the shape and texture.
We introduce SceneCraft, a novel method for generating detailed indoor scenes
that adhere to textual descriptions and spatial layout preferences provided by users.
Central to our method is a rendering-based technique, which converts 3D semantic
layouts into multi-view 2D proxy maps. Furthermore, we design a semantic and
depth conditioned diffusion model to generate multi-view images, which are used
to learn a neural radiance field (NeRF) as the final scene representation. Without
the constraints of panorama image generation, we surpass previous methods in
supporting complicated indoor space generation beyond a single room, even as
complicated as a whole multi-bedroom apartment with irregular shapes and layouts. Through experimental analysis, we demonstrate that our method significantly
outperforms existing approaches in complex indoor scene generation with diverse
textures, consistent geometry, and realistic visual quality.

1

Introduction

The generation of diverse and complex 3D scenes plays a critical role in enhancing virtual and
augmented reality (VR/AR) experiences, video game development, and the advancement of humancentric embodied AI. However, manually creating these complex 3D scenes is a tedious procedure that
requires extensive knowledge and proficiency in 3D modeling tools [13, 14]. The recent success of
2D generative models [23, 50, 55] fuels the development of a line of text-to-3D work [31, 46, 63, 66].
Although these methods have achieved impressive object generation performance, scaling from objectlevel to scene-level generation presents significant challenges. It involves managing a considerably
larger space with complicated semantics while ensuring 3D consistency (in terms of shape, texture,
occlusion, etc.) across various camera perspectives.
Recent advances in scene-level 3D generation [17, 24, 37, 60, 75] have opened new pathways for
creating larger-scale virtual environments. Most work leverages image inpainting [17, 24, 75] or
multi-view diffusion methods [37, 60] to optimize a text-guided 3D scene. While generating locally
convincing textured meshes, these methods share two common drawbacks: (1) Focusing on local
coherence, they often struggle to accurately depict geometrically consistent rooms with plausible
layouts and rich semantic details. (2) Conditioned only on textual prompts, these methods fall short in
terms of offering precise control over the entire scene’s composition and arrangement. Although some
concurrent research [16, 45, 53] has explored the generation of an indoor environment conditioned
on user-defined 3D layouts, it is restricted to creating small-scale compositions involving multiple
* Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

