State Space Models on Temporal Graphs:
A First-Principles Study

Jintang Li1∗, Ruofan Wu2∗ , Xinzhou Jin1 , Boqun Ma3 , Liang Chen1†, Zibin Zheng1
1
Sun Yat-sen University, 2 Coupang, 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
# {lijt55,jinxzh5}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,{wuruofan1989,boqun.mbq}@gmail
{chenliang6,zhzibin}@mail.sysu.edu.cn}

Abstract
Over the past few years, research on deep graph learning has shifted from static
graphs to temporal graphs in response to real-world complex systems that exhibit
dynamic behaviors. In practice, temporal graphs are formalized as an ordered
sequence of static graph snapshots observed at discrete time points. Sequence
models such as RNNs or Transformers have long been the predominant backbone
networks for modeling such temporal graphs. Yet, despite the promising results,
RNNs struggle with long-range dependencies, while transformers are burdened by
quadratic computational complexity. Recently, state space models (SSMs), which
are framed as discretized representations of an underlying continuous-time linear
dynamical system, have garnered substantial attention and achieved breakthrough
advancements in independent sequence modeling. In this work, we undertake a
principled investigation that extends SSM theory to temporal graphs by integrating
structural information into the online approximation objective via the adoption
of a Laplacian regularization term. The emergent continuous-time system introduces novel algorithmic challenges, thereby necessitating our development of
G RAPH SSM, a graph state space model for modeling the dynamics of temporal graphs. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our
G RAPH SSM framework across various temporal graph benchmarks.

1

Introduction

As a class of neural networks designed to operate directly on graph-structured data, graph neural
networks (GNNs) [21, 43, 24] have achieved remarkable success and have established new state-ofthe-art performance across a broad spectrum of graph-based learning tasks [19]. While significant
progress has been made in researching static graphs, many real-world networks, such as social, traffic,
and financial networks may exhibit temporal behaviors that carry valuable time information [20, 23].
This gives rise to temporal (dynamic) graphs, wherein the nodes and edges of the graph may undergo
constant or periodic changes over time. In applications where temporal graphs arise, modeling
and exploiting the dynamic nature of the continuously evolving graph is crucial in representing the
underlying data and achieving high predictive performance [22, 44, 41].
Learning over temporal graphs is typically approached as a sequence modeling problem in which
graph snapshots form a sequence [34]. This often involves challenges related to long graph sequences
and scalability issues [25]. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [46, 4, 18] have historically dominated
sequence modeling over the last years. However, they have long been plagued by poor capability
in modeling long sequences due to rapid forgetting. This hampers their performance in temporal
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

