Scaling Laws for Reward Model Overoptimization in
Direct Alignment Algorithms

Rafael Rafailov∗
Stanford University

Yaswanth Chittepu∗
UMass Amherst

Ryan Park∗
Stanford University

rafailov@cs.stanford.edu

ychittepu@umass.edu

rypark@stanford.edu

Harshit Sikchi∗
UT Austin

Joey Hejna∗
Stanford University

W. Bradley Knox
UT Austin

hsikchi@utexas.edu

jhejna@cs.stanford.edu

bradknox@cs.utexas.edu

Chelsea Finn
Stanford University

Scott Niekum
UMass Amherst

cbfinn@cs.stanford.edu

sniekum@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) has been crucial to the
recent success of Large Language Models (LLMs), however, it is often a complex
and brittle process. In the classical RLHF framework, a reward model is first trained
to represent human preferences, which is in turn used by an online reinforcement
learning (RL) algorithm to optimize the LLM. A prominent issue with such methods is reward over-optimization or reward hacking, where performance as measured
by the learned proxy reward model increases, but true quality plateaus or even deteriorates. Direct Alignment Algorithms (DAAs) like Direct Preference Optimization
have emerged as alternatives to the classical RLHF pipeline by circumventing the
reward modeling phase. However, although DAAs do not use a separate proxy
reward model, they still commonly deteriorate from over-optimization. While
the so-called reward hacking phenomenon is not well-defined for DAAs, we still
uncover similar trends: at higher KL budgets, DAA algorithms exhibit similar
degradation patterns to their classic RLHF counterparts. In particular, we find that
DAA methods deteriorate not only across a wide range of KL budgets but also often
before even a single epoch of the dataset is completed. Through extensive empirical
experimentation, this work formulates and formalizes the reward over-optimization
or hacking problem for DAAs and explores its consequences across objectives,
training regimes, and model scales.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) have broadened their capabilities significantly, enabling applications in code generation, mathematical reasoning, tool use, and interactive
communication. These improvements have popularized LLMs across various domains. Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) has been instrumental in these advances and is now
integral to sophisticated LLM training regimes [10, 55]. Before alignment, LLMs, trained on vast text
corpses to predict subsequent tokens [45, 8] are often unwieldy and hard to use. Today, leading LLMs
incorporate variants of the RLHF framework [14, 69, 36] to align them with human intent, which
∗

Equal Contribution, Dice Rolling

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

