Flaws can be Applause: Unleashing Potential of
Segmenting Ambiguous Objects in SAM

Chenxin Li1∗, Yuzhi Huang2∗, Wuyang Li1 , Hengyu Liu1 ,
Xinyu Liu1 , Qing Xu3 , Zhen Chen4 , Yue Huang2 , Yixuan Yuan1†
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Xiamen University
3
University of Nottingham Ningbo China 4 Yale University

Abstract
As the vision foundation models like the Segment Anything Model (SAM) demonstrate potent universality, they also present challenges in giving ambiguous and
uncertain predictions. Significant variations in the model output and granularity
can occur with simply subtle changes in the prompt, contradicting the consensus
requirement for the robustness of a model. While some established works have
been dedicated to stabilizing and fortifying the prediction of SAM, this paper takes
a unique path to explore how this flaw can be inverted into an advantage when
modeling inherently ambiguous data distributions. We introduce an optimization
framework based on a conditional variational autoencoder, which jointly models the
prompt and the granularity of the object with a latent probability distribution. This
approach enables the model to adaptively perceive and represent the real ambiguous
label distribution, taming SAM to produce a series of diverse, convincing, and
reasonable segmentation outputs controllably. Extensive experiments on several
practical deployment scenarios involving ambiguity demonstrates the exceptional
performance of our framework. Project page: https://a-sa-m.github.io/.

1

Introduction

The advent of Visual Foundational Models (VFMs) such as the Segment Anything Model (SAM) [22]
has been unprecedented, largely due to the availability of vast datasets and computational resources.
These models have exhibited remarkable generalization capabilities in zero-shot scenarios and the
capacity to interact with human feedback. SAM, in particular, employs a specialized data engine to
manage 11 million image masks, using a unique prompt-based segmentation framework to generate
accurate masks for any object within a visual context, largely extending the capacity and generality of
segmentation [27]. Such successes have been widely extended to various domains, such as medical
imaging analysis [8, 35, 28], remote sensing [48], etc.
However, it has been observed that SAM suffers from severe predictive ambiguity to segment desired
concepts [22] in practical scenarios. To uncover the factual basis, we delve into this ambiguity
and detail it into two flaws according to experimental insight. Specifically, the first flaw lies in
that SAM prediction is sensitive to slightly different prompt variants. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), we
ground SAM into a realistic clinical scenario to segment the lesion in CT images. Even though three
medical experts uniformly give rational box prompts covering the lesion, SAM, unfortunately, makes
enormous differences among them, even including one wrong case. Further, we provide detailed
statistics regarding IoU over the small perturbation (only 5 pixels) of box prompts, as shown in Fig. 1
∗
†

Equal Contribution: {chenxinli@link.cuhk.edu.hk, yzhuang13@stu.xmu.edu.cn}.
Corresponding Author: {yxyuan@ee.cuhk.edu.hk}.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

