B-ary Tree Push-Pull Method is Provably Efficient
for Distributed Learning on Heterogeneous Data

Runze You1 Shi Pu1∗
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
runzeyou@link.cuhk.edu.cn, pushi@cuhk.edu.cn
1

Abstract
This paper considers the distributed learning problem where a group of agents
cooperatively minimizes the summation of their local cost functions based on
peer-to-peer communication. Particularly, we propose a highly efficient algorithm,
termed “B-ary Tree Push-Pull” (BTPP), that employs two B-ary spanning trees
for distributing the information related to the parameters and stochastic gradients
across the network. The simple method is efficient in communication since each
agent interacts with at most (B + 1) neighbors per iteration. More importantly,
BTPP achieves linear speedup for smooth nonconvex and strongly convex objective
functions with only Õ(n) and Õ(1) transient iterations, respectively, significantly
outperforming the state-of-the-art results to the best of our knowledge. Our code is
available at https://github.com/ryou98/BTPP.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider a group of agents, labeled as N := {1, 2, . . . , n}, in which each agent i
holds its own local cost function fi : Rp → R and communicates only within its direct neighborhood.
We investigate how the agents collaborate to locate x ∈ Rp that minimizes the average of all the cost
functions:
!
n
1X
fi (x) ,
(1)
min f (x) =
x∈Rp
n i=1
where fi (x) := Eξi ∼Di [Fi (x; ξi )]. Here ξi denotes the local data of agent i that follows the local
n
distribution Di . Data heterogeneity exists if {Di }i=1 are not identical.
To solve problem (1), we assume each agent i queries a stochastic oracle (SO) to obtain noisy
gradient samples. Stochastic gradients appear in many areas including online distributed learning
[23, 3], reinforcement learning [17, 15], generative modeling [5, 6], and parameter estimation [2, 27].
Assumption 1.1 ensures that the gradient estimator gi (x; ξi ) remains unbiased with a bounded
variance for any given x, while independent samples ξi are gathered continuously over time. In
addition, the assumption is critical in simulation-based optimization as gradient estimation often
encounters noise from multiple sources, such as modeling and discretization errors, or limitations
due to finite sample sizes in Monte-Carlo methods [7].
Modern optimization and machine learning typically involve tremendous data samples and model
parameters. The scale of these problems calls for efficient distributed algorithms across multiple
computing nodes. Recently, distributed algorithms dealing with problem (1) have been studied
extensively in the literature; see, e.g., [19, 14, 4, 34]. Traditional distributed learning approaches
typically follow a centralized master-worker setup, where each worker node communicates with a
(virtual) central server [12]. However, such a communication pattern incurs significant communication
overheads and long latency, especially when the training requires a large number of computing nodes.
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

