SDP4Bit: Toward 4-bit Communication Quantization
in Sharded Data Parallelism for LLM Training

Jinda Jia∗
Indiana University
jindjia@iu.edu

Cong Xie∗
ByteDance Inc.
cong.xie@bytedance.com

Daoce Wang
Indiana University
daocwang@iu.edu
Baixi Sun
Indiana University
sunbaix@iu.edu

Hao Feng
Indiana University
haofeng@iu.edu

Haibin Lin
ByteDance Inc.
haibin.lin@bytedance.com

Xin Liu
ByteDance Inc.
liuxin.ai@bytedance.com

Hanlin Lu
ByteDance Inc.
hanlin.lu@bytedance.com
Chengming Zhang
University of Houston
czhang59@cougarnet.uh.edu
Zhi Zhang
ByteDance Inc.
zhangzhi.joshua@bytedance.com
Dingwen Tao
Indiana University
ditao@iu.edu

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed a clear trend towards language models with an everincreasing number of parameters, as well as the growing training overhead and
memory usage. Distributed training, particularly through Sharded Data Parallelism
(ShardedDP) which partitions optimizer states among workers, has emerged as
a crucial technique to mitigate training time and memory usage. Yet, a major
challenge in the scalability of ShardedDP is the intensive communication of weights
and gradients. While compression techniques can alleviate this issue, they often
result in worse accuracy. Driven by this limitation, we propose SDP4Bit (Toward
4Bit Communication Quantization in Sharded Data Parallelism for LLM Training),
which effectively reduces the communication of weights and gradients to nearly
4 bits via two novel techniques: quantization on weight differences, and twolevel gradient smooth quantization. Furthermore, SDP4Bit presents an algorithmsystem co-design with runtime optimization to minimize the computation overhead
of compression. In addition to the theoretical guarantees of convergence, we
empirically evaluate the accuracy of SDP4Bit on the pre-training of GPT models
with up to 6.7 billion parameters, and the results demonstrate a negligible impact
on training loss. Furthermore, speed experiments show that SDP4Bit achieves up
to 4.08× speedup in end-to-end throughput on a scale of 128 GPUs.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly utilized across various applications, leading to
a trend toward larger model sizes. This expansion in model size significantly escalates training
overheads, making the process more costly and resource-intensive. To mitigate the time-consuming
∗

Equal Contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

