Fast T2T: Optimization Consistency Speeds Up
Diffusion-Based Training-to-Testing Solving for
Combinatorial Optimization

1

Yang Li1† , Jinpei Guo1† , Runzhong Wang2 , Hongyuan Zha3 , Junchi Yan1 ∗
Dept. of CSE & School of AI & MOE Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
{yanglily,mike0728,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn
runzhong@mit.edu, zhahy@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion models have recently advanced Combinatorial Optimization (CO) as
a powerful backbone for neural solvers. However, their iterative sampling process
requiring denoising across multiple noise levels incurs substantial overhead. We
propose to learn direct mappings from different noise levels to the optimal solution
for a given instance, facilitating high-quality generation with minimal shots. This
is achieved through an optimization consistency training protocol, which, for a
given instance, minimizes the difference among samples originating from varying
generative trajectories and time steps relative to the optimal solution. The proposed
model enables fast single-step solution generation while retaining the option of
multi-step sampling to trade for sampling quality, which offers a more effective
and efficient alternative backbone for neural solvers. In addition, within the
training-to-testing (T2T) framework, to bridge the gap between training on historical instances and solving new instances, we introduce a novel consistency-based
gradient search scheme during the test stage, enabling more effective exploration
of the solution space learned during training. It is achieved by updating the latent
solution probabilities under objective gradient guidance during the alternation of
noise injection and denoising steps. We refer to this model as Fast T2T. Extensive
experiments on two popular tasks, the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) and
Maximal Independent Set (MIS), demonstrate the superiority of Fast T2T regarding
both solution quality and efficiency, even outperforming LKH given limited time
budgets. Notably, Fast T2T with merely one-step generation and one-step gradient
search can mostly outperform the SOTA diffusion-based counterparts that require
hundreds of steps, while achieving tens of times speedup. The codes are publicly
available at https://github.com/Thinklab-SJTU/Fast-T2T.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial Optimization (CO) problems, which involve optimizing discrete variables under
given objectives, are essential in computer science and operational research. Due to the inherent
computational difficulty, e.g. NP-hardness, solving efficiency poses significant challenges and
requires exhaustive human efforts to design solving heuristics. Recent progress in this domain has
shown promise in automatically learning heuristics with Machine Learning (ML) in a data-driven
∗
Correspondence author. † denotes equal contribution. This work was partly supported by NSFC (92370201,
62222607) and Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Major Project under Grant 2021SHZDZX0102.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

