Scribbles for All: Benchmarking Scribble Supervised
Segmentation Across Datasets

Wolfgang Boettcher1
1

Lukas Hoyer2

Ozan Unal2

Jan Eric Lenssen1

Bernt Schiele1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
2
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
{wolfgang.boettcher, jlenssen, schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de
{lhoyer, ouenal}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
In this work, we introduce Scribbles for All, a label and training data generation algorithm for semantic segmentation trained on scribble labels. Training or
fine-tuning semantic segmentation models with weak supervision has become an
important topic recently and was subject to significant advances in model quality.
In this setting, scribbles are a promising label type to achieve high quality segmentation results while requiring a much lower annotation effort than usual pixel-wise
dense semantic segmentation annotations. The main limitation of scribbles as
source for weak supervision is the lack of challenging datasets for scribble segmentation, which hinders the development of novel methods and conclusive evaluations.
To overcome this limitation, Scribbles for All provides scribble labels for several
popular segmentation datasets and provides an algorithm to automatically generate
scribble labels for any dataset with dense annotations, paving the way for new
insights and model advancements in the field of weakly supervised segmentation.
In addition to providing datasets and algorithm, we evaluate state-of-the-art segmentation models on our datasets and show that models trained with our synthetic
labels perform competitively with respect to models trained on manual labels.
Thus, our datasets enable state-of-the-art research into methods for scribble-labeled
semantic segmentation. The datasets, scribble generation algorithm, and baselines
are publicly available at https://github.com/wbkit/Scribbles4All.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation is one of the most crucial tasks for computer vision research and a key
component to scene understanding in many applications. While substantial advancements have
been made in designing highly accurate segmentation architectures [25, 6, 8, 7, 17], those models
heavily rely on detailed labels. The crafting of such dense labels constitutes a laborious and resourceintensive process. This limitation impedes the availability of specialized datasets and the practical
deployment of vision algorithms in real-world scenarios. It is particularly pronounced in selfdriving applications, which demand immense amounts of training data [2, 32, 9] or in domains with
fine-grained classes [24, 54]. Those settings necessitate models capable of dealing with complex interobject relations, varying shapes, and scales. Even in the current era of large pre-trained foundation
models [27, 19], fine-tuning these models on custom, labeled data still remains a necessity for many
applications [48, 4, 42].
One popular approach to addressing the issue of label cost is weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) [3, 49, 43] which has made significant progress in recent years. WSSS methods use
incomplete labelling in the form of image level labels [51] or bounding boxes [18, 26, 50] to label
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

