Cooperative Hardware-Prompt Learning for Snapshot
Compressive Imaging

Jiamian Wang1∗ , Zongliang Wu2,3 , Yulun Zhang4 , Xin Yuan2 , Tao Lin2 , Zhiqiang Tao1∗
1
Rochester Institute of Technology, 2 Westlake University,
3
Zhejiang University, 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Existing reconstruction models in snapshot compressive imaging systems (SCI)
are trained with a single well-calibrated hardware instance, making their performance vulnerable to hardware shifts and limited in adapting to multiple hardware
configurations. To facilitate cross-hardware learning, previous efforts attempt to
directly collect multi-hardware data and perform centralized training, which is
impractical due to severe user data privacy concerns and hardware heterogeneity
across different platforms/institutions. In this study, we explicitly consider data
privacy and heterogeneity in cooperatively optimizing SCI systems by proposing a
Federated Hardware-Prompt learning (FedHP) framework. Rather than mitigating
the client drift by rectifying the gradients, which only takes effect on the learning
manifold but fails to solve the heterogeneity rooted in the input data space, FedHP
learns a hardware-conditioned prompter to align inconsistent data distribution
across clients, serving as an indicator of the data inconsistency among different
hardware (e.g., coded apertures). Extensive experimental results demonstrate that
the proposed FedHP coordinates the pre-trained model to multiple hardware configurations, outperforming prevalent FL frameworks for 0.35dB under challenging
heterogeneous settings. Moreover, a Snapshot Spectral Heterogeneous Dataset has
been built upon multiple practical SCI systems. Data and code are aveilable at
https://github.com/Jiamian-Wang/FedHP-Snapshot-Compressive-Imaging.git

1

Introduction

The technology of snapshot compressive imaging (SCI) [Yuan et al., 2021] has gained prominence
in the realm of computational imaging. Taking an example of hyperspectral image reconstruction,
the spectral SCI [Gehm et al., 2007] can fast capture and compress 3D hyperspectral signals as
2D measurements through optical hardware, and then restore the original signals with high fidelity
by training deep neural networks [Meng et al., 2020, Miao et al., 2019]. Despite the remarkable
performance [Cai et al., 2022a,b, Lin et al., 2022, Huang et al., 2021, Hu et al., 2022], existing deep
SCI methods are generally trained with a specific hardware configuration, e.g., a well-calibrated
coded aperture (physical mask). The resulting model is vulnerable to hardware shift/perturbation and
limited in adapting to multiple hardware configurations. However, directly learning a reconstruction
model cooperatively from multi-hardware seems to be infeasible due to data proprietary constraint. It
is also non-trivial to coordinate heterogeneous hardware instances with a unified model.
To elaborate, we first recap previous research efforts of centralized learning solutions. A naive
solution is to jointly train a single reconstruction model with data collected from different hardware
configurations, i.e., coded apertures. As shown in Fig. 1 right, this solution enhances the ability
of reconstruction (0.5dB+) by comparison to a single hardware training scenario. However, the
∗

Corresponding authors: Jiamian Wang (jw4905@rit.edu) and Zhiqiang Tao (zhiqiang.tao@rit.edu)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

