Adaptive Variance Reduction for Stochastic
Optimization under Weaker Assumptions

1

Wei Jiang1 , Sifan Yang1,2 , Yibo Wang1,2 , Lijun Zhang1,2,∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
{jiangw, yangsf, wangyb, zhanglj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper explores adaptive variance reduction methods for stochastic optimization
based on the STORM technique. Existing adaptive extensions of STORM rely
on strong assumptions like bounded gradients and bounded function values, or
suffer an additional O(log T ) term in the convergence rate. To address these
limitations, we introduce a novel adaptive STORM method that achieves an optimal
convergence rate of O(T −1/3 ) for non-convex functions with our newly designed
learning rate strategy. Compared with existing approaches, our method requires
weaker assumptions and attains the optimal convergence rate without the additional
O(log T ) term. We also extend the proposed technique to stochastic compositional
optimization, obtaining the same optimal rate of O(T −1/3 ). Furthermore, we
investigate the non-convex finite-sum problem and develop another innovative
adaptive variance reduction method that achieves an optimal convergence rate of
O(n1/4 T −1/2 ), where n represents the number of component functions. Numerical
experiments across various tasks validate the effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

This paper investigates the stochastic optimization problem
min f (x),

x∈Rd

(1)

where f : Rd 7→ R is a smooth non-convex function. We assume that only noisy estimations of its
gradient ∇f (x) can be accessed, denoted as ∇f (x; ξ), where ξ represents the random sample drawn
from a stochastic oracle such that E[∇f (x; ξ)] = ∇f (x).

Problem (1) has been comprehensively investigated in the literature [Duchi et al., 2011, Kingma
and Ba, 2015, Loshchilov and Hutter, 2017], and it is well-known that the classical stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) achieves a convergence rate of O(T −1/4 ), where T denotes the iteration
number [Ghadimi and Lan, 2013]. To further improve the convergence rate, variance reduction
methods have been developed, and attain an improved rate of O(T −1/3 ) under a slightly stronger
smoothness assumption [Fang et al., 2018, Wang et al., 2019]. However, these methods necessitate
the use of a huge batch size in each iteration, which is often impractical to use. To eliminate the
need for large batches, a momentum-based variance reduction method — STORM [Cutkosky and
Orabona, 2019] is introduced, which achieves a convergence rate of O(T −1/3 log T ).

Although aforementioned methods are equipped with convergence guarantees, their analyses rely on
delicate configurations of hyper-parameters, such as the learning rate and the momentum parameter.
To set them properly, the algorithm typically needs to know the value of the smoothness parameter L,
∗

Lijun Zhang is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

