What Makes and Breaks Safety Fine-tuning?
A Mechanistic Study

Samyak Jain
Five AI Ltd.

Philip H.S. Torr
University of Oxford

Ekdeep Singh Lubana
University of Michigan &
CBS, Harvard University

Kemal Oksuz
Five AI Ltd.

Amartya Sanyal
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems &
University of Copenhagen

Tom Joy
Five AI Ltd.

Puneet K. Dokania
Five AI Ltd. &
University of Oxford

Abstract
Safety fine-tuning helps align Large Language Models (LLMs) with human preferences for their safe deployment. To better understand the underlying factors
that make models safe via safety fine-tuning, we design a synthetic data generation framework that captures salient aspects of an unsafe input by modeling
the interaction between the task the model is asked to perform (e.g., “design”)
versus the specific concepts the task is asked to be performed upon (e.g., a “cycle” vs. a “bomb”). Using this, we investigate three well-known safety finetuning methods—supervised safety fine-tuning, direct preference optimization,
and unlearning—and provide significant evidence demonstrating that these methods minimally transform MLP weights to specifically align unsafe inputs into
its weights’ null space. This yields a clustering of inputs based on whether
the model deems them safe or not. Correspondingly, when an adversarial input (e.g., a jailbreak) is provided, its activations are closer to safer samples, leading
to the model processing such an input as if it were safe. Code is available at
https://github.com/fiveai/understanding_safety_finetuning.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are commonly trained via a combination of pre-training on a large
corpus and instruction fine-tuning, wherein the model is supervised to follow instructions (Driess
et al., 2023; Team et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2024). While pre-training enables a model to learn different
capabilities (Wei et al., 2022; Bubeck et al., 2023), instruction fine-tuning enables use of open-ended,
generic inputs to control said capabilities (Ouyang et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2021; Sanh et al., 2021; Bai
et al., 2022; Raffel et al., 2020). Since this pipeline does not restrict what tasks the model can be used
for, potential misuse is left feasible under its purview (Bengio et al., 2023; Anwar et al., 2024): as
long as an instruction can be formulated and the model possesses the relevant capabilities to perform
the instructed task, it will strive to perform it. To prevent such misuse, safety fine-tuning is used as
an additional training phase for LLMs, in which the model is supervised to prioritize generation of
outputs deemed safe as per human preferences. Popular approaches for safety fine-tuning include: (i)
supervised safety fine-tuning (SSFT) (Ouyang et al., 2022); (ii) reinforcement learning with human
feedback (RLHF) (Christiano et al., 2017; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; Stiennon et al., 2020)
and its recent renditions that avoid use of an explicit reward model, e.g., DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023);
and (iii) machine unlearning (Liu et al., 2024). Despite immense use of these protocols to enable
Samyak worked on this research project during his internship at Five AI Oxford Team. Tom participated in this
project during his employment at Five AI Ltd.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

