Can Models Learn Skill Composition from Examples?

Haoyu Zhao1,2

Simran Kaur1,2 Dingli Yu1,2 Anirudh Goyal3 Sanjeev Arora1,2
Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
2
Princeton Language and Intelligence (PLI), Princeton University
3
Meta
{haoyu,arora}@cs.princeton.edu
1

Abstract
As large language models (LLMs) become increasingly advanced, their ability to
exhibit compositional generalization—the capacity to combine learned skills in
novel ways not encountered during training—has garnered significant attention.
This type of generalization, particularly in scenarios beyond training data, is also
of great interest in the study of AI safety and alignment.
A recent study introduced the SKILL - MIX [33] evaluation, where models are tasked
with composing a short paragraph demonstrating the use of a specified k-tuple of
language skills. While small models struggled with composing even with k = 3,
larger models like GPT-4 performed reasonably well with k = 5 and 6.
In this paper, we employ a setup akin to SKILL - MIX to evaluate the capacity of
smaller models to learn compositional generalization from examples. Utilizing a
diverse set of language skills—including rhetorical, literary, reasoning, theory of
mind, and common sense—–GPT-4 was used to generate text samples that exhibit
random subsets of k skills. Subsequent fine-tuning of 7B and 13B parameter
models on these combined skill texts, for increasing values of k, revealed the
following findings:
• Training on combinations of k = 2 and 3 skills results in noticeable improvements in the ability to compose texts with k = 4 and 5 skills, despite models
never having seen such examples during training.
• When skill categories are split into training and held-out groups, models
significantly improve at composing texts with held-out skills during testing
despite having only seen training skills during fine-tuning, illustrating the
efficacy of the training approach even with previously unseen skills.
This study also suggests that incorporating skill-rich (potentially synthetic) text
into training can substantially enhance the compositional capabilities of models.

1

Introduction

Today’s large language models (LLMs) exhibit many impressive skills but remain imperfect in key
areas. Arguably, one significant limitation stems from their difficulty in combining or composing
the skills they have already learned. For example, solving a math problem on a specific topic may
require a certain set of skills, while solving a more challenging question may require applying broader
combinations of more skills as compared to a simple question. Understanding how well models can
learn to compose skills with limited training examples is therefore a crucial area of investigation.
Let us note why this is a nontrivial challenge. If a model has learned N base skills, and we want it
to be able to compose any subset of k skills, there are N
k possible combinations of interest. Since

N
scales
roughly
with
the
k-th
power
of
N
,
even
reasonable-sized
training datasets will likely omit
k
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

