SaulLM-54B & SaulLM-141B: Scaling Up Domain
Adaptation for the Legal Domain

Pierre Colombo
Equall
MICS - CentraleSupelec
Dominic Culver
Equall

Telmo Pires
Equall

Malik Boudiaf
Equall

Rui Melo
Equall

Etienne Malaboeuf
CINES

Gabriel Hautreux
CINES

Johanne Charpentier
CINES

Michael Desa
Equall

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce SaulLM-54B and SaulLM-141B, two large language
models (LLMs) tailored for the legal sector. These models, which feature architectures of 54 billion and 141 billion parameters, respectively, are based on the Mixtral
architecture. The development of SaulLM-54B and SaulLM-141B is guided by
large-scale domain adaptation, divided into three strategies: (1) the exploitation
of continued pretraining involving a base corpus that includes over 540 billion of
legal tokens, (2) the implementation of a specialized legal instruction-following
protocol, and (3) the alignment of model outputs with human preferences in legal interpretations. The integration of synthetically generated data in the second
and third steps enhances the models’ capabilities in interpreting and processing
legal texts, effectively reaching state-of-the-art performance and outperforming
previous open-source models on LegalBench-Instruct. This work explores the
trade-offs involved in domain-specific adaptation at this scale, offering insights
that may inform future studies on domain adaptation using strong decoder models.
Building upon SaulLM-7B, this study refines the approach to produce an LLM
better equipped for legal tasks. We are releasing base, instruct, and aligned versions
on top of SaulLM-54B and SaulLM-141B under the MIT License to facilitate reuse
and collaborative research.

1

Introduction

LLMs have demonstrated exceptional capabilities across various domains [1, 67, 60, 76, 39, 40,
77, 7, 28], excelling in tasks such as language translation [6], medical diagnostics [16, 11, 12], and
automated code generation [4, 42, 32], among others. These achievements highlight the potential for
human-like communication through large language models (LLMs). Despite the significant potential
benefits, the adaptation of most recent LLMs for legal tasks has not been extensively examined, with
only two recent studies cited from [18, 55, 86], and its impact on society could be substantial. Indeed,
at a time when legal systems in many countries are overburdened [71], the development of robust and
high-performing legal LLMs could provide critical support to lawyers and judicial systems [65, 10].
However, adapting LLMs to the legal domain presents unique challenges, particularly because of the
vast scale involved, with hundreds of billions of existing legal data available.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

