Hollowed Net for On-Device Personalization of
Text-to-Image Diffusion Models

Wonguk Cho∗,1,2 Seokeon Choi1 Debasmit Das1 Matthias Reisser1
Taesup Kim2 Sungrack Yun1 Fatih Porikli1
1
1

Qualcomm AI Research†

2

Seoul National University

{wongcho, seokchoi, debadas, mreisser, sungrack, fporikli}@qti.qualcomm.com
2
{wongukcho, taesup.kim}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent advancements in text-to-image diffusion models have enabled the personalization of these models to generate custom images from textual prompts. This
paper presents an efficient LoRA-based personalization approach for on-device
subject-driven generation, where pre-trained diffusion models are fine-tuned with
user-specific data on resource-constrained devices. Our method, termed Hollowed
Net, enhances memory efficiency during fine-tuning by modifying the architecture
of a diffusion U-Net to temporarily remove a fraction of its deep layers, creating a
hollowed structure. This approach directly addresses on-device memory constraints
and substantially reduces GPU memory requirements for training, in contrast to
previous methods that primarily focus on minimizing training steps and reducing
the number of parameters to update. Additionally, the personalized Hollowed Net
can be transferred back into the original U-Net, enabling inference without additional memory overhead. Quantitative and qualitative analyses demonstrate that our
approach not only reduces training memory to levels as low as those required for
inference but also maintains or improves personalization performance compared to
existing methods.

1

Introduction

Recent research on text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models [1, 2], which generate high-resolution images
from text prompts, has increasingly focused on personalizing and customizing these generative models
effectively [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. A primary approach, termed subject-driven generation [5], involves finetuning pre-trained diffusion models with a few user-specific images to generate varied representations
of a subject using simple text prompts. This allows users to create personalized images of specific
subjects, such as family, friends, pets, or personal items, with preferred appearances, backgrounds, and
styles. Such capabilities enable creative applications including art renditions, property modifications,
and accessorization.
From a practical standpoint, implementing subject-driven generation on-device offers significant
benefits in efficiency and privacy. By operating independently of congested cloud servers or networks,
users can generate personalized images anywhere at no additional cost and do not need to compromise
their privacy as all data and personal information remain on the device.
∗
†

Work done during an internship at Qualcomm AI Research.
Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

