UniGAD: Unifying Multi-level Graph Anomaly
Detection
Yiqing Lin1∗, Jianheng Tang2,3 , Chenyi Zi3 , H.Vicky Zhao1 , Yuan Yao2 , Jia Li2,3†
1
Tsinghua University
2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
linyq20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, jtangbf@connect.ust.hk,
barristanzi666@gmail.com, vzhao@tsinghua.edu.cn, {yuany,jialee}@ust.hk

Abstract
Graph Anomaly Detection (GAD) aims to identify uncommon, deviated, or suspicious objects within graph-structured data. Existing methods generally focus
on a single graph object type (node, edge, graph, etc.) and often overlook the
inherent connections among different object types of graph anomalies. For instance, a money laundering transaction might involve an abnormal account and
the broader community it interacts with. To address this, we present UniGAD,
the first unified framework for detecting anomalies at node, edge, and graph levels jointly. Specifically, we develop the Maximum Rayleigh Quotient Subgraph
Sampler (MRQSampler) that unifies multi-level formats by transferring objects
at each level into graph-level tasks on subgraphs. We theoretically prove that
MRQSampler maximizes the accumulated spectral energy of subgraphs (i.e., the
Rayleigh quotient) to preserve the most significant anomaly information. To
further unify multi-level training, we introduce a novel GraphStitch Network to
integrate information across different levels, adjust the amount of sharing required
at each level, and harmonize conflicting training goals. Comprehensive experiments show that UniGAD outperforms both existing GAD methods specialized
for a single task and graph prompt-based approaches for multiple tasks, while
also providing robust zero-shot task transferability. All codes can be found at
https://github.com/lllyyq1121/UniGAD.

1

Introduction

Graph Anomaly Detection (GAD) involves identifying a minority of uncommon graph objects that
significantly deviate from the majority within graph-structured data [17, 2]. These anomalies can
manifest as abnormal nodes, unusual relationships, irregular substructures within the graph, or
entire graphs that deviate significantly from others. GAD has many practical applications in various
contexts, including the identification of bots and fake news on social media [3, 1, 4, 30], detection
of sensor faults and internet invasions in IoT networks [8, 14], and prevention of fraudsters and
money laundering activities in transaction networks [19, 55]. The mainstream GAD models originate
from the Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), which have recently gained popularity for mining graph
data [52, 24, 57, 16]. To address the specific challenges of graph anomalies such as label imbalance
[34, 31], relation camouflage [12, 38], and feature heterophily [50, 15], numerous adaptations of
standard GNNs have been proposed [9, 67, 13, 40, 39, 10, 53, 41, 62].
However, existing GAD approaches typically focus on a single type of graph object, such as node-level
or graph-level anomaly detection, often overlooking the inherent correlations between different types
∗
†

Work done as a visiting student at Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

