Learning Group Actions on Latent Representations

Aman Shrivastava
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
as3ek@virginia.edu

Yinzhu Jin
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
yj3cz@virginia.edu

P. Thomas Fletcher
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
ptf8v@virginia.edu

Abstract
In this work, we introduce a new approach to model group actions in autoencoders.
Diverging from prior research in this domain, we propose to learn the group actions
on the latent space rather than strictly on the data space. This adaptation enhances
the versatility of our model, enabling it to learn a broader range of scenarios
prevalent in the real world, where groups can act on latent factors. Our method
allows a wide flexibility in the encoder and decoder architectures and does not
require group-specific layers. In addition, we show that our model theoretically
serves as a superset of methods that learn group actions on the data space. We
test our approach on five image datasets with diverse groups acting on them and
demonstrate superior performance to recently proposed methods for modeling
group actions.

1

Introduction

Group actions are a natural mathematical representation of symmetries and geometric transformations
of data. Recent work has demonstrated that explicitly modeling and learning such group actions in
neural networks can be beneficial for many tasks, such as learning latent representations [15, 22, 33],
generative models [8, 12, 34], and classifiers [1, 4]. While many existing works model group actions
on the data space, to the best of our knowledge, nearly all prior works have overlooked group actions
on latent factors.
However, there are certain scenarios where we desire to model group actions on factors that are not
directly observed. Figure 1 provides an illustrative example. The top row shows a rotating image
of a ‘7’, i.e., an orbit under the group action of SO(2) on the image space. (Technically, because of
image interpolation, this is only approximately a group action.) This can be effectively modeled using
existing approaches designed to learn group actions on the data space. However, if we introduce a
slight modification, adding a fixed block, then the digit will be partially occluded for some rotations.
The occluded part of the digit is absent from these images but reappears when the digit continues to
rotate. This new scenario can no longer be modeled as a group action on the data space. Instead, the
group is now acting on the underlying factors. By encoding the representation of these latent factors,
specifically the digit in this example, and learning the group action on it, we will be able to correctly
model this scenario. While this is a synthesized example, it does exemplify a common phenomenon
in real-world images, namely occlusion. Other scenarios in real-world data involve group actions on
latent factors. For example, consider taking photographs of a rotating 3D object. The rotation group
will be acting on the 3D object geometry but not on the resulting 2D images.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

