LinNet: Linear Network for Efficient Point Cloud
Representation Learning

Hao Deng1, 2 Kunlei Jing3,4∗ Shengmei Cheng1, 2 Cheng Liu1, 2
Jiawei Ru1, 2 Jiang Bo1, 2 Lin Wang1, 2∗
1
State-Province Joint Engineering and Research Center of Advanced Networking and Intelligent
Information Services, School of Information Science and Technology, Northwest University
2
Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Higher Education Institution of
Generative Artificial Intelligence and Mixed Reality
3
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
4
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
denghao@stumail.nwu.edu.cn, kunlei.jing@xjtu.edu.cn
1615241805@qq.com, lc@nwu.edu.cn
rujiawei@stumail.nwu.edu.cn, {jiangbo, wanglin}@nwu.edu.cn

Abstract
Point-based methods have made significant progress, but improving their scalability in large-scale 3D scenes is still a challenging problem. In this paper, we
delve into the point-based method and develop a simpler, faster, stronger variant
model, dubbed as LinNet. In particular, we first propose the disassembled set
abstraction (DSA) module, which is more effective than the previous version of
set abstraction. It achieves more efficient local aggregation by leveraging spatial anisotropy and channel anisotropy separately. Additionally, by mapping 3D
point clouds onto 1D space-filling curves, we enable parallelization of downsampling and neighborhood queries on GPUs with linear complexity. LinNet,
as a purely point-based method, outperforms most previous methods in both indoor and outdoor scenes without any extra attention, and sparse convolution but
merely relying on a simple MLP. It achieves the mIoU of 73.7%, 81.4%, and
69.1% on the S3DIS Area5, NuScenes, and SemanticKITTI validation benchmarks, respectively, while speeding up almost 10x times over PointNeXt. Our
work further reveals both the efficacy and efficiency potential of the vanilla pointbased models in large-scale representation learning. Our code will be available at
https://github.com/DengH293/LinNet.

1

Introduction

Appealed by the ongoing evolution progress of technologies in robotics, autonomous driving, augmented reality, etc., LiDAR sensors are incrementally integrated into hardware-constrained devices
such as mobile devices and AR headsets. This has led to a growing interest in efficient point cloud
processing models. Given the limited computational power of mobile devices and embedded systems,
the design of mobile-friendly point cloud representation learning algorithms should not only focus on
performance but also pay attention to high computational efficiency.
Unlike images, point cloud data is irregular and unordered. There are various methods for processing
point cloud data in 3D vision. Common approaches include multi-view methods [1, 2, 3] and
voxel-based methods [4, 5]. Converting irregular data into the required formal representations often
∗

Corresponding Authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

