EfficientCAPER: An End-to-End Framework for Fast
and Robust Category-Level Articulated Object Pose
Estimation
Xinyi Yu1 , Haonan Jiang1 , Li Zhang2 , Lin Yuanbo Wu3 , Linin Ou1∗ , Liu Liu4∗
1 Zhejiang University of Technology, Zhejiang, China
2 University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
3 Swansea University, Swansea, UK
4 Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China
211122030127@zjut.edu.cn, liuliu@hfut.edu.cn

Abstract
Human life is populated with articulated objects. Pose estimation for categorylevel articulated objects is a significant challenge due to their inherent complexity
and diverse kinematic structures. Current methods for this task usually meet the
problems of insufficient consideration of kinematic constraints, self-occlusion,
and optimization requirements. In this paper, we propose EfficientCAPER, an
end-to-end Category-level Articulated object Pose EstimatoR, eliminating the need
for optimization functions as post-processing and utilizing the kinematic structure
for joint-centric pose modeling, thus enhancing the efficiency and applicability.
Given a partial point cloud as input, the EfficientCAPER firstly estimates the pose
for the free part of an articulated object using decoupled rotation representation.
Next, we canonicalize the input point cloud to estimate constrained parts’ poses by
predicting the joint parameters and states as replacements. Evaluations on three
diverse datasets, ArtImage, ReArtMix, and RobotArm, show EfficientCAPER’s
effectiveness and generalization ability to real-world scenarios. The framework
exhibits excellent static pose estimation performance for articulated objects, contributing to the advancement of category-level pose estimation. Code is available
at https://github.com/wxycwymds/EfficientCAPER.

1

Introduction

Articulated objects are everywhere in our daily lives, from small items like eyeglasses to larger entities
like dishwashers. Unlike rigid objects, which are treated as single entities in three-dimensional space,
articulated objects are made up of several movable rigid parts connected by joints, following a specific
kinematic structure. Estimating the 6D pose—meaning the 3D rotation and translation for each rigid
part from visual observation of an articulated object is a fundamental challenge in computer vision.
This task is crucial for various applications in robotics [1], augmented reality [2], virtual reality [3],
and 3D scene understanding [4].
Generally, compared to instance-level 6D pose estimation [5, 6, 7], category-level pose estimation
requires machines to understand the 3D rotation, 3D translation, and 3D scale of unseen objects,
using only semantic category prior.
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in the task of category-level articulated object
pose estimation [8, 9, 10, 11]. Representative methods such as Normalized Object Coordinate Space
(NOCS) and its variants [12, 13] have emerged as leading approaches. These methods introduce
∗

Corresponding author: Linlin Ou and Liu Liu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

