DART-Math: Difficulty-Aware Rejection Tuning
for Mathematical Problem-Solving

Yuxuan Tong∗1 , Xiwen Zhang2 , Rui Wang2 , Ruidong Wu2 , Junxian He3
1

Tsinghua University 2 Helixon Research 3 HKUST
tongyx21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
junxianh@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Solving mathematical problems requires advanced reasoning abilities and presents
notable challenges for large language models. Previous works usually synthesize
data from proprietary models to augment existing datasets, followed by instruction
tuning to achieve top-tier results. However, our analysis of these datasets reveals
severe biases towards easy queries, with frequent failures to generate any correct
response for the most challenging queries. Hypothesizing that difficult queries are
crucial to learning complex reasoning, we propose Difficulty-Aware Rejection Tuning (DART), a method that allocates difficult queries more trials during the synthesis
phase, enabling more extensive training on difficult samples. Utilizing DART, we
have created new datasets for mathematical problem-solving that focus more on
difficult queries and are substantially smaller than previous ones. Remarkably, our
synthesis process solely relies on a 7B-sized open-weight model, without reliance
on the commonly used proprietary GPT-4. We fine-tune various base models on
our datasets ranging from 7B to 70B in size, resulting in a series of strong models
called DART-Math. In comprehensive in-domain and out-of-domain evaluation
on 6 mathematical benchmarks, DART-Math outperforms vanilla rejection tuning
significantly, being superior or comparable to previous arts, despite using much
smaller datasets and no proprietary models. Furthermore, our results position
our synthetic datasets as the most effective and cost-efficient publicly available
resources for advancing mathematical problem-solving.1

1

Introduction

Recent years have seen remarkable advancements in various tasks through the use of large language
models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Touvron et al., 2023; Chowdhery et al., 2023; Anthropic, 2023;
OpenAI et al., 2023). However, these models still struggle with complex reasoning (Hendrycks et al.,
2021; Jimenez et al., 2024; He et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024), a cornerstone of human cognitive essential
for tackling intricate tasks. Mathematical reasoning, in particular, represents a significant challenge
and stands as one of the most difficult categories of reasoning for state-of-the-art LLMs (Hendrycks
et al., 2021; Cobbe et al., 2021b; Zheng et al., 2022).
In this work, we focus on mathematical problem-solving to explore enhancement of the mathematical
reasoning abilities of pretrained LLMs. We investigate instruction tuning (Longpre et al., 2023; Wang
et al., 2023), which is recognized as the most cost-effective method and achieves the state-of-theart performance on various mathematical benchmarks (Yu et al., 2024; Yue et al., 2024). Current
SOTA instruction tuning methods for mathematical problem-solving are typically implemented as
∗
1

Work done during visit to HKUST.
Our datasets, models and code are publicly available at https://github.com/hkust-nlp/dart-math.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

