ImageNet3D: Towards General-Purpose
Object-Level 3D Understanding

Wufei Ma1 , Guofeng Zhang1 , Qihao Liu1 , Guanning Zeng2 ,
Adam Kortylewski4,5 , Yaoyao Liu6 , Alan Yuille1
1

5

Johns Hopkins University 2 Tsinghua University 4 University of Freiburg
Max Planck Institute for Informatics 6 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
A vision model with general-purpose object-level 3D understanding should be
capable of inferring both 2D (e.g., class name and bounding box) and 3D information (e.g., 3D location and 3D viewpoint) for arbitrary rigid objects in natural
images. This is a challenging task, as it involves inferring 3D information from 2D
signals and most importantly, generalizing to rigid objects from unseen categories.
However, existing datasets with object-level 3D annotations are often limited by
the number of categories or the quality of annotations. Models developed on these
datasets become specialists for certain categories or domains, and fail to generalize. In this work, we present ImageNet3D, a large dataset for general-purpose
object-level 3D understanding. ImageNet3D augments 200 categories from the
ImageNet dataset with 2D bounding box, 3D pose, 3D location annotations, and image captions interleaved with 3D information. With the new annotations available
in ImageNet3D, we could (i) analyze the object-level 3D awareness of visual foundation models, and (ii) study and develop general-purpose models that infer both
2D and 3D information for arbitrary rigid objects in natural images, and (iii) integrate unified 3D models with large language models for 3D-related reasoning. We
consider two new tasks, probing of object-level 3D awareness and open vocabulary
pose estimation, besides standard classification and pose estimation. Experimental
results on ImageNet3D demonstrate the potential of our dataset in building vision
models with stronger general-purpose object-level 3D understanding. Our dataset
and project page are available here: https://imagenet3d.github.io.

1

Introduction

General-purpose object-level 3D understanding requires models to infer both 2D (e.g., class name and
bounding box) and 3D information (e.g., 3D location and 3D viewpoint) for arbitrary rigid objects
in natural images. Correctly predicting these 2D and 3D information is crucial to a wide range of
applications in robotics [1, 2] and general-purpose artificial intelligence [3, 4, 5]. Despite the success
of previous learning-based approaches [6, 7], embodied or multi-modal LLM agents with stronger
3D awareness will not only reason and interact better with the 3D world [8, 9], but also alleviate
certain key limitations, such as shortcut learning [10] or hallucination [11, 12].
Despite the importance of object-level 3D understanding, previous datasets in this area were limited
to a very small number of categories [13, 14, 15] or specific domains, such as autonomous driving [16,
17] or indoor furniture [18]. Subsequent works then focused on developing specialized models that
excel at 3D tasks for the categories and domains considered in these datasets. While these specialized
models are found useful for certain downstream applications, they fail easily when generalizing to
novel categories. It is largely understudied of how to develop unified 3D models that are capable of
inferring 2D and 3D information for all common rigid objects in natural images.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

