DARNet: Dual Attention Refinement Network with
Spatiotemporal Construction for Auditory Attention
Detection
Sheng Yan1∗

1

Cunhang Fan1∗†

Hongyu Zhang1

Xiaoke Yang1

Jianhua Tao2

Zhao Lv1
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Multimodal Cognitive Computations,
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University

Abstract
At a cocktail party, humans exhibit an impressive ability to direct their attention.
The auditory attention detection (AAD) approach seeks to identify the attended
speaker by analyzing brain signals, such as EEG signals. However, current AAD
algorithms overlook the spatial distribution information within EEG signals and
lack the ability to capture long-range latent dependencies, limiting the model’s
ability to decode brain activity. To address these issues, this paper proposes a dual
attention refinement network with spatiotemporal construction for AAD, named
DARNet, which consists of the spatiotemporal construction module, dual attention
refinement module, and feature fusion & classifier module. Specifically, the spatiotemporal construction module aims to construct more expressive spatiotemporal
feature representations, by capturing the spatial distribution characteristics of EEG
signals. The dual attention refinement module aims to extract different levels
of temporal patterns in EEG signals and enhance the model’s ability to capture
long-range latent dependencies. The feature fusion & classifier module aims to
aggregate temporal patterns and dependencies from different levels and obtain
the final classification results. The experimental results indicate that DARNet
achieved excellent classification performance, particularly under short decision
windows. While maintaining excellent classification performance, DARNet significantly reduces the number of required parameters. Compared to the state-of-the-art
models, DARNet reduces the parameter count by 91%. Code is available at:
https://github.com/fchest/DARNet.git.

1

Introduction

The auditory attention detection (AAD) aims to study human auditory attention tendencies by
analyzing brain signals [1, 2, 3]. The auditory attention refers to the ability of individuals to isolate
or concentrate on specific sounds, which aids them in focusing on a single speaker amidst a multispeaker environment, a scenario commonly referred to as the "cocktail party scenario" [4]. However,
this ability may diminish or even completely disappear for individuals with impairment. Therefore,
finding solutions to assist these individuals in overcoming this challenge has become an urgent matter.
Mesgarani and Chang [5] have demonstrated a close connection between auditory attention and brain
activity, which indicates that researchers can study auditory attention by analyzing brain activity.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author. Correspondence to cunhang.fan@ahu.edu.cn.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

