Oja’s Algorithm for Streaming Sparse PCA

Syamantak Kumar1

Purnamrita Sarkar2

1

Department of Computer Science, UT Austin
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, UT Austin
syamantak@utexas.edu, purna.sarkar@austin.utexas.edu
2

Abstract
Oja’s algorithm for Streaming Principal Component Analysis (PCA) for n datapoints in a d dimensional space achieves the same sin-squared error O(reff /n) as
the offline algorithm in O(d) space and O(nd) time and a single pass through
the datapoints. Here reff is the effective rank (ratio of the trace and the principal
eigenvalue of the population covariance matrix Σ). Under this computational
budget, we consider the problem of sparse PCA, where the principal eigenvector
of Σ is s-sparse, and reff can be large. In this setting, to our knowledge, there are
no known single-pass algorithms that achieve the minimax error bound in O(d)
space and O(nd) time without either requiring strong initialization conditions or
assuming further structure (e.g., spiked) of the covariance matrix. We show that
a simple single-pass procedure that thresholds the output of Oja’s algorithm (the
Oja vector) can achieve the minimax error bound under some regularity conditions
in O(d) space and O(nd) time. We present a nontrivial and novel analysis of the
entries of the unnormalized Oja vector, which involves the projection of a product
of independent random matrices on a random initial vector. This is completely
different from previous analyses of Oja’s algorithm and matrix products, which
have been done when the reff is bounded.

1

Introduction

Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [Pea01, Jol03] is a classical statistical method for data analysis
and visualization. Given a dataset {Xi }i=1,...,n where Xi ∈ Rd , sampled independently from a
distribution with mean zero and covariance matrix Σ, the goal in PCA is to find the directions that
explain most of the variance in the data. It is well known [Wed72, JJK+ 16, Ver10] that the leading
eigenvector, v̂, of the empirical covariance matrix, Σ̂, provides an optimal error rate under suitable
tail conditions on the datapoints.
Computing v̂ can be inefficient for large sample sizes, n, and dimensions d. Oja’s algorithm [Oja82a]
offers a comparable error rate in O(nd) time and O(d) space. Going back to the Canadian
psychologist Donald Hebb’s research [Heb49], it has attracted a lot of attention in theoretical Statistics
and Computer Science communities [JJK+ 16, AZL17, CYWZ18, YHW18, HW19a, HNW21, MP22,
LSW21, Mon22, HNWW21]. In these works, the error metric is the sin2 error between the estimated
vector and the principal eigenvector of Σ (true population eigenvector v1 ). Notably, [JJK+ 16],
[AZL17], and [HNW21] establish that Oja’s algorithm achieves the same O(reff /n) sin-squared error
as the offline algorithm that estimates the top eigenvector of the empirical covariance matrix.
However, when the effective rank, reff , of Σ (defined as Tr(Σ)/∥Σ∥) is large, PCA has been shown
to be inconsistent [Pau07, JM09, JL09]. This setting comes up in sparse PCA problems, when v1 is
s-sparse (i.e. has only s nonzero entries). Let ∥.∥0 denote the l0 norm, i.e, the count of non-zero
vector entries. Then, sparse PCA can be formally framed as the optimization problem:
X
2
vbsparse := arg max
XiT w , under constraints ∥w∥2 = 1, ∥w∥0 = s
(1)
w∈Rd

i

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

