A Simple Image Segmentation Framework via
In-Context Examples

Yang Liu1 , Chenchen Jing1 , Hengtao Li1 , Muzhi Zhu1
Hao Chen1∗, Xinlong Wang3 , Chunhua Shen1,2
1

Zhejiang University, China

2

Ant Group

3

Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
Recently, there have been explorations of generalist segmentation models that can
effectively tackle a variety of image segmentation tasks within a unified in-context
learning framework. However, these methods still struggle with task ambiguity in
in-context segmentation, as not all in-context examples can accurately convey the
task information. In order to address this issue, we present SINE, a simple image
Segmentation framework utilizing in-context examples. Our approach leverages a
Transformer encoder-decoder structure, where the encoder provides high-quality
image representations, and the decoder is designed to yield multiple task-specific
output masks to eliminate task ambiguity effectively. Specifically, we introduce an
In-context Interaction module to complement in-context information and produce
correlations between the target image and the in-context example and a Matching
Transformer that uses fixed matching and a Hungarian algorithm to eliminate
differences between different tasks. In addition, we have further perfected the
current evaluation system for in-context image segmentation, aiming to facilitate
a holistic appraisal of these models. Experiments on various segmentation tasks
show the effectiveness of the proposed method.
Our code is released at: https://github.com/aim-uofa/SINE

1

Introduction

Image segmentation [65, 31, 24, 58, 46] involves localizing and organizing concepts at the pixel level.
Different definitions of concepts, such as foreground, category, and object instance, lead to different
types of segmentation tasks. Recent years, we have witnessed great progress in developing more
accurate and faster algorithms for various segmentation tasks such as semantic segmentation [35, 64,
48], instance segmentation [19, 7, 2], panoptic segmentation [24, 4, 5], foreground segmentation [52],
interactive segmentation [57, 37, 25]. Nonetheless, most existing segmentation methods are tailored
for certain tasks and cannot be applied to other tasks.
More recently, a few works [54, 56] have explored generalist segmentation models that are capable
of solving diverse and unlimited segmentation tasks via in-context learning [3]. Painter [54] performs
in-context training with masked image modeling and can achieve various tasks according to the
in-context visual prompts. SegGPT [56] focuses on visual segmentation and introduces in-context
segmentation, which unifies multiple segmentation tasks by incorporating both a target image and
an annotated reference image as input. To encourage the model to leverage contextual information,
SegGPT employs a random coloring scheme during the task completion process. However, these
models still struggle with task ambiguity in in-context segmentation.
As shown in Figure 1(a), the in-context segmentation model needs to understand the task and content
information conveyed by the in-context example and segments related concepts on the target image.
∗

HC is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

