RoME: A Robust Mixed-Effects Bandit Algorithm for
Optimizing Mobile Health Interventions

Easton Huch
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, USA
ekhuch@umich.edu

Jieru Shi
Statistical Laboratory, DPMMS
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, England, UK
js2882@cam.ac.uk

Madeline R. Abbott
Department of Biostatistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, USA
mrabbott@umich.edu

Jessica R. Golbus
Michigan Medicine
Ann Arbor, MI, USA
jgolbus@umich.edu

Alexander Moreno
Independent Researcher∗
alexander.f.moreno@gmail.com

Walter H. Dempsey
Department of Biostatistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, USA
wdem@umich.edu

Abstract
Mobile health leverages personalized and contextually tailored interventions optimized through bandit and reinforcement learning algorithms. In practice, however,
challenges such as participant heterogeneity, nonstationarity, and nonlinear relationships hinder algorithm performance. We propose RoME, a Robust Mixed-Effects
contextual bandit algorithm that simultaneously addresses these challenges via
(1) modeling the differential reward with user- and time-specific random effects,
(2) network cohesion penalties, and (3) debiased machine learning for flexible
estimation of baseline rewards. We establish a high-probability regret bound that
depends solely on the dimension of the differential-reward model, enabling us to
achieve robust regret bounds even when the baseline reward is highly complex. We
demonstrate the superior performance of the RoME algorithm in a simulation and
two off-policy evaluation studies.

1

Introduction

Mobile health (mHealth) uses smart devices to deliver digital notification interventions to users. These
notifications nudge users toward healthier attitudes and behaviors. Because mHealth applications can
monitor and react to users and their environment, they offer the promise of personalized, contextually
tailored interventions. In practice, achieving this promise requires bandit or reinforcement learning
(RL) algorithms that can accurately learn mHealth intervention effects, including how they vary by
user, over time, and based on context. In this regard, contextual bandit algorithms are appealing due
to strong empirical performance in other settings, their ability to customize intervention decisions
based on changing contexts, and their simplicity and extensibility relative to full RL algorithms.
One unique aspect of mHealth (Greenewald et al., 2017) is the presence of a “do-nothing” action in
which the mHealth app does not intervene. As mHealth rewards typically involve human decision
making (e.g., whether the user chooses to exercise), the distribution of the corresponding baseline
reward—the reward under the do-nothing action—typically evolves in a complex, nonstationary
fashion as time progresses and contexts change. In contrast, the treatment effects—the difference
in the expected value of the reward relative to the do-nothing action—tend to be much more stable
∗

A portion of this work was performed while Alexander was employed at Luminous Computing.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

