Image Copy Detection for Diffusion Models

1

Wenhao Wang1 , Yifan Sun2∗, Zhentao Tan2 , Yi Yang3
University of Technology Sydney 2 Baidu Inc. 3 Zhejiang University

New Bing

DALL·E 2

SDXL

DeepFloyd IF

GLIDE

Matched

Generated

Midjourney

Figure 1: Some generated images (top) from diffusion models replicates the contents of existing
images (bottom). The existing (matched) images are from LAION-Aesthetics [1]. The diffusion
models include both commercial and open-source ones.

Abstract
Images produced by diffusion models are increasingly popular in digital artwork
and visual marketing. However, such generated images might replicate content
from existing ones and pose the challenge of content originality. Existing Image
Copy Detection (ICD) models, though accurate in detecting hand-crafted replicas,
overlook the challenge from diffusion models. This motivates us to introduce
ICDiff, the first ICD specialized for diffusion models. To this end, we construct a
Diffusion-Replication (D-Rep) dataset and correspondingly propose a novel deep
embedding method. D-Rep uses a state-of-the-art diffusion model (Stable Diffusion V1.5) to generate 40, 000 image-replica pairs, which are manually annotated
into 6 replication levels ranging from 0 (no replication) to 5 (total replication).
Our method, PDF-Embedding, transforms the replication level of each imagereplica pair into a probability density function (PDF) as the supervision signal.
The intuition is that the probability of neighboring replication levels should be
continuous and smooth. Experimental results show that PDF-Embedding surpasses
protocol-driven methods and non-PDF choices on the D-Rep test set. Moreover,
by utilizing PDF-Embedding, we find that the replication ratios of well-known
diffusion models against an open-source gallery range from 10% to 20%. The
project is publicly available at https://icdiff.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have gained popularity due to their ability to generate high-quality images. A
phenomenon accompanying this trend is that these generated images might replicate content from
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

