Generated and Pseudo Content guided Prototype
Refinement for Few-shot Point Cloud Segmentation

Lili Wei1,2 Congyan Lang1,2∗ Ziyi Chen1,2 Tao Wang1,2 Yidong Li1,2 Jun Liu3
1
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
2
Key Laboratory of Big Data & Artificial Intelligence in Transportation, Ministry of Education, China
3
School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University, UK
{20112014, cylang, 20112021, twang, ydli}@bjtu.edu.cn
j.liu81@lancaster.ac.uk

Abstract
Few-shot 3D point cloud semantic segmentation aims to segment query point
clouds with only a few annotated support point clouds. Existing prototype-based
methods learn prototypes from the 3D support set to guide the segmentation of
query point clouds. However, they encounter the challenge of low prototype quality
due to constrained semantic information in the 3D support set and class information
bias between support and query sets. To address these issues, in this paper, we
propose a novel framework called Generated and Pseudo Content guided Prototype
Refinement (GPCPR), which explicitly leverages LLM-generated content and reliable query context to enhance prototype quality. GPCPR achieves prototype
refinement through two core components: LLM-driven Generated Content-guided
Prototype Refinement (GCPR) and Pseudo Query Context-guided Prototype Refinement (PCPR). Specifically, GCPR integrates diverse and differentiated class
descriptions generated by large language models to enrich prototypes with comprehensive semantic knowledge. PCPR further aggregates reliable class-specific
pseudo-query context to mitigate class information bias and generate more suitable
query-specific prototypes. Furthermore, we introduce a dual-distillation regularization term, enabling knowledge transfer between early-stage entities (prototypes or
pseudo predictions) and their deeper counterparts to enhance refinement. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the superiority of our method, surpassing the state-ofthe-art methods by up to 12.10% and 13.75% mIoU on S3DIS and ScanNet,
respectively.

1

Introduction

Point cloud semantic segmentation, aiming to assign a semantic label to each point in the 3D point
clouds, benefits various applications like autonomous driving, robotics, and augmented/virtual reality.
Despite the remarkable performance of supervised methods in this field [33, 34, 22, 24, 12, 37], they
rely on labor-intensive labeled data and struggle to distinguish novel classes not present in the training
data. To address these issues, few-shot 3D point cloud semantic segmentation (FS-3DSeg), which
segments novel classes with only a few labeled data, has gained widespread attention.
FS-3DSeg aims to learn a model on base classes and generalize it to novel classes with only a few
annotated point clouds. Existing FS-3DSeg methods [39, 17, 36, 9, 41, 20, 10, 16] typically adopt
prototype-based paradigms [28, 32], where prototypes extracted from the support point clouds are
treated as class descriptors to guide the segmentation of unlabeled query point clouds by matching
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

