Retrieval-Augmented Diffusion Models
for Time Series Forecasting

Jingwei Liu1,2∗ Ling Yang3 † Hongyan Li1,2 ‡ Shenda Hong3,4,5 ‡
1
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
3
Institute of Medical Technology, Peking University Health Science Center
4
National Institute of Health Data Science, Peking University
5
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
jingweiliu1996@163.com, yangling0818@163.com
{leehy, hongshenda}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
While time series diffusion models have received considerable focus from many
recent works, the performance of existing models remains highly unstable. Factors
limiting time series diffusion models include insufficient time series datasets and
the absence of guidance. To address these limitations, we propose a RetrievalAugmented Time series Diffusion model (RATD). The framework of RATD consists of two parts: an embedding-based retrieval process and a reference-guided
diffusion model. In the first part, RATD retrieves the time series that are most
relevant to historical time series from the database as references. The references
are utilized to guide the denoising process in the second part. Our approach allows
leveraging meaningful samples within the database to aid in sampling, thus maximizing the utilization of datasets. Meanwhile, this reference-guided mechanism
also compensates for the deficiencies of existing time series diffusion models in
terms of guidance. Experiments and visualizations on multiple datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, particularly in complicated prediction
tasks. Our code is available at https://github.com/stanliu96/RATD

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting plays a critical role in a variety of applications including weather forecasting
[15, 11], finance forecasting [7, 5], earthquake prediction [19] and energy planning [6]. One way to
approach time series forecasting tasks is to view them as conditional generation tasks [32, 42], where
conditional generative models are used to learn the conditional distribution P (xP |xH ) of predicting
the target time series xP given the observed historical sequence xH . As the current state-of-the-art
conditional generative model, diffusion models [12] have been utilized in many works for time series
forecasting tasks [28, 36, 30].
Although the performance of the existing time series diffusion models is reasonably well on some
time series forecasting tasks, it remains unstable in certain scenarios (an example is provided in 1(c)).
The factors limiting the performance of time series diffusion models are complex, two of them are
particularly evident. First, most time series lack direct semantic or label correspondences, which
often results in time series diffusion models lacking meaningful guidance during the generation
* Contact: Jingwei Liu, jingweiliu1996@163.com
†
‡

Contributed equally.
Corresponding Authors: Hongyan Li, Shenda Hong

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

