Who’s asking? User personas and the mechanics of
latent misalignment

Asma Ghandeharioun∗
Google Research
aghandeharioun@google.com
Emily Reif
Google Research
ereif@google.com

Ann Yuan∗
Google Research
annyuan@google.com

Marius Guerard
Google Research
mariusguerard@google.com

Michael A. Lepori
Brown University / Google Research
mlepori@google.com

Lucas Dixon
Google Research
ldixon@google.com

Abstract
Studies show that safety-tuned models may nevertheless divulge harmful information. In this work, we show that whether they do so depends significantly on who
they are talking to, which we refer to as user persona. In fact, we find manipulating
user persona to be more effective for eliciting harmful content than certain more
direct attempts to control model refusal. We study both natural language prompting
and activation steering as intervention methods and show that activation steering
is significantly more effective at bypassing safety filters. We shed light on the
mechanics of this phenomenon by showing that even when model generations are
safe, harmful content can persist in hidden representations and can be extracted
by decoding from earlier layers. We also show we can predict a persona’s effect
on refusal given only the geometry of its steering vector. Finally, we show that
certain user personas induce the model to form more charitable interpretations of
otherwise dangerous queries.

1

Introduction

Safety training procedures, such as reinforcement learning with human feedback [Bai et al., 2022b,a],
have been widely adopted for large language models (LLMs). However, recent studies suggest that
misaligned capabilities can remain latent after such training [Anwar et al., 2024, Merchant et al.,
2020, Prakash et al., 2023, Lee et al., 2024], similar to how harmful stereotypes remain in word
embeddings despite deliberate debiasing [Gonen and Goldberg, 2019]. This leaves models vulnerable
to adversarial attacks [Carlini et al., 2023, Mehrotra et al., 2023, Chao et al., 2023, Wei et al., 2023,
Solaiman and Dennison, 2021].
One effective attack strategy is to ask the model to adopt a system persona that is more likely to
acquiesce to adversarial requests [e.g., Lisa P. Argyle and Wingate, 2023, Aher et al., 2023, Zeng
et al., 2024]. In fact the choice of system persona can even affect the model’s core capabilities such
as mathematical reasoning [Gupta et al., 2023]. Inspired by these results, we set out to investigate
whether manipulating the user persona (the model’s judgment of the user’s attributes) might also
have significant effects on its propensity to refuse adversarial queries (§2).
We focus on queries that ask for harmful content such as misinformation and conspiracy theories,
hate speech, discriminatory behavior, how to commit a crime such as theft or cyber attacks, following
prior work [e.g., Wei et al., 2023, Ganguli et al., 2022, Zou et al., 2023b]. We consider a response to
∗

equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

