Learning 3D Equivariant Implicit Function with
Patch-Level Pose-Invariant Representation

Xin Hu1 , Xiaole Tang1 , Ruixuan Yu2 , Jian Sun(B)1,3
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
2
Shandong University, Weihai, China
3
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, China
{huxin7020,tangxl}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,
yuruixuan@sdu.edu.cn, jiansun@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Implicit neural representation gains popularity in modeling the continuous 3D
surface for 3D representation and reconstruction. In this work, we are motivated
by the fact that the local 3D patches repeatedly appear on 3D shapes/surfaces
if the factor of poses is removed. Based on this observation, we propose the
3D patch-level equivariant implicit function (PEIF) based on the 3D patch-level
pose-invariant representation, allowing us to reconstruct 3D surfaces by estimating equivariant displacement vector fields for query points. Specifically, our
model is based on the pose-normalized query/patch pairs and enhanced by the
proposed intrinsic patch geometry representation, modeling the intrinsic 3D patch
geometry feature by learnable multi-head memory banks. Extensive experiments show that our model achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple
surface reconstruction datasets, and also exhibits better generalization to crossdataset shapes and robustness to arbitrary rotations. Our code will be available at
https://github.com/mathXin112/PEIF.git.

1

Introduction

Surface reconstruction aims at generating continuous surfaces from discrete point clouds. It is a
fundamental and challenging task in current robotics and vision applications [1, 2, 3]. Recently,
deep learning-based implicit neural representations (INRs) have emerged as a powerful tool for this
task, such as signed distance fields (SDFs) [4, 5], unsigned distance fields (UDFs) [6, 7, 8], and
neural vector fields (NVF) [9]. INRs benefit from its continuity, and the ability to handle complicated
topology, showing promising performance on surface reconstruction.
Although current INRs-based methods have achieved promising performance in reconstructing
surfaces, they suffer from two main challenges. First, most methods [9, 10, 11] deal with the distinct
local regions as geometry elements to estimate the query point values, e.g., signed/unsigned distance.
However, different local regions may exhibit different poses but with similar intrinsic geometry. The
extrinsic poses of these 3D patches prevent the models from capturing the intrinsic geometry of
3D shape patches. Second, INRs [5, 6, 7, 9, 12] without considering equivalence commonly learn
the representation of the points using a fixed coordinate frame, implying that if the input points are
rotated, the original coordinate mapping may no longer accurately predict the desired output, leading
to distortions or inaccuracies. These properties of INRs hinder their applicability to complex 3D
scenarios, in particular with regard to their cross-domain generalization ability and robustness to
arbitrary transformations like rotations.
To tackle these challenges, we try to eliminate the redundant factor of poses and more focus on
the learning of the intrinsic geometric representation of local regions, yielding a patch-level pose38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

