Fourier-enhanced Implicit Neural Fusion Network
for Multispectral and Hyperspectral Image Fusion

Yu-Jie Liang†
University of Electronic
Science and Technology of China
yujieliang0219@gmail.com

Zihan Cao†
University of Electronic
Science and Technology of China
iamzihan666@gmail.com

Shangqi Deng
Xi’an Jiaotong University
shangqideng0124@gmail.com

Hong-Xia Dou
Xihua University
hongxiadou1991@126.com

Liang-Jian Deng∗
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
liangjian.deng@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, implicit neural representations (INR) have made significant strides in
various vision-related domains, providing a novel solution for Multispectral and
Hyperspectral Image Fusion (MHIF) tasks. However, INR is prone to losing
high-frequency information and is confined to the lack of global perceptual capabilities. To address these issues, this paper introduces a Fourier-enhanced Implicit
Neural Fusion Network (FeINFN) specifically designed for MHIF task, targeting
the following phenomena: The Fourier amplitudes of the HR-HSI latent code
and LR-HSI are remarkably similar; however, their phases exhibit different patterns. In FeINFN, we innovatively propose a spatial and frequency implicit fusion
function (Spa-Fre IFF), helping INR capture high-frequency information and expanding the receptive field. Besides, a new decoder employing a complex Gabor
wavelet activation function, called Spatial-Frequency Interactive Decoder (SFID),
is invented to enhance the interaction of INR features. Especially, we further
theoretically prove that the Gabor wavelet activation possesses a time-frequency
tightness property that favors learning the optimal bandwidths in the decoder. Experiments on two benchmark MHIF datasets verify the state-of-the-art (SOTA)
performance of the proposed method, both visually and quantitatively. Also, ablation studies demonstrate the mentioned contributions. The code can be available at
https://github.com/294coder/Efficient-MIF.

1

Introduction

Hyperspectral imaging captures scenes across contiguous spectral bands, offering intricate details
compared to traditional single or limited-band images, and improving computer vision application
accuracy, such as target recognition, classification [47], tracking, and segmentation [12, 38, 39, 37, 44,
48, 49]. However, practical optical sensors face challenges in balancing spatial resolution and spectral
precision. Images with over 100 bands often exhibit lower spatial resolution, while those with fewer
†

Equal contribution.

* Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

