Generalize or Detect? Towards Robust Semantic
Segmentation Under Multiple Distribution Shifts

Zhitong Gao1,2

Bingnan Li1 Mathieu Salzmann2 Xuming He1,3
ShanghaiTech University 2 EPFL
3
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
{gaozht, libn, hexm}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch
1

Abstract
In open-world scenarios, where both novel classes and domains may exist, an ideal
segmentation model should detect anomaly classes for safety and generalize to new
domains. However, existing methods often struggle to distinguish between domainlevel and semantic-level distribution shifts, leading to poor out-of-distribution
(OOD) detection or domain generalization performance. In this work, we aim to
equip the model to generalize effectively to covariate-shift regions while precisely
identifying semantic-shift regions. To achieve this, we design a novel generative
augmentation method to produce coherent images that incorporate both anomaly
(or novel) objects and various covariate shifts at both image and object levels. Furthermore, we introduce a training strategy that recalibrates uncertainty specifically
for semantic shifts and enhances the feature extractor to align features associated
with domain shifts. We validate the effectiveness of our method across benchmarks
featuring both semantic and domain shifts. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance across all benchmarks for both OOD detection and domain generalization.
Code is available at https://github.com/gaozhitong/MultiShiftSeg.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation, a fundamental task in computer vision, has become indispensable in various
real-world applications, such as autonomous driving [35]. Recent progress in deep learning-based
semantic segmentation has exhibited promising results under the assumption of consistent distributions between the training and testing data. However, these models often falter when faced with
distributional shifts. Consequently, research on semantic segmentation under distributional shifts
has garnered significant attention in recent years. Some studies approach this challenge from a
generalization perspective, aiming to train networks to adapt to data with covariate distribution shifts,
such as novel domains [9, 45]. Another line of research focuses on training models to discern (or
detect) test data exhibiting semantic distributional shifts, such as anomalies or unfamiliar objects, to
ensure reliable predictions [5, 4]. In real-world situation, both types of distribution shifts often occur
jointly. This leaves us with the question: Can a model jointly handle both kinds of distribution shift?
To address this question, we assess the ability of current domain generalization techniques [9, 45] to
detect unknown objects and that of out-of-distribution detection techniques [31, 42, 46] to generalize
to unknown domains. Interestingly, we find that models trained using domain generalization techniques, such as domain randomization or whitening transformation, often fail to identify unknown
objects, and sometimes even perform worse than the baseline without domain generalization. Furthermore, we observe that models trained using out-of-distribution detection techniques struggle to
generalize to unknown domains, exhibiting overly high uncertainty towards objects experiencing
domain shifts compared to baseline methods without OOD training. While one intuitive approach is
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

