Vision Mamba Mender
∗

Jiacong Hu1,3 , Anda Cao1 , Zunlei Feng2,3,4 ,
Shengxuming Zhang2 , Yi Wang1 , Lingxiang Jia1 , Mingli Song1,3,4
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University,
2
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University,
3
State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University,
4
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
{jiaconghu,caoanda,zunleifeng}@zju.edu.cn,
{zsxm1998,y_w,lingxiangjia,brooksong}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Mamba, a state-space model with selective mechanisms and hardware-aware architecture, has demonstrated outstanding performance in long sequence modeling
tasks, particularly garnering widespread exploration and application in the field
of computer vision. While existing works have mixed opinions of its application
in visual tasks, the exploration of its internal workings and the optimization of its
performance remain urgent and worthy research questions given its status as a novel
model. Existing optimizations of the Mamba model, especially when applied in
the visual domain, have primarily relied on predefined methods such as improving
scanning mechanisms or integrating other architectures, often requiring strong
priors and extensive trial and error. In contrast to these approaches, this paper
proposes the Vision Mamba Mender, a systematic approach for understanding
the workings of Mamba, identifying flaws within, and subsequently optimizing
model performance. Specifically, we present methods for predictive correlation
analysis of Mamba’s hidden states from both internal and external perspectives,
along with corresponding definitions of correlation scores, aimed at understanding
the workings of Mamba in visual recognition tasks and identifying flaws therein.
Additionally, tailored repair methods are proposed for identified external and internal state flaws to eliminate them and optimize model performance. Extensive
experiments validate the efficacy of the proposed methods on prevalent Mamba architectures, significantly enhancing Mamba’s performance. For more information,
please visit https://vision-mamba-mender.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has demonstrated outstanding performance in various fields of artificial intelligence,
with deep neural networks such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [1, 2] and Vision Transformer [3, 4] dominating the field of computer vision. However, the limited receptive field [5, 6]
of CNNs and the quadratic computational complexity [7, 8] of Transformers constrain their further
development. To overcome these limitations, an increasing number of studies have attempted to
propose more advanced models [9–12]. Recently, Mamba [13], based on the state space model [11],
has become the focus of these research efforts. Mamba can maintain nearly linear computational complexity while achieving a global receptive field, leading to outstanding performance. Consequently, it
has been widely adopted in the field of computer vision [14–16].
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

