Fairness Without Harm:
An Influence-Guided Active Sampling Approach

Jinlong Pang∗
UC Santa Cruz
jpang14@ucsc.edu

Jialu Wang∗
UC Santa Cruz
faldict@ucsc.edu

Zhaowei Zhu∗
Docta.ai
zzw@docta.ai

Yuanshun Yao
Meta GenAI
kevinyao@meta.com

Yang Liu†
UC Santa Cruz
yangliu@ucsc.edu

Chen Qian
UC Santa Cruz
cqian12@ucsc.edu

Abstract
The pursuit of fairness in machine learning (ML), ensuring that the models do not
exhibit biases toward protected demographic groups, typically results in a compromise scenario. This compromise can be explained by a Pareto frontier where given
certain resources (e.g., data), reducing the fairness violations often comes at the
cost of lowering the model accuracy. In this work, we aim to train models that mitigate group fairness disparity without causing harm to model accuracy. Intuitively,
acquiring more data is a natural and promising approach to achieve this goal by
reaching a better Pareto frontier of the fairness-accuracy tradeoff. The current data
acquisition methods, such as fair active learning approaches, typically require annotating sensitive attributes. However, these sensitive attribute annotations should be
protected due to privacy and safety concerns. In this paper, we propose a tractable
active data sampling algorithm that does not rely on training group annotations,
instead only requiring group annotations on a small validation set. Specifically, the
algorithm first scores each new example by its influence on fairness and accuracy
evaluated on the validation dataset, and then selects a certain number of examples
for training. We theoretically analyze how acquiring more data can improve fairness
without causing harm, and validate the possibility of our sampling approach in the
context of risk disparity. We also provide the upper bound of generalization error
and risk disparity as well as the corresponding connections. Extensive experiments
on real-world data demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm. Our
code is available at github.com/UCSC-REAL/FairnessWithoutHarm.

1

Introduction

Machine Learning (ML) has dramatically impacted numerous optimization and decision-making processes across various domains, such as credit scoring [62] and demand forecasting [14]. Algorithmic
fairness embraces the principle, often enforced by law and regulations, that the decision-maker should
not exhibit biases toward protected group membership [84], identified by characteristics such as race,
gender, or disability. However, the pursuit of fairness unavoidably results in a compromise scenario
where reducing the fairness violations usually leads to a degradation in accuracy, which has been
observed and verified by numerous literature [52, 25, 81, 69, 83]. Theoretically, the phenomenon
can be understood through a Pareto frontier on the tradeoff between group fairness and accuracy
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding Author: Yang Liu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

