Learning diffusion at lightspeed

Antonio Terpin
ETH Zürich
aterpin@ethz.ch

Nicolas Lanzetti
ETH Zürich
lnicolas@ethz.ch

Martín Gadea
ETH Zürich
mgadea@ethz.ch

Florian Dörfler
ETH Zürich
dorfler@ethz.ch

Abstract
Diffusion regulates numerous natural processes and the dynamics of many successful generative models. Existing models to learn the diffusion terms from
observational data rely on complex bilevel optimization problems and model only
the drift of the system. We propose a new simple model, JKOnet∗ , which bypasses
the complexity of existing architectures while presenting significantly enhanced
representational capabilities: JKOnet∗ recovers the potential, interaction, and
internal energy components of the underlying diffusion process. JKOnet∗ minimizes a simple quadratic loss and outperforms other baselines in terms of sample
efficiency, computational complexity, and accuracy. Additionally, JKOnet∗ provides a closed-form optimal solution for linearly parametrized functionals, and,
when applied to predict the evolution of cellular processes from real-world data,
it achieves state-of-the-art accuracy at a fraction of the computational cost of all
existing methods. Our methodology is based on the interpretation of diffusion processes as energy-minimizing trajectories in the probability space via the so-called
JKO scheme, which we study via its first-order optimality conditions.
Source code: https://github.com/antonioterpin/jkonet-star

1

Introduction

Diffusion processes govern the homeostasis of biological systems [40], stem cells reprogramming
[20, 36], and the learning dynamics of diffusion models [16, 22, 54] and transformers [19, 52]. The
diffusion process of interest often originates from three quantities: a drift term due to a potential
field, the interaction with other particles, and a stochastic term. If these three components are known,
predictions follow from simple forward sampling [27] or the recent work in optimization in the
probability space [1, 3, 11, 25, 34, 38, 41]. In this paper, we consider the case when the diffusion
process is unknown, and we seek to learn its representation from observational data. The problem
has been addressed when the trajectories of the individual particles are known [5, 32], but it is often
the case that we only have “population data”. For instance, single-cell RNA sequencing techniques
enabled the collection of large quantities of data on biological systems [35], but the observer cannot
access the trajectories of individual cells since measurements are destructive [20, 36]. The most
promising avenue to circumvent the lack of particle trajectories is the Jordan-Kinderlehrer-Otto (JKO)
scheme [24] which predicates that the particles as a whole move to decrease an aggregate energy,
while not deviating too much from the current configuration. However, the JKO scheme entails an
optimization problem in the probability space. Thus, the problem of finding the energy functional
that minimizes a prediction error (w.r.t. observational data) takes the form of a computationallychallenging infinite-dimensional bilevel optimization problem, whereby the upper-level problem is
the minimization of the prediction error and the lower-level problem is the JKO scheme. Recent
work [1, 9] exploits the theory of optimal transport and in particular Brenier’s theorem [7] to attack
this bilevel optimization problem, a model henceforth referred to as JKOnet. Despite promising
initial results in [9], this complexity undermines scalability, stability, and generality of the model.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

