Exocentric-to-Egocentric Video Generation

Jia-Wei Liu1∗ , Weijia Mao1∗ , Zhongcong Xu1 , Jussi Keppo2 , Mike Zheng Shou1B
1

Show Lab, 2 National University of Singapore

Figure 1: Given sparse 4 exocentric videos configured 360° around daily-life skilled human activities
such as playing basketball (upper), CPR training (lower), our Exo2Ego-V can generate corresponding
egocentric videos with the same activity and environment as the exocentric videos. We encourage
readers to click and play the video clips in this figure using Adobe Acrobat.

Abstract
We introduce Exo2Ego-V, a novel exocentric-to-egocentric diffusion-based video
generation method for daily-life skilled human activities where sparse 4-view exocentric viewpoints are configured 360° around the scene. This task is particularly
challenging due to the significant variations between exocentric and egocentric
viewpoints and high complexity of dynamic motions and real-world daily-life
environments. To address these challenges, we first propose a new diffusionbased multi-view exocentric encoder to extract the dense multi-scale features from
multi-view exocentric videos as the appearance conditions for egocentric video
generation. Then, we design an exocentric-to-egocentric view translation prior
to provide spatially aligned egocentric features as a concatenation guidance for
the input of egocentric video diffusion model. Finally, we introduce the temporal
attention layers into our egocentric video diffusion pipeline to improve the temporal consistency cross egocentric frames. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that Exo2Ego-V significantly outperforms SOTA approaches on 5 categories from
the Ego-Exo4D dataset with an average of 35% in terms of LPIPS. Our code and
model will be made available on https://github.com/showlab/Exo2Ego-V.

1

Introduction

When people observe and learn skills such as cooking or playing basketball from an exocentric (thirdperson) perspective, they can easily envision themselves executing these skills from an egocentric
(first-person) perspective [2]. This exocentric-egocentric (Exo-Ego) translation remains the foundation
of visual learning [15] for both human beings and AI robots [8, 4, 3, 37, 35], and unleashes new
opportunities for AI assistant [54, 7, 13] and augmented reality [1]. However, it remains particularly
challenging for computer vision algorithms to achieve such exocentric to egocentric video generation
for daily-life skilled human activities, primarily due to 1) significant variations between exocentric
* Equal Contribution

B

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

