FLoRA: Federated Fine-Tuning Large Language
Models with Heterogeneous Low-Rank Adaptations

Ziyao Wang1 , Zheyu Shen1 , Yexiao He1 , Guoheng Sun1 Hongyi Wang2,3
Lingjuan Lyu4 , Ang Li1
1. University of Maryland, College Park
2. Rutgers University 3. GenBio.ai 4. Sony Reasearch
{ziyaow,zyshen,yexiaohe,ghsun,angliece}@umd.edu,
hongyi.wang.001@rutgers.edu, lingjuanlvsmile@gmail.com

Abstract
The rapid development of Large Language Models (LLMs) has been pivotal in
advancing AI, with pre-trained LLMs being adaptable to diverse downstream
tasks through fine-tuning. Federated learning (FL) further enhances fine-tuning
in a privacy-aware manner by utilizing clients’ local data through in-situ computation, eliminating the need for data movement. However, fine-tuning LLMs,
given their massive scale of parameters, poses challenges for clients with constrained and heterogeneous resources in FL. Previous methods employed low-rank
adaptation (LoRA) for efficient federated fine-tuning but utilized traditional FL
aggregation strategies on LoRA adapters. These approaches led to mathematically
inaccurate aggregation noise, reducing fine-tuning effectiveness and failing to
address heterogeneous LoRAs. In this work, we first highlight the mathematical incorrectness of LoRA aggregation in existing federated fine-tuning methods.
We introduce a new approach called FL O RA that enables federated fine-tuning
on heterogeneous LoRA adapters across clients through a novel stacking-based
aggregation method. Our approach is noise-free and seamlessly supports heterogeneous LoRA adapters. Extensive experiments demonstrate FL O RA’s superior
performance in both homogeneous and heterogeneous settings, surpassing stateof-the-art methods. We envision this work as a milestone for efficient, privacypreserving, and accurate federated fine-tuning of LLMs. Our code is available at
https://github.com/ATP-1010/FederatedLLM.

1

Introduction

The Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown remarkable performance on various tasks, such as
chatbots [1], virtual assistants [4], search engines [11], and healthcare [20; 18]. However, adapting pretrained LLMs (e.g., Llama 2 [22]) to downstream tasks requires tremendous computation resources to
fine-tune all the model parameters. To mitigate this issue, a variety of parameter-efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT) methods have been proposed. One of the most widely used PEFT methods is low-rank
adaptation (LoRA) [10]. As shown in the top of Figure 1, LoRA adds a parallel branch of trainable
adapters A and B to compute the model update ∆W, where the ranks of A and B are much smaller
than the pre-trained model parameter W. When applying LoRA for fine-tuning, only A and B are
updated while the entire W is frozen, thereby significantly reducing the GPU memory consumption.
Fine-tuning LLMs requires ample data for adaptation to specific downstream tasks [13; 7]. Often,
this data is dispersed across a multitude of devices, raising privacy concerns. For instance, aggregating medical data from hospitals for centralized LLM fine-tuning poses significant challenges.
Consequently, to facilitate fine-tuning without compromising private data, federated learning (FL)
becomes essential, enabling LLM fine-tuning across distributed clients while preserving data privacy [16; 27; 33; 24]. In this work, we focus on federated fine-tuning, enabling distributed clients to
collaboratively fine-tune LLMs for adaptation to downstream tasks while preserving data privacy.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

