Dual-Perspective Activation: Efficient Channel
Denoising via Joint Forward-Backward Criterion for
Artificial Neural Networks
Tian Qiu 1

Chenchao Gao 3 Zunlei Feng 1,2∗ Jie Lei 4 Bingde Hu 1,5
Xingen Wang 1,5 Yi Gao 1 Mingli Song 1,2

1

2

State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
3
Dalian University of Technology 4 Zhejiang University of Technology
5
Bangsheng Technology Co., Ltd.

{tqiu,zunleifeng,tonyhu,newroot,gaoyi,songml}@zju.edu.cn
gccgyllyp@mail.dlut.edu.cn
jasonlei@zjut.edu.cn

Abstract
The design of Artificial Neural Network (ANN) is inspired by the working patterns
of the human brain. Connections in biological neural networks are sparse, as they
only exist between few neurons. Meanwhile, the sparse representation in ANNs
has been shown to possess significant advantages. Activation responses of ANNs
are typically expected to promote sparse representations, where key signals get
activated while irrelevant/redundant signals are suppressed. It can be observed that
samples of each category are only correlated with sparse and specific channels in
ANNs. However, existing activation mechanisms often struggle to suppress signals
from other irrelevant channels entirely, and these signals have been verified to be
detrimental to the network’s final decision. To address the issue of channel noise
interference in ANNs, a novel end-to-end trainable Dual-Perspective Activation
(DPA) mechanism is proposed. DPA efficiently identifies irrelevant channels and
applies channel denoising under the guidance of a joint criterion established online from both forward and backward propagation perspectives while preserving
activation responses from relevant channels. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that DPA successfully denoises channels and facilitates sparser neural representations. Moreover, DPA is parameter-free, fast, applicable to many mainstream ANN
architectures, and achieves remarkable performance compared to other existing
activation counterparts across multiple tasks and domains. Code is available at
https://github.com/horrible-dong/DPA.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) [1] have achieved notable advancements in a
wide range of computer vision tasks [2] as well as various other tasks and domains [3–6].
The ANN design is inspired by the working patterns of the human brain [7]. Multi-Layer Perceptron
(MLP) [8], a classical artificial neural network that utilizes neurons as its basic unit, closely resembles
biological neural networks. Another significant development in the field is the Convolutional Neural
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

