Extending Video Masked Autoencoders to 128 frames

Nitesh B. Gundavarapu1∗ Luke Friedman1∗ Raghav Goyal2∗† Chaitra Hegde1∗
Eirikur Agustsson1 Sagar Waghmare1 Mikhail Sirotenko1 Ming-Hsuan Yang1
Tobias Weyand1 Boqing Gong1 Leonid Sigal2 ‡
1
Google Research 2 University of British Columbia
{ngundavarapu,lbfried,cvhegde,eirikur}@google.com
{rgoyal14,lsigal}@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
Video understanding has witnessed significant progress with recent video foundation models demonstrating strong performance owing to self-supervised pretraining objectives; Masked Autoencoders (MAE) being the design of choice.
Nevertheless, the majority of prior works that leverage MAE pre-training have
focused on relatively short video representations (16 / 32 frames in length) largely
due to hardware memory and compute limitations that scale poorly with video
length due to the dense memory-intensive self-attention decoding. One natural
strategy to address these challenges is to subsample tokens to reconstruct during
decoding (or decoder masking). In this work, we propose an effective strategy for
prioritizing tokens which allows training on longer video sequences (128 frames)
and gets better performance than, more typical, random and uniform masking
strategies. The core of our approach is an adaptive decoder masking strategy that
prioritizes the most important tokens and uses quantized tokens as reconstruction
objectives. Our adaptive strategy leverages a powerful MAGVIT-based tokenizer
that jointly learns the tokens and their priority. We validate our design choices
through exhaustive ablations and observe improved performance of the resulting
long-video (128 frames) encoders over short-video (32 frames) counterparts. With
our long-video masked autoencoder (LVMAE) strategy, we surpass state-of-theart on Diving48 by 3.9 points and EPIC-Kitchens-100 verb classification by 2.5
points while relying on a simple core architecture and video-only pre-training
(unlike some of the prior works that require millions of labeled video-text pairs or
specialized encoders).

1

Introduction

Long video understanding has witnessed growing interest with various aspects of the problem
having been explored by recent works [1, 2]. This includes incorporating (i) efficient attention
mechanisms [3, 4], (ii) designing memory modules [5–7] to reason over context from the past, and
(iii) approaching the problem from video-language perspective by proposing benchmarks [2, 8] and
architectural choices that effectively leverage the interplay between the modalities [9–11, 8, 12].
The majority of recent models rely on foundational models pre-trained in a self-supervised manner
based on videos and/or, for vision-language counterparts, video-text pairs; these foundational models,
once pre-trained, can then be fine-tuned for a specific task at hand (e.g., action classification). Masked
*

Equal primary contribution
Work done as Student Researcher at Google Research
‡
Work done as Visiting Research Faculty at Google Research
1
Authors now at Google DeepMind
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

