Diffusion-based Layer-wise Semantic Reconstruction
for Unsupervised Out-of-Distribution Detection

Ying Yang1∗ , De Cheng1∗† , Chaowei Fang1∗† , Yubiao Wang1
Changzhe Jiao1 , Lechao Cheng2 , Nannan Wang1 , Xinbo Gao3
1
Xidian University
2
Hefei University of Technology
3
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{yycfq, ybwang_3}@stu.xidian.edu.cn
chenglc@hfut.edu.cn, gaoxb@cqupt.edu.cn
{dcheng, cwfang, cjiao, nnwang}@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised out-of-distribution (OOD) detection aims to identify out-of-domain
data by learning only from unlabeled In-Distribution (ID) training samples, which
is crucial for developing a safe real-world machine learning system. Current
reconstruction-based method provides a good alternative approach, by measuring
the reconstruction error between the input and its corresponding generative counterpart in the pixel/feature space. However, such generative methods face the key
dilemma, i.e., improving the reconstruction power of the generative model, while
keeping compact representation of the ID data. To address this issue, we propose
the diffusion-based layer-wise semantic reconstruction approach for unsupervised
OOD detection. The innovation of our approach is that we leverage the diffusion
model’s intrinsic data reconstruction ability to distinguish ID samples from OOD
samples in the latent feature space. Moreover, to set up a comprehensive and
discriminative feature representation, we devise a multi-layer semantic feature
extraction strategy. Through distorting the extracted features with Gaussian noises
and applying the diffusion model for feature reconstruction, the separation of ID
and OOD samples is implemented according to the reconstruction errors. Extensive
experimental results on multiple benchmarks built upon various datasets demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in terms of detection
accuracy and speed. Code is available at https://github.com/xbyym/DLSR.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised Out-of-Distribution (OOD) detection aims to identify whether a data point belongs
to the In-Distribution (ID) or OOD dataset, by learning only from unlabeled in-distribution training
samples. OOD detection plays a vital role in developing a safe real-world machine learning system,
which ensures that the model is only performed on data drawn from the same distribution as its
training data. If the test data does not follow the training distribution, the model could unintentionally
produce nonsensical predictions, resulting in some misleading conclusions. Naturally, OOD detection
is one of the key techniques for ensuring the model’s robustness and safety.
Existing research studies the OOD detection mainly under two settings, i.e., supervised and unsupervised. The supervised OOD detection methods usually deem this task as a binary classification
problem, which relies on training with data labeled as OOD from disjoint categories or adversaries
∗

Equation Contribution. † Corresponding authors: De Cheng and Chaowei Fang.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

