Generative Semi-supervised Graph Anomaly Detection

1

Hezhe Qiao1 , Qingsong Wen2 , Xiaoli Li3,4 , Ee-Peng Lim1 , Guansong Pang1∗
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University
2
Squirrel AI
3
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
4
A*STAR Centre for Frontier AI Research, Singapore
hezheqiao.2022@phdcs.smu.edu.sg, qingsongedu@gmail.com
xlli@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, eplim@smu.edu.sg, gspang@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
This work considers a practical semi-supervised graph anomaly detection (GAD)
scenario, where part of the nodes in a graph are known to be normal, contrasting
to the extensively explored unsupervised setting with a fully unlabeled graph. We
reveal that having access to the normal nodes, even just a small percentage of
normal nodes, helps enhance the detection performance of existing unsupervised
GAD methods when they are adapted to the semi-supervised setting. However,
their utilization of these normal nodes is limited. In this paper we propose a novel
Generative GAD approach (namely GGAD) for the semi-supervised scenario to
better exploit the normal nodes. The key idea is to generate pseudo anomaly
nodes, referred to as outlier nodes, for providing effective negative node samples
in training a discriminative one-class classifier. The main challenge here lies in
the lack of ground truth information about real anomaly nodes. To address this
challenge, GGAD is designed to leverage two important priors about the anomaly
nodes – asymmetric local affinity and egocentric closeness – to generate reliable
outlier nodes that assimilate anomaly nodes in both graph structure and feature
representations. Comprehensive experiments on six real-world GAD datasets
are performed to establish a benchmark for semi-supervised GAD and show that
GGAD substantially outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised and semi-supervised
GAD methods with varying numbers of training normal nodes. Code is available
at https://github.com/mala-lab/GGAD.

1

Introduction

Graph anomaly detection (GAD) has received significant attention due to its broad application
domains, e.g., cyber security and fraud detection [9, 16, 33]. However, it is challenging to recognize
anomaly nodes in a graph due to its complex graph structure and attributes [27, 34, 44, 46, 62, 65, 66].
Moreover, most traditional anomaly detection methods [4, 39, 60] are designed for Euclidean data,
which are shown to be ineffective on non-Euclidean data like graph data [8, 17, 28, 44, 51, 66]. To
address this challenge, as an effective way of modeling graph data, graph neural networks (GNN)
have been widely used for deep GAD [34, 45]. These GNN methods typically assume that the labels
of all nodes are unknown and perform anomaly detection in a fully unsupervised way by, e.g., data
reconstruction [8, 11], self-supervised learning [6, 28, 36, 61], or one-class homophily modeling [44].
Although these methods achieve remarkable advances, they are not favored in real-world applications
where the labels for normal nodes are easy to obtain due to their overwhelming presence in a graph.
This is because their capability to utilize those labeled normal nodes is very limited due to their
∗

Corresponding author: G. Pang

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

