DuQuant: Distributing Outliers via Dual
Transformation Makes Stronger Quantized LLMs

Haokun Lin∗ 1,3,4 , Haobo Xu∗ 2 , Yichen Wu∗ 4 , Jingzhi Cui2 , Yingtao Zhang2 ,
Linzhan Mou5 , Linqi Song4 , Zhenan Sun† 1,3 , Ying Wei† 4,5
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Tsinghua University 3 NLPR & MAIS, Institute of Automation, CAS
4
City University of Hong Kong 5 Zhejiang University

haokun.lin@cripac.ia.ac.cn xuhb20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
wuyichen.am97@gmail.com znsun@nlpr.ia.ac.cn ying.wei@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Quantization of large language models (LLMs) faces significant challenges, particularly due to the presence of outlier activations that impede efficient low-bit
representation. Traditional approaches predominantly address Normal Outliers,
which are activations across all tokens with relatively large magnitudes. However,
these methods struggle with smoothing Massive Outliers that display significantly
larger values, which leads to significant performance degradation in low-bit quantization. In this paper, we introduce DuQuant, a novel approach that utilizes rotation
and permutation transformations to more effectively mitigate both massive and
normal outliers. First, DuQuant starts by constructing the rotation matrix, using
specific outlier dimensions as prior knowledge, to redistribute outliers to adjacent
channels by block-wise rotation. Second, We further employ a zigzag permutation
to balance the distribution of outliers across blocks, thereby reducing block-wise
variance. A subsequent rotation further smooths the activation landscape, enhancing model performance. DuQuant simplifies the quantization process and excels in
managing outliers, outperforming the state-of-the-art baselines across various sizes
and types of LLMs on multiple tasks, even with 4-bit weight-activation quantization.
Our code is available at https://github.com/Hsu1023/DuQuant.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) [51, 7, 50] have demonstrated exceptional performance across a
wide range of natural language processing tasks. However, their billions of parameters present
considerable deployment challenges on resource-constrained edge devices, particularly in terms of
memory usage and inference speed [22, 15, 56]. In response to these challenges, network quantization
methods [20, 23] have been extensively explored to minimize memory usage by converting floatingpoint parameters into low-bit formats [18, 32, 8], and to expedite inference by quantizing both
activations and weights for accelerating the matrix multiplication process [64, 34, 74].
Among LLM quantization methods, a primary issue is the presence of activation outliers, which
enlarge the quantization step sizes and subsequently cause significant accuracy loss [59]. To mitigate
this problem, current research has developed various methods to address Normal Outliers in
activations, which are persistent in several channels across all tokens [13, 64]. However, besides
Normal Outliers, there exists another type of activation outlier [48, 35], termed Massive Outliers.
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

