Interpreting CLIP with Sparse Linear
Concept Embeddings (SpLiCE )

Usha Bhalla∗
Harvard University a,b

Alex Oesterling∗
Harvard University b

Flavio P. Calmon†
Harvard University b

Suraj Srinivas
Harvard University b

Himabindu Lakkaraju†
Harvard University b,c

Abstract
CLIP embeddings have demonstrated remarkable performance across a wide range
of multimodal applications. However, these high-dimensional, dense vector representations are not easily interpretable, limiting our understanding of the rich
structure of CLIP and its use in downstream applications that require transparency.
In this work, we show that the semantic structure of CLIP’s latent space can be
leveraged to provide interpretability, allowing for the decomposition of representations into semantic concepts. We formulate this problem as one of sparse recovery
and propose a novel method, Sparse Linear Concept Embeddings (SpLiCE ),
for transforming CLIP representations into sparse linear combinations of humaninterpretable concepts. Distinct from previous work, SpLiCE is task-agnostic
and can be used, without training, to explain and even replace traditional dense
CLIP representations, maintaining high downstream performance while significantly improving their interpretability. We also demonstrate significant use cases
of SpLiCE representations including detecting spurious correlations and model
editing. Code is provided at https://github.com/AI4LIFE-GROUP/SpLiCE.

1

Introduction

Natural images include complex semantic information, such as the objects they contain, the scenes
they depict, the actions being performed, and the relationships between them. Machine learning
models trained on visual data aim to encode this semantic information in their representations
to perform a wide variety of downstream tasks, such as object classification, scene recognition,
segmentation, or action prediction. However, it is often difficult to enforce explicit encoding of
these semantics within model representations, and it is even harder to interpret these semantics
post hoc to better understand what models may have learnt and how they leverage this information.
Further, model representations can be brittle, encoding idiosyncratic patterns specific to individual
datasets and modalities instead of general human-interpretable semantic information. Multimodal
models have been proposed as a potential solution to this issue, and methods such as CLIP [1] have
empirically been found to provide highly performant, semantically rich representations of image data.
The richness of these representations is evident from their high performance on a variety of tasks,
such as zero-shot classification and image retrieval [1], image captioning [2], and image generation
[3]. However, despite their performance, it remains unclear how to quantify the semantic content
contained in their dense representations. In this work, we answer the question: can we decompose
∗

†
Equal contribution, order by coin flip.
Equal contribution, alphabetic order.
Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural & Artificial Intelligence
b
c
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard Business School
a

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

