Exploring Token Pruning in Vision State Space Models

Zheng Zhan1∗ , Zhenglun Kong12∗, Yifan Gong1 , Yushu Wu1 , Zichong Meng1
Hangyu Zheng3 , Xuan Shen1 , Stratis Ioannidis1 , Wei Niu3 , Pu Zhao1 , Yanzhi Wang1
1
Northeastern University, 2 Harvard University, 3 University of Georgia
{zhan.zhe, kong.zhe, yanz.wang}@northeastern.edu

Abstract
State Space Models (SSMs) have the advantage of keeping linear computational
complexity compared to attention modules in transformers, and have been applied
to vision tasks as a new type of powerful vision foundation model. Inspired by the
observations that the final prediction in vision transformers (ViTs) is only based
on a subset of most informative tokens, we take the novel step of enhancing the
efficiency of SSM-based vision models through token-based pruning. However,
direct applications of existing token pruning techniques designed for ViTs fail to
deliver good performance, even with extensive fine-tuning. To address this issue,
we revisit the unique computational characteristics of SSMs and discover that naive
application disrupts the sequential token positions. This insight motivates us to
design a novel and general token pruning method specifically for SSM-based vision
models. We first introduce a pruning-aware hidden state alignment method to stabilize the neighborhood of remaining tokens for performance enhancement. Besides,
based on our detailed analysis, we propose a token importance evaluation method
adapted for SSM models, to guide the token pruning. With efficient implementation
and practical acceleration methods, our method brings actual speedup. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our approach can achieve significant computation
reduction with minimal impact on performance across different tasks. Notably,
we achieve 81.7% accuracy on ImageNet with a 41.6% reduction in the FLOPs
for pruned PlainMamba-L3. Furthermore, our work provides deeper insights into
understanding the behavior of SSM-based vision models for future research2 .

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed the rapid evolvement of the computer vision field in the era of deep
learning. Significant research efforts have been devoted to designing effective and efficient architectures of deep neural networks (DNNs) for visual tasks. Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs)
[29, 12, 23, 30] and Vision Transformers (ViTs) [6, 22, 31, 43] are two representative categories
of backbone networks. Though ViTs exhibit superior modeling capabilities with the incorporation
of the self-attention mechanism [6, 32], the complexity of self-attention grows quadratically as the
input size increases. Inspired by the great potential of State Space Models (SSMs) for long sequence
modeling with linear complexity in natural language processing (NLP) tasks [9, 24, 33, 44], the
latest backbone network designs for visual tasks [10, 21] leverage SSM-based blocks. Particularly,
VMamba [21] reduces the complexity of attention computation with the selective scan mechanism
presented in the S6 model [9] and matches the performance with existing foundation models.
Like the existing research efforts promoting the efficiency of CNNs and ViTs, the exploration of the
SSM efficiency is desirable to facilitate real-time applications. While weight pruning is the prevalent
∗
2

Equal contributions
Code available at https://github.com/ZLKong/ToP-ViM

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

