Over-parameterized Student Model via Tensor
Decomposition Boosted Knowledge Distillation

Yu-Liang Zhan
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence
Renmin University of China
zhanyuliang@ruc.edu.cn

Zhong-Yi Lu
School of Physics
Renmin University of China
zlu@ruc.edu.cn

Hao Sun∗
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence
Renmin University of China
haosun@ruc.edu.cn

Ze-Feng Gao∗
School of Physics
Renmin University of China
zfgao@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Increased training parameters have enabled large pre-trained models to excel in
various downstream tasks. Nevertheless, the extensive computational requirements associated with these models hinder their widespread adoption within the
community. We focus on Knowledge Distillation (KD), where a compact student model is trained to mimic a larger teacher model, facilitating the transfer
of knowledge of large models. In contrast to much of the previous work, we
scale up the parameters of the student model during training, to benefit from overparameterization without increasing the inference latency. In particular, we propose
a tensor decomposition strategy that effectively over-parameterizes the relatively
small student model through an efficient and nearly lossless decomposition of
its parameter matrices into higher-dimensional tensors. To ensure efficiency, we
further introduce a tensor constraint loss to align the high-dimensional tensors
between the student and teacher models. Comprehensive experiments validate
the significant performance enhancement by our approach in various KD tasks,
covering computer vision and natural language processing areas. Our code is
available at https://github.com/intell-sci-comput/OPDF.

1

Introduction

Large-scale pre-trained models are gradually achieving remarkable milestones due to the exhibit of
remarkable performance across various tasks [1–7]. These models leverage extensive pre-training data
and parameters, enabling them to effectively encapsulate a significant breadth of world knowledge [8,
9] and exhibit strong generalization capabilities across diverse tasks [1, 10–13]. Following this
trajectory, the utilization of increased data and parameters has emerged as a notable trend in enhancing
the performance of pre-trained models in recent years, leading to the number expansion of pre-trained
model parameters from millions to billions [4, 14, 15].
Despite their impressive performance, the substantial storage demands and high computational
complexity hinder the practical deployment of these models in real-world applications. Therefore,
on the one hand, some studies focus on pre-training relatively smaller models (such as BERTbase-uncased [2]) on domain-specific or task-specific corpora [16–18]. However, due to the lesser
over-parameterization of small models compared to large ones, their generalization capability often
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

