Addressing Asynchronicity in Clinical Multimodal
Fusion via Individualized Chest X-ray Generation

Wenfang Yao1∗, Chen Liu 1,3∗, Kejing Yin 2†, William K. Cheung2 , Jing Qin1
1
School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
3
School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology

Abstract
Integrating multi-modal clinical data, such as electronic health records (EHR)
and chest X-ray images (CXR), is particularly beneficial for clinical prediction
tasks. However, in a temporal setting, multi-modal data are often inherently
asynchronous. EHR can be continuously collected but CXR is generally taken
with a much longer interval due to its high cost and radiation dose. When clinical
prediction is needed, the last available CXR image might have been outdated,
leading to suboptimal predictions. To address this challenge, we propose DDLCXR, a method that dynamically generates an up-to-date latent representation of
the individualized CXR images. Our approach leverages latent diffusion models
for patient-specific generation strategically conditioned on a previous CXR image
and EHR time series, providing information regarding anatomical structures and
disease progressions, respectively. In this way, the interaction across modalities
could be better captured by the latent CXR generation process, ultimately improving
the prediction performance. Experiments using MIMIC datasets show that the
proposed model could effectively address asynchronicity in multimodal fusion and
consistently outperform existing methods.

1

Introduction

Clinical data in modern healthcare is documented through various complementary modalities [1, 2].
Electronic health records (EHRs), for instance, systematically record the progression of diseases over
time, including medical histories, laboratory test results, and treatment outcomes [3–6]. In parallel,
medical imaging, such as chest X-rays (CXRs), is valuable for providing visual insights into the
patient’s internal anatomy, organ functions, and potential abnormalities [7]. Recent studies have
shown that strategic integration of multimodal clinical data could lead to improved performance for
clinical predictions compared to relying solely on uni-modal data [8–13].
Despite the promising results obtained, the inherent asynchronicity of multimodal clinical data still
hinders effective integration. Take the intensive care unit (ICU) setting as an example, patients
are subject to continuous monitoring systems that capture vital signs, including heart rate, blood
pressure, and oxygen saturation, with this information being routinely recorded in the EHR [14, 15].
On the other hand, CXRs are captured only on an as-needed basis and often as less as possible,
due to limitations of radiation dose and resources [16]. However, patients admitted to ICU are in
life-threatening conditions, which means their medical status is prone to rapid changes and highly
time-sensitive [17]. In the MIMIC-CXR dataset [18], it is observed that among patients with positive
disease findings in their CXR, over 70% of subsequent CXR images — taken within a median interval
∗
†

These authors contributed equally.
Correspondence to: Kejing Yin <cskjyin@comp.hkbu.edu.hk>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

