Weight Diffusion for Future: Learn to Generalize in
Non-Stationary Environments

Mixue Xie

Shuang Li

Binhui Xie

Beijing Institute of Technology
mxxie@bit.edu.cn

Beijing Institute of Technology
shuangli@bit.edu.cn

Beijing Institute of Technology
binhuixie@bit.edu.cn

Chi Harold Liu

Jian Liang

Zixun Sun

Beijing Institute of Technology
chiliu@bit.edu.cn

Kuaishou Technology
liangjian03@kuaishou.com

Tencent
sunzixun@126.com

Ke Feng

Chengwei Zhu

Tencent
richardfeng@tencent.com

Tencent
chavezzhu@tencent.com

Abstract
Enabling deep models to generalize in non-stationary environments is vital for
real-world machine learning, as data distributions are often found to continually
change. Recently, evolving domain generalization (EDG) has emerged to tackle
the domain generalization in a time-varying system, where the domain gradually
evolves over time in an underlying continuous structure. Nevertheless, it typically
assumes multiple source domains simultaneously ready. It still remains an open
problem to address EDG in the domain-incremental setting, where source domains
are non-static and arrive sequentially to mimic the evolution of training domains.
To this end, we propose Weight Diffusion (W-Diff), a novel framework that utilizes
the conditional diffusion model in the parameter space to learn the evolving pattern
of classifiers during the domain-incremental training process. Specifically, the
diffusion model is conditioned on the classifier weights of different historical domain (regarded as a reference point) and the prototypes of current domain, to learn
the evolution from the reference point to the classifier weights of current domain
(regarded as the anchor point). In addition, a domain-shared feature encoder is
learned by enforcing prediction consistency among multiple classifiers, so as to
mitigate the overfitting problem and restrict the evolving pattern to be reflected
in the classifier as much as possible. During inference, we adopt the ensemble
manner based on a great number of target domain-customized classifiers, which
are cheaply obtained via the conditional diffusion model, for robust prediction.
Comprehensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets show the
superior generalization performance of W-Diff on unseen domains in the future.

1

Introduction

Domain generalization (DG) deals with a fundamental problem in modern machine learning [13, 46,
47], where performance degeneration often occurs when deep models encounter out-of-distribution
(OOD) data [38, 56]. The goal of DG is to learn a model that can perform well on unseen target
domains by leveraging labeled data from multiple related but different source domains [23, 19, 57, 22].
Corresponding author. Code is available at https://github.com/BIT-DA/W-Diff.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

