Conditioning non-linear and
infinite-dimensional diffusion processes

Elizabeth Louise Baker
Department of Computer Science,
University of Copenhagen
elba@di.ku.dk

Gefan Yang
Department of Computer Science,
University of Copenhagen
gy@di.ku.dk

Michael L. Severinsen
Globe Institute,
University of Copenhagen
michael.baand@sund.ku.dk

Christy Anna Hipsley
Department of Biology,
University of Copenhagen
christy.hipsley@bio.ku.dk

Stefan Sommer
Department of Computer Science,
University of Copenhagen
sommer@di.ku.dk

Abstract
Generative diffusion models and many stochastic models in science and engineering
naturally live in infinite dimensions before discretisation. To incorporate observed
data for statistical and learning tasks, one needs to condition on observations. While
recent work has treated conditioning linear processes in infinite dimensions, conditioning non-linear processes in infinite dimensions has not been explored. This
paper conditions function-valued stochastic processes without prior discretisation.
To do so, we use an infinite-dimensional version of Girsanov’s theorem to condition
a function-valued stochastic process, leading to a stochastic differential equation
(SDE) for the conditioned process involving the score. We apply this technique to
do time series analysis for shapes of organisms in evolutionary biology, where we
discretise via the Fourier basis and then learn the coefficients of the score function
with score matching methods.

1

Introduction

When modelling finite-dimensional data, such as temperature or speed, there are well-known methods
for incorporating observations into stochastic or probabilistic models, for example, those based on
Gaussian-process regression [Rasmussen and Williams, 2005]. For non-linear models, techniques
like Doob’s h-transform can be used [Rogers and Williams, 2000, Chapter 6]. But for data that is
function-valued (and thus infinite-dimensional) with non-linear models, conditioning is still an open
problem. This paper introduces a way of conditioning infinite-dimensional diffusion processes by
introducing an infinite-dimensional version of Doob’s h-transform. We then discretise the conditioned
process and sample from it; that is, we condition and then discretise rather than discretising and then
conditioning.
We present methods to condition a process to hit a specific set at the end time, also known as bridges.
This method covers the case of conditioning strong solutions to Hilbert space-valued stochastic
differential equations (SDEs). For the conditioning, we consider two scenarios. The first is that the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

