Mixture of Experts for Audio-Visual Learning

Ying Cheng1,2,3 Yang Li1,2
Junjie He1,2
Rui Feng1,2,3∗
1
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
3
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
{chengy18, fengrui}@fudan.edu.cn,
{liy23, hejj23}@m.fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
With the rapid development of multimedia technology, audio-visual learning has
emerged as a promising research topic within the field of multimodal analysis.
In this paper, we explore parameter-efficient transfer learning for audio-visual
learning and propose the Audio-Visual Mixture of Experts (AVMoE) to inject
adapters into pre-trained models flexibly. Specifically, we introduce unimodal and
cross-modal adapters as multiple experts to specialize in intra-modal and intermodal information, respectively, and employ a lightweight router to dynamically
allocate the weights of each expert according to the specific demands of each task.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed approach AVMoE achieves
superior performance across multiple audio-visual tasks, including AVE, AVVP,
AVS, and AVQA. Furthermore, visual-only experimental results also indicate that
our approach can tackle challenging scenes where modality information is missing.
The source code is available at https://github.com/yingchengy/AVMOE.

1

Introduction

Audio-visual learning is a challenging problem that analyzes auditory and visual information simultaneously, which aims at naturally integrating information from multiple modalities to perceive
and understand the real-world comprehensively. By leveraging both auditory and visual cues, the
models can learn multimodal correlations and solve various tasks such as Audio-Visual Event localization (AVE) [54], Audio-Visual Segmentation (AVS) [65], and Audio-Visual Question Answering
(AVQA) [61, 27, 64].
In recent years, audio-visual learning has received steadily increasing attention in the field of
multimodal analysis. Some previous works [3, 9, 22, 43, 1] utilize the correspondence between
auditory and visual streams to learn multimodal representations in a self-supervised manner. By
reducing the reliance on labeled data, self-supervised approaches can scale to larger datasets [14]
and improve generalization performance. However, due to the rapid growth of the model size,
fine-tuning full parameters of large pre-trained models entails significant computational costs for each
downstream task. Recently, some researchers [30, 11] have attempted to inject adapters into frozen
audio-visual pre-trained models, so as to reduce trainable parameters when applying to downstream
tasks. Although these approaches have achieved satisfactory performance, they only focus on crossmodal attention in adapters to introduce information from other modalities, lacking the prominence
of crucial information within the current modality. Besides, not every visual frame and audio segment
can promote each other, and only introducing cross-modal adapters may bring irrelevant information
during the learning process. As shown in Figure 1, the sound of basketball bounce is completely
drowned out by the commentator’s voice and the cheers from the audience. In these cases such
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

