Getting More Juice Out of the SFT Data: Reward
Learning from Human Demonstration Improves SFT
for LLM Alignment

Jiaxiang Li
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN, USA
li003755@umn.edu
Chenliang Li
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA
chenliangli@tamu.edu

Siliang Zeng
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN, USA
zeng0176@umn.edu

Hoi-To Wai
Chinese University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong
htwai@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Alfredo Garcia
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA
alfredo.garcia@tamu.edu

Mingyi Hong
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN, USA
mhong@umn.edu

Abstract
Aligning human preference and value is an important requirement for contemporary
foundation models. State-of-the-art techniques such as Reinforcement Learning
from Human Feedback (RLHF) often consist of two stages: 1) supervised finetuning (SFT), where the model is fine-tuned by learning from human demonstration
data; 2) Preference learning, where preference data is used to learn a reward model,
which is in turn used by a reinforcement learning (RL) step to fine-tune the model.
Such reward model serves as a proxy to human preference, and it is critical to
guide the RL step towards improving the model quality. In this work, we argue
that the SFT stage significantly benefits from learning a reward model as well.
Instead of using the human demonstration data directly via supervised learning,
we propose to leverage an Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) technique to
simultaneously build an reward model and a policy model. This approach leads
to new SFT algorithms that are not only efficient to implement, but are robust
to the presence of low-quality supervised learning data. Moreover, we discover
a connection between the proposed IRL based approach, and a recent line of
works called Self-Play Fine-tune (SPIN, Chen et al. [2024]). Theoretically, we
show that the proposed algorithms converge to the stationary solutions of the IRL
problem. Empirically, we align 1B and 7B models using proposed methods and
evaluate them on a reward benchmark model and the HuggingFace Open LLM
Leaderboard. The proposed methods show significant performance improvement
over existing SFT approaches. Our results indicate that it is beneficial to leverage
reward learning throughout the entire alignment process. Our code is available at
https://github.com/JasonJiaxiangLi/Reward_learning_SFT.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have become the cornerstone of modern artificial intelligence
applications. They are believed to lead the way towards artificial general intelligence [Bubeck et al.,
2023], also have shown great capabilities towards specialized domains such as math problem solving
[Cobbe et al., 2021, Trinh et al., 2024, Wei et al., 2022, Lewkowycz et al., 2022], code generation
[Chen et al., 2021, Austin et al., 2021, Li et al., 2022], text generation [Anil et al., 2023, Touvron
et al., 2023, Thoppilan et al., 2022], etc. Usually, researchers need to align the pre-trained LLMs
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

