PURE: Prompt Evolution with Graph ODE for
Out-of-distribution Fluid Dynamics Modeling

Hao Wu1,3 , Changhu Wang2 , Fan Xu1 , Jinbao Xue3 ,
Chong Chen4 , Xian-Sheng Hua4 , Xiao Luo2,∗
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 University of California, Los Angeles,
3
Tencent , 4 Terminus Group
wuhao2022@mail.ustc.edu.cn, wangch156@g.ucla.edu, markxu@mail.ustc.edu.cn
markxu@mail.ustc.edu.cn,jinbaoxue@tencent.com, chenchong.cz@gmail.com,
huaxiansheng@gmail.com, xiaoluo@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
This work studies the problem of out-of-distribution fluid dynamics modeling. Previous works usually design effective neural operators to learn from mesh-based data
structures. However, in real-world applications, they would suffer from distribution
shifts from the variance of system parameters and temporal evolution of the dynamical system. In this paper, we propose a novel approach named Prompt Evolution
with Graph ODE (PURE) for out-of-distribution fluid dynamics modeling. The
core of our PURE is to learn time-evolving prompts using a graph ODE to adapt
spatio-temporal forecasting models to different scenarios. In particular, our PURE
first learns from historical observations and system parameters in the frequency domain to explore multi-view context information, which could effectively initialize
prompt embeddings. More importantly, we incorporate the interpolation of observation sequences into a graph ODE, which can capture the temporal evolution of
prompt embeddings for model adaptation. These time-evolving prompt embeddings
are then incorporated into basic forecasting models to overcome temporal distribution shifts. We also minimize the mutual information between prompt embeddings
and observation embeddings to enhance the robustness of our model to different
distributions. Extensive experiments on various benchmark datasets validate the
superiority of the proposed PURE in comparison to various baselines. Our codes
are available at https://github.com/easylearningscores/PURE_main.

1

Introduction

Fluid dynamics [44, 89] is a critical area in the field of mechanics and computational fluid dynamics
has emerged as a powerful tool to understanding fluid flow [32, 58, 67, 45]. Recently, various
machine learning approaches have been widely adopted to solve the problem in a data-driven
manner [59, 46, 66, 65, 18, 7, 81], which can achieve high efficiency in comparison to previous
traditional numerical solvers. Moreover, they enjoy strong applicability when the underlying rules
are not explicit, such as real-world weather forecasting [4] and disease transmission [68].
In literature, existing data-driven fluid dynamics modeling approaches can be roughly divided
into grid-based approaches [12, 17] and geometry-based approaches [59, 66, 65, 20]. Grid-based
approaches construct regular meshes and then utilize neural operators to explore spatio-temporal
relationships. In contrast, geometry-based approaches focus on irregular point clouds and then utilize
graph neural networks (GNNs) [30, 70] to learn from the interaction between mesh points.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

