WaveAttack: Asymmetric Frequency Obfuscation-based Backdoor Attacks
Against Deep Neural Networks

Jun Xia1,† , Zhihao Yue1,† , Yingbo Zhou1 , Zhiwei Ling1 ,
Yiyu Shi2 , Xian Wei1 , Mingsong Chen1∗
1
MoE Eng. Research Center of SW/HW Co-design Tech. and App., East China Normal University
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame
{jxia, 51215902034, 52215902009, 51215902044}@stu.ecnu.edu.cn,
yshi4@nd.edu, {xwei, mschen}@sei.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Due to the increasing popularity of Artificial Intelligence (AI), more and more
backdoor attacks are designed to mislead Deep Neural Network (DNN) predictions by manipulating training samples or processes. Although backdoor attacks
have been investigated in various scenarios, they still suffer from the problems of
both low fidelity of poisoned samples and non-negligible transfer in latent space,
which make them easily identified by existing backdoor detection algorithms. To
overcome this weakness, this paper proposes a novel frequency-based backdoor
attack method named WaveAttack, which obtains high-frequency image features
through Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) to generate highly stealthy backdoor
triggers. By introducing an asymmetric frequency obfuscation method, our approach adds an adaptive residual to the training and inference stages to improve
the impact of triggers, thus further enhancing the effectiveness of WaveAttack.
Comprehensive experimental results show that, WaveAttack can not only achieve
higher effectiveness than state-of-the-art backdoor attack methods, but also outperform them in the fidelity of images (i.e., by up to 28.27% improvement in
PSNR, 1.61% improvement in SSIM, and 70.59% reduction in IS). Our code is
available at https://github.com/BililiCode/WaveAttack.

1

Introduction

Along with the prosperity of Artificial Intelligence (AI), Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have become increasingly prevalent in numerous safety-critical domains for precise perception and real-time
control, such as autonomous vehicles [1], medical diagnosis, and industrial automation [2]. However, the trustworthiness of DNNs faces significant threats due to various notorious adversarial and
backdoor attacks. Typically, adversarial attacks [3, 4] manipulate input data during the inference
stage to induce incorrect predictions by a trained DNN, while backdoor attacks [5] tamper with
training samples or processes to embed concealed triggers during training, which can be exploited
to generate malicious outputs. Although adversarial attacks on DNNs frequently appear in various
scenarios, backdoor attacks have attracted more attention because of their stealthiness and effectiveness. Generally, the performance of backdoor attacks can be evaluated by the following three
objectives of an adversary: i) efficacy that refers to the effectiveness of an attack in causing the
target model to produce incorrect outputs or exhibit unintended behavior; ii) specificity that denotes
the precision of the attack in targeting a specific class; and iii) fidelity that represents the degree
to which adversarial examples or poisoned training samples are indistinguishable from their benign
counterparts [6]. Note that efficacy and specificity represent the effectiveness of backdoor attacks,
while fidelity denotes the stealthiness of backdoor attacks.
∗

Mingsong Chen is the corresponding author. † Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

