Swift Sampler: Efficient Learning of Sampler by 10
Parameters

1

Jiawei Yao1∗ Chuming Li2,3∗ Canran Xiao4†
University of Washington 2 Shanghai Artifcial Intelligence Laboratory
3
The University of Sydney 4 Central South University

jwyao@uw.edu, chli3951@uni.sydney.edu.au, xiaocanran@csu.edu.cn

Abstract
Data selection is essential for training deep learning models. An effective data
sampler assigns proper sampling probability for training data and helps the model
converge to a good local minimum with high performance. Previous studies in
data sampling are mainly based on heuristic rules or learning through a huge
amount of time-consuming trials. In this paper, we propose an automatic swift
sampler search algorithm, SS, to explore automatically learning effective samplers
efficiently. In particular, SS utilizes a novel formulation to map a sampler to a low
dimension of hyper-parameters and uses an approximated local minimum to quickly
examine the quality of a sampler. Benefiting from its low computational expense,
SS can be applied on large-scale data sets with high efficiency. Comprehensive
experiments on various tasks demonstrate that SS powered sampling can achieve
obvious improvements (e.g., 1.5% on ImageNet) and transfer among different
neural networks. Project page: https://github.com/Alexander-Yao/Swift-Sampler.

1

Introduction

Training data plays a pivotal role in deep learning tasks. The sampling probability of data in the
training process can significantly influence the performance of the learned model. A set of works
[Jiang et al., 2019, Katharopoulos and Fleuret, 2018, Needell et al., 2014, Johnson and Guestrin, 2018,
Han et al., 2018, Hu et al., 2024] have demonstrated improvements in model training by sampling
data according to different features and under different rules. These studies reveal that how to sample
examples during training is nontrivial and sampling data in a totally uniform way is not always the
optimal choice.
Previous works on data sampling strategy include two main categories: human-defined rules and
learning-based methods. Some works [Han et al., 2018, Jiang et al., 2019, Katharopoulos and Fleuret,
2018, Hacohen and Weinshall, 2019, Kumar et al., 2010] proposed manually designed rules, such as
setting the sampling probability of training examples with loss values larger than a threshold as zero,
or making the sampling probability proportional to the gradient norms. Such human-defined rules are
designed for specific tasks and hardly adapts to different scenarios, because optimal sampling strategy
varies among different tasks and data sets. Learning-based methods [Fan et al., 2017, Jiang et al.,
2017, Ren et al., 2018] explore an automatic way to assign sampling probability to a given learning
task, including sample-based and differential based methods. Sample-based methods take advantage
of deep reinforcement learning (DRL) [Fan et al., 2017] to model the training process of the target
model as an environment and use a DRL model to learn the optimal sampling strategy during training.
These methods need hundreds of replays of the training process and require too much searching cost
to be applied on large-scale data sets, e.g., ImageNet [Russakovsky et al., 2015]. Differential based
methods [Ren et al., 2018, Shu et al., 2019] assume a completely clean meta dataset and use the inner
∗
†

These authors contribute equally to this work.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

