Neural Collapse To Multiple Centers For Imbalanced
Data
Hongren Yan, Yuhua Qian∗, Furong Peng, Jiachen Luo, Zheqing Zhu, Feijiang Li
Shanxi University

Abstract
Neural Collapse (NC) was a recently discovered phenomenon that the output features and the classifier weights of the neural network converge to optimal geometric
structures at the Terminal Phase of Training (TPT) under various losses. However,
the relationship between these optimal structures at TPT and the classification
performance remains elusive, especially in imbalanced learning. Even though it
is noticed that fixing the classifier to an optimal structure can mitigate the minority collapse problem, the performance is still not comparable to the classical
imbalanced learning methods with a learnable classifier. In this work, we find that
the optimal structure can be designed to represent a better classification rule, and
thus achieve better performance. In particular, we justify that, to achieve better
classification, the features from the minor classes should align with more directions.
This justification then yields a decision rule called the Generalized Classification
Rule (GCR) and we also term these directions as the centers of the classes. Then
we study the NC under an MSE-type loss via the Unconstrained Features Model
(UFM) framework where (1) the features from a class tend to collapse to the mean
of the corresponding centers of that class (named Neural Collapse to Multiple Centers (NCMC)) at the global optimum, and (2) the original classifier approximates
a surrogate to GCR when NCMC occurs. Based on the analysis, we develop a
strategy for determining the number of centers and propose a Cosine Loss function
for the fixed classifier that induces NCMC. Our experiments have shown that the
Cosine Loss can induce NCMC and has performance on long-tail classification
comparable to the classical imbalanced learning methods.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are popular choices classification tasks[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Researchers try to
demystify the deep representations learned from data [8, 9]. A recent paper [10] observed "Neural
Collapse" (NC) phenomenon: all the backbone network output features from each class converge
into their corresponding vertices of an equiangular tight frame (ETF) and the within-class variability
collapses.
The layer-peeled model (LPM) [11] and unconstrained feature model (UFM) [12] are the simplified
model to study NC, in which the backbone output feature and the classifier weights are assumed
free variables to optimize. NC phenomena occur with different loss functions. The optimality of
UFM satisfies NC under the CE loss with constraints [13, 11, 14], regularization [15], or even no
explicit constraint [16]. MSE objectives also induce NC at global optimality [12, 17, 18, 19]. There
is another line of works that extend UFM or LPM on deeper linear layers [19, 20, 21, 22].
Data imbalance has been recently considered in NC literature[11, 23, 20]. In particular, Fang et al.
[11] originally observe the "minority collapse" phenomenon that the classifier weights of the minority
∗

Corresponding Author. Email: jinchengqyh@126.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

