NoiseGPT: Label Noise Detection and Rectification
through Probability Curvature

Haoyu Wang
School of Automation
Beijing Institute of Technology
haoyu.wang@bit.edu.cn
Zhiwei Lin∗
School of Automation
Beijing Institute of Technology
linzhiwei@bit.edu.cn

Zhuo Huang
Sydney AI Centre
University of Sydney
zhuohuang.ai@gmail.com
Tongliang Liu†
Sydney AI Centre
University of Sydney
tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Machine learning craves high-quality data which is a major bottleneck during
realistic deployment, as it takes abundant resources and massive human labor to
collect and label data. Unfortunately, label noise where image data mismatches
with incorrect label exists ubiquitously in all kinds of datasets, significantly degrading the learning performance of deep networks. Learning with Label Noise
(LNL) has been a common strategy for mitigating the influence of noisy labels.
However, existing LNL methods either require pertaining using the memorization
effect to separate clean data from noisy ones or rely on dataset assumptions that
cannot extend to various scenarios. Thanks to the development of Multimodal
Large Language Models (MLLMs) which possess massive knowledge and hold
In-Context Learning (ICL) ability, this paper proposes NoiseGPT to effectively
leverage MLLMs as a knowledge expert for conducting label noise detection and
rectification. Specifically, we observe a probability curvature effect of MLLMs
where clean and noisy examples reside on curvatures with different smoothness,
further enabling the detection of label noise. By designing a token-wise Mixof-Feature (MoF) technique to produce the curvature, we propose an In-Context
Discrepancy (ICD) measure to determine the authenticity of an image-label pair.
Subsequently, we repeat such a process to find the best matching pairs to complete
our label rectification. Through extensive experiments, we carefully demonstrate
the effectiveness of NoiseGPT on detecting and cleansing dataset noise, especially
on ILSVRC12, the AUROC of NoiseGPT reached over 0.92. And by integrating with existing methods, the classification performance can be significantly
improved on noisy datasets, typically by 22.8% on 80% symmetric CIFAR-10 with
M-correction. Source code: https://github.com/drunkerWang/NoiseGPT

1

Introduction

Contemporary machine learning is greedy for high-quality datasets. However, large-scale datasets
such as human-annotated ones like ImageNet [1] and COCO [2] or internet-downloaded ones like
WebVision [3] and Instagram Datasets [4] are either resource-consuming or untrustworthy. As a
∗
†

Corresponding author: Zhiwei Lin (linzhiwei@bit.edu.cn)
Corresponding author: Tongliang Liu (tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

