DiffusionFake: Enhancing Generalization in Deepfake
Detection via Guided Stable Diffusion
Ke Sun1 , Shen Chen2 , Taiping Yao2 , Hong Liu3∗,
Xiaoshuai Sun1 , Shouhong Ding2 , Rongrong Ji1
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, 361005, P.R. China.
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent, P.R. China.
3
Osaka University, Japan.

Abstract
The rapid progress of Deepfake technology has made face swapping highly realistic, raising concerns about the malicious use of fabricated facial content. Existing
methods often struggle to generalize to unseen domains due to the diverse nature of facial manipulations. In this paper, we revisit the generation process and
identify a universal principle: Deepfake images inherently contain information
from both source and target identities, while genuine faces maintain a consistent identity. Building upon this insight, we introduce DiffusionFake, a novel
plug-and-play framework that reverses the generative process of face forgeries to
enhance the generalization of detection models. DiffusionFake achieves this by
injecting the features extracted by the detection model into a frozen pre-trained
Stable Diffusion model, compelling it to reconstruct the corresponding target and
source images. This guided reconstruction process constrains the detection network
to capture the source and target related features to facilitate the reconstruction,
thereby learning rich and disentangled representations that are more resilient to
unseen forgeries. Extensive experiments demonstrate that DiffusionFake significantly improves cross-domain generalization of various detector architectures
without introducing additional parameters during inference. Code are available in
https://github.com/skJack/DiffusionFake.git.

1

Introduction

The rapid progress in AI-generated content (AIGC) has led to the emergence of highly sophisticated
forged face content, making it increasingly challenging for humans to distinguish between genuine
and forged faces [31, 54, 8, 6]. Face swapping, also known as Deepfakes, is one of the most wellknown techniques for generating forged facial images. It replaces the face of a target individual with
that of a source person to create a seamless and realistic composite image [43]. The widespread
proliferation of Deepfakes content on social media platforms has raised significant security concerns,
including the spread of disinformation, fraud, and impersonation. As a result, developing effective
and generalizable face forgery detection methods to counter these malicious attacks has become a
critical challenge in the field of computer vision.
The growing diversity of facial forgery techniques has spurred interest in the general face forgery
detection task [40, 37, 26], which aims to develop models that detect forgeries from unseen domains.
Previous approaches primarily utilize forgery simulation [22, 35, 3, 38] to augment data by simulating
various forgery traces, or framework engineering to enhance generalization through specialized
designs like contrastive learning, attention mechanisms, and reconstruction learning [41, 50, 39, 2, 12].
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

