A Siamese Transformer with Hierarchical Refinement
for Lane Detection
Zinan Lv1 Dong Han2∗ Wenzhe Wang2† Danny Z. Chen3
1
Shanghai JiaoTong University 2 Zhejiang University
3
University of Notre Dame

Abstract
Lane detection is an important yet challenging task in autonomous driving systems.
Existing lane detection methods mainly rely on finer-scale information to identify
key points of lane lines. Since local information in realistic road environments is
frequently obscured by other vehicles or affected by poor outdoor lighting conditions, these methods struggle with the regression of such key points. In this paper,
we propose a novel Siamese Transformer with hierarchical refinement for lane
detection to improve the detection accuracy in complex road environments. Specifically, we propose a high-to-low hierarchical refinement Transformer structure,
called LAne TRansformer (LATR), to refine the key points of lane lines, which
integrates global semantics information and finer-scale features. Moreover, exploiting the thin and long characteristics of lane lines, we propose a novel Curve-IoU
loss to supervise the fit of lane lines. Extensive experiments on three benchmark
datasets of lane detection demonstrate that our proposed new method achieves
state-of-the-art results with high accuracy and efficiency. Specifically, our method
achieves improved F1 scores on the OpenLane dataset, surpassing the current
best-performing method by 5.0 points.

1

Introduction

Lane detection is a fundamental task in Autonomous Driving Systems (ADS), which enables a
vehicle to localize its relative position and avoid potential risks. It plays an important role in many
downstream tasks, such as driving route planning, road tracking, and adaptive cruise control. Recently,
lane detection methods based on computer vision have attained lots of achievements. Compared
to methods that combine GPS/INS (Inertial Navigation System) [2], lane detection methods that
incorporate only a camera are cheaper and safer to apply.
Early lane detection research focused on hand-crafted features and applied methods such as Hough
Transform [16] or Kalman Filter [36] to filter out unreasonable lanes. However, manually extracted
features often fail in complex scenarios. Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based methods
[10, 13, 38, 39] arose to cope with different scenarios, which greatly improved the accuracy of lane
detection. These methods often rely on straight-line anchors [12, 15, 31, 32, 35] or parametric curves
[18, 33, 9, 4] to detect lane lines. Although CNN-based methods can handle different scenarios, they
still struggle with realistic road environments, especially when involving strong light, shadows, or
dense traffic. Due to the thin and long characteristics of lane lines, lane detection requires a lot of
contextual information, and CNN-based methods may be ineffective and incapable of clustering
global semantics information and combining it with finer-scale features.
Recently, attention-based methods (e.g., CLRNet [41]) have shown promising capability in lane
detection by describing a lane line as a series of key points. By taking the lane lines as a whole unit,
∗
†

Corresponding Author. Email: phhandong@outlook.com
Corresponding Author. Email: wangwnezhe@zju.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

