Benchmarking Counterfactual Image Generation
∗

∗

∗

Thomas Melistas 1, 2, 3 , Nikos Spyrou 1, 2, 3 , Nefeli Gkouti 1, 2, 3 , Pedro Sanchez3 , Athanasios
Vlontzos4, 6 , Yannis Panagakis1, 2 , Giorgos Papanastasiou2, 5 , Sotirios A. Tsaftaris2, 3
1

National & Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece
2
Archimedes/Athena RC, Greece
3
The University of Edinburgh, UK
4
Imperial College London, UK
5
The University of Essex, UK
6
Spotify
https://gulnazaki.github.io/counterfactual-benchmark/

Abstract
Generative AI has revolutionised visual content editing, empowering users to
effortlessly modify images and videos. However, not all edits are equal. To
perform realistic edits in domains such as natural image or medical imaging,
modifications must respect causal relationships inherent to the data generation
process. Such image editing falls into the counterfactual image generation regime.
Evaluating counterfactual image generation is substantially complex: not only it
lacks observable ground truths, but also requires adherence to causal constraints.
Although several counterfactual image generation methods and evaluation metrics
exist, a comprehensive comparison within a unified setting is lacking. We present a
comparison framework to thoroughly benchmark counterfactual image generation
methods. We evaluate the performance of three conditional image generation
model families developed within the Structural Causal Model (SCM) framework.
We incorporate several metrics that assess diverse aspects of counterfactuals, such
as composition, effectiveness, minimality of interventions, and image realism. We
integrate all models that have been used for the task at hand and expand them to
novel datasets and causal graphs, demonstrating the superiority of Hierarchical
VAEs across most datasets and metrics. Our framework is implemented in a userfriendly Python package that can be extended to incorporate additional SCMs,
causal methods, generative models, and datasets for the community to build on.
Code: https://github.com/gulnazaki/counterfactual-benchmark.

1

Introduction

Generative AI has revolutionized visual content editing, empowering users to effortlessly modify
images and videos (9; 30; 45; 34; 17). However, not all edits are equal, especially in complex domains
such as natural or medical imaging, where image realism is paramount (58; 23). In these fields,
modifications must adhere to the underlying causal relationships that govern the data generation
process. Ignoring these, can lead to unrealistic and potentially misleading results, undermining the
integrity of the edited content (46; 58). Image editing inherently relies on implied causal relationships.
However, learned generative models powering image editing, will not explicitly account for these
causal relations and can produce unrealistic results. Figure 1 showcases clearly what happens when
causal relationships are not taken into account and motivates the need for causally faithful approaches.
*

These authors contributed equally to this work

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

