DreamCatcher: A Wearer-aware Sleep Event Dataset
Based on Earables in Non-restrictive Environments
Zeyu Wang1∗ , Xiyuxing Zhang1∗ , Ruotong Yu1∗,
Yuntao Wang , Kenneth Christofferson2 , Jingru Zhang1 , Alex Mariakakis2 ,
Yuanchun Shi1,3
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University‡
2
University of Toronto 3 Qinghai University
wang-zy23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yuntaowang@tsinghua.edu.cn
1†

Abstract
Poor quality sleep can be characterized by the occurrence of events ranging from
body movement to breathing impairment. Widely available earbuds equipped
with sensors (also known as earables) can be combined with a sleep event detection algorithm to offer a convenient alternative to laborious clinical tests for
individuals suffering from sleep disorders. Although various solutions utilizing
such devices have been proposed to detect sleep events, they ignore the fact that
individuals often share sleeping spaces with roommates or couples. To address
this issue, we introduce DreamCatcher, the first publicly available dataset for
wearer-aware sleep event algorithm development on earables. DreamCatcher
encompasses eight distinct sleep events, including synchronous dual-channel audio and motion data collected from 12 pairs (24 participants) totaling 210 hours
(420 hour.person) with fine-grained label. We tested multiple benchmark models on three tasks related to sleep event detection, demonstrating the usability
and unique challenge of DreamCatcher. We hope that the proposed DreamCatcher can inspire other researchers to further explore efficient wearer-aware
human vocal activity sensing on earables. DreamCatcher is publicly available at
https://github.com/thuhci/DreamCatcher.

1

Introduction

More than one-seventh of the global population suffers from at least one kind of sleep disorder, yet
many are undiagnosed [6, 36, 41]. Sleep disorders can lead to various health issues, such as cardiovascular disease and depression [14, 20, 39]. The gold-standard diagnostic method, polysomnography
(PSG), requires patients to spend the night in a specialized sleep clinic. Conducting such sleep
studies can be cost-prohibitive and resource-intensive. Additionally, patients may suffer from the
“first-night effect” where they exhibit anomalous sleep behavior when spending the night in a new
environment [29]. These challenges call for a minimally intrusive at-home sleep monitoring solution
that can alert wearers to potential sleep disorders.
∗

equal contribution
corresponding author
‡
Key Laboratory of Pervasive Computing, Ministry of Education, Beijing National Research Center for
Information Science and Technology, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, 100084, China
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

