SurgicAI: A Hierarchical Platform for Fine-Grained
Surgical Policy Learning and Benchmarking

Jin Wu1 Haoying Zhou2 Peter Kazanzides1 Adnan Munawar1 Anqi Liu1
2
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore
Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Worcester
{jwu220, pkaz, amunawa2, aliu.cs}@jhu.edu hzhou6@wpi.edu

1

Abstract
Despite advancements in robotic-assisted surgery, automating complex tasks like suturing remains challenging due to the need for adaptability and precision. Learningbased approaches, particularly reinforcement learning (RL) and imitation learning (IL), require realistic simulation environments for efficient data collection.
However, current platforms often include only relatively simple, non-dexterous
manipulations and lack the flexibility required for effective learning and generalization. We introduce SurgicAI, a novel platform for development and benchmarking that addresses these challenges by providing the flexibility to accommodate
both modular subtasks and more importantly task decomposition in RL-based
surgical robotics. Compatible with the da Vinci Surgical System, SurgicAI offers a standardized pipeline for collecting and utilizing expert demonstrations. It
supports the deployment of multiple RL and IL approaches, and the training of
both singular and compositional subtasks in suturing scenarios, featuring high
dexterity and modularization. Meanwhile, SurgicAI sets clear metrics and benchmarks for the assessment of learned policies. We implemented and evaluated
multiple RL and IL algorithms on SurgicAI. Our detailed benchmark analysis
underscores SurgicAI’s potential to advance policy learning in surgical robotics.
Details: https://github.com/surgical-robotics-ai/SurgicAI

1

Introduction

Robotic-assisted surgery (RAS) has revolutionized the medical field by enhancing precision, reducing
surgeon fatigue, and significantly shortening recovery times. While existing RAS systems lack
automation, arguably automation has the potential to improve upon the current standard of care and
surgeon workload. However, automating complex surgical tasks such as suturing remains a significant
challenge. Traditional methods [1–5] rely on pre-programmed instructions and heuristics, lacking
the adaptability and generality needed for diverse surgical scenarios. Additionally, there is a lack of
fine-grained platforms for complex, multi-stage tasks that provide rich data and assessment metrics.
These limitations highlight the need for advanced learning frameworks to handle the complexities of
surgical manipulation, as well as comprehensive evaluation and benchmarking methods.
Reinforcement learning (RL) and imitation learning (IL) have emerged as powerful mechanisms in
robotic automation, exhibiting the potential to transform the field of surgical robotics. By enabling
robots to learn from interactions with their environment and from expert demonstrations, these
learning paradigms promise to significantly enhance the autonomy and effectiveness of surgical
robots. Recent research [6–8] has focused on developing simulation environments for implementing
machine learning algorithms for various tasks. However, previous work on surgical application often
compromises on either photorealism [9, 10] or physical realism [11]. Additionally, these platforms
typically involve only relatively simple surgical tasks.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

