Discovery of the Hidden World with
Large Language Models

Chenxi Liu1∗, Yongqiang Chen2,3,4∗, Tongliang Liu5,2
1
TMLR Group, Hong Kong Baptist University
2
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
{cscxliu,bhanml}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk {yqchen,jcheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Mingming Gong6,2 , James Cheng4 , Bo Han1† , Kun Zhang2,3
Carnegie Mellon University 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
5
Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney 6 The University of Melbourne
tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au mingming.gong@unimelb.edu.au kunz1@cmu.edu
3

https://causalcoat.github.io

Abstract
Revealing the underlying causal mechanisms in the real world is the key to the
development of science. Despite the progress in the past decades, traditional causal
discovery approaches (CDs) mainly rely on high-quality measured variables, usually given by human experts, to find causal relations. The lack of well-defined
high-level variables in many real-world applications has already been a longstanding roadblock to a broader application of CDs. To this end, this paper presents
Causal representatiOn AssistanT (COAT) that introduces large language models
(LLMs) to bridge the gap. LLMs are trained on massive observations of the world
and have demonstrated great capability in extracting key information from unstructured data. Therefore, it is natural to employ LLMs to assist with proposing useful
high-level factors and crafting their measurements. Meanwhile, COAT also adopts
CDs to find causal relations among the identified variables as well as to provide
feedback to LLMs to iteratively refine the proposed factors. We show that LLMs
and CDs are mutually beneficial and the constructed feedback provably also helps
with the factor proposal. We construct and curate several synthetic and real-world
benchmarks including analysis of human reviews and diagnosis of neuropathic
and brain tumors, to comprehensively evaluate COAT. Extensive empirical results
confirm the effectiveness and reliability of COAT with significant improvements.

1

Introduction

Science originates along with identifying important variables and revealing their causal relations [1, 2].
Despite the progress in the past decades, existing causal discovery approaches (CDs) mainly rely
on high-quality measured variables, which are usually given by human experts [3, 4, 5]. However,
the desired variables and their measurements are usually unavailable in a wide range of real-world
applications. For example, Amazon sellers who want to analyze the factors related to user ratings
only have raw user reviews, which are written according to the underlying user preferences for
certain product characteristics. Therefore, the lack of high-quality high-level variables has been a
longstanding impediment to broader real-world applications of CDs or causality-inspired methods [6].
∗

These authors contributed equally. † Correspondence to Bo Han (bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

