NoMAD-Attention: Efficient LLM Inference on CPUs
Through Multiply-add-free Attention

Tianyi Zhang
Dept. of Computer Science,
Rice University
xMAD.ai
Houston, TX
tz21@rice.edu

Jonah Yi
Dept. of Computer Science,
Rice University
xMAD.ai
Houston, TX
jwy4@rice.edu

Zhaozhuo Xu
Dept. of Computer Science,
Stevens Institute of Technology
xMAD.ai
Hoboken, NJ
zxu79@stevens.edu

Bowen Yao
Dept. of Computer Science,
Rice University
Houston, TX
by18@rice.edu

Anshumali Shrivastava
Dept. of Computer Science, Rice University
Ken Kennedy Institute
ThirdAI Corp.
xMAD.ai
Houston, TX
anshumali@rice.edu

Abstract
Large Language Model (LLM) inference on Central Processing Units (CPU) is
challenging due to the vast quantities of Multiply-Add (MAD) matrix operations
in the attention computations. This paper highlights a rare gem in modern CPUs,
Single-Instruction-Multiple-Data (SIMD) registers, which allows for ultra-lowlatency lookups in a batch. We leverage this unique capability to propose NoMADAttention, an efficient attention algorithm that replaces MAD operations with inregister lookups. Through hardware-aware algorithmic designs, NoMAD-Attention
achieves the computation of attention scores using repeated fast accesses to SIMD
registers. NoMAD-Attention works with pre-trained attention-based LLMs without
model finetuning. Extensive empirical evaluations demonstrate that NoMADAttention maintains the quality of the original LLMs well and speeds up the 4-bit
quantized LLaMA-7B-based model by up to 2× at 16k context length.

1

Introduction

Auto-regressive transformer-based Large Language Models (LLM) demonstrate remarkable abilities
across a wide range of natural language processing tasks without finetuning [35] and exhibit emergent
abilities [49] for solving complex problems.
The Need for Deploying LLM on CPUs. Despite the potential of LLMs, their deployment is
costly [27]. Serving LLMs with billion-scale parameters requires specialized hardware such as
NVIDIA A100 Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) [55]. However, mainstream personal devices
are predominately equipped with only Central Processing Units (CPUs) [43]. As a result, making
LLM-related services accessible to everyone remains a major challenge. Reducing the LLM inference
latency on CPUs would significantly influence its accessibility and adoption.
Expensive Multiply-add Operations for Attention in LLM Inference. LLM inference on CPUs
is compute-bound, and the primary computational bottleneck is the calculation of attention scores
[21]. Attention, a mechanism that models token interactions through all-pair dot products, heavily
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

