Estimating Generalization Performance Along the
Trajectory of Proximal SGD in Robust Regression

Kai Tan
Department of Statistics
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ 08854
kai.tan@rutgers.edu

Pierre C. Bellec
Department of Statistics
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ 08854
pierre.bellec@rutgers.edu

Abstract
This paper studies the generalization performance of iterates obtained by Gradient
Descent (GD), Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and their proximal variants in
high-dimensional robust regression problems. The number of features is comparable to the sample size and errors may be heavy-tailed. We introduce estimators
that precisely track the generalization error of the iterates along the trajectory of
the iterative algorithm. These estimators are provably consistent under suitable
conditions. The results are illustrated through several examples, including Huber
regression, pseudo-Huber regression, and their penalized variants with non-smooth
regularizer. We provide explicit generalization error estimates for iterates generated from GD and SGD, or from proximal SGD in the presence of a non-smooth
regularizer. The proposed risk estimates serve as effective proxies for the actual
generalization error, allowing us to determine the optimal stopping iteration that
minimizes the generalization error. Extensive simulations confirm the effectiveness
of the proposed generalization error estimates.

1

Introduction

Consider the linear model:
n

y = Xb∗ + ε,
n×p

(1)
∗

p

where y ∈ R is the response vector, X ∈ R
is the design matrix, b ∈ R is the unknown
regression vector, and ε ∈ Rn is the noise vector that we assume independent of X. The entries of ε
may be heavy-tailed, for instance our working assumptions allow for infinite second moment.
For the estimation of b∗ , we consider the following regularized optimization problem
n
X
b ∈ arg min 1
ρ(yi − x⊤
b
i b) + g(b),
p
n
b∈R
i=1

(2)

where ρ : R → R is a data-fitting loss and g : Rp → R is a regularization function. In the
present robust regression setting, typical examples of ρ include the Huber [14] loss ρ(r; δ) =
p
R |r/δ|
δ2 0
min(1, x) dx, the Pseudo-Huber loss ρ(r; δ) = δ 2 ( 1 + (r/δ)2 − 1) or other Lipschitz
loss functions to combat the possible heavy-tails of the additive noise. Typical examples of penalty
functions include the L1/Lasso [27] penalty g(b) = λ∥b∥1 , group-Lasso penalty [29] for grouped
variables, or their non-convex variants including for instance SCAD [12] or MCP [30].
In order to solve the optimization problem (2), practitioners resort to iterative algorithms, for instance
gradient descent, accelerated gradient descent, stochastic gradient descent, and the corresponding
proximal methods [20] in the presence of a non-smooth regularizer. Let the algorithm starts with
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

