Risk-Sensitive Control as Inference
with Rényi Divergence

Kaito Ito
The University of Tokyo
kaito@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Kenji Kashima
Kyoto University
kk@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
This paper introduces the risk-sensitive control as inference (RCaI) that extends CaI
by using Rényi divergence variational inference. RCaI is shown to be equivalent
to log-probability regularized risk-sensitive control, which is an extension of the
maximum entropy (MaxEnt) control. We also prove that the risk-sensitive optimal
policy can be obtained by solving a soft Bellman equation, which reveals several
equivalences between RCaI, MaxEnt control, the optimal posterior for CaI, and
linearly-solvable control. Moreover, based on RCaI, we derive the risk-sensitive
reinforcement learning (RL) methods: the policy gradient and the soft actor-critic.
As the risk-sensitivity parameter vanishes, we recover the risk-neutral CaI and RL,
which means that RCaI is a unifying framework. Furthermore, we give another risksensitive generalization of the MaxEnt control using Rényi entropy regularization.
We show that in both of our extensions, the optimal policies have the same structure
even though the derivations are very different.

1

Introduction

Optimal control theory is a powerful framework for sequential decision making [1]. In optimal control
problems, one seeks to find a control policy that minimizes a given cost functional and typically
assumes the full knowledge of the system’s dynamics. Optimal control with unknown or partially
known dynamics is called reinforcement learning (RL) [2], which has been successfully applied to
highly complex and uncertain systems, e.g., robotics [3], self-driving vehicles [4]. However, solving
optimal control and RL problems is still challenging, especially for continuous spaces.
Control as Inference (CaI), which connects optimal control and Bayesian inference, is a promising
paradigm for overcoming the challenges of RL [5]. In CaI, the optimality of a state and control
trajectory is defined by introducing optimality variables rather than explicit costs. Consequently,
an optimal control problem can be formulated as a probabilistic inference problem. In particular,
maximum entropy (MaxEnt) control [6, 7] is equivalent to a variational inference problem using the
Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence. MaxEnt control has entropy regularization of a control policy,
and as a result, the optimal policy is stochastic. Several works have revealed the advantages of
the regularization such as robustness against disturbances [8], natural exploration induced by the
stochasticity [7, 9], fast convergence of the MaxEnt policy gradient method [10].
On the other hand, the KL divergence is not the only option available for variational inference. In
[11], the variational inference was extended to Rényi α-divergence [12], which is a rich family
of divergences including the KL divergence. Similar to the traditional variational inference, this
extension optimizes a lower bound of the evidence, which is called the variational Rényi bound.
The parameter α of Rényi divergence controls the balance between mass-covering and zero-forcing
effects for approximate inference [13]. However, if we use Rényi divergence for CaI, it remains
unclear how α affects the optimal policy, and a natural question arises: what objective does CaI using
Rényi divergence optimize?
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

