Aligning Model Properties via Conformal Risk Control

William Overman1
1

Jacqueline Jil Vallon2

Stanford Graduate School of Business
{wpo,bayati}@stanford.edu,

2

Mohsen Bayati1

Management Science and Engineering
jjvallon@alumni.stanford.edu

Abstract
AI model alignment is crucial due to inadvertent biases in training data and the
underspecified machine learning pipeline, where models with excellent test metrics
may not meet end-user requirements. While post-training alignment via human
feedback shows promise, these methods are often limited to generative AI settings
where humans can interpret and provide feedback on model outputs. In traditional
non-generative settings with numerical or categorical outputs, detecting misalignment through single-sample outputs remains challenging, and enforcing alignment
during training requires repeating costly training processes. In this paper we consider an alternative strategy. We propose interpreting model alignment through
property testing, defining an aligned model f as one belonging to a subset P of
functions that exhibit specific desired behaviors. We focus on post-processing a
pre-trained model f to better align with P using conformal risk control. Specifically, we develop a general procedure for converting queries for testing a given
property P to a collection of loss functions suitable for use in a conformal risk
control algorithm. We prove a probabilistic guarantee that the resulting conformal
interval around f contains a function approximately satisfying P. We exhibit
applications of our methodology on a collection of supervised learning datasets for
(shape-constrained) properties such as monotonicity and concavity. The general
procedure is flexible and can be applied to a wide range of desired properties.
Finally, we prove that pre-trained models will always require alignment techniques
even as model sizes or training data increase, as long as the training data contains
even small biases.

1

Introduction

The emergence of large foundation models has increased the attention to the problem of alignment.
Aligned models are artificial intelligences designed to pursue goals that align with human values,
principles, and intentions (Leike et al., 2018; Ouyang et al., 2022; Hendrycks et al., 2023; Ngo
et al., 2024). Although the alignment problem is predominantly examined in the context of potential
artificial general intelligence (AGI), large language models (LLMs), and reinforcement learning (RL)
agents, it also has roots in the modern machine learning pipeline (D’Amour et al., 2022). Motivated by
this, we introduce a broader notion of alignment in this paper, extending beyond the aforementioned
generative models to include even tabular regression models.
As an example, consider a regression task where property P represents models that are monotonically
decreasing in a given feature (covariate). For example, predicting cancer patient survival should be
monotonically decreasing in cancer stage (Vallon et al., 2022, 2024). Constraining a prediction model
during training to maintain monotonicity in this feature can be viewed as a form of alignment. For a
pre-trained model f that was trained without such constraints, ensuring monotonically decreasing
predictions in this feature can be more complex. This complexity arises particularly in non-generative
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

