UniDSeg: Unified Cross-Domain 3D Semantic
Segmentation via Visual Foundation Models Prior

Yao Wu1 , Mingwei Xing2 , Yachao Zhang1∗, Xiaotong Luo1 , Yuan Xie4,5 , Yanyun Qu1,2,3∗
1
School of Informatics, Xiamen University
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University
3
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
5
Chongqing Institute of East China Normal University
wuyao@stu.xmu.edu.cn, yyqu@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
3D semantic segmentation using an adapting model trained from a source domain
with or without accessing unlabeled target-domain data is the fundamental task in
computer vision, containing domain adaptation and domain generalization. The
essence of simultaneously solving cross-domain tasks is to enhance the generalizability of the encoder. In light of this, we propose a groundbreaking universal
method with the help of off-the-shelf Visual Foundation Models (VFMs) to boost
the adaptability and generalizability of cross-domain 3D semantic segmentation,
dubbed UniDSeg. Our method explores the VFMs prior and how to harness them,
aiming to inherit the recognition ability of VFMs. Specifically, this method introduces layer-wise learnable blocks to the VFMs, which hinges on alternately
learning two representations during training: (i) Learning visual prompt. The
3D-to-2D transitional prior and task-shared knowledge is captured from the prompt
space, and then (ii) Learning deep query. Spatial Tunability is constructed to the
representation of distinct instances driven by prompts in the query space. Integrating these representations into a cross-modal learning framework, UniDSeg efficiently mitigates the domain gap between 2D and 3D modalities, achieving unified
cross-domain 3D semantic segmentation. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method across widely recognized tasks and datasets, all achieving superior performance over state-of-the-art methods. Remarkably, UniDSeg
achieves 57.5%/54.4% mIoU on “A2D2/sKITTI” for domain adaptive/generalized
tasks. Code is available at https://github.com/Barcaaaa/UniDSeg.

1

Introduction

As deep learning technology develops by leaps and bounds [47, 57, 59], 3D scene understanding has
become the foundation for many real-world applications, including autonomous driving, robotics,
augmented reality, smart cities, etc. Based on the LiDAR sensor, 3D semantic segmentation is a
critical task that provides an accurate and robust semantic prediction of the surrounding scenarios.
However, annotating large-scale datasets for training every new scenario is labor-intensive and timeconsuming, especially for the tasks demanding point-wise annotations. These limitations hinder their
practical applicability in real-world scenarios where acquiring high-quality labeled data.
Currently, domain adaptive 3D semantic segmentation (DA3SS) [19, 32, 38, 45, 48, 51] and domain
generalized 3D semantic segmentation (DG3SS) [21, 27, 49, 60] have been widely explored in
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

