Task-recency bias strikes back: Adapting covariances
in Exemplar-Free Class Incremental Learning

Grzegorz Rypeść∗
IDEAS NCBR
Warsaw University of Technology
grzegorz.rypesc@ideas-ncbr.pl

Sebastian Cygert
IDEAS NCBR
Gdańsk University of Technology
sebastian.cygert@ideas-ncbr.pl

Tomasz Trzciński
IDEAS NCBR
Warsaw University of Technology
Tooploox

Bartłomiej Twardowski
IDEAS NCBR
Autonomous University of Barcelona
Computer Vision Center

Abstract
Exemplar-Free Class Incremental Learning (EFCIL) tackles the problem of training
a model on a sequence of tasks without access to past data. Existing state-of-the-art
methods represent classes as Gaussian distributions in the feature extractor’s latent
space, enabling Bayes classification or training the classifier by replaying pseudo
features. However, we identify two critical issues that compromise their efficacy
when the feature extractor is updated on incremental tasks. First, they do not
consider that classes’ covariance matrices change and must be adapted after each
task. Second, they are susceptible to a task-recency bias caused by dimensionality
collapse occurring during training. In this work, we propose AdaGauss – a novel
method that adapts covariance matrices from task to task and mitigates the taskrecency bias owing to the additional anti-collapse loss function. AdaGauss yields
state-of-the-art results on popular EFCIL benchmarks and datasets when training
from scratch or starting from a pre-trained backbone.

1

Introduction

Continual learning (CL), an essential area of machine learning, focuses on developing algorithms
that can learn progressively from a continuous stream of data and adapt to new tasks while retaining
previously acquired knowledge. This paradigm is paramount for creating systems capable of lifelong
learning, much like humans, and robust in dynamic environments where data distribution evolves
over time. A significant challenge within CL is exemplar-free class incremental learning (EFCIL) [41,
26], which requires the model to incorporate new classes without storing previous data samples
(exemplars). This approach is especially relevant in scenarios with privacy constraints or limited
storage capacity, as it compels the model to retain knowledge and prevent catastrophic forgetting [9,
27] solely through internal mechanisms, such as knowledge distillation [12, 21, 45, 51, 24], parameter
regularization [17, 2, 6], expanding neural architecture [44, 53, 32, 3] or generative replay [40, 14, 28].
Recent state-of-the-art methods designed for EFCIL often represent classes as Gaussian distributions
in the latent space of the feature extractor. That enables an inference using Bayes classifier [10, 35] or
training a linear classifier using pseudo-prototypes sampled from these distributions [24, 31, 51, 37].
However, we present in this work that these methods have multiple shortcomings and can be improved.
First, they assume that covariance matrices of past classes are constant across incremental training.
∗

Code: https://github.com/grypesc/AdaGauss

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

