Online Non-convex Learning in Dynamic
Environments

1

Zhipan Xu1 , Lijun Zhang1,2,∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
xuzhipan@smail.nju.edu.cn, zhanglj@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper considers the problem of online learning with non-convex loss functions
in dynamic environments. Recently, Suggala and Netrapalli [2020] demonstrated
that follow the perturbed leader (FTPL) can achieve optimal regret for non-convex
losses, but their results are limited to static environments. In this research, we
examine dynamic environments and choose dynamic regret and adaptive regret
to measure the performance. First, we propose an algorithm named FTPL-D
1
2
by restarting FTPL periodically and establish O(T 3 (VT + 1) 3 ) dynamic regret
with the prior knowledge of VT , which is the variation of loss functions. In
the case that VT is unknown, we run multiple FTPL-D with different restarting
parameters as experts and use a meta-algorithm to track the best one on the fly.
To address the challenge of non-convexity, we utilize randomized sampling in the
process of tracking experts. Next, we present a novel algorithm called FTPL-A
that dynamically maintains a group of√FTPL experts and combines them with an
advanced meta-algorithm to obtain O( τ log T ) adaptive regret for any interval of
2
1
length τ . Moreover, we demonstrate that FTPL-A also attains an Õ(T 3 (VT + 1) 3 )
dynamic regret bound. Finally, we discuss the application to online constrained
meta-learning and conduct experiments to verify the effectiveness of our methods.

1

Introduction

Online learning is a powerful model for sequential decision-making tasks, supported by wellestablished theoretical guarantees [Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi, 2006, Orabona, 2019]. It can be
regarded as a repeated game between a learner and an adversary. In each round t, the learner first
selects a decision xt ∈ K, where K is a candidate set. Then a loss function ft (·) : K → R is revealed
and the learner suffers a loss ft (xt ). The goal of the learner is to minimize the cumulative loss
PT
t=1 ft (xt ) over all rounds. Traditionally, the performance measure is static regret or simply regret
R(T ) =

T
X
t=1

ft (xt ) − min
x∈K

T
X

ft (x),

(1)

t=1

defined as the difference between the cumulative loss of the online learner and that of the optimal
decision chosen in hindsight. During the past decades, numerous algorithms and theories have been
developed to minimize static regret. An extensively researched setting is online convex optimization
(OCO) [Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2012], in which the losses are assumed to be convex and Lipschitz√
continuous. For OCO, many efficient methods such as online gradient descent (OGD) attain O( T )
regret [Zinkevich, 2003], which is known to be minimax optimal [Abernethy et al., 2008].
∗

Lijun Zhang is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

