KFNN: K-Free Nearest Neighbor For Crowdsourcing

Liangxiao Jiang∗
School of Computer Science
China University of Geosciences
Wuhan 430074, China
ljiang@cug.edu.cn

Wenjun Zhang
School of Computer Science
China University of Geosciences
Wuhan 430074, China
wjzhang@cug.edu.cn

Chaoqun Li
School of Mathematics and Physics
China University of Geosciences
Wuhan 430074, China
chqli@cug.edu.cn

Abstract
To reduce annotation costs, it is common in crowdsourcing to collect only a few
noisy labels from different crowd workers for each instance. However, the limited
noisy labels restrict the performance of label integration algorithms in inferring
the unknown true label for the instance. Recent works have shown that leveraging
neighbor instances can help alleviate this problem. Yet, these works all assume
that each instance has the same neighborhood size, which defies common sense.
To address this gap, we propose a novel label integration algorithm called K-free
nearest neighbor (KFNN). In KFNN, the neighborhood size of each instance is
automatically determined based on its attributes and noisy labels. Specifically,
KFNN initially estimates a Mahalanobis distance distribution from the attribute
space to model the relationship between each instance and all classes. This distance
distribution is then utilized to enhance the multiple noisy label distribution of
each instance. Subsequently, a Kalman filter is designed to mitigate the impact
of noise incurred by neighbor instances. Finally, KFNN determines the optimal
neighborhood size by the max-margin learning. Extensive experimental results
demonstrate that KFNN significantly outperforms all the other state-of-the-art
algorithms and exhibits greater robustness in various crowdsourcing scenarios. Our
codes and datasets are available at https://github.com/jiangliangxiao/KFNN.

1

Introduction

Crowdsourcing provides a more cost-effective way to obtain annotated instances than traditional
expert annotation [1]. Through crowdsourcing platforms such as Figure Eight and Clickworker,
instances can be annotated by crowd workers at a low cost [2, 3]. While more affordable, these
workers possess less expertise than domain experts and are more prone to assigning noisy labels to
instances [4]. To address this issue, the concept of repeated annotation is introduced and becomes
popular in crowdsourcing [5]. With repeated annotation, each instance is annotated by several
workers, thereby obtaining multiple noisy labels. To train supervised models using multiple noisy
labels, two main categories of methods have been developed: one-stage methods and two-stage
methods. One-stage methods [6, 7, 8] train models directly using multiple noisy labels. Two-stage
methods [1, 9] first infer the unknown true label for each instance from its multiple noisy labels via
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

