Cherry on Top: Parameter Heterogeneity and
Quantization in Large Language Models

Wanyun Cui*† ‡ , Qianle Wang∗†
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
‡
MoE Key Laboratory of Interdisciplinary Research of Computation and Economics,
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
cui.wanyun@sufe.edu.cn, wql20000111@stu.sufe.edu.cn
†

Abstract
This paper reveals the phenomenon of parameter heterogeneity in large language
models (LLMs). We find that a small subset of “cherry” parameters exhibit a
disproportionately large influence on model performance, while the vast majority
of parameters have minimal impact. This heterogeneity is found to be prevalent
across different model families, scales, and types. Motivated by this observation,
we propose CherryQ, a novel quantization method that unifies the optimization of
mixed-precision parameters. CherryQ identifies and preserves the critical cherry parameters in high precision while aggressively quantizing the remaining parameters
to low precision. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of CherryQ.
CherryQ outperforms existing quantization approaches in terms of perplexity and
downstream task performance. Notably, our 3-bit quantized Vicuna-1.5 exhibits
competitive performance compared to their 16-bit counterparts.

1

Introduction

The rapid development of large language models (LLMs) has increased the demand of efficient
deployment in various environments [1, 2, 11, 23]. However, the parameter size poses significant
challenges for GPU memory requirements. Quantization, which reduces the bit-width of model
parameters, has emerged as a solution to alleviate memory constraints of LLM deployment [12, 14,
18, 25, 26].
Low-precision parameter representation leads to quantization errors. Surprisingly, existing research
has shown that LLMs exhibit a high robustness for quantization errors even for low-bit settings.
For example, although 4-bit quantization can only represent 16 distinct values, even the simplest
round-to-nearest strategy does not significantly degrade performance [17]. This raises the question:
what causes LLMs to be robust to quantization?
We explore the parameters and answer this question via Parameter Heterogeneity, which refers
to the significant variation in the influence of quantization on different parameters. We reveal that
for the vast majority (> 99%) of normal parameters, the effect of their quantization to the model
are minimal and can thus be alleviated or ignored. However, there exists a small subset (< 1%) of
“cherry” parameters for which the effect are substantial and hard to mitigate.
Consider Figure 1a as an example. We show a scatter plot of the impacts on the model loss when
perturbing each individual parameter in a parameter matrix from LLaMA2-7b [23]. The derivation
of impacts is detailed in § 3. While 99% of the parameters fall within the range of (0, 0.1), a small
subset of “cherry” parameters exhibits values ranging from (5, 30), which is 50-300 times higher
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

