Road Network Representation Learning with the
Third Law of Geography

Haicang Zhou1 Weiming Huang1 Yile Chen1 Tiantian He2, 3 Gao Cong1 Yew-Soon Ong1, 2, 3
1
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Institute of High-Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
3
Centre for Frontier Al Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
haicang001@e.ntu.edu.sg, weiming.huang@nateko.lu.se
he_tiantian@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg, {yile.chen, gaocong, ASYSOng}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Road network representation learning aims to learn compressed and effective
vectorized representations for road segments that are applicable to numerous tasks.
In this paper, we identify the limitations of existing methods, particularly their
overemphasis on the distance effect as outlined in the First Law of Geography. In
response, we propose to endow road network representation with the principles
of the recent Third Law of Geography. To this end, we propose a novel graph
contrastive learning framework that employs geographic configuration-aware graph
augmentation and spectral negative sampling, ensuring that road segments with
similar geographic configurations yield similar representations, and vice versa,
aligning with the principles stated in the Third Law. The framework further fuses
the Third Law with the First Law through a dual contrastive learning objective
to effectively balance the implications of both laws. We evaluate our framework
on two real-world datasets across three downstream tasks. The results show
that the integration of the Third Law significantly improves the performance
of road segment representations in downstream tasks. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Haicang/Garner.

1

Introduction

Road networks, which form a fundamental infrastructure within urban spaces, describe the geometries
and connectivity among road segments in transportation systems. Correspondingly, road networks
serve as indispensable components to support numerous smart city applications, such as traffic
forecasting [8, 14], route inference [4, 20, 42], and travel time estimation [19]. Motivated by the
advancements of graph representation learning [29, 37], the versatile utility of road networks has
spurred research into developing effective and expressive representation learning methods for road
networks. The objective is to derive functional and easily integrable representations of road segments
that can align with the paradigm of neural network models.
Road networks are inherently regarded as graphs, which allow existing methods for road network
representation learning to build upon graph representation learning techniques. In particular, apart
from encoding the topological information of road networks, these methods further integrate additional
spatial characteristics, such as geographical distance [2], which are unique to road networks. In
these methods, the inductive bias induced by spatial characteristics is primarily based on the First
Law of Geography [25], which states that "everything is related to everything else, but near things
are more related than distant things." This principle implies that spatially close road segments
tend to have similar representations. For example, skip-gram based methods [3, 39, 40] define the
context window based on hops among graph neighbors or spatial distance and derive road segment
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

