On the Identifiability of Hybrid Deep Generative
Models: Meta-Learning as a Solution

Yubo Ye ∗
Zhejiang University
22230131@zju.edu.cn
Sumeet Vadhavkar
Rochester Institute of Technology
sv6234@rit.edu

Maryam Toloubidokhti
Rochester Institute of Technology
mt6129@rit.edu
Xiajun Jiang
Rochester Institute of Technology
xj7056@rit.edu

Huafeng Liu B
Zhejiang University
liuhf@zju.edu.cn

Linwei Wang
Rochester Institute of Technology
linwei.wang@rit.edu

Abstract
The interest in leveraging physics-based inductive bias in deep learning has resulted
in recent development of hybrid deep generative models (hybrid-DGMs) that
integrates known physics-based mathematical expressions in neural generative
models. To identify these hybrid-DGMs requires inferring parameters of the
physics-based component along with their neural component. The identifiability of
these hybrid-DGMs, however, has not yet been theoretically probed or established.
How does the existing theory of the un-identifiability of general DGMs apply to
hybrid-DGMs? What may be an effective approach to consutrct a hybrid-DGM
with theoretically-proven identifiability? This paper provides the first theoretical
probe into the identifiability of hybrid-DGMs, and present meta-learning as a
novel solution to construct identifiable hybrid-DGMs. On synthetic and real-data
benchmarks, we provide strong empirical evidence for the un-identifiability of
existing hybrid-DGMs using unconditional priors, and strong identifiability results
of the presented meta-formulations of hybrid-DGMs.

1

Introduction

There has been increasing interest in integrating mathematical expressions of known physics with
neural-network functions for hybrid, or gray-box, modeling [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. The incorporation of
physics-based inductive bias has the potential to improve the generalizability and interpretability of
deep learning [4], while the expressive and flexible neural functions offer the opportunity to fill the gap
in our prior knowledge of physics (or expert models) [4, 5]. Recent progress in particular has started
to see principled developments of hybrid deep generative models (DGM) where the data-generation
process is described by a hybridization of physics-based and neural components. Both of these two
components are then identified from data via, for instance, amortized variational inference [2, 4].
These hybrid-DGMs have shown benefits of intepretability, generalizability, and out-of-distribution
(OoD) robustness, especially when learning to model physics systems from observational data [2, 4].
An important premise of these successes is that the hybrid expression of the physical systems can
be accurately identified from the observed data: for example, if we can identify the parameters
∗

Work was done as a visiting exchange student at Rochester Institute of Technology.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

