SPRINQL: Sub-optimal Demonstrations driven
Offline Imitation Learning

Huy Hoang
Singapore Management University
mh.hoang.2024@phdcs.smu.edu.sg

Tien Mai
Singapore Management University
atmai@smu.edu.sg

Pradeep Varakantham
Singapore Management University
pradeepv@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
We focus on offline imitation learning (IL), which aims to mimic an expert’s behavior using demonstrations without any interaction with the environment. One of the
main challenges in offline IL is the limited support of expert demonstrations, which
typically cover only a small fraction of the state-action space. While it may not be
feasible to obtain numerous expert demonstrations, it is often possible to gather
a larger set of sub-optimal demonstrations. For example, in treatment optimization problems, there are varying levels of doctor treatments available for different
chronic conditions. These range from treatment specialists and experienced general
practitioners to less experienced general practitioners. Similarly, when robots are
trained to imitate humans in routine tasks, they might learn from individuals with
different levels of expertise and efficiency.
In this paper, we propose an offline IL approach that leverages the larger set
of sub-optimal demonstrations while effectively mimicking expert trajectories.
Existing offline IL methods based on behavior cloning or distribution matching
often face issues such as overfitting to the limited set of expert demonstrations
or inadvertently imitating sub-optimal trajectories from the larger dataset. Our
approach, which is based on inverse soft-Q learning, learns from both expert
and sub-optimal demonstrations. It assigns higher importance (through learned
weights) to aligning with expert demonstrations and lower importance to aligning
with sub-optimal ones. A key contribution of our approach, called SPRINQL, is
transforming the offline IL problem into a convex optimization over the space of Q
functions. Through comprehensive experimental evaluations, we demonstrate that
the SPRINQL algorithm achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on offline
IL benchmarks. Code is available at https://github.com/hmhuy0/SPRINQL.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has established itself as a strong and reliable framework for sequential
decision-making with applications in diverse domains: robotics [19, 18], healthcare [34, 28, 27], and
environment generation [9, 24]. Unfortunately, RL requires an underlying simulator that can provide
rewards for different experiences, which is usually not available.
Imitation Learning (IL) [16, 29, 13, 17] handles the lack of reward function by utilizing expert
demonstrations to guide the learning scheme to compute a good policy. However, IL approaches
still require the presence of a simulator that allows for online interactions. Initial works in Offline
IL [35, 23, 40, 2] tackle the absence of simulator by considering an offline dataset of expert
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

