Immiscible Diffusion: Accelerating Diffusion Training
with Noise Assignment

Yiheng Li1 Heyang Jiang1,2∗ Akio Kodaira1
Masayoshi Tomizuka1 Kurt Keutzer1 Chenfeng Xu1†
1
University of California, Berkeley 2 Tsinghua University

1

2

line

3

%

x

of code:
image-noise assignment*

image-noise data point
distance reduction

training efficiency
enhancement

*Only one of the Immiscible Diffusion methods;
Excluding Image Normalization for Some Baselines

For Batch Sizes in [128, 1024]

On Consistency Model + CIFAR Dataset
Effective on unconditional / conditional generation & fine-tuning

One Line of Code
& Running Efficiently

Assignments of Corresponding
Images in Gaussian Noise Space

Effectiveness Observed
Both in FID and in Image Comparison

noise_immiscible =
linear_sum_assignment
(image, noise)

3x

Image
Distribution

Unconditional Conditional Fine-tuning
Immiscible
Stable
Diffusion

6.7 ms*
Execution Time
*For Batch Sizes = 256

Noise
Distribution

Stable
Diffusion

Figure 1: Immiscible Diffusion can use a single line of code to efficiently achieve immiscibility
by re-assigning a batch of noise to images. This process results in only a 2% reduction in distance
post-assignment, leading to up to 3x increased training efficiency on top of the Consistency Model
for CIFAR Dataset. Additionally, Immiscible Diffusion significantly enhances the image quality of
Stable Diffusion for both unconditional and conditional generation tasks, and for both training from
scratch and fine-tuning training tasks, on ImageNet Dataset within the same number of training steps.

Abstract
In this paper, we point out that suboptimal noise-data mapping leads to slow
training of diffusion models. During diffusion training, current methods diffuse
each image across the entire noise space, resulting in a mixture of all images at
every point in the noise layer. We emphasize that this random mixture of noisedata mapping complicates the optimization of the denoising function in diffusion
models. Drawing inspiration from the immiscibility phenomenon in physics, we
propose Immiscible Diffusion, a simple and effective method to improve the
random mixture of noise-data mapping. In physics, miscibility can vary according
to various intermolecular forces. Thus, immiscibility means that the mixing of
molecular sources is distinguishable. Inspired by this concept, we propose an
assignment-then-diffusion training strategy to achieve Immiscible Diffusion. As
one example, prior to diffusing the image data into noise, we assign diffusion target
∗
†

The work of this paper was done when Heyang was in internship at UC Berkeley.
Corresponding Author: xuchenfeng@berkeley.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

