Hybrid Mamba for Few-Shot Segmentation
Qianxiong Xu1 , Xuanyi Liu2 , Lanyun Zhu3 , Guosheng Lin1∗, Cheng Long1∗, Ziyue Li4 , Rui Zhao5
1

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 Peking University
Singapore University of Technology and Design 4 University of Cologne 5 SenseTime Research
{qianxiong.xu, gslin, c.long}@ntu.edu.sg, xuanyi@stu.pku.edu.cn,
lanyun_zhu@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, zlibn@wiso.uni-koeln.de, zhaorui@sensetime.com
3

Abstract
Many few-shot segmentation (FSS) methods use cross attention to fuse support
foreground (FG) into query features, regardless of the quadratic complexity. A
recent advance Mamba can also well capture intra-sequence dependencies, yet the
complexity is only linear. Hence, we aim to devise a cross (attention-like) Mamba
to capture inter-sequence dependencies for FSS. A simple idea is to scan on support
features to selectively compress them into the hidden state, which is then used as the
initial hidden state to sequentially scan query features. Nevertheless, it suffers from
(1) support forgetting issue: query features will also gradually be compressed when
scanning on them, so the support features in hidden state keep reducing, and many
query pixels cannot fuse sufficient support features; (2) intra-class gap issue: query
FG is essentially more similar to itself rather than to support FG, i.e., query may
prefer not to fuse support features but their own ones from the hidden state, yet the
success of FSS relies on the effective use of support information. To tackle them,
we design a hybrid Mamba network (HMNet), including (1) a support recapped
Mamba to periodically recap the support features when scanning query, so the
hidden state can always contain rich support information; (2) a query intercepted
Mamba to forbid the mutual interactions among query pixels, and encourage them
to fuse more support features from the hidden state. Consequently, the support
information is better utilized, leading to better performance. Extensive experiments
have been conducted on two public benchmarks, showing the superiority of HMNet.
The code is available at https://github.com/Sam1224/HMNet.

1

Introduction

In the realm of computer vision, the advent of deep learning has ushered in remarkable advancements,
e.g., in semantic segmentation [14, 26, 33, 62, 63, 65, 67]. However, the realization of such feats
demands extensive time and human efforts dedicated to annotating pixel-wise masks. Furthermore,
semantic segmentation methods will falter when confronted with previously unseen classes, thus
impeding the generalization of segmentation to arbitrary classes. Inspired by the phenomenon that
human can learn to recognize new objects by referring to a handful of samples, researchers have
introduced few-shot segmentation (FSS) [34, 36, 46, 59, 66], which aims to use a few manually
annotated support samples to help the segmentation of a query image, with arbitrary classes.
Recent advances in FSS consist of prototypical methods [2, 40, 46, 59] and attention-based methods [31, 48, 54, 60]. According to the support annotations, prototypical methods extract support
foreground (FG) and compress their features into single or a few prototypes, which are then used
to segment the query image through either feature comparison [2, 46] or feature fusion [40, 59].
∗

Co-corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

