The High Line: Exact Risk and Learning Rate Curves
of Stochastic Adaptive Learning Rate Algorithms

Elizabeth Collins-Woodfin
McGill University
elizabeth.collins-woodfin@mail.mcgill.ca

Inbar Seroussi
Tel-Aviv University
inbarser@tauex.tau.ac.il

Begoña García Malaxechebarría
University of Washington
begogar9@uw.edu

Andrew W. Mackenzie
McGill University
andrew.mackenzie@mail.mcgill.ca

Elliot Paquette
McGill University
elliot.paquette@mcgill.ca

Courtney Paquette∗
McGill University & Google DeepMind
courtney.paquette@mcgill.ca

Abstract
We develop a framework for analyzing the training and learning rate dynamics on a
large class of high-dimensional optimization problems, which we call the high line,
trained using one-pass stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with adaptive learning
rates. We give exact expressions for the risk and learning rate curves in terms of
a deterministic solution to a system of ODEs. We then investigate in detail two
adaptive learning rates – an idealized exact line search and AdaGrad-Norm – on
the least squares problem. When the data covariance matrix has strictly positive
eigenvalues, this idealized exact line search strategy can exhibit arbitrarily slower
convergence when compared to the optimal fixed learning rate with SGD. Moreover
we exactly characterize the limiting learning rate (as time goes to infinity) for line
search in the setting where the data covariance has only two distinct eigenvalues.
For noiseless targets, we further demonstrate that the AdaGrad-Norm learning
rate converges to a deterministic constant inversely proportional to the average
eigenvalue of the data covariance matrix, and identify a phase transition when the
covariance density of eigenvalues follows a power law distribution. We provide
our code for evaluation at https://github.com/amackenzie1/highline2024.

1

Introduction

In deterministic optimization, adaptive stepsize strategies, such as line search (see [40], therein),
AdaGrad-Norm [59], Polyak stepsize [48], and others were developed to provide stability and improve
efficiency and adaptivity to unknown parameters. While the practical benefits for deterministic
optimization problems are well-documented, much of our understanding of adaptive learning rate
strategies for stochastic algorithms are still in their infancy.
There are many adaptive learning rate strategies used in machine learning with many design goals.
Some are known to adapt to stochastic gradient descent (SGD) gradient noise while others are
robust to hyper-parameters (e.g., [4, 63]). Theoretical results for adaptive algorithms tend to focus on
guaranteeing minimax-optimal rates, but this theory is not engineered to provide realistic performance
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

