T2VSafetyBench: Evaluating the Safety of
Text-to-Video Generative Models
Yibo Miao1,3⋆ , Yifan Zhu1⋆ , Lijia Yu4 , Jun Zhu2,3 , Xiao-Shan Gao1† , Yinpeng Dong2,3†
1
KLMM, UCAS, Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
2
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center,
THBI Lab, BNRist Center, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China 3 RealAI
4
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
Warning: This paper contains data and model outputs which are offensive in nature.

Abstract
The recent development of Sora leads to a new era in text-to-video (T2V) generation.
Along with this comes the rising concern about its safety risks. The generated
videos may contain illegal or unethical content, and there is a lack of comprehensive
quantitative understanding of their safety, posing a challenge to their reliability and
practical deployment. Previous evaluations primarily focus on the quality of video
generation. While some evaluations of text-to-image models have considered safety,
they cover limited aspects and do not address the unique temporal risk inherent in
video generation. To bridge this research gap, we introduce T2VSafetyBench, the
first comprehensive benchmark for conducting safety-critical assessments of textto-video models. We define 4 primary categories with 14 critical aspects of video
generation safety and construct a malicious prompt dataset including real-world
prompts, LLM-generated prompts, and jailbreak attack-based prompts. We then
conduct a thorough safety evaluation on 9 recently released T2V models. Based on
our evaluation results, we draw several important findings, including: 1) no single
model excels in all aspects, with different models showing various strengths; 2)
the correlation between GPT-4 assessments and manual reviews is generally high;
3) there is a trade-off between the usability and safety of text-to-video generative
models. This indicates that as the field of video generation rapidly advances, safety
risks are set to surge, highlighting the urgency of prioritizing video safety. We
hope that T2VSafetyBench can provide insights for better understanding the safety
of video generation in the era of generative AIs. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/yibo-miao/T2VSafetyBench.

1

Introduction

Text-to-video (T2V) generation has achieved unprecedented performance in the past two years [43,
27], where realistic and imaginative videos can be generated given text descriptions [2, 11, 7, 33, 4]
with the thriving of diffusion models [15]. One notable advancement in this field is the release of
Sora [33] by OpenAI. Sora distinguishes itself from previous video generative models by its ability to
produce up to 1-minute-long high-fidelity videos that closely align with user’s text prompts, marking
a new era in video generation [27]. Advanced video generation technologies have the potential to
transform creative industries, entertainment, and scientific visualization, including but not limited to
filmmaking [62], embodied intelligence [12], and physical world simulations [64].
⋆
‡

Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.
Benchmark maintenance contact email: miaoyibo@amss.ac.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

