Fair Allocation in Dynamic Mechanism Design

Alireza Fallah
University of California, Berkeley
afallah@berkeley.edu

Michael I. Jordan
University of California, Berkeley and INRIA, Paris
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Annie Ulichney
University of California, Berkeley
annie_ulichney@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We consider a dynamic mechanism design problem where an auctioneer sells an
indivisible good to two groups of buyers in every round, for a total of T rounds.
The auctioneer aims to maximize their discounted overall revenue while adhering
to a fairness constraint that guarantees a minimum average allocation for each
group. We begin by studying the static case (T = 1) and establish that the optimal
mechanism involves two types of subsidization: one that increases the overall
probability of allocation to all buyers, and another that favors the group which
otherwise has a lower probability of winning the item. We then extend our results
to the dynamic case by characterizing a set of recursive functions that determine
the optimal allocation and payments in each round. Notably, our results establish
that in the dynamic case, the seller, on the one hand, commits to a participation
reward to incentivize truth-telling, and, on the other hand, charges an entry fee for
every round. Moreover, the optimal allocation once more involves subsidization
in favor of one group, where the extent of subsidization depends on the difference
in future utilities for both the seller and buyers when allocating the item to one
group versus the other. Finally, we present an approximation scheme to solve the
recursive equations and determine an approximately optimal and fair allocation
efficiently.

1

Introduction

Auctions play a pivotal role in allocation decisions across various domains, serving as a structured
methodology for determining the distribution of resources based on bids. Housing, government
contracts, electromagnetic spectrum rights, and advertising slots are a few of the many domains
where allocations are determined by auctions. In many of the real-world applications of auction-based
allocations, the resource in question is both valuable and limited, which raises concerns about fairness.
For instance, housing auctions are often governed by policies addressing the needs of low- and
moderate-income households, such as Affordable Housing Quotas in the United Kingdom to tax
credits and vouchers in the United States [20, 22]. Government procurement contracts for goods
and services in the United States are subject to the United States Small Business Act which outlines
target contracting rates across categories (e.g., woman-owned businesses, veteran-owned businesses,
historically underutilized zones) [17]. The United States Federal Communications Commission drives
initiatives ensuring , for instance, that small and regional companies maintain reasonable access to
connectivity [35].
The importance of incorporating a consideration of fairness in important real-world use cases
motivates recent work that extends classical work on auction design emphasizing economic efficiency
to ensure outcomes do not disproportionately favor some bidders over others. Integrating fairness
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

