Quasi-Bayes meets Vines

David Huk
Department of Statistics
University of Warwick
David.Huk@warwick.ac.uk

Yuanhe Zhang
Department of Statistics
University of Warwick
Yuanhe.Zhang@warwick.ac.uk

Mark Steel
Department of Statistics
University of Warwick
m.steel@warwick.ac.uk

Ritabrata Dutta
Department of Statistics
University of Warwick
Ritabrata.Dutta@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
Recently developed quasi-Bayesian (QB) methods [29] proposed a stimulating
change of paradigm in Bayesian computation by directly constructing the Bayesian
predictive distribution through recursion, removing the need for expensive computations involved in sampling the Bayesian posterior distribution. This has proved
to be data-efficient for univariate predictions, however, existing constructions for
higher dimensional densities are only possible by relying on restrictive assumptions
on the model’s multivariate structure. Here, we propose a wholly different approach to extend Quasi-Bayesian prediction to high dimensions through the use of
Sklar’s theorem, by decomposing the predictive distribution into one-dimensional
predictive marginals and a high-dimensional copula. We use the efficient recursive
QB construction for the one-dimensional marginals and model the dependence
using highly expressive vine copulas. Further, we tune hyperparameters using
robust divergences (eg. energy score) and show that our proposed Quasi-Bayesian
Vine (QB-Vine) is a fully non-parametric density estimator with an analytical form
and convergence rate independent of the dimension of the data in some situations.
Our experiments illustrate that the QB-Vine is appropriate for high dimensional
distributions (∼64), needs very few samples to train (∼200) and outperforms stateof-the-art methods with analytical forms for density estimation and supervised
tasks by a considerable margin.

1

Introduction

The estimation of joint densities is a cornerstone of machine learning as a looking glass into the
underlying data-generating process of multivariate data. Methods that support explicit density
evaluation are crucial in probabilistic modelling, with applications in variational methods [58, 85],
Importance Sampling [2, 67], Sequential Monte Carlo [41], Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
[92, 49] and simulation-based inference [81, 62]. A prominent example are Normalising Flows (NF)
[80, 24, 82], leveraging deep networks with invertible transformations for analytical expressions and
sampling. Despite impressive performances, they require meticulous manual hyperparameter tuning
and large amounts of data to train. Bayesian methods are another attractive approach for analytical
density modelling where the central object of interest is the predictive density, with the Dirichlet
Process Mixture Model (DPMM) [46] as the canonical nonparametric choice. Similar to kernel
density estimation, the DPMM can be interpreted as an infinite mixture of densities. It is composed
of a density called a kernel, with a fixed parametric form, and of a mixing density responsible for
assigning those parameters. The specification of this kernel and mixing density is thus important
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

