Addressing Spectral Bias of Deep Neural Networks by
Multi-Grade Deep Learning

Ronglong Fang, Yuesheng Xu∗
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Old Dominion University
{rfang002, y1xu}@odu.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have showcased their remarkable precision in approximating smooth functions. However, they suffer from the spectral bias, wherein
DNNs typically exhibit a tendency to prioritize the learning of lower-frequency
components of a function, struggling to effectively capture its high-frequency
features. This paper is to address this issue. Notice that a function having only
low frequency components may be well-represented by a shallow neural network
(SNN), a network having only a few layers. By observing that composition of low
frequency functions can effectively approximate a high-frequency function, we
propose to learn a function containing high-frequency components by composing
several SNNs, each of which learns certain low-frequency information from the
given data. We implement the proposed idea by exploiting the multi-grade deep
learning (MGDL) model, a recently introduced model that trains a DNN incrementally, grade by grade, a current grade learning from the residue of the previous
grade only an SNN (with trainable parameters) composed with the SNNs (with
fixed parameters) trained in the preceding grades as features. We apply MGDL
to synthetic, manifold, colored images, and MNIST datasets, all characterized
by presence of high-frequency features. Our study reveals that MGDL excels at
representing functions containing high-frequency information. Specifically, the
neural networks learned in each grade adeptly capture some low-frequency information, allowing their compositions with SNNs learned in the previous grades
effectively representing the high-frequency features. Our experimental results
underscore the efficacy of MGDL in addressing the spectral bias inherent in DNNs.
By leveraging MGDL, we offer insights into overcoming spectral bias limitation
of DNNs, thereby enhancing the performance and applicability of deep learning
models in tasks requiring the representation of high-frequency information. This
study confirms that the proposed method offers a promising solution to address the
spectral bias of DNNs. The code is available on GitHub: Addressing Spectral
Bias via MGDL.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved tremendous success in various applications, including
computer vision [15], natural language processing [38], speech recognition [26], and finance [27].
From a mathematical perspective, the success is mainly due to their high expressiveness, as evidenced
by theoretical demonstrations showing their capability to approximate smooth functions with arbitrary
precision [3, 10, 14, 17, 48]. Various mathematical aspects of DNNs as an approximation tool were
recently investigated in [11, 16, 22, 25, 35, 45–47, 49]. However, it was noted in [30, 42] that the
standard deep learning model, which is called single grade deep learning (SGDL) in this paper,
∗

Corresponding author: y1xu@odu.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

