B-cosification: Transforming Deep Neural Networks
to be Inherently Interpretable

1

Shreyash Arya∗,1,2 , Sukrut Rao∗,1,2 , Moritz Böhle∗,†,1,3 , Bernt Schiele1
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
2
RTG Neuroexplicit Models of Language, Vision, and Action, Saarbrücken, Germany
3
Kyutai, Paris, France
{sarya,sukrut.rao,schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de moritz@kyutai.org
∗
Equal contribution † Work done while at MPI Informatics

Abstract
B-cos Networks have been shown to be effective for obtaining highly human
interpretable explanations of model decisions by architecturally enforcing stronger
alignment between inputs and weight. B-cos variants of convolutional networks
(CNNs) and vision transformers (ViTs), which primarily replace linear layers with
B-cos transformations, perform competitively to their respective standard variants
while also yielding explanations that are faithful by design. However, it has so far
been necessary to train these models from scratch, which is increasingly infeasible
in the era of large, pre-trained foundation models. In this work, inspired by the
architectural similarities in standard DNNs and B-cos networks, we propose ‘Bcosification’, a novel approach to transform existing pre-trained models to become
inherently interpretable. We perform a thorough study of design choices to perform
this conversion, both for convolutional neural networks and vision transformers. We
find that B-cosification can yield models that are on par with B-cos models trained
from scratch in terms of interpretability, while often outperforming them in terms of
classification performance at a fraction of the training cost. Subsequently, we apply
B-cosification to a pretrained CLIP model, and show that, even with limited data
and compute cost, we obtain a B-cosified version that is highly interpretable and
competitive on zero shot performance across a variety of datasets. We release our
code and pre-trained model weights at https://github.com/shrebox/B-cosification.

1

Introduction

Despite their strong performance on a variety of tasks, understanding decisions of deep neural
networks (DNNs) remains challenging. Explanation methods, such as feature attributions [46, 48, 53,
5], have been proposed in an attempt to explain such decisions post-hoc, but have often found to be
unfaithful to the model being explained [2, 3, 40, 60].
Inherently interpretable Deep Neural Network (DNN) models have recently gained popularity. In
contrast to the common approach of explaining existing DNNs in a post-hoc fashion, these models
typically feature certain architectural constraints that allow for extracting human-interpretable, modelfaithful simplifications of the models’ computations by design; examples of this include prototypebased [14, 17, 32], dynamic linear [9, 10], or concept-bottleneck models [28, 58, 33, 42]. However,
given those architectural changes, this comes at a price: specifically, the models need to be trained
from scratch, which—especially in the case of large foundation models, which are increasingly
popular—can cost millions of dollars.
To mitigate this, in this work, we explore a novel approach of fine-tuning DNNs for inherent
interpretability and propose to ‘B-cosify’ existing DNNs. Specifically, we investigate whether
pre-trained DNNs can simply be efficiently fine-tuned to obtain a similar degree of interpretability as
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

