FACT or Fiction: Can Truthful Mechanisms
Eliminate Federated Free Riding?

Marco Bornstein
University of Maryland
marcob@umd.edu

Amrit Singh Bedi
University of Central Florida
amritbedi@ucf.edu

Abdirisak Mohamed
University of Maryland
SAP Labs, LLC
amoham70@umd.edu

Furong Huang
University of Maryland
furongh@umd.edu

Abstract
Standard federated learning (FL) approaches are vulnerable to the free-rider
dilemma: participating agents can contribute little to nothing yet receive a welltrained aggregated model. While prior mechanisms attempt to solve the free-rider
dilemma, none have addressed the issue of truthfulness. In practice, adversarial
agents can provide false information to the server in order to cheat its way out of
contributing to federated training. In an effort to make free-riding-averse federated
mechanisms truthful, and consequently less prone to breaking down in practice,
we propose FACT. FACT is the first federated mechanism that: (1) eliminates
federated free riding by using a penalty system, (2) ensures agents provide truthful
information by creating a competitive environment, and (3) encourages agent participation by offering better performance than training alone. Empirically, FACT
avoids free-riding when agents are untruthful, and reduces agent loss by over 4x.

1

Introduction

Truth is essential to the functioning of fair systems. In its absence, fraud and corruption lead to
negative effects on those left participating. This too is true within machine learning (ML). Adversaries
can attack ML algorithms for insidious purposes [3, 7], and algorithms trained on data that is not
well-representative or poisoned can lead to dangerous and unfair results [28, 29, 37].
Issues of truthfulness have begun to bleed into multi-agent collaborative learning systems. Federated
Learning (FL), the preeminent collaborative learning framework, is susceptible to the free-rider
dilemma: agents can contribute little to nothing during training while still obtaining a well-trained
final aggregated model [8, 12, 17]. Furthermore, Karimireddy et al. [12] proves that standard FL
algorithms naturally yield catastrophic free-riding equilibria, where most rational agents contribute
nothing. It is important to note that we do not consider the possibility of malicious gradient updates
from adversarial agents, covered by recent works [6, 23, 25, 27]. We assume that agents share a
common goal of reducing loss, and act selfishly rather than maliciously.
Recent work has aimed to remedy the free-rider dilemma in FL through contract theory [4, 11, 16, 19],
collaborative fairness [21, 26, 36], and mechanisms that incentivize contributions [2, 12]. The
mechanisms presented in Karimireddy et al. [12] and Bornstein et al. [2] are notable because they do
not require (i) carefully optimized contracts (agents will always participate because the mechanism is
individually rational) or (ii) alterations to standard FL training (simple FedAvg [22] can be run with
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

