BLURD: Benchmarking and Learning using a Unified
Rendering and Diffusion Model

Boris Repasky Anthony Dick Ehsan Abbasnejad
Australian Institute for Machine Learning (AIML),
Department of Computer Science, University of Adelaide
boris.repasky,anthony.dick,ehsan.abbasnejad@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Recent advancements in pre-trained vision models have made them pivotal in computer vision, emphasizing the need for their thorough evaluation and benchmarking.
This evaluation needs to consider various factors of variation, their potential biases,
shortcuts, and inaccuracies that ultimately lead to disparate performance in models.
Such evaluations are conventionally done using either synthetic data from 2D or 3D
rendering software or real-world images in controlled settings. Synthetic methods
offer full control and flexibility, while real-world methods are limited by high costs
and less adaptability. Moreover, 3D rendering can’t yet fully replicate real photography, creating a realism gap. In this paper, we introduce BLURD–Benchmarking
and Learning using a Unified Rendering and Diffusion Model–a novel method
combining 3D rendering and Stable Diffusion to bridge this gap in representation
learning. With BLURD we create a new family of datasets that allow for the
creation of both 3D rendered and photo-realistic images with identical factors.
BLURD, therefore, provides deeper insights into the representations learned by
various CLIP backbones. The source code for creating the BLURD datasets is
available at https://github.com/squaringTheCircle/BLURD.

1

Introduction

Using large pre-trained models such as CLIP [44] has become the standard practice in computer vision.
These models are primarily trained on data from the internet without explicit human supervision,
making them increasingly powerful. However, evaluating their performance, especially as they are
employed in increasingly more critical applications, is crucial. One challenge is the significant data
contamination in existing benchmarks. Additionally, evaluating these models on various factors of
variation-elements that could create alternative inputs-is important. It enables a better understanding
of the unknown underlying biases in the representations learned by these models. Further, it is
important to be able to build datasets with known factors of variations that could mitigate these biases
via fine-tuning [62].
Many existing datasets do not explicitly consider these factors, but their evaluation is vital. For
example, the widespread issue of racial biases stemming from the uneven representation of human
faces requires access to datasets that allow for precise manipulation of factors of variation, e.g. gender,
hair color, etc [55]. One needs to be able to manipulate one factor (e.g. hair color) while maintaining
other variables constant, to be able to generate an unbiased dataset. This is a significant challenge.
Current datasets created for representation learning and used to evaluate and benchmark pre-trained
models are commonly created using either synthetic data, generated using approaches like 3D rendering software, e.g. [8], or real-world photographs, captured in controlled settings, e.g. MPI3D [25].
Synthetic methods, favored for their flexibility and lower costs, can utilize existing tools from gaming
and 3D modeling [17]. Despite their utility, these methods often fall short in realism, crucially needed
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

