Resolving Discrepancies in Compute-Optimal Scaling
of Language Models

Tomer Porian∗

Mitchell Wortsman†

Jenia Jitsev‡

Ludwig Schmidt†

Yair Carmon∗

Abstract
Kaplan et al. [30] and Hoffmann et al. [25] developed influential scaling laws for
the optimal model size as a function of the compute budget, but these laws yield
substantially different predictions. We explain the discrepancy by reproducing
the Kaplan et al. scaling law on two datasets (OpenWebText2 and RefinedWeb)
and identifying three factors causing the difference: last layer computational cost,
warmup duration, and scale-dependent optimizer tuning. With these factors corrected, we obtain excellent agreement with the Hoffmann et al. (i.e., “Chinchilla”)
scaling law. Counter to a hypothesis implied in Hoffmann et al. [25], we find that
careful learning rate decay is not essential for the validity of their scaling law. As
a secondary result, we derive scaling laws for the optimal learning rate and batch
size, finding that tuning the AdamW β2 parameter is essential at lower batch sizes.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of compute-optimal language model training: given a compute budget
C, we wish to predict how to best allocate it across model size (in parameters) and dataset size(in
tokens). With pretraining budgets ever-increasing, compute-optimal scaling is a question of paramount
importance. In their seminal work, Kaplan et al. [30] proposed a scaling law predicting that the
optimal ratio of tokens to parameters decays as a power of C. This scaling law was influential in
determining the size of GPT-3 and several subsequent models [12, 51, 43, 32, 47, 62, 52]. However,
Hoffmann et al. [25] challenged its validity, arguing instead that the optimal token-to-parameter ratio
should be approximately independent of C, and that contemporary models had too many parameters
relative to their number of training tokens. Based on this prediction, they trained a 67B parameters
model called Chinchilla and which outperformed larger models with a similar compute budget.
While Hoffmann et al. [25] and subsequent work [55, 56, 17, 26, 15] established that following the
Hoffmann et al. scaling law leads to better performance than Kaplan et al. scaling, it is still important
to understand why the two works arrived at different conclusions. Is the difference due to architecture,
training setup, pretraining data, results analysis, or perhaps something else entirely? The answer
could teach us important lessons on how to correctly predict and perform model scaling.
Hoffmann et al. [25] hypothesize that the scaling law discrepancy is due to Kaplan et al. [30] not
tailoring the learning rate schedule for each token budget separately. While they demonstrate that
mismatched learning rate decay results in a higher loss, they do not show it leads to a different
compute-optimal scaling law. We further discuss Hoffmann et al. [25]’s hypothesis in Appendix A.
To the best of our knowledge, this hypothesis is the only explanation offered in the literature so far.
Our contribution. In this work, we uncover three factors contributing to the discrepancy, and
disprove Hoffman et al.’s hypothesis about the role of learning rate decay; Figure 1 illustrates our main
∗

Tel Aviv University; correspondence to tomerpor@gmail.com and ycarmon@tauex.tau.ac.il.
University of Washington.
‡
Jülich Supercomputing Centre (JSC) and LAION.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

