Practical 0.385-Approximation for Submodular
Maximization Subject to a Cardinality Constraint

Murad Tukan
DataHeroes Israel
murad@dataheroes.ai

Loay Mualem
Department of Computer Science
University of Haifa
Haifa Israel
loaymual@gmail.com

Moran Feldman
Department of Computer Science
University of Haifa
Haifa Israel
moranfe@cs.haifa.ac.il

Abstract
Non-monotone constrained submodular maximization plays a crucial role in various
machine learning applications. However, existing algorithms often struggle with a
trade-off between approximation guarantees and practical efficiency. The current
state-of-the-art is a recent 0.401-approximation algorithm, but its computational
complexity makes it highly impractical. The best practical algorithms for the
problem only guarantee 1/e-approximation. In this work, we present a novel
algorithm for submodular maximization subject to a cardinality constraint that
combines a guarantee of 0.385-approximation with a low and practical query
complexity of O(n+k 2 ), where n is the size of the ground set and k is the maximum
size of a feasible solution. Furthermore, we evaluate the empirical performance of
our algorithm in experiments based on the machine learning applications of Movie
Recommendation, Image Summarization, and Revenue Maximization. These
experiments demonstrate the efficacy of our approach.

1

Introduction

In the last few years, the ability to effectively summarize data has gained importance due to the
advent of massive datasets in many fields. Such summarization often consists of selecting a small
representative subset from a large corpus of images, text, movies, etc. Without a specific structure, this
task can be as challenging as finding a global minimum of a non-convex function. Fortunately, many
practical machine learning problems exhibit some structure, making them suitable for optimization
techniques (either exact or approximate).
A key structure present in many such problems is submodularity, also known as the principle of
diminishing returns. This principle suggests that the incremental value of an element decreases
as the set it is added to grows. Submodularity enables the creation of algorithms that can provide
near-optimal solutions, making it fundamental in machine learning. It has been successfully applied to
various tasks, such as social graph analysis [39], adversarial attacks [26, 36], dictionary learning [13],
data summarization [32, 34, 35], interpreting neural networks [14], robotics [45, 41], and many more.
To exemplify the notion of submodularity, consider the following task. Given a large dataset, our goal
is to identify a subset that effectively summarizes (or covers) the data, with a good representative
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

