Humanoid Locomotion as Next Token Prediction
Ilija Radosavovic
UC Berkeley

Bike Zhang∗
UC Berkeley

Baifeng Shi∗
UC Berkeley

Sarthak Kamat
UC Berkeley

Trevor Darrell†
UC Berkeley

Jathushan Rajasegaran∗
UC Berkeley

Koushil Sreenath†
UC Berkeley

Jitendra Malik
UC Berkeley

Abstract
We cast real-world humanoid control as a next token prediction problem, akin to
predicting the next word in language. Our model is a causal transformer trained
via autoregressive prediction of sensorimotor sequences. To account for the multimodal nature of the data, we perform prediction in a modality-aligned way, and
for each input token predict the next token from the same modality. This general
formulation enables us to leverage data with missing modalities, such as videos
without actions. We train our model on a dataset of sequences from a prior neural
network policy, a model-based controller, motion capture, and YouTube videos of
humans. We show that our model enables a real humanoid robot to walk in San
Francisco zero-shot. Our model can transfer to the real world even when trained
on only 27 hours of walking data, and can generalize to commands not seen during
training. These findings suggest a promising path toward learning challenging
real-world control tasks by generative modeling of sensorimotor sequences.

1

Introduction

The last decade of artificial intelligence (AI) has shown that large neural networks trained on diverse
datasets from the Internet can lead to impressive results across different settings. The core enablers of
this wave of AI have been large transformer models [37] trained by generative modeling of massive
quantities of language data from the Internet [26, 6, 27, 4]. By predicting the next word, these models
acquire rich representations of language that can be transferred to downstream tasks [26], perform
multi-task learning [27, 25], and learn in a few-shot manner [4].
Are such modeling techniques exclusive to language? Can we learn powerful models of sensory and
motor representations in a similar fashion? Indeed, we have seen that we can learn good representations of high-dimensional visual data by autoregressive modeling [5] and related masked modeling
approaches [11]. While there has been positive signal on learning sensorimotor representations in the
context of manipulation [28], this area remains largely unexplored.
In this paper, we cast humanoid control as data modeling of large collections of sensorimotor
sequences. Like in language, we train a general transformer model to autoregressively predict the
sequences. In contrast to language, the nature of data in robotics is different. It is high-dimensional
and contains multiple input modalities. Different modalities include sensors, like joint encoders or
inertial measurement units, as well as motor commands. These give rise to sensorimotor sequences
which we view as the sentences of the physical world. Adopting this perspective suggests a simple
instantiation of the language modeling framework in the robotics context. We tokenize the input
sequences and train a causal transformer model to predict future tokens. Importantly, we predict
complete input sequences, including both sensory and motor tokens. In other words, we are modeling
the joint data distribution as opposed to the conditional action distribution.
*,†

Authors with stars and daggers listed in arbitrary order. Author contributions listed at the end of the paper.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

