STk : A Scalable Module for Solving Top-k Problems∗
Hanchen Xia†,♣ , Weidong Liu†,‡ , Xiaojun Mao†,§
{† School of Mathematical Sciences,
‡
Ministry of Education Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence,
§
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Scientific and Engineering Computing}
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
♣
RoyalFlush AI Research Institute, Hangzhou, China
{x_hc_2000, weidongl, maoxj}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
The cost of ranking becomes significant in the new stage of deep learning. We propose STk , a fully differentiable module with a single trainable parameter, designed
to solve the Top-k problem without requiring additional time or GPU memory.
Due to its fully differentiable nature, STk can be embedded end-to-end into neural
networks and optimize the Top-k problems within a unified computational graph.
We apply STk to the Average Top-k Loss (ATk ), which inherently faces a Top-k
problem. The proposed STk Loss outperforms ATk Loss and achieves the best
average performance on multiple benchmarks, with the lowest standard deviation.
With the assistance of STk Loss, we surpass the state-of-the-art (SOTA) on both
CIFAR-100-LT and Places-LT leaderboards.

1

Introduction

The ranking problem is quite common in the field of AI. For imbalanced datasets, the Average Top-k
(ATk ) Loss is more suitable than the conventional Average Loss [Lyu et al., 2020]. In the context
of ambiguous classification tasks, Top-k Learning allows the ground truth to fall within the largest
k probabilities, enhancing the model’s generalizability [Lapin et al., 2017, Berrada et al., 2018,
Petersen et al., 2022]. For language models, the Top-k sampling method helps the models select the
top k most probable words during text generation, producing more fluent and coherent sentences.
Distributed learning systems employ Top-k sparsification with error compensation (Top-k SGD) to
reduce communication traffic without noticeably impacting model accuracy [Chen et al., 2018, Lin
et al., 2018, Shi et al., 2019]. However, as deep learning models continue to grow in size, the cost of
the ranking process becomes increasingly significant. For example, on a single NVIDIA H800
GPU, tuning a Llama-8B model using the LoRA [Hu et al., 2022] method with a batch size of 4096
and 1000 iterations takes 990.14 seconds. In particular, performing QuickSort on the individual
losses consumes 86.33 seconds.
In this work, we propose STk (Smoothed Top-k), a scalable module for Top-k problems. By adding
only a single trainable parameter, STk is able to solve the Top-k problem in O(n + k) steps. Due
to the fully differentiable nature of STk , it can be embedded end-to-end as a layer. Experiments
show that we can even add λ to the computational graph for unified optimization using Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD), which means that we do not need to consider the time cost of solving
the Top-k problems within the computational graph. However, we can still enjoy the performance
improvements that Top-k optimization provides. The contributions of this work are summarized as
follows:
∗
Weidong Liu and Xiaojun Mao are the co-corresponding authors. Xiaojun Mao’s research is supported by
NSFC Grant No. 12422111 and 12371273, the Shanghai Rising-Star Program 23QA1404600 and Young Elite
Scientists Sponsorship Program by CAST (2023QNRC001).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

