Hierarchical and Density-based Causal Clustering

Kwangho Kim
Korea University
kwanghk@korea.ac.kr

Jisu Kim
Seoul National University
jkim82133@snu.ac.kr

Larry A. Wasserman
Carnegie Mellon University
larry@stat.cmu.edu

Edward H. Kennedy
Carnegie Mellon University
edward@stat.cmu.edu

Abstract
Understanding treatment effect heterogeneity is vital for scientific and policy research. However, identifying and evaluating heterogeneous treatment effects pose
significant challenges due to the typically unknown subgroup structure. Recently, a
novel approach, causal k-means clustering, has emerged to assess heterogeneity
of treatment effect by applying the k-means algorithm to unknown counterfactual
regression functions. In this paper, we expand upon this framework by integrating
hierarchical and density-based clustering algorithms. We propose plug-in estimators which are simple and readily implementable using off-the-shelf algorithms.
Unlike k-means clustering, which requires the margin condition, our proposed
estimators do not rely on strong structural assumptions on the outcome process. We
go on to study their rate of convergence, and show that under the minimal regularity
conditions, the additional cost of causal clustering is essentially the estimation error
of the outcome regression functions. Our findings significantly extend the capabilities of the causal clustering framework, thereby contributing to the progression
of methodologies for identifying homogeneous subgroups in treatment response,
consequently facilitating more nuanced and targeted interventions. The proposed
methods also open up new avenues for clustering with generic pseudo-outcomes.
We explore finite sample properties via simulation, and illustrate the proposed
methods in voting and employment projection datasets.

1

Introduction

1.1

Heterogeneity of Treatment Effects

Causal effects are typically summarized using population-level measures, such as the average treatment effect (ATE). However, these summaries may be insufficient when treatment effects vary across
subgroups. For example, finding the subgroups that experience the least or greatest benefit from a
specific treatment is of particular importance in personalized medicine or policy evaluation, where
the subgroup effects of interest may diverge significantly from the population effect. Even while
experiencing the same treatment effects, some people may have been exposed to a significantly higher
baseline risk. In the presence of effect heterogeneity, the typically unknown subgroup structure
poses significant challenges in accurately identifying and evaluating subgroup effects compared to
population-level effects.
To delve deeper than the information provided by the population summaries and to better understand
treatment effect heterogeneity, investigators often estimate the conditional average treatment effect
(CATE) defined by
E(Y 1 − Y 0 | X),
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

