Equivariant Neural Diffusion for Molecule Generation

François Cornet
Technical University of Denmark
frjc@dtu.dk

Grigory Bartosh
University of Amsterdam
g.bartosh@uva.nl

Mikkel N. Schmidt
Technical University of Denmark
mnsc@dtu.dk

Christian A. Naesseth
University of Amsterdam
c.a.naesseth@uva.nl

Abstract
We introduce Equivariant Neural Diffusion (END), a novel diffusion model for
molecule generation in 3D that is equivariant to Euclidean transformations. Compared to current state-of-the-art equivariant diffusion models, the key innovation
in END lies in its learnable forward process for enhanced generative modelling.
Rather than pre-specified, the forward process is parameterized through a time- and
data-dependent transformation that is equivariant to rigid transformations. Through
a series of experiments on standard molecule generation benchmarks, we demonstrate the competitive performance of END compared to several strong baselines
for both unconditional and conditional generation.

1

Introduction

The discovery of novel chemical compounds with relevant properties is critical to a number of
scientific fields, such as drug discovery and materials design (Merchant et al., 2023). However, due to
the large size and complex structure of the chemical space (Ruddigkeit et al., 2012), which combines
continuous and discrete features, it is notably difficult to search. Additionally, ab-initio Quantum
Mechanics (QM) methods for computing target properties are often computationally expensive,
preventing brute-force enumeration. While some of these heavy computations can be amortized
through learned surrogates, the need for innovative search methods remains, and generative models
have recently emerged as a promising avenue (Anstine and Isayev, 2023). Such models can learn
complex data distributions, that, in turn, can be sampled from to obtain novel samples similar to the
original data. Compared to other data modalities such as images or text, molecules present additional
challenges as they have to adhere to strict chemical rules, and obey the symmetries of the 3D space.
Currently, the most promising directions for molecule generation in 3D are either auto-regressive
models (Gebauer et al., 2019; 2022; Luo and Ji, 2022; Daigavane et al., 2024) building molecules
one atom at a time, or Diffusion Models (DMs) (Hoogeboom et al., 2022; Vignac et al., 2023; Le
et al., 2024) that learn to revert a corruption mechanism that transforms the data distribution into
noise. As both approaches directly operate in 3D space, they can leverage architectures designed
for machine learned force fields (Unke et al., 2021), that were carefully developed to encode the
symmetries inherent to the data (Schütt et al., 2017; 2021; Batzner et al., 2022; Batatia et al., 2022).
The success of DMs has not been limited to molecule generation, and promising results have been
demonstrated on a variety of other data modalities (Yang et al., 2023). Nevertheless, most existing
DMs pre-specify the forward process, forcing the reverse process to comply with it. A recent line of
work has sought to overcome that limitation and improve generation by replacing the fixed forward
process with a learnable one (Bartosh et al., 2023; Nielsen et al., 2024; Bartosh et al., 2024).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

