Learning Linear Causal Representations from General
Environments: Identifiability and Intrinsic Ambiguity

Jikai Jin
Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
jkjin@stanford.edu
Vasilis Syrgkanis
Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
vsyrgk@stanford.edu

Abstract
We study causal representation learning, the task of recovering high-level latent
variables and their causal relationships in the form of a causal graph from lowlevel observed data (such as text and images), assuming access to observations
generated from multiple environments. Prior results on the identifiability of causal
representations typically assume access to single-node interventions which is rather
unrealistic in practice, since the latent variables are unknown in the first place. In
this work, we consider the task of learning causal representation learning with data
collected from general environments. We show that even when the causal model
and the mixing function are both linear, there exists a surrounded-node ambiguity
(SNA) [46] which is basically unavoidable in our setting. On the other hand, in
the same linear case, we show that identification up to SNA is possible under mild
conditions, and propose an algorithm, LiNGCReL which provably achieves such
identifiability guarantee. We conduct extensive experiments on synthetic data and
demonstrate the effectiveness of LiNGCReL in the finite-sample regime.

1

Introduction

Artificial intelligence (AI) has achieved tremendous success in various domains in the past decade
[4, 40, 6]. However, current approaches are largely based on learning the statistical structures and
relationships in the data that we observe. As a result, it is not surprising that these approaches often
capture spurious statistical dependencies between different features, resulting in poor performance in
the presence of test distribution shift [30, 22] or adversarial attacks [3, 50].
In view of these pitfalls, a recent line of work has explored the problem of causal representation
learning (CRL) [34], the task of learning the causal relationships between high-level latent variables
underlying our low-level observations. Notably, it is widely believed in cognitive psychology that
humans take a causal approach to distill information from the world and make decisions to achieve
their goals [37, 12, 19]. As a result, there is reason to believe that learning causal representations has
the potential to significantly improve the power of AI, especially on tasks where performance lags far
behind human level [17].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

