Algorithmic progress in language models

Anson Ho1∗
Robi Rahman1

Tamay Besiroglu1,2∗
Zifan Carl Guo2

Ege Erdil1
David Atkinson1,3

David Owen1
Neil Thompson2

Jaime Sevilla1

Abstract
We investigate the rate at which algorithms for pre-training language models
have improved since the advent of deep learning. Using a dataset of over 200
language model evaluations on Wikitext and Penn Treebank spanning 2012-2023,
we find that the compute required to reach a set performance threshold has halved
approximately every 8 months, with a 90% confidence interval of around 2 to 22
months, substantially faster than hardware gains per Moore’s Law. We estimate
augmented scaling laws, which enable us to quantify algorithmic progress and
determine the relative contributions of scaling models versus innovations in training
algorithms. Despite the rapid pace of algorithmic progress and the development of
new architectures such as the transformer, our analysis reveals that the increase in
compute made an even larger contribution to overall performance improvements
over this time period. Though limited by noisy benchmark data, our analysis
quantifies the rapid progress in language modeling, shedding light on the relative
contributions from compute and algorithms.

1

Introduction

The field of language modeling has seen rapid advances, with recent large language models (LLMs)
demonstrating strong performance in domains such as programming [Li et al., 2022, Leblond et al.,
2023], mathematics [Cobbe et al., 2021, Trinh et al., 2024], and standardized tests [OpenAI, 2023].
But how has this progress been possible?
One salient factor is the scaling of training compute based on neural scaling laws [Sevilla et al., 2022,
Hoffmann et al., 2022, Kaplan et al., 2020], with state-of-the-art systems being trained for months on
tens of thousands of GPUs. But this is only part of the story: another key factor has been algorithmic
improvements, which result in more efficient use of resources such as compute and training data.
These include changes in model architectures, optimization algorithms, and software frameworks.
This picture raises some important questions: How much of recent progress in language models has
come from algorithmic improvements during pre-training, and how much has been from scaling up
models and datasets? The answers to these questions have crucial implications for the future of AI
progress, and have an important role in informing AI policy.
∗
Joint first authors. 1 Epoch. 2 MIT FutureTech, CSAIL, 3 Northeastern University. Email correspondence
to tamay@epochai.org. You can find our code and data here: https://github.com/epoch-research/
lm-algorithmic-progress.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

