Towards Flexible 3D Perception: Object-Centric
Occupancy Completion Augments 3D Object Detection

Chaoda Zheng1,2∗ Feng Wang3 Naiyan Wang4 Shuguang Cui2,1 Zhen Li2,1
1
FNii-Shenzhen 2 SSE, CUHK-Shenzhen 3 TuSimple 4 Xiaomi EV
{feng.wff, winsty}@gmail.com
{chaodazheng@link., shuguangcui@,lizhen@}cuhk.edu.cn
https://github.com/Ghostish/ObjectCentricOccCompletion

Abstract
While 3D object bounding box (bbox) representation has been widely used in
autonomous driving perception, it lacks the ability to capture the precise details of
an object’s intrinsic geometry. Recently, occupancy has emerged as a promising
alternative for 3D scene perception. However, constructing a high-resolution occupancy map remains infeasible for large scenes due to computational constraints.
Recognizing that foreground objects only occupy a small portion of the scene, we
introduce object-centric occupancy as a supplement to object bboxes. This representation not only provides intricate details for detected objects but also enables
higher voxel resolution in practical applications. We advance the development of
object-centric occupancy perception from both data and algorithm perspectives. On
the data side, we construct the first object-centric occupancy dataset from scratch
using an automated pipeline. From the algorithmic standpoint, we introduce a
novel object-centric occupancy completion network equipped with an implicit
shape decoder that manages dynamic-size occupancy generation. This network
accurately predicts the complete object-centric occupancy volume for inaccurate
object proposals by leveraging temporal information from long sequences. Our
method demonstrates robust performance in completing object shapes under noisy
detection and tracking conditions. Additionally, we show that our occupancy
features significantly enhance the detection results of state-of-the-art 3D object
detectors, especially for incomplete or distant objects in the Waymo Open Dataset.

1

Introduction

In autonomous driving, accurate and robust 3D
scene perception is crucial for safe and efficient
navigation. Conventional perception systems primarily adopt 3D object bounding boxes as the perception representation [25, 6, 15, 16]. However, the
limitations of 3D bounding boxes (bboxes) are becoming increasingly pronounced as the demands
for perception accuracy continue to escalate. Since
(b) Scene-Level Occupancy
(a) Bounding Boxes
a 3D bbox is essentially a cuboid that encapsulates the object, it fails to capture the precise details of the object’s shape, particularly for objects Figure 1: Bounding Box vs. Occupancy. Ocwith irregular geometries. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), cupancy can better represent the crane’s shape
than the bounding box.
∗

Works done during the internship at TuSimple.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

