Benchmarking Generative Models on Computational
Thinking Tests in Elementary Visual Programming
Victor-Alexandru Pădurean
MPI-SWS
vpadurea@mpi-sws.org

Adish Singla
MPI-SWS
adishs@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
Generative models have demonstrated human-level proficiency in various benchmarks across domains like programming, natural sciences, and general knowledge.
Despite these promising results on competitive benchmarks, they still struggle with
seemingly simple problem-solving tasks typically carried out by elementary-level
students. How do state-of-the-art models perform on standardized programmingrelated tests designed to assess computational thinking and problem-solving skills
at schools? In this paper, we curate a novel benchmark involving computational
thinking tests grounded in elementary visual programming domains. Our initial
results show that state-of-the-art models like GPT-4o and Llama3 barely match the
performance of an average school student. To further boost the performance of
these models, we fine-tune them using a novel synthetic data generation methodology. The key idea is to develop a comprehensive dataset using symbolic methods
that capture different skill levels, ranging from recognition of visual elements to
multi-choice quizzes to synthesis-style tasks. We showcase how various aspects
of symbolic information in synthetic data help improve fine-tuned models’ performance. We will release the full implementation and datasets to facilitate further
research on enhancing computational thinking in generative models.

1

Introduction

The recent advances in generative models and large language models (LLMs) have the potential to
positively impact a wide variety of domains, such as medicine [1, 2, 3], arts [4, 5], and education
[6, 7, 8, 9]. This potential is reflected by their success on a wide range of popular competitive
benchmarks assessing their knowledge of natural sciences and day-to-day facts [10, 11, 12, 13, 14]
and their skills in programming. For example, GPT-4o [10] is capable of obtaining a high accuracy
on two popular programming benchmarks: 90.2% on HumanEval [15] and 87.5% on MBPP [16].
Previous studies also showed that GPT-4 [17] is capable of passing assessments in higher education
programming courses, achieving course totals greater than 79% [18].
Despite these promising results, state-of-the-art models struggle with seemingly simple tasks. These
models often underperform in tasks requiring mathematical reasoning, planning, and problem-solving
[19, 20, 21, 22]. For example, they fail to solve planning tasks involving stacking of colored blocks
[23]. Moreover, generative models often face problems with basic algebra and counting [19], or
coming up with correct codes in visual programming domains [24], tasks which can successfully be
carried out by elementary-level school students. These weaknesses seem to contradict the generative
models’ impressive performance in complex programming tasks. Based on these observations,
we aim to study how generative models tackle programming tasks specifically designed to foster
computational thinking and problem-solving skills in elementary-level students. This leads to our
main research question: How do state-of-the-art models perform on standardized programmingrelated tests designed to assess computational thinking and problem-solving skills at schools?
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

