Stochastic Taylor Derivative Estimator: Efficient
amortization for arbitrary differential operators

Zekun Shi
National University of Singapore
Sea AI Lab
shizk@sea.com,

Zheyuan Hu
National University of Singapore
e0792494@u.nus.edu,

Min Lin
Sea AI Lab
linmin@sea.com,

Kenji Kawaguchi
National University of Singapore
kenji@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Optimizing neural networks with loss that contain high-dimensional and high-order
differential operators is expensive to evaluate with back-propagation due to O(dk )
scaling of the derivative tensor size and the O(2k−1 L) scaling in the computation
graph, where d is the dimension of the domain, L is the number of ops in the
forward computation graph, and k is the derivative order. In previous works, the
polynomial scaling in d was addressed by amortizing the computation over the
optimization process via randomization. Separately, the exponential scaling in k
for univariate functions (d = 1) was addressed with high-order auto-differentiation
(AD). In this work, we show how to efficiently perform arbitrary contraction of
the derivative tensor of arbitrary order for multivariate functions, by properly
constructing the input tangents to univariate high-order AD, which can be used to
efficiently randomize any differential operator. When applied to Physics-Informed
Neural Networks (PINNs), our method provides >1000× speed-up and >30×
memory reduction over randomization with first-order AD, and we can now solve
1-million-dimensional PDEs in 8 minutes on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU 1 . This
work opens the possibility of using high-order differential operators in large-scale
problems.

1

Introduction

In many problems, especially in Physics-informed machine learning [19, 33], one needs to solve
optimization problems where the loss contains differential operators:
(1)

(n)

arg min f (x, uθ (x), Dα uθ (x), . . . , Dα

uθ (x)),

′

uθ : Rd → Rd .

(1)

θ
|α|

In this above, Dα = ∂xα1∂,...,∂xαd , α = (α1 , α2 , . . . , αd ) is a multi-index, uθ is some neural network
1
d
parameterized by θ, and f is some cost function. When either the differentiation order k or the
dimensionality d is high, the objective function above is expensive to evaluate with back-propagation
(backward
mode AD) in both memory and computation: the size of the

 derivative tensor has scaling
O dk , and the size of the computation graph has scaling O 2k−1 L where L is the number of ops
in the forward computation graph.
1

Our code is available at https://github.com/sail-sg/stde
Received the Best Paper Award at NeurIPS 2024

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

