Time-Reversal Provides
Unsupervised Feedback to LLMs

Varun Yerram ∗ † §
Google DeepMind

Rahul Madhavan ∗ ‡
Indian Institute of Science

Arun Suggala †
Google DeepMind

Karthikeyan Shanmugam † §
Google DeepMind

Sravanti Addepalli ∗ † §
Google DeepMind
Prateek Jain †
Google DeepMind

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) are typically trained to predict in the forward
direction of time. However, recent works have shown that prompting these models
to look back and critique their own generations can produce useful feedback. Motivated by this, we explore the question of whether LLMs can be empowered to think
(predict and score) backwards to provide unsupervised feedback that complements
forward LLMs. Towards this, we introduce Time Reversed Language Models
(TRLMs), which can score and generate queries when conditioned on responses,
effectively functioning in the reverse direction of time. Further, to effectively infer
in the response to query direction, we pre-train and fine-tune a language model
(TRLM-Ba) in the reverse token order from scratch. We show empirically (and
theoretically in a stylized setting) that time-reversed models can indeed complement forward model predictions when used to score the query given response for
re-ranking multiple forward generations. We obtain up to 5% improvement on the
widely used AlpacaEval Leaderboard over the competent baseline of best-of-N
re-ranking using self log-perplexity scores. We further show that TRLM scoring
outperforms conventional forward scoring of response given query, resulting in
significant gains in applications such as citation generation and passage retrieval.
We next leverage the generative ability of TRLM to augment or provide unsupervised
feedback to input safety filters of LLMs, demonstrating a drastic reduction in false
negative rate with negligible impact on false positive rates against several attacks
published on the popular JailbreakBench leaderboard.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) trained on a large corpora of text are able to accomplish a wide
variety of downstream tasks such as summarization, open-ended/ context-based question answering,
document retrieval, and citation generation [Brown et al., 2020, Zhao et al., 2023a]. While the generations from pre-trained and instruction-tuned models already show significant promise, alignment
techniques such as Reinforcement Learning via Human Feedback (RLHF) [Anil et al., 2023a, Ouyang
et al., 2022] are widely used to improve the quality of their generations further. However, these
methods rely heavily on additional supervision to construct preference data, which can be expensive
to acquire, or noisy for training. This brings up a natural question – Can we generate useful feedback
on LLM generations without additional supervised data?
∗

Equal Contribution.
Work done as part of Google Research
‡
Work done as a Student Researcher at Google Research
§
Correspondence to: vyerram@google.com, sravantia@google.com, karthikeyanvs@google.com
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

