What Variables Affect Out-of-Distribution
Generalization in Pretrained Models?
1,∗

2,∗

1

Md Yousuf Harun
Kyungbok Lee
Jhair Gallardo
3
2
Giri Krishnan
Christopher Kanan
1
2
3
Rochester Institute of Technology
University of Rochester
Georgia Tech

Abstract
Embeddings produced by pre-trained deep neural networks (DNNs) are widely
used; however, their efficacy for downstream tasks can vary widely. We study the
factors influencing transferability and out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization
of pre-trained DNN embeddings through the lens of the tunnel effect hypothesis,
which is closely related to intermediate neural collapse. This hypothesis suggests
that deeper DNN layers compress representations and hinder OOD generalization.
Contrary to earlier work, our experiments show this is not a universal phenomenon.
We comprehensively investigate the impact of DNN architecture, training data, image resolution, and augmentations on transferability. We identify that training with
high-resolution datasets containing many classes greatly reduces representation
compression and improves transferability. Our results emphasize the danger of
generalizing findings from toy datasets to broader contexts.

1

Introduction

Understanding deep neural network (DNN) representations has been a central focus of the deep
learning community. It is generally accepted that a DNN’s initial layers learn transferable universal
features, with deeper layers being task-specific [1–8]. At NeurIPS-2023, [9] challenged this view
with evidence for the tunnel effect hypothesis:
The Tunnel Effect Hypothesis: An overparameterized N -layer DNN forms two distinct groups:
1. The extractor consists of the first K layers, creating linearly separable representations.
2. The tunnel comprises the remaining N − K layers, compressing representations and
hindering OOD generalization.
To test the tunnel effect hypothesis, they trained models on an in-distribution (ID) dataset and
compared linear probes trained and evaluated on either ID or OOD datasets for embeddings produced
by each DNN layer. They showed that ID accuracy increased monotonically, whereas OOD accuracy
rapidly decreased after the extractor (Fig. 1). The likely cause of the tunnel effect is intermediate
neural collapse [10]. Both [10] and [9] showed that collapsed/tunnel layers could be static without
needing learning. If these results are universal, they suggest universal visual features learned in
early layers and using embeddings from the penultimate layers of pre-trained DNNs, need to be
rethought. However, both [9] and [10] limited their experiments to datasets with low-resolution
images and relatively few categories (CIFAR-10, MNIST). Given the widespread use of embeddings
from pre-trained DNNs for downstream OOD tasks, we aim to assess the universality of the tunnel
†
effect and the variables that influence its strength .
∗
†

Equal contribution. Corresponding author: Md Yousuf Harun (mh1023@rit.edu)
Project website and code: https://yousuf907.github.io/oodg

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

