Quantifying Aleatoric Uncertainty of the Treatment
Effect: A Novel Orthogonal Learner

1

Valentyn Melnychuk1,* , Stefan Feuerriegel1 , Mihaela van der Schaar2
LMU Munich & Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML), Germany
2
University of Cambridge & Alan Turing Institute, United Kingdom
*
Correspondence: melnychuk@lmu.de

Abstract
Estimating causal quantities from observational data is crucial for understanding
the safety and effectiveness of medical treatments. However, to make reliable
inferences, medical practitioners require not only estimating averaged causal quantities, such as the conditional average treatment effect, but also understanding
the randomness of the treatment effect as a random variable. This randomness is
referred to as aleatoric uncertainty and is necessary for understanding the probability of benefit from treatment or quantiles of the treatment effect. Yet, the
aleatoric uncertainty of the treatment effect has received surprisingly little attention
in the causal machine learning community. To fill this gap, we aim to quantify
the aleatoric uncertainty of the treatment effect at the covariate-conditional level,
namely, the conditional distribution of the treatment effect (CDTE). Unlike average
causal quantities, the CDTE is not point identifiable without strong additional
assumptions. As a remedy, we employ partial identification to obtain sharp bounds
on the CDTE and thereby quantify the aleatoric uncertainty of the treatment effect.
We then develop a novel, orthogonal learner for the bounds on the CDTE, which
we call AU-learner. We further show that our AU-learner has several strengths in
that it satisfies Neyman-orthogonality and, thus, quasi-oracle efficiency. Finally,
we propose a fully-parametric deep learning instantiation of our AU-learner.

1

Introduction

Estimating causal quantities from observational data is crucial for decision-making in medicine [9, 12,
22, 30, 70]. For example, medical practitioners are interested in estimating the effect of chemotherapy
vs. immunotherapy on patient survival from electronic health records to understand the best treatment
strategies in cancer care. Here, common estimation targets are averaged causal quantities such as the
average treatment effect (ATE) and the conditional average treatment effect (CATE), yet averaged
causal quantities do not allow for understanding the variability of the treatment effect.
What is needed for the reliability of causal quantities in medicine? To obtain reliable causal quantities,
one often needs to “move beyond the mean” [44, 68] and consider the inherent randomness in the
treatment effect as a random variable. This randomness is referred to as aleatoric uncertainty [17, 60,
110]. Quantifying the aleatoric uncertainty of the treatment effect is relevant in medical practice to
understand the probability of benefit from treatment [26, 60] and the quantiles and variance of the
treatment effect [5, 17, 26, 33, 59]. As an example, averaged quantities such as the CATE would
simply suggest a positive effect for some patients, while the probability of benefit from treatment
can inform patients about the odds of being negatively affected by the treatment. Hence, aleatoric
uncertainty of the treatment effect promises additional, fine-grained insights beyond simple averages.
Methods for quantifying the aleatoric uncertainty of the treatment effect have gained surprisingly
little attention in the causal machine learning community. So far, machine learning for treatment
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

