Towards Comprehensive Detection of Chinese
Harmful Memes
Junyu Lu1 , Bo Xu1 , Xiaokun Zhang1 , Hongbo Wang1 ,
Haohao Zhu1 , Dongyu Zhang2 , Liang Yang1,3 , Hongfei Lin1∗
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, 2 School of Foreign Languages,
3
Key Laboratory of Social Computing and Cognitive Intelligence，
Dalian University of Technology, China
dutljy,zhuhh@mail.dlut.edu.cn, dawnkun1993,1846742523a@gmail.com
xubo,zhangdongyu,liang,hflin@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Harmful memes have proliferated on the Chinese Internet, while research on detecting Chinese harmful memes significantly lags behind due to the absence of
reliable datasets and effective detectors. To this end, we focus on the comprehensive detection of Chinese harmful memes. We construct T OXI CN MM, the
first Chinese harmful meme dataset, which consists of 12,000 samples with finegrained annotations for various meme types. Additionally, we propose a baseline
detector, Multimodal Knowledge Enhancement (MKE), incorporating contextual
information of meme content generated by the LLM to enhance the understanding
of Chinese memes. During the evaluation phase, we conduct extensive quantitative
experiments and qualitative analyses on multiple baselines, including LLMs and
our MKE. The experimental results indicate that detecting Chinese harmful memes
is challenging for existing models while demonstrating the effectiveness of MKE.1
Disclaimer: The samples presented by this paper may be considered offensive.

1

Introduction

With the development of the Internet, harmful memes on the web have become increasingly rampant.
Harmful memes are typically defined as multimodal units consisting of an image and embedded text
that cause harm to an individual, an organization, a community, or a social group by specifically
targeting social entities (Pramanick et al., 2021a; Sharma et al., 2022b). They may exacerbate social
divisions, trigger discriminatory behaviors, and harm social harmony and unity (Kiela et al., 2020).
Due to their negative impact on society, the widespread dissemination of harmful memes has been
widely recognized as a growing concern.
In recent years, researchers have made substantial progress in detecting harmful memes. Several
datasets, including HMC (Kiela et al., 2020), MMHS (Gomez et al., 2020), Harm-C, and Harm-P
(Pramanick et al., 2021a), have been established, and various detectors have been proposed Hee
et al. (2022); Aggarwal et al. (2023); Pramanick et al. (2021b); Sharma et al. (2022a); Cao et al.
(2022). However, most existing studies only focus on English memes. In contrast, Chinese harmful
meme detection remains largely unexplored, presenting challenges in building reliable datasets and
developing effective detectors.
On one hand, the types of Chinese harmful memes are diverse. In addition to those targeting specific
social entities, many memes on Chinese platforms contain general offense, sexual innuendo, or
∗
1

Corresponding author
Resources of this paper are available at https://github.com/DUT-lujunyu/ToxiCN_MM.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

