Co-occurrence is not Factual Association in Language
Models
Xiao Zhang
Department of Electronics Engineering
Tsinghua University
xzhang19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Miao Li
Department of Electronics Engineering
Tsinghua University
miao-li@tsinghua.edu.cn

Ji Wu
Department of Electronics Engineering, College of AI
Tsinghua University
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
Center for Big Data and Clinical Research, Institute for Precision Medicine
Tsinghua University
wuji_ee@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Pretrained language models can encode a large amount of knowledge and utilize
it for various reasoning tasks, yet they can still struggle to learn novel factual
knowledge effectively from finetuning on limited textual demonstrations. In this
work, we show that the reason for this deficiency is that language models are
biased to learn word co-occurrence statistics instead of true factual associations.
We identify the differences between two forms of knowledge representation in
language models: knowledge in the form of co-occurrence statistics is encoded in
the middle layers of the transformer model and does not generalize well to reasoning
scenarios beyond simple question answering, while true factual associations are
encoded in the lower layers and can be freely utilized in various reasoning tasks.
Based on these observations, we propose two strategies to improve the learning
of factual associations in language models. We show that training on text with
implicit rather than explicit factual associations can force the model to learn
factual associations instead of co-occurrence statistics, significantly improving the
generalization of newly learned knowledge. We also propose a simple training
method to actively forget the learned co-occurrence statistics, which unblocks and
enhances the learning of factual associations when training on plain narrative text.
On both synthetic and real-world corpora, the two proposed strategies improve the
generalization of the knowledge learned during finetuning to reasoning scenarios
such as indirect and multi-hop question answering.

1

Introduction

Language models pretrained on large-scale text have been shown to encode a large amount of
factual knowledge [1, 2] and are capable of utilizing knowledge in various reasoning scenarios
[3, 4]. However, recent evidence suggest that language models could have poor sample efficiency in
learning factual knowledge from text. When finetuned on simple textual demonstrations of novel
facts, for example, “The capital city of Andoria is Copperton.”, even larger language models can fail
to generalize the learned facts beyond simple question answering or utilize them well in reasoning
[5, 6]. The success of learning factual knowledge in pretraining may simply be due to exposure to
enough variations of common facts in massive corpora.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

