Reinforcement Learning under Latent Dynamics:
Toward Statistical and Algorithmic Modularity

Philip Amortila∗
philipa4@illinois.edu

Dylan J. Foster
dylanfoster@microsoft.com

Akshay Krishnamurthy
akshaykr@microsoft.com

Nan Jiang
nanjiang@illinois.edu

Zakaria Mhammedi
mhammedi@google.com

Abstract
Real-world applications of reinforcement learning often involve environments
where agents operate on complex, high-dimensional observations, but the
underlying (“latent”) dynamics are comparatively simple. However, outside
of restrictive settings such as small latent spaces, the fundamental statistical
requirements and algorithmic principles for reinforcement learning under latent
dynamics are poorly understood.
This paper addresses the question of reinforcement learning under general latent
dynamics from a statistical and algorithmic perspective. On the statistical side,
our main negative result shows that most well-studied settings for reinforcement
learning with function approximation become intractable when composed
with rich observations; we complement this with a positive result, identifying
latent pushforward coverability as a general condition that enables statistical
tractability. Algorithmically, we develop provably efficient observable-to-latent
reductions—that is, reductions that transform an arbitrary algorithm for the latent
MDP into an algorithm that can operate on rich observations—in two settings:
one where the agent has access to hindsight observations of the latent dynamics
[LADZ23], and one where the agent can estimate self-predictive latent models
[SAGHCB20]. Together, our results serve as a first step toward a unified statistical
and algorithmic theory for reinforcement learning under latent dynamics.

1

Introduction

Many application domains for reinforcement learning (RL) require the agent to operate on rich,
high-dimensional observations of the environment, such as images or text [WSD15; LFDA16;
KFPM21; NRKFG22; Bak+22; Bro+22]. However, the environment itself can often be summarized
by latent dynamics for a low-dimensional or otherwise simple latent state space. The decoupling
of latent dynamics from the complex observation process naturally suggests a modular framework
for algorithm design: first learn a representation that decodes the latent state from observations, then
apply a reinforcement learning algorithm for the latent dynamics on top of the learned representation.
This paper investigates the algorithmic and statistical foundations of this framework. We ask: Can
we take existing algorithms and sample complexity guarantees for reinforcement learning in the
latent state space and lift them to the observation space in a modular fashion?
There is a growing body of theoretical and empirical work developing algorithms that combine
representation learning and reinforcement learning to develop scalable algorithms. On the empirical
side, a plethora of representation learning objectives have been deployed to varying degrees of
success [PAED17; Tan+17; ZMCGL21; LSA20; YFK21; Lam+24; Guo+22; HPBL23], but we lack
∗

The full (author-recommended) version of this paper can be found at: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2410.17904.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

