Benchmarking Uncertainty Disentanglement:
Specialized Uncertainties for Specialized Tasks

Bálint Mucsányi
University of Tübingen
b.h.mucsanyi@gmail.com

Michael Kirchhof
University of Tübingen

Seong Joon Oh
University of Tübingen
Tübingen AI Center

Abstract
Uncertainty quantification, once a singular task, has evolved into a spectrum of
tasks, including abstained prediction, out-of-distribution detection, and aleatoric
uncertainty quantification. The latest goal is disentanglement: the construction
of multiple estimators that are each tailored to one and only one source of uncertainty. This paper presents the first benchmark of uncertainty disentanglement. We
reimplement and evaluate a comprehensive range of uncertainty estimators, from
Bayesian over evidential to deterministic ones, across a diverse range of uncertainty
tasks on ImageNet. We find that, despite recent theoretical endeavors, no existing
approach provides pairs of disentangled uncertainty estimators in practice. We
further find that specialized uncertainty tasks are harder than predictive uncertainty tasks, where we observe saturating performance. Our results provide both
practical advice for which uncertainty estimators to use for which specific task,
and reveal opportunities for future research toward task-centric and disentangled
uncertainties. All our reimplementations and Weights & Biases logs are available
at https://github.com/bmucsanyi/untangle.

1

Introduction

When uncertainty quantification methods were first pioneered for deep learning [12, 29], their task
was simple: giving one total uncertainty estimate. The recent demand for trustworthy machine
learning [36] created new requirements, mostly centering around disentangling the above predictive
uncertainty into aleatoric (data-inherent and irreducible) and epistemic (model-centric and reducible)
components [11, 52, 47]. Such disentangled estimators are needed for multiple modern applications:
Out-of-distribution detection needs to filter unseen samples with high epistemic uncertainty without
being confounded with seen samples with high aleatoric uncertainty [37], and active learning uses
individual aleatoric and epistemic estimates to select the most efficient samples to learn from [28, 35].
However, recent advances towards such disentangled uncertainties are primarily theoretical and
supported by only small-scale experiments [47, 53, 37]. Conversely, larger-scale benchmarks evaluate
methods w.r.t. only one uncertainty component and do not test for undesirable side effects on other
components [13, 40]. There is currently no study that evaluates which component(s) each method
captures in practice and which it does not – which is often contrary to their original intuition.
Our work provides a comprehensive benchmark of the vast recent landscape of uncertainty methods
and tasks. We reimplement nineteen uncertainty quantification methods in up to fourteen ways
and evaluate each on thirteen practically defined tasks on ImageNet-1k [10] and CIFAR-10 [27].
This includes recent information-theoretical and Bregman decomposition formulas that intend to
disentangle total uncertainties into aleatoric and epistemic components [57, 42, 11]. We reveal
that none of the existing approaches achieve disentanglement in practice. Most proposed pairs of
estimators are highly internally correlated (rank corr. ≥ 0.78) and fail to unmix aleatoric and epistemic
uncertainty (Section 3.1). We also find that specialized tasks (Sections 3.2 and 3.3) are harder to solve
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

