On the Target-kernel Alignment: a Unified Analysis
with Kernel Complexity

Chao Wang† , Xin He†♯∗, Yuwen Wang‡∗, Junhui Wang ‡
School of Statistics and Management, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
♯
Key Laboratory of Mathematical Economics (SUFE), Ministry of Education, Shanghai
‡
Chinese University of Hong Kong
wang.chao@stu.sufe.edu.cn, he.xin17@mail.shufe.edu.cn
wangyw@link.cuhk.edu.hk, junhuiwang@cuhk.edu.hk
†

Abstract
This paper investigates the impact of alignment between the target function of
interest and the kernel matrix on a variety of kernel-based methods based on a
general loss belonging to a rich loss function family, which covers many commonly
used methods in regression and classification problems. We consider the truncated
kernel-based method (TKM) which is estimated within a reduced function space
constructed by using the spectral truncation of the kernel matrix and compare
its theoretical behavior to that of the standard kernel-based method (KM) under
various settings. By using the kernel complexity function that quantifies the
complexity of the induced function space, we derive the upper bounds for both
TKM and KM, and further reveal their dependencies on the degree of target-kernel
alignment. Specifically, for the alignment with polynomial decay, the established
results indicate that under the just-aligned and weakly-aligned regimes, TKM and
KM share the same learning rate. Yet, under the strongly-aligned regime, KM
suffers the saturation effect, while TKM can be continuously improved as the
alignment becomes stronger. This further implies that TKM has a strong ability
to capture the strong alignment and provide a theoretically guaranteed solution
to eliminate the phenomena of saturation effect. The minimax lower bound is
also established for the squared loss to confirm the optimality of TKM. Extensive
numerical experiments further support our theoretical findings. The Python code
for reproducing the numerical experiments is available on Github.

1

Introduction

Kernel-based methods have attracted increasing attention in recent years (Belkin et al., 2018; Liang
& Rakhlin, 2020; Ghorbani et al., 2020; Li et al., 2023), due to its close connection with some
cutting-edge research topics, including the understanding of over-parameterized neural network
through the neural tangent kernel (Jacot et al., 2018; Chizat et al., 2019) and large-scale kernel
learning with gradient descent (Lin & Zhou, 2018; Xu et al., 2021). It is of fundamental importance
to provide theoretical explanations of their behaviors under these research topics.
In literature, some recent works show that the learning rate of kernel-based methods is actually
affected by both the model complexity of the considered reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS)
and the target-kernel alignment, a measure to quantify the similarity between the considered RKHS
(or kernel matrix from the empirical point of view) and the target function, which is also known
as the smoothness of a target function in the RKHS (Caponnetto & De Vito, 2007; Smale & Zhou,
∗

Xin He and Yuwen Wang are the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

