Optimal Rates for Vector-Valued Spectral
Regularization Learning Algorithms

Dimitri Meunier∗
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
dimitri.meunier.21@ucl.ac.uk

Zikai Shen∗
Department of Statistical Science
University College London
zikai.shen.22@ucl.ac.uk

Mattes Mollenhauer
Merantix Momentum
mattes.mollenhauer@merantix-momentum.com
Arthur Gretton
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
arthur.gretton@gmail.com

Zhu Li
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
zli12@ic.ac.uk

Abstract
We study theoretical properties of a broad class of regularized algorithms with
vector-valued output. These spectral algorithms include kernel ridge regression,
kernel principal component regression and various implementations of gradient
descent. Our contributions are twofold. First, we rigorously confirm the so-called
saturation effect for ridge regression with vector-valued output by deriving a
novel lower bound on learning rates; this bound is shown to be suboptimal when
the smoothness of the regression function exceeds a certain level. Second, we
present an upper bound on the finite sample risk for general vector-valued spectral
algorithms, applicable to both well-specified and misspecified scenarios (where the
true regression function lies outside of the hypothesis space), and show that this
bound is minimax optimal in various regimes. All of our results explicitly allow
the case of infinite-dimensional output variables, proving consistency of recent
practical applications.

1

Introduction

We investigate a fundamental topic in modern machine learning—the behavior and efficiency of
learning algorithms for regression in high-dimensional and potentially infinite-dimensional output
spaces Y. Given two random variables X and Y , we seek to empirically minimize the squared
expected risk
E(F ) ∶= E [∥Y − F (X)∥2Y ]
(1)
over functions F in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space consisting of vector-valued functions from a
topological space X to a Hilbert space Y. The study of this setting as an ill-posed statistical inverse
problem is well established: see e.g. 46, 6, 53, 3, 5, 17. In this work, we study the setting when Y
is high- or infinite-dimensional, since it has been less well covered by the literature, yet has many
applications in multitask regression [7, 2] and infinite-dimensional learning problems, including
∗

Equal Contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

