An Analysis of Elo Rating Systems via Markov Chains

Sam Olesker-Taylor
Department of Statistics
University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK
sam.olesker-taylor@warwick.ac.uk

Luca Zanetti
Department of Mathematical Sciences
University of Bath
Bath, BA2 7AY, UK
lz2040@bath.ac.uk

Abstract
We present a theoretical analysis of the Elo rating system, a popular method for
ranking skills of players in an online setting. In particular, we study Elo under the
Bradley–Terry–Luce model and, using techniques from Markov chain theory, show
that Elo learns the model parameters at a rate competitive with the state of the art.
We apply our results to the problem of efficient tournament design and discuss a
connection with the fastest-mixing Markov chain problem.

1

Introduction

The Elo rating system is a popular method for calculating the relative skills of players (or teams) in
sports analytics and particularly chess [2, 4, 1, 3]. It is based on a simple zero-sum update rule: if
player i beats player j, then the rating of player i increases proportionally to the model probability
that i would lose to j, while the rating of j decreases by the same amount. This amount depends on
the previously estimated difference in skills between i and j.
Despite their widespread popularity, Elo rating systems still lack a rigorous theoretical understanding [6]. Here, we take a probabilistic approach and study Elo under the well-known Bradley–Terry–
Luce model (BTL) [11, 28]. In this model, the probability pi,j that i wins against j is wi /(wi + wj ),
where wk is the strength of player k. In Elo, this is usually reparametrised via wk = eρk :
pi,j = eρi /(eρi + eρj ) = 1/(1 + eρj −ρi ) = σ(ρi − ρj ),
where ρk is the true rating of k and σ(z) := 1/(1 + exp(−z)) for z ∈ R is the sigmoid function. In
this setting, after observing i beat j, the corresponding Elo ratings xi and xj are updated as
xi ← xi + ησ(xj − xi ) and

xj ← xj − ησ(xj − xi ),

where the step-size η > 0 is chosen by the modeller. The size of the update depends exponentially on
the difference in ratings: beating a much lower rated opponent does not change the ratings much.
The goal of the Elo rating system is to estimate the true ratings of n players by observing results
of matches between pairs of players. It is, therefore, aiming to solve the problem of ranking from
pairwise comparisons. Compared with most algorithms in the area [5, 20, 27, 31, 37], however, Elo
benefits from three qualities that help explain its popularity in real-world applications: simplicity,
interpretability and the ability to update a ranking of the players in an online fashion.
The knowledgeable reader might have noticed that Elo’s update rule is actually based on the gradient
of the BTL log-likelihood: Elo can be interpreted simply as stochastic gradient descent with fixed
step-size. Rather than studying Elo from a convex optimisation angle, however, we take a more
probabilistic point of view: we assume at each time t, players i and j are selected to play against one
another with probability qi,j . This allows us to interpret Elo as a Markov chain over Rn and deploy
powerful tools to study its behaviour. On the other hand, this approach also presents us with some
challenges: Elo is not a reversible Markov chain and, while it has a unique stationary distribution,
assuming a minor and natural condition on (qi,j )i,j [7], it does not converge to it in total variation [6].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

