When LLMs Meet Cunning Texts:
A Fallacy Understanding Benchmark for
Large Language Models

Yinghui Li1∗, Qingyu Zhou2,∗,†, Yuanzhen Luo∗ , Shirong Ma1 ,
Yangning Li1 , Hai-Tao Zheng1,† , Xuming Hu3,† , Philip S. Yu4
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Bytedance Inc.
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
4
University of Illinois Chicago
liyinghu20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) make remarkable evolutions in language
understanding and generation. Following this, various benchmarks for measuring
all kinds of capabilities of LLMs have sprung up. In this paper, we challenge the reasoning and understanding abilities of LLMs by proposing a FaLlacy Understanding
Benchmark (FLUB) containing cunning texts that are easy for humans to understand
but difficult for models to grasp. Specifically, the cunning texts that FLUB focuses
on mainly consist of the tricky, humorous, and misleading texts collected from the
real internet environment. And we design three tasks with increasing difficulty in
the FLUB benchmark to evaluate the fallacy understanding ability of LLMs. Based
on FLUB, we investigate the performance of multiple representative and advanced
LLMs, reflecting our FLUB is challenging and worthy of more future study. Interesting discoveries and valuable insights are achieved in our extensive experiments
and detailed analyses. We hope that our benchmark can encourage the community
to improve LLMs’ ability to understand fallacies. Our data and codes are available
at https://github.com/THUKElab/FLUB.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown great abilities to understand human languages, including
information extraction [1], text correction [2], humor understanding [3], etc. Researchers have
constructed numerous benchmarks to evaluate LLMs in various aspects [4–8]. By using constructed
benchmarks to interact with LLMs, researchers can analyze the behavior of LLMs to compare the
performance of different LLMs and study how to further improve LLMs in a targeted manner.
Although many LLM benchmarks have sprung up, we believe that existing benchmarks are not
challenging enough to truly measure the human-like intelligence of LLMs. In particular, we are still
wondering whether LLMs can understand cunning texts that may contain misleading, wrong premise,
intentional ambiguity, and so forth, considering that almost all LLMs are trained on “cleaned” and
“correct” corpora. Therefore, we build a FaLlacy Understanding Benchmark (FLUB) to challenge
LLMs for solving these problems.
Figure 1a shows the running examples from FLUB. From these cases, we directly feel the different
behaviors of LLMs and humans when facing cunning texts. In the first example, LLMs ignore the
∗
†

indicates equal contribution.
Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

