Scaling Continuous Latent Variable Models as
Probabilistic Integral Circuits

Gennaro Gala1, ∗

Cassio de Campos1

Antonio Vergari2, ∫

Erik Quaeghebeur1, ∫

1

2

Eindhoven University of Technology, NL
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, UK

Abstract
Probabilistic integral circuits (PICs) have been recently introduced as probabilistic
models enjoying the key ingredient behind expressive generative models: continuous latent variables (LVs). PICs are symbolic computational graphs defining
continuous LV models as hierarchies of functions that are summed and multiplied
together, or integrated over some LVs. They are tractable if LVs can be analytically integrated out, otherwise they can be approximated by tractable probabilistic
circuits (PC) encoding a hierarchical numerical quadrature process, called QPCs.
So far, only tree-shaped PICs have been explored, and training them via numerical quadrature requires memory-intensive processing at scale. In this paper, we
address these issues, and present: (i) a pipeline for building DAG-shaped PICs
out of arbitrary variable decompositions, (ii) a procedure for training PICs using
tensorized circuit architectures, and (iii) neural functional sharing techniques to
allow scalable training. In extensive experiments, we showcase the effectiveness
of functional sharing and the superiority of QPCs over traditional PCs.

1

Introduction

Continuous latent variables (LVs) are arguably the key ingredient behind many successful generative models, from variational autoencoders [24] to generative adversarial networks [20], and more
recently diffusion models [56]. While these models allow to learn expressive distributions from
data, they are limited to sampling and require task-specific approximations when it comes to perform probabilistic reasoning, as even simple tasks such as computing marginals or conditionals are
intractable for them. On the other hand, performing these tasks can be tractable for (hierarchical)
discrete LV models [4, 3], but these prove to be more challenging to learn at scale [9, 10, 32, 33].
This inherent trade-off among tractability, ease of learning, and expressiveness can be analyzed
and explored with probabilistic integral circuits (PICs) [18], a recently introduced class of deep
generative models defining hierarchies of continuous LVs using symbolic functional circuits. PICs
are tractable when their continuous LVs can be analytically integrated out. Intractable PICs can
however be systematically approximated as (tensorized) probabilistic circuits (PCs) [53, 4], the
representation language of discrete LV models. An instance of such PCs encodes a hierarchical
numerical quadrature process of the PIC to approximate, and as such is called quadrature PC (QPC).
Distilling QPCs from PICs has proven to be an effective alternative way to train PCs, but it has
only been explored for tree-shaped PICs, as building and scaling to richer LV structures is an open
research question that requires new tools [18]. In this paper, we fill this gap by redefining the semantics of PICs and extending them to DAG-shaped hierarchies of continuous LVs. Specifically, we
∗

.

Corresponding author: g.gala@tue.nl
∫ Shared supervision

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

