Deep Submodular Peripteral Networks

Gantavya Bhatt∗
Arnav M. Das∗
Jeffrey A. Bilmes
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195
{gbhatt2, arnavmd2, bilmes}@uw.edu

Abstract
Submodular functions, crucial for various applications, often lack practical learning
methods for their acquisition. Seemingly unrelated, learning a scaling from oracles
offering graded pairwise preferences (GPC) is underexplored, despite a rich history
in psychometrics. In this paper, we introduce deep submodular peripteral networks
(DSPNs), a novel parametric family of submodular functions, and methods for
their training using a GPC-based strategy to connect and then tackle both of the
above challenges. We introduce newly devised GPC-style “peripteral” loss which
leverages numerically graded relationships between pairs of objects (sets in our
case). Unlike traditional contrastive learning, or RHLF preference ranking, our
method utilizes graded comparisons, extracting more nuanced information than
just binary-outcome comparisons, and contrasts sets of any size (not just two). We
also define a novel suite of automatic sampling strategies for training, including
active-learning inspired submodular feedback. We demonstrate DSPNs’ efficacy in
learning submodularity from a costly target submodular function and demonstrate
its superiority both for experimental design and online streaming applications.

1

Introduction and Background

This paper jointly addresses two seemingly disparate problems presently open in the machine
learning community.
The first is that of identifying a useful practical scalable submodular function that can be used for
real-world data science tasks. Submodular functions, set functions that exhibit a diminishing returns
property (see Appendix B), have received considerable attention in the field of machine learning.
This has fostered new algorithms that offer near-optimal solutions for various applications. These
applications include detecting disease outbreaks [56], modeling fine structure in computer vision [41],
summarizing images [102, 72, 26, 37], active learning [34, 32, 25], compressed sensing, structured convex norms, and sparsity [4, 24], fairness [17, 43], efficient model training [57, 58, 70, 69]
recommendation systems [71], causal structure [114, 97], and brain parcellating [85] (see also the reviews [101, 12]). Despite these myriad applications, most research on submodularity has been on the
algorithmic and theoretical side which assumes the submodular function needing to be optimized is already at hand. While there has been work showing the theoretical challenges associated with learning
submodularity [5, 7, 6], there is relatively little work on practical methods to produce a useful submodular function in the first place (a few exceptions include [60, 92, 103]). Often, because it works well,
one uses P
the non-parametric submodular facility location (FL) function, i.e., for A ⊆ V with |V | = n,
n
f (A) = i=1 maxa∈A sa,i where sa,i ≥ 0 is a similarity between items a and i. On the other hand,
the FL function’s computational and memory costs grow quadratically with dataset size n and so FL
can become infeasible for large data or online streaming applications. There is a need for practical
strategies to obtain useful, scalable, general-purpose, and widely applicable submodular functions.
∗

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

