Slot-VLM: Object-Event Slots for Video-Language
Modeling

Jiaqi Xu1∗, Cuiling Lan2 , Wenxuan Xie2 , Xuejin Chen1 , Yan Lu2
1
University of Science and Technology of China,
2
Microsoft Research Asia
xujiaqi@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {culan,wenxie,yanlu}@microsoft.com, xjchen99@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Video-Language Models (VLMs), powered by the advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs), are charting new frontiers in video understanding. A pivotal
challenge is the development of an effective method to encapsulate video content
into a set of representative tokens to align with LLMs. In this work, we introduce
Slot-VLM, a new framework designed to generate semantically decomposed video
tokens, in terms of object-wise and event-wise visual representations, to facilitate
LLM inference. Particularly, we design an Object-Event Slots module, i.e., OESlots, that adaptively aggregates the dense video tokens from the vision encoder to
a set of representative slots. In order to take into account both the spatial object
details and the varied temporal dynamics, we build OE-Slots with two branches:
the Object-Slots branch and the Event-Slots branch. The Object-Slots branch focuses on extracting object-centric slots from features of high spatial resolution but
low frame sample rate, emphasizing detailed object information. The Event-Slots
branch is engineered to learn event-centric slots from high temporal sample rate but
low spatial resolution features. These complementary slots are combined to form
the vision context, serving as the input to the LLM for effective video reasoning.
Our experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our Slot-VLM, which
achieves the state-of-the-art performance on video question-answering2 .

1

Introduction

Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have gained significant progress [5, 39, 31]. They present
exceptional ability to comprehend, reason with, and generate human language text. Such amazing
capabilities have stimulated the wave of research on extending the models to Vision Language Models,
enabling the vision reasoning ability.
For image understanding, MiniGPT-4 [51] leverages a Q-Former and a projector to align a frozen
vision encoder with a frozen advanced LLM, where Q-Former converts the visual input into a fixedlength learned visual query tokens (32 tokens). LLaVA [25] and MiniGPT-v2 [10] directly use the
gridded visual tokens (after projection) as the LLM input. Image-text pairs are leveraged to align the
visual model and the LLM in training. For handling videos, one straightforward way is to stack the
tokens from sampled frames and feed them into the LLM [19, 12, 50]. This is challenging when we
densely sample frames (e.g., with the purpose of preserving more information) or when we sample
abundant frames for long videos. For example, for a video of 10 minutes, when we sample at 1 frame
per second and each frame uses 32 (or 256), we will have 19,200 (or 153,600) tokens in total. On the
one hand, the large number of tokens increases both the memory and computational requirement. On
the other hand, there is spatio-temporal redundancy and the features are not representative.
∗
2

This work was done when Jiaqi was an intern at Microsoft Research Asia.
This paper is the result of an open source research project starting from October, 2023.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

