SVFT: Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning
with Singular Vectors

Vijay Lingam† §∗

Atula Tejaswi†∗

Aditya Vavre†∗

Gautham Krishna Gudur†∗ Joydeep Ghosh†
Aleksandar Bojchevski‡∗
†

University of Texas at Austin

Aneesh Shetty†∗

Alex Dimakis†

Eunsol Choi†

Sujay Sanghavi†∗
‡

University of Cologne

§CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security

Abstract
Popular parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods, such as LoRA and its
variants, freeze pre-trained model weights W and inject learnable matrices ∆W.
These ∆W matrices are structured for efficient parameterization, often using techniques like low-rank approximations or scaling vectors. However, these methods
typically exhibit a performance gap compared to full fine-tuning. While recent
PEFT methods have narrowed this gap, they do so at the expense of additional
learnable parameters. We propose SVFT2 , a simple approach that structures ∆W
based on the specific weight matrix W. SVFT updates W as a sparse combination
M of outer products of its singular vectors, training only the coefficients of these
combinations. Crucially, we make additional off-diagonal elements in M learnable,
enabling a smooth trade-off between trainable parameters and expressivity—an
aspect that distinctly sets our approach apart from previous works leveraging
singular values. Extensive experiments on language and vision benchmarks show
that SVFT recovers up to 96% of full fine-tuning performance while training only
0.006 to 0.25% of parameters, outperforming existing methods that achieve only
up to 85% performance with 0.03 to 0.8% of the trainable parameter budget.

1

Introduction

Large-scale foundation models are often adapted for specific downstream tasks after pre-training.
Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) facilitates this adaptation efficiently by learning a minimal set
of new parameters, thus creating an "expert" model. For instance, Large Language Models (LLMs)
pre-trained on vast training corpora are fine-tuned for specialized tasks such as text summarization [13,
37], sentiment analysis [27, 21], and code completion [28] using instruction fine-tuning datasets.
Although full fine-tuning (Full-FT) is a viable method to achieve this, it requires re-training and
storing all model weights, making it impractical for deployment with large foundation models.
To address these challenges, PEFT techniques [14] (e.g., LoRA [15]) were introduced to significantly
reduce the number of learnable parameters compared to Full-FT, though often at the cost of performance. DoRA [19] bridges this performance gap by adding more learnable parameters and being
more expressive than LoRA. Almost all these methods apply a low-rank update additively to the
frozen pre-trained weights, potentially limiting their expressivity. Furthermore, these adapters are
agnostic to the structure and geometry of the weight matrices they modify. Finally, more expressive
∗
2

indicates equal contribution/advising
Code is available at https://github.com/VijayLingam95/SVFT/

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

