Improving self-training under distribution shifts via
anchored confidence with theoretical guarantees

Taejong Joo & Diego Klabjan
Department of Industrial Engineering & Management Sciences
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL, USA
{taejong.joo,d-klabjan}@northwestern.edu

Abstract
Self-training often falls short under distribution shifts due to an increased discrepancy between prediction confidence and actual accuracy. This typically necessitates
computationally demanding methods such as neighborhood or ensemble-based label corrections. Drawing inspiration from insights on early learning regularization,
we develop a principled method to improve self-training under distribution shifts
based on temporal consistency. Specifically, we build an uncertainty-aware temporal ensemble with a simple relative thresholding. Then, this ensemble smooths
noisy pseudo labels to promote selective temporal consistency. We show that our
temporal ensemble is asymptotically correct and our label smoothing technique
can reduce the optimality gap of self-training. Our extensive experiments validate that our approach consistently improves self-training performances by 8% to
16% across diverse distribution shift scenarios without a computational overhead.
Besides, our method exhibits attractive properties, such as improved calibration
performance and robustness to different hyperparameter choices.

1

Introduction

In this work, we address the challenge of adapting pre-trained neural networks at test time under
distribution shifts, a problem known as test-time adaptation (TTA) or source-free domain adaptation
(SFDA). Distribution shifts—where a model trained on one distribution is then tested on a different
one—are ubiquitous in many practical scenarios due to demographic subpopulation shift [1] and
changes in data collection environments [2–4]. Despite the robust performance of neural networks
under independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) settings, they often suffer from substantial performance degradation under such shifts [5, 6]. Recently, TTA and SFDA have proven their effectiveness
in resolving these critical issues by effectively leveraging information about the distribution shifts
contained in unlabeled samples given at the test time.
Self-training is the basis of many state-of-the-art methods in TTA and SFDA [7–9], utilizing pseudo
labels generated from the model’s own predictions to train a model on unlabeled samples [10]. Since
pseudo labels are regarded as true labels in self-training, the success of self-training methods highly
depends on how to filter incorrect pseudo labels to prevent self-confirmation bias [11]. This issue
has been effectively handled via simple confidence-based thresholding in i.i.d. settings [12–14].
However, the distribution shifts make it hard to filter incorrect pseudo labels due to high noise rates
even under high threshold [15]. Thus, sophisticated methods filter incorrect pseudo labels based on a
neighborhood structure of the data [16–18] and consistency of multiple predictions under different
models [19] or augmentations [20](cf. Section 5), which are computationally intensive by nature.
Recent insights in [8] suggest an alternative strategy can be also effective: promoting temporal
consistency can enhance self-training performance in SFDA without the computational burden of
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

