Designing Cell-Type-Specific Promoter Sequences
Using Conservative Model-Based Optimization

Aniketh Janardhan Reddy∗,† , Xinyang Geng∗,† , Michael H. Herschl∗,† ,
Sathvik Kolli, Aviral Kumar, Patrick D. Hsu† , Sergey Levine† , Nilah M. Ioannidis†
University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
Gene therapies have the potential to treat disease by delivering therapeutic genetic
cargo to disease-associated cells. One limitation to their widespread use is the lack
of short regulatory sequences, or promoters, that differentially induce the expression
of delivered genetic cargo in target cells, minimizing side effects in other cell types.
Such cell-type-specific promoters are difficult to discover using existing methods,
requiring either manual curation or access to large datasets of promoter-driven
expression from both targeted and untargeted cells. Model-based optimization
(MBO) has emerged as an effective method to design biological sequences in
an automated manner, and has recently been used in promoter design methods.
However, these methods have only been tested using large training datasets that are
expensive to collect, and focus on designing promoters for markedly different cell
types, overlooking the complexities associated with designing promoters for closely
related cell types that share similar regulatory features. Therefore, we introduce
a comprehensive framework for utilizing MBO to design promoters in a dataefficient manner, with an emphasis on discovering promoters for similar cell types.
We use conservative objective models (COMs) for MBO and highlight practical
considerations such as best practices for improving sequence diversity, getting
estimates of model uncertainty, and choosing the optimal set of sequences for
experimental validation. Using three leukemia cell lines (Jurkat, K562, and THP1),
we show that our approach discovers many novel cell-type-specific promoters after
experimentally validating the designed sequences. For K562 cells, in particular,
we discover a promoter that has 75.85% higher cell-type-specificity than the best
promoter from the initial dataset used to train our models. Our code and data will
be available at https://github.com/young-geng/promoter_design.

1

Introduction

Gene therapies treat diseases through the delivery and expression of therapeutic genetic cargo in
disease-associated cells and tissues. Expression is controlled by a promoter sequence, a short
regulatory DNA sequence (typically up to a few hundred base pairs (bp) long) placed upstream of the
coding region. An ideal promoter for gene therapy would differentially induce expression in targeted
cells while repressing expression in all other cells to increase effectiveness and reduce side-effects;
i.e. it should be cell-type-specific and induce differential expression (DE). However, although there
are over 400 types of cells in the human body [1], very few cell-type-specific promoters are known.
Traditional methods to design cell-type-specific promoters rely heavily on manual curation or involve
tiling known cis-regulatory elements (CREs) or transcription factor (TF) binding motifs ([2–6] among
others). These methods are difficult to automate and are not guaranteed to work, especially in less
*

Equal contributions
Corresponding authors: aniketh@berkeley.edu, young.geng@berkeley.edu, michael_herschl@berkeley.edu,
pdhsu@berkeley.edu, svlevine@eecs.berkeley.edu, nilah@berkeley.edu
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

