On Affine Homotopy between Language Encoders

Robin S. M. Chan1 Reda Boumasmoud1 Anej Svete1 Yuxin Ren2
Qipeng Guo3 Zhijing Jin1,4 Shauli Ravfogel1 Mrinmaya Sachan1
Bernhard Schölkopf1,4 Mennatallah El-Assady1 Ryan Cotterell1
1
ETH Zürich 2 Tsinghua University 3 Fudan University
4
Max Plank Institute for Intelligent Systems

Abstract
Pre-trained language encoders—functions that represent text as vectors—are an
integral component of many NLP tasks. We tackle a natural question in language
encoder analysis: What does it mean for two encoders to be similar? We contend
that a faithful measure of similarity needs to be intrinsic, that is, task-independent,
yet still be informative of extrinsic similarity—the performance on downstream
tasks. It is common to consider two encoders similar if they are homotopic, i.e.,
if they can be aligned through some transformation.1 In this spirit, we study the
properties of affine alignment of language encoders and its implications on extrinsic
similarity. We find that while affine alignment is fundamentally an asymmetric
notion of similarity, it is still informative of extrinsic similarity. We confirm this
on datasets of natural language representations. Beyond providing useful bounds
on extrinsic similarity, affine intrinsic similarity also allows us to begin uncovering the structure of the space of pre-trained encoders by defining an order over them.
https://github.com/chanr0/affine-homotopy

1

Introduction

A common paradigm in modern natural language processing (NLP) is to pre-train a language encoder
on a large swathe of natural language text. Then, a task-specific model is fit (fine-tuned) using the
language encoder as the representation function of the text. More formally, a language encoder is a
function h : Σ˚ Ñ RD , i.e., a function that maps a string over an alphabet Σ to a finite-dimensional
vector. Now, consider sentiment analysis as an informative example of a task. Suppose our goal is
to classify a string y P Σ˚ as one of three polarities Π “ t , , u. Then, the probability of y
exhibiting a specific polarity is often given by a log-linear model, e.g., the probability of is
pp

| yq “ softmaxpE hpyq ` bq

(1)

where E P R3ˆD , b P R3 and softmax : RN Ñ ∆N ´1 . Empirically, using a pre-trained encoder h
leads to significantly better classifier performance than training a log-linear model from scratch.
In the context of the widespread deployment of language encoders, this paper tackles a natural
question: Given two language encoders h and g, how can we judge to what extent they are similar?
This question is of practical importance—recent studies have shown that even small variations in
the random seed used for training can result in significant performance differences on downstream
tasks between models with the same architecture [13, 35] In this case, we say that two such language
encoders exhibit an extrinsic difference, i.e., the difference between two encoders manifests itself
when considering their performance on a downstream task. However, we also seek an intrinsic notion
1
Homotopy, from the Greek ὁμός (homo; same) and τόπος (topos; place), refers to a continuous transformation between functions or shapes, showing they can be deformed into one another without breaking or tearing.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

