CaptainCook4D: A Dataset for Understanding Errors
in Procedural Activities
Rohith Peddi

∗

Shivvrat Arya

Akshay Vyas
Vasundhara Komaragiri

Bharath Challa

Bhavya Gouripeddi
Eric Ragan

Likhitha Pallapothula

Qifan Zhang

Nicholas Ruozzi

Jikai Wang

Yu Xiang

Vibhav Gogate

Abstract
Following step-by-step procedures is an essential component of various activities
carried out by individuals in their daily lives. These procedures serve as a guiding
framework that helps to achieve goals efficiently, whether it is assembling furniture
or preparing a recipe. However, the complexity and duration of procedural activities
inherently increase the likelihood of making errors. Understanding such procedural
activities from a sequence of frames is a challenging task that demands an accurate
interpretation of visual information and the ability to reason about the structure of
the activity. To this end, we collect a new egocentric 4D dataset CaptainCook4D
comprising 384 recordings (94.5 hours) of people performing recipes in real kitchen
environments. This dataset consists of two distinct types of activities: one in
which participants adhere to the provided recipe instructions and another in which
they deviate and induce errors. We provide 5.3K step annotations and 10K finegrained action annotations and benchmark the dataset for the following tasks: error
recognition, multi-step localization and procedure learning2 .

1

Introduction

Have you ever excitedly prepared your favourite meal after a long day, only to be disappointed
upon realizing you missed a key ingredient? Such scenarios are common because performing long
step-by-step procedures increases the likelihood of making errors. While some errors are harmless
and can be corrected with little consequence, others can have detrimental consequences, particularly
those that occur during medical procedures or complex chemical experiments. Therefore, there is a
pressing need to build AI systems that can guide users in performing procedural activities [15].
A key problem we need to solve in order to build such AI systems is procedural activity understanding, a challenging and multifaceted task that demands interpreting what is happening —specifically,
determining whether the person is following the procedure correctly or making an error, anticipating
what will happen, and planning the course of action to accomplish the goal. For effective interpretation, the system must be capable of recognizing and categorizing actions while assessing the
current state of the environment. To anticipate what might happen next, it should be able to forecast
actions right from the start of the interaction or even before it begins. Additionally, planning a course
of action necessitates understanding the potential consequences of these actions. Numerous datasets
have been developed to improve our understanding of procedural activities. However, these datasets
only include videos of individuals performing step-by-step tasks correctly without making any errors.
∗
2

Corresponding Author ,
= UT Dallas,
= University of Florida
website: https://captaincook4d.github.io/captain-cook/

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

