First-Order Methods for
Linearly Constrained Bilevel Optimization

Guy Kornowski†

Swati Padmanabhan‡

Kai Wang§

Jimmy Zhang¶

Suvrit Sra∥

Abstract
Algorithms for bilevel optimization often encounter Hessian computations, which
are prohibitive in high dimensions. While recent works offer first-order methods
for unconstrained bilevel problems, the constrained setting remains relatively underexplored. We present first-order linearly constrained optimization methods with
finite-time hypergradient stationarity guarantees. For linear equality constraints, we
e −2 ) gradient oracle calls, which is nearly-optimal. For
attain ϵ-stationarity in O(ϵ
e −1 ϵ−3 )
linear inequality constraints, we attain (δ, ϵ)-Goldstein stationarity in O(dδ
gradient oracle calls, where d is the upper-level dimension. Finally, we obtain for
e −1 ϵ−4 ) oracle complexthe linear inequality setting dimension-free rates of O(δ
ity under the additional assumption of oracle access to the optimal dual variable.
Along the way, we develop new nonsmooth nonconvex optimization methods with
inexact oracles. Our numerical experiments verify these guarantees.

1

Introduction

Bilevel optimization [1–4], an important problem in optimization, is defined as follows:
minimizex∈X F (x) := f (x, y ∗ (x)) subject to y ∗ (x) ∈ arg miny∈S(x) g(x, y).

(1.1)

Here, the value of the upper-level problem at any point x depends on the solution of the lowerlevel problem. This framework has recently found numerous applications in meta-learning [5–8],
hyperparameter optimization [9–11], and reinforcement learning [12–15]. Its growing importance
has spurred increasing efforts towards designing computationally efficient algorithms for it.
As demonstrated by [16], a key computational step in algorithms for bilevel optimization is estimating
dy ∗ (x)/dx, the gradient of the lower-level solution. This gradient estimation problem has been
extensively studied in differentiable optimization [17, 18] by applying the implicit function theorem
to the KKT system of the given problem [19–24]. However, this technique typically entails computing
(or estimating) second-order derivatives, which can be prohibitive in high dimensions [25–27].
Recently, [28] made a big leap forward towards addressing this computational bottleneck. Restricting
themselves to the class of unconstrained bilevel optimization, they proposed a fully first-order method
with finite-time stationarity guarantees. While a remarkable breakthrough, [28] does not directly
extend to the important setting of constrained bilevel optimization. This motivates the question:
Can we develop a first-order algorithm for constrained bilevel optimization?
1

Full version: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.12771. GK, SP, KW, ZZ contributed equally; authors ordered
alphabetically.
†
Weizmann Institute of Science. guy.kornowski@weizmann.ac.il
‡
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. pswt@mit.edu
§
Georgia Institute of Technology. kwang692@gatech.edu
¶
Purdue University. zhan5111@purdue.edu
∥
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. suvrit@mit.edu
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

