Learning Cooperative Trajectory Representations
for Motion Forecasting

Hongzhi Ruan 1,2

Haibao Yu 1,3∗ Wenxian Yang 1

Siqi Fan 1

Zaiqing Nie 1∗

1

2

Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
University of Chinese Academy of Science 3 The University of Hong Kong

hongzhi.rynn@gmail.com, yuhaibao94@gmail.com, zaiqing@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Motion forecasting is an essential task for autonomous driving, and utilizing information from infrastructure and other vehicles can enhance forecasting capabilities.
Existing research mainly focuses on leveraging single-frame cooperative information to enhance the limited perception capability of the ego vehicle, while underutilizing the motion and interaction context of traffic participants observed from
cooperative devices. In this paper, we propose a forecasting-oriented representation
paradigm to utilize motion and interaction features from cooperative information.
Specifically, we present V2X-Graph, a representative framework to achieve interpretable and end-to-end trajectory feature fusion for cooperative motion forecasting.
V2X-Graph is evaluated on V2X-Seq in vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) scenarios.
To further evaluate on vehicle-to-everything (V2X) scenario, we construct the first
real-world V2X motion forecasting dataset V2X-Traj, which contains multiple
autonomous vehicles and infrastructure in every scenario. Experimental results
on both V2X-Seq and V2X-Traj show the advantage of our method. We hope
both V2X-Graph and V2X-Traj will benefit the further development of cooperative
motion forecasting. Find the project at https://github.com/AIR-THU/V2X-Graph.

1

Introduction

In recent years, autonomous driving has made significant progress. However, single-vehicle autonomous driving still faces substantial safety challenges due to its limited perception ability. Utilizing external information, such as data from other connected autonomous vehicles and infrastructure
sensors through vehicle-to-everything (V2X), has shown great potential to enhance autonomous
driving capabilities. In this paper, we focus on motion forecasting, a fundamental task for autonomous
driving that has received significant attention in recent years [40, 33, 31, 19]. Specifically, considering
currently practical communication conditions, we transmit perception results and input trajectories
from the ego vehicle and external sources for cooperative motion forecasting.
Cooperative motion forecasting involves the ego vehicle aggregating its own data with data transmitted
from other connected vehicles or infrastructure devices to predict future waypoints for each agent in
traffic scenarios. To accommodate limited communication conditions, we consider data in the form
of perception results. These perception results form historical trajectories of agents from respective
views, termed cooperative trajectories. The autonomous vehicle utilizes these trajectories to enhance
its motion forecasting capabilities. High-definition (HD) maps are also used in this task.
To leverage cooperative trajectories for improving motion forecasting performance, two critical
issues must be addressed: (1) Observations of the agents from different views may different due
to various sensor perspectives and configurations; (2) In the cooperative scenario, there are multi* Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

