Divergences between Language Models
and Human Brains
Yuchen Zhou

Emmy Liu Graham Neubig Michael J. Tarr Leila Wehbe
Carnegie Mellon University
{zhouyuchen,emmy,gneubig,michaeltarr,lwehbe}@cmu.edu

Abstract
Do machines and humans process language in similar ways? Recent research has
hinted at the affirmative, showing that human neural activity can be effectively
predicted using the internal representations of language models (LMs). Although
such results are thought to reflect shared computational principles between LMs
and human brains, there are also clear differences in how LMs and humans represent and use language. In this work, we systematically explore the divergences
between human and machine language processing by examining the differences
between LM representations and human brain responses to language as measured
by Magnetoencephalography (MEG) across two datasets in which subjects read
and listened to narrative stories. Using an LLM-based data-driven approach, we
identify two domains that LMs do not capture well: social/emotional intelligence
and physical commonsense. We validate these findings with human behavioral
experiments and hypothesize that the gap is due to insufficient representations of
social/emotional and physical knowledge in LMs. Our results show that fine-tuning
LMs on these domains can improve their alignment with human brain responses.1

1

Introduction

Language models (LMs) now demonstrate proficiency that may equal or even surpass human-level
performance on tasks including generating text [Brown et al., 2020a], answering questions [Lewis
et al., 2019], translating languages [Costa-jussà et al., 2022], and even tasks that necessitate reasoning
and inference [Dasgupta et al., 2022]. This has inspired researchers to leverage LM representations
to investigate and model the human brain’s language system, positing that LMs may serve as reliable
proxies for human linguistic processes [Abdou, 2022]. Prior studies have found that human neural
activity, as measured by neuroimaging techniques such as fMRI [Jain and Huth, 2018, Toneva and
Wehbe, 2019], EEG [Hale et al., 2018], MEG [Wehbe et al., 2014a], and ECoG [Goldstein et al.,
2022], can effectively be predicted using representations from language models such as BERT [Devlin
et al., 2018] or GPT-2 [Radford et al., 2019]. Robust neural prediction is hypothesized to stem from
the shared computational objective of both LMs and the human brain: predicting subsequent words
based on prior context [Yamins and DiCarlo, 2016, Schrimpf et al., 2021].
Despite the evident behavioral similarities, the extent to which LMs and human brains align functionally for language processing remains an open question. Essentially, the methods that LMs and
humans use to acquire language are very different. LMs learn statistical regularities across massive
sets of linguistic symbols, whereas humans rely on applying structured linguistic principles across
relatively little input. Additionally, LMs that are confined to linguistic data are likely to fail to
ground linguistic symbols in real-world contexts [Harnad, 1990, Bender and Koller, 2020, Bisk et al.,
2020a]. Furthermore, the learning environments and goals of LMs and humans are markedly different.
While humans communicate through active inquiry, expressing needs, directed communication, and
1

Data and code are available at: https://github.com/FlamingoZh/divergence_MEG

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

