DiffusionBlend: Learning 3D Image Prior through
Position-aware Diffusion Score Blending for 3D
Computed Tomography Reconstruction

Bowen Song ∗

Jason Hu∗

Zhaoxu Luo

Jeffrey A. Fessler

Liyue Shen

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
{bowenbw, jashu, luozhx, fessler, liyues}@umich.edu

Abstract
Diffusion models face significant challenges when employed for large-scale medical image reconstruction in real practice such as 3D Computed Tomography (CT).
Due to the demanding memory, time, and data requirements, it is difficult to train a
diffusion model directly on the entire volume of high-dimensional data to obtain
an efficient 3D diffusion prior. Existing works utilizing diffusion priors on single
2D image-slice with hand-crafted cross-slice regularization would sacrifice the
z-axis consistency, which results in severe artifacts along the z-axis. In this work,
we propose a novel framework that enables learning the 3D image prior through
position-aware 3D-patch diffusion score blending for reconstructing large-scale 3D
medical images. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to utilize a 3D-patch
diffusion prior for 3D medical image reconstruction. Extensive experiments on
sparse view and limited angle CT reconstruction show that our DiffusionBlend
method significantly outperforms previous methods and achieves state-of-the-art
performance on real-world CT reconstruction problems with high-dimensional 3D
image (i.e., 256 × 256 × 500). Our algorithm also comes with better or comparable
computational efficiency than previous state-of-the-art methods. Code is available
at: https://github.com/efzero/DiffusionBlend.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models learn the prior of an underlying data distribution, which enables sampling from the
distribution to generate new images [1–3]. By starting with a clean image and gradually adding noise
of different scales, diffusion sampler eventually obtains an image that is indistinguishable from pure
noise. Let xt be the image sequence where t = 0 represents the clean image and t = T is pure noise.
The score function of the image distribution, denoted as s(xt ) = ∇ log p(xt ), can be learned by a
neural network parametrization, which takes xt as input and then approximates ∇ log p(xt ). The
reverse process then starts with pure noise and uses the learned score function to iteratively remove
noise, ending with a clean image sampled from the target distribution p(x).
Leveraging the learned score function as a prior, it is efficient to solve the inverse problems based
on diffusion priors. Previous works have proposed to use diffusion inverse solvers for deblurring,
super-resolution, and medical image reconstruction such as in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
and computed tomography (CT), and many other applications [4–16].
∗

These authors contributed equally to the work

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

