StoryDiffusion: Consistent Self-Attention for
Long-Range Image and Video Generation

Yupeng Zhou1∗ Daquan Zhou2§† Ming-Ming Cheng1,3 Jiashi Feng2 Qibin Hou1,3§†
1

VCIP & TMCC, CS, Nankai University 2 ByteDance Inc. 3 NKIARI, Futian, Shenzhen
https://StoryDiffusion.github.io

Abstract
For recent diffusion-based generative models, maintaining consistent content across
a series of generated images, especially those containing subjects and complex
details, presents a significant challenge. In this paper, we propose a simple but
effective self-attention mechanism, termed Consistent Self-Attention, that boosts
the consistency between the generated images. It can be used to augment pre-trained
diffusion-based text-to-image models in a zero-shot manner. Based on the images
with consistent content, we further show that our method can be extended to longrange video generation by introducing a semantic space temporal motion prediction
module, named Semantic Motion Predictor. It is trained to estimate the motion
conditions between two provided images in the semantic spaces. This module
converts the generated sequence of images into videos with smooth transitions and
consistent subjects that are more stable than the modules based on latent spaces
only, especially in the context of long video generation. By merging these two
novel components, our framework, referred to as StoryDiffusion, can describe a
text-based story with consistent images or videos encompassing a rich variety of
contents. The proposed StoryDiffusion encompasses pioneering explorations in
visual story generation with the presentation of images and videos, which we hope
could inspire more research from the aspect of architectural modifications.

1

Introduction

With extensive pre-training and advanced architectures, diffusion models have shown superior
performance in generating very high-quality images and videos over previous generative-adversarial
network (GAN) based methods [5]. However, generating subject-consistent (e.g. characters with
consistent identity and attire) images and videos to describe a story is still challenging for existing
models. The commonly used IP-Adapter [55] taking an image as a reference could be used to guide
the diffusion process to generate images similar to it. However, due to the strong guidance, the
controllability over the generated content of the text prompts is reduced. On the other hand, recent
state-of-the-art identity preservation methods, such as InstantID [47] and PhotoMaker [26], focus
on identity controllability but the consistency of the attires and the scenarios cannot be guaranteed.
Hence, in this paper, we aim to find a method that can generate images and videos with consistent
characters in terms of both identity and attire while maximizing the controllability of the user via text
prompts.
A common approach to preserve the consistency between different images (or frames in the context of
video generation) is to use a temporal module [15, 4]. However, this requires extensive computational
resources and data. Differently, we target to explore a lightweight method with minimum data and
computational cost, or even in a zero-shot manner.
∗

During the internship at ByteDance Inc. § Project lead. † Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

