Matryoshka Query Transformer for
Large Vision-Language Models

Wenbo Hu Zi-Yi Dou Liunian Harold Li Amita Kamath
Nanyun Peng Kai-Wei Chang
University of California, Los Angeles
{whu,zdou,liunian.harold.li,kamatha}@cs.ucla.edu
https://github.com/MQT-LLaVA

Abstract
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) typically encode an image into a fixed
number of visual tokens (e.g., 576) and process these tokens with a language model.
Despite their strong performance, LVLMs face challenges in adapting to varying
computational constraints. This raises the question: can we achieve flexibility in
the number of visual tokens to suit different tasks and computational resources? We
answer this with an emphatic yes. Inspired by Matryoshka Representation Learning,
we introduce the Matryoshka Query Transformer (MQT), capable of encoding an
image into m visual tokens during inference, where m can be any number up to a
predefined maximum. This is achieved by employing a query transformer with M
latent query tokens to compress the visual embeddings. During each training step,
we randomly select m ≤ M latent query tokens and train the model using only
these first m tokens, discarding the rest. Combining MQT with LLaVA, we train
a single model once, and flexibly and drastically reduce the number of inferencetime visual tokens while maintaining similar or better performance compared to
training independent models for each number of tokens. Our model, MQT-LL AVA,
matches LLaVA-1.5 performance across 11 benchmarks using a maximum of 256
tokens instead of LLaVA’s fixed 576. Reducing to 16 tokens (8x less TFLOPs)
only sacrifices the performance by 2.4 points on MMBench. On certain tasks
such as ScienceQA and MMMU, we can even go down to only 2 visual tokens
with performance drops of just 3% and 6% each. Our exploration of the trade-off
between the accuracy and computational cost brought about by the number of
visual tokens facilitates future research to achieve the best of both worlds.

1

Introduction

Recent work in Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) (OpenAI, 2023; Liu et al., 2023b; Bai et al.,
2023) has shown remarkable performance across a broad range of vision-language tasks (Huang
et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Cai et al., 2024a; Li et al., 2023b). These LVLMs typically consist of
a vision encoder to embed images into grid features, which are fed into a Large Language Model
(LLM) (Touvron et al., 2023; Chiang et al., 2023) for processing and reasoning alongside a text input.
A key research question is how to transform these raw visual embeddings into the visual tokens
that are fed into the LLM. Prior work either directly projects the grid features with a multi-layer
perceptron (MLP) (Liu et al., 2023b) or compresses the grid features into fewer tokens with a query
transformer or resampler (Li et al., 2023a; Dai et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2023; Alayrac
et al., 2022). However, these models all need to pre-determine how many tokens an image is worth,
and set a fixed number for all images. Finding a flexible number that adaptively strikes a balance
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

