AlphaMath Almost Zero: Process Supervision
without Process
Guoxin Chen∗, Minpeng Liao∗ , Chengxi Li∗ , Kai Fan∗†
Tongyi Lab
chenguoxin22@mails.ucas.ac.cn
{minpeng.lmp,xiji.lcx,k.fan}@alibaba-inc.com
Code: https://github.com/MARIO-Math-Reasoning/Super_MARIO

Abstract
Although recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) have significantly
improved their performance on various tasks, they still face challenges with complex and symbolic multi-step reasoning, particularly in mathematical reasoning. To
bolster the mathematical reasoning capabilities of LLMs, most existing efforts concentrate on seeking assistance from either domain experts or GPT-4 for high-quality
process-supervised data, which is not only expensive but also labor-intensive. In
our study, we propose an innovative framework, AlphaMath, that bypasses the
need for process annotations (from humans or GPTs) by leveraging Monte Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS). This framework focuses on unleashing the potential of a
well-pretrained LLM to autonomously enhance its mathematical reasoning. Specifically, we integrate a value model with the LLM, automatically generating both
process supervision and step-level evaluation signals in MCTS. Furthermore, we
propose an efficient inference strategy—step-level beam search, where the value
model is crafted to assist the policy model (i.e., LLM) in navigating more effective
reasoning paths, rather than solely relying on prior probabilities. The experimental
results on both in-domain and out-of-domain datasets demonstrate that even without GPT-4 or human-annotated process supervision, our AlphaMath framework
achieves comparable or superior results to previous state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Recent studies have extensively explored how to improve mathemat- Table 1: Annotation Cost
ical reasoning in large language models (LLMs) [27, 1, 37, 34, 2, 35].
An effective approach [46, 38, 14, 21, 31, 25] is to artificially inject Annotation Source
Methods
external knowledge into LLMs through fine-tuning on a substantial
Human GPT-4
volume of high-quality, process-supervised data (i.e., solutions). As
✓
✓
[21, 46]
shown in Table 1, the annotation of high-quality solutions in current
✗
✓
[14, 25, 38]
efforts primarily relies on domain experts or GPT-4 [27]. However,
due to trillions of training tokens and billions of parameters, existing
✗
✗
Ours
LLMs possess a vast reservoir of knowledge, which remains underutilized in current finetuning-based approaches.
To more effectively harness the intrinsic knowledge of LLMs, advanced prompting techniques, such
as Program-of-Thought (PoT) [6] and Program-Aided Language (PAL) [13], have been developed,
integrating the in-context learning proficiency with external tools such as code interpreter to handle
precise numerical and symbolic computation. However, these approaches have not fully unleashed
∗
†

equal contribution
Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

