Learning from Pattern Completion: Self-supervised
Controllable Generation
Zhiqiang Chen1,2*‡ , Guofan Fan3*† , Jinying Gao2,1,4* , Lei Ma5 , Bo Lei1 ,
Tiejun Huang1,5 , and Shan Yu2,4‡
1

2

Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Science
3
Xi’an Jiaotong University
4
University of Chinese Academy of Science
5
Peking University

Abstract
The human brain exhibits a strong ability to spontaneously associate different
visual attributes of the same or similar visual scene, such as associating sketches
and graffiti with real-world visual objects, usually without supervising information.
In contrast, in the field of artificial intelligence, controllable generation methods
like ControlNet heavily rely on annotated training datasets such as depth maps,
semantic segmentation maps, and poses, which limits the method’s scalability.
Inspired by the neural mechanisms that may contribute to the brain’s associative
power, specifically the cortical modularization and hippocampal pattern completion, here we propose a self-supervised controllable generation (SCG) framework.
Firstly, we introduce an equivariance constraint to promote inter-module independence and intra-module correlation in a modular autoencoder network, thereby
achieving functional specialization. Subsequently, based on these specialized modules, we employ a self-supervised pattern completion approach for controllable
generation training. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed modular
autoencoder effectively achieves functional specialization, including the modular
processing of color, brightness, and edge detection, and exhibits brain-like features
including orientation selectivity, color antagonism, and center-surround receptive
fields. Through self-supervised training, associative generation capabilities spontaneously emerge in SCG, demonstrating excellent zero-shot generalization ability
to various tasks such as superresolution, dehaze and associative or conditional
generation on painting, sketches, and ancient graffiti. Compared to the previous
representative method ControlNet, our proposed approach not only demonstrates
superior robustness in more challenging high-noise scenarios but also possesses
more promising scalability potential due to its self-supervised manner. Codes are
released on Github and Gitee.

1

Introduction

In contrast to artificial intelligence, the human brain exhibits a remarkable characteristic: the spontaneous emergence of associative generation[17, 23, 18], such as associating real-world visual scenes
through pictures, sketches, graffiti, and so on (Figure 1a). With the development of controllable
∗

Equal Contribution.
Work done during Internship at Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence.
‡
Corresponse author.
chenzhiqiang@mails.ucas.ac.cn,shan.yu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

