Minimizing UCB: a Better Local Search Strategy in
Local Bayesian Optimization
Zheyi Fan1,2 , Wenyu Wang3 , Szu Hui Ng3 †, Qingpei Hu1,2
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
Department of Industrial Systems Engineering & Management, National University of Singapore, Singapore
1,2
{fanzheyi,qingpeihu}@amss.ac.cn, 3 {wangwy,isensh}@nus.edu.sg
1

Abstract
Local Bayesian optimization is a promising practical approach to solve high dimensional black-box function optimization problem. Among them is the approximated
gradient class of methods, which implements a strategy similar to gradient descent.
These methods have achieved good experimental results and theoretical guarantees.
However, given the distributional properties of the Gaussian processes applied on
these methods, there may be potential to further exploit the information of the
Gaussian processes to facilitate the Bayesian optimization search. In this work, we
develop the relationship between the steps of the gradient descent method and one
that minimizes the Upper Confidence Bound (UCB), and show that the latter can be
a better strategy than direct gradient descent when a Gaussian process is applied as
a surrogate. Through this insight, we propose a new local Bayesian optimization algorithm, MinUCB, which replaces the gradient descent step with minimizing UCB
in GIBO [22]. We further show that MinUCB maintains a similar convergence rate
with GIBO. We then improve the acquisition function of MinUCB further through a
look ahead strategy, and obtain a more efficient algorithm LA-MinUCB. We apply
our algorithms on different synthetic and real-world functions, and the results show
the effectiveness of our method. Our algorithms also illustrate improvements on
local search strategies from an upper bound perspective in Bayesian optimization,
and provides a new direction for future algorithm design.

1

Introduction

Bayesian Optimization [8] is one of the most well-known black box function optimization methods,
where objectives can be extremely expensive to evaluate, noisy, and multimodal. The high efficiency
of Bayesian Optimization in finding global optima leads to the widespread application in various
research fields, such as hyperparameter tuning [10, 11, 28], neural architecture search [26], chemical
experiment design [12], reinforcement learning [31], aerospace engineering [16]. However, the
performance of Bayesian optimization is limited by the input dimension d, as the theoretical regret
bound grows exponentially with input dimension [25]. This difficulty hinders the application of
Bayesian optimization when the actual dimension of problem is rather high [8].
There are various methods that have been proposed to handle this difficult task, including works
that rely on some assumptions on the model structure, such as the assumption that the majority
of the variables have no effect [6] or the kernel satisfies an additive structure [9]. Local Bayesian
optimization methods, which focus on finding a local optima (instead of the global one), have also been
a popular (and less restrictive) compromise to manage the curse of dimensionality. Representative
†

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

