Efficient Contextual LLM Cascades through
Budget-Constrained Policy Learning

Xuechen Zhang
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI
zxuechen@umich.edu
Carlee Joe-Wong
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA
cjoewong@andrew.cmu.edu

Zijian Huang
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI
zijianh@umich.edu

Ege Onur Taga
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI
egetaga@umich.edu

Samet Oymak
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI
oymak@umich.edu

Jiasi Chen
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI
jiasi@umich.edu

Abstract
Recent successes in natural language processing have led to the proliferation
of large language models (LLMs) by multiple providers. Each LLM offering
has different inference accuracy, monetary cost, and latency, and their accuracy
further depends on the exact wording of the question (i.e., the specific prompt).
At the same time, users often have a limit on monetary budget and latency to
answer all their questions, and they do not know which LLMs to choose for each
question to meet their accuracy and long term budget requirements. To navigate
this rich design space, we propose TREACLE (Thrifty Reasoning via ContextAware LLM and Prompt Selection), a reinforcement learning policy that jointly
selects the model and prompting scheme while respecting the user’s monetary cost
and latency constraints. TREACLE uses the problem context, including question
text embeddings (reflecting the type or difficulty of a query) and the response
history (reflecting the consistency of previous responses) to make smart decisions.
Our evaluations on standard reasoning datasets (GSM8K, CSQA, and LLC) with
various LLMs and prompts show that TREACLE enables cost savings of up to 85%
compared to baselines, while maintaining high accuracy. Importantly, it provides
the user with the ability to gracefully trade off accuracy for cost.

1

Introduction

The success of large language models (LLMs) in recent
years has led to a explosion of heterogeneous models
and providers, including as Meta’s Llama, OpenAI’s
ChatGPT, and Google’s Gemini. As LLMs continue
to proliferate in the near future, we envisage a generative AI marketplace with a large variety of providers,
LLMs, and deployments. Notably, LLMs have widely
varying capabilities and costs: capabilities in terms of
accuracy in responding to different types of queries,
and cost in terms of monetary price and query latency.
As an illustration, the accuracy versus cost tradeoffs of
various Llama and GPT LLMs are shown in Figure 1 Figure 1: TREACLE chooses LLMs to
on grade school math word problems [4]. As can be achieve high accuracy and ∼85% cost reseen, GPT-3.5 tends to have lower accuracy than GPT-4 duction, compared to individual LLMs.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

