DeTikZify: Synthesizing Graphics Programs
for Scientific Figures and Sketches with TikZ
Jonas Belouadi∗
Simone Paolo Ponzetto†
Steffen Eger‡
∗,‡
Natural Language Learning Group, Data and Web Science Group†
University of Mannheim,∗,† University of Technology Nuremberg‡
{jonas.belouadi,ponzetto}@uni-mannheim.de, steffen.eger@utn.de

Abstract
Creating high-quality scientific figures can be time-consuming and challenging,
even though sketching ideas on paper is relatively easy. Furthermore, recreating
existing figures that are not stored in formats preserving semantic information
is equally complex. To tackle this problem, we introduce DeTikZify, a novel
multimodal language model that automatically synthesizes scientific figures as
semantics-preserving TikZ graphics programs based on sketches and existing
figures. To achieve this, we create three new datasets: DaTikZv2 , the largest TikZ
dataset to date, containing over 360k human-created TikZ graphics; SketchFig, a
dataset that pairs hand-drawn sketches with their corresponding scientific figures;
and MetaFig, a collection of diverse scientific figures and associated metadata. We
train DeTikZify on MetaFig and DaTikZv2 , along with synthetically generated
sketches learned from SketchFig. We also introduce an MCTS-based inference
algorithm that enables DeTikZify to iteratively refine its outputs without the
need for additional training. Through both automatic and human evaluation, we
demonstrate that DeTikZify outperforms commercial Claude 3 and GPT-4V in
synthesizing TikZ programs, with the MCTS algorithm effectively boosting its
performance. We make our code, models, and datasets publicly available.1

1

Introduction

Creating high-quality scientific figures is similar to typesetting scientific documents in many ways.
When it comes to typesetting, markup languages like LATEX enjoy widespread popularity, as exemplified
by major machine learning conferences that either mandate or strongly encourage LATEX-formatted
submissions.2 The advantages of using such languages go beyond producing high-quality outputs;
documents expressed as high-level, semantics-preserving programs enhance accessibility, serve
archival purposes, and remain easily editable and human-readable (facilitating language modeling
applications; Moosavi et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2023). Consequently, efforts have been made to recover
this type of information from outputs stored in lower-level vector graphics formats like PDF or SVG,
or raster graphics formats (Desai et al., 2021; Blecher et al., 2024). At the other end of the spectrum,
the versatility of LATEX comes with a steep learning curve, and typesetting can often be challenging
for end users. In response, researchers have been working on assisting authors with certain aspects of
the problem, such as typesetting math based on hand-drawn sketches (Kirsch, 2010; Wu et al., 2020).
Just like documents, scientific figures can also be created using markup languages. A popular example
is the TikZ graphics language (Tantau, 2023), which can be integrated into LATEX documents, providing
comparable benefits and encountering similar challenges. However, unlike LATEX, the prospects of
TikZ in research contexts remain largely unexplored. Although the promise of simplifying editing and
1https://github.com/potamides/DeTikZify
2https://{neurips.cc,icml.cc,iclr.cc}/Conferences/2024/CallForPapers
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

