Faster Differentially Private Top-k Selection:
A Joint Exponential Mechanism with Pruning

Hao WU∗
University of Waterloo
Canada
hao.wu1@uwaterloo.ca

Hanwen Zhang
University of Copenhagen
Denmark
hazh@di.ku.dk

Abstract
We study the differentially private top-k selection problem, aiming to identify a sequence of k
items with approximately the highest scores from d items. Recent work by Gillenwater et al.
(ICML ’22) employs a direct sampling approach from the vast collection of d Θ(k) possible lengthk sequences, showing superior empirical accuracy compared to previous pure or approximate
differentially private methods. Their algorithm has a time and space complexity of Õ(dk).
In this paper, we present an improved algorithm with time and space complexity O(d+k 2 /ε·ln d)2
, where ε denotes the privacy parameter. Experimental results show that our algorithm runs
orders of magnitude faster than their approach, while achieving similar empirical accuracy.

1

Introduction

Top-k selection is a fundamental operation with a wide range of applications: search engines, ecommerce recommendations, data analysis, social media feeds etc. Here, we consider the setting
where the dataset consists of d items evaluated by n people. Each person can cast at most one vote
for each item, and vote for unlimited number of items. Our goal is to find a sequence of k items
which receives the highest number of votes.
Given that data can contain sensitive personal information such as medical conditions, browsing
history, or purchase records, we focus on top-k algorithms that are differentially private (Dwork et al.,
2006): it is guaranteed that adding/removing an arbitrary single person to/from the dataset does not
substantially affect the output. Research for algorithms under this model centers around how accurate
the algorithms can be and how efficient they are.
Significant progress has been made in understanding the theoretical boundaries. There are approximate differentially private algorithms (Durfee and Rogers, 2019; Qiao et al., 2021) that achieve
asymptotic accuracy lower bound (Bafna and Ullman, 2017; Steinke and Ullman, 2017), and have
O(d) time and space usage.
There is also a research endeavor aimed at enhancing the empirical performance of the algorithms.
A particularly noteworthy one is the J OINT mechanism by Gillenwater, Joseph, Medina, and Diaz
(2022), which exhibits best empirical accuracy across various parameter settings. Diverging from
the prevalent peeling strategy for top-k selection–wherein items are iteratively selected, removed
and repeated k times–the J OINT mechanism considers the sequence holistically, directly selecting an
output from the space comprising all d Θ(k) possible length-k sequences.
While the algorithm has running time and space Õ(dk), successfully avoiding an exponential time or
space consumption, it notably incurs a higher computational cost than its O(d) counterparts. This
prompts the interesting question:
∗
2

This work was conducted while the author was a Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of Copenhagen.
A simplified bound from Theorem 4.1 for a wide range of failure probabilities concerning solution quality.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

