CA-SSLR: Condition-Aware Self-Supervised Learning
Representation for Generalized Speech Processing

Yen-Ju Lu† , Jing Liu, Thomas Thebaud† , Laureano Moro-Velazquez† ,
Ariya Rastrow, Najim Dehak† , Jesus Villalba†
†
Center for Language and Speech Processing, Johns Hopkins University
{ylu125, tthebau1, laureano, ndehak3, jvillal7}@jhu.edu

Abstract
We introduce Condition-Aware Self-Supervised Learning Representation (CASSLR), a generalist conditioning model broadly applicable to various speechprocessing tasks. Compared to standard fine-tuning methods that optimize for
downstream models, CA-SSLR integrates language and speaker embeddings from
earlier layers, making the SSL model aware of the current language and speaker
context. This approach reduces the reliance on the input audio features while
preserving the integrity of the base SSLR. CA-SSLR improves the model’s capabilities and demonstrates its generality on unseen tasks with minimal task-specific
tuning. Our method employs linear modulation to dynamically adjust internal
representations, enabling fine-grained adaptability without significantly altering
the original model behavior. Experiments show that CA-SSLR reduces the number
of trainable parameters, mitigates overfitting, and excels in under-resourced and
unseen tasks. Specifically, CA-SSLR achieves a 10% relative reduction in LID
errors, a 37% improvement in ASR CER on the ML-SUPERB benchmark, and a
27% decrease in SV EER on VoxCeleb-1, demonstrating its effectiveness.

1

Introduction

The emergence of Self-Supervised Learning Representations (SSLRs) models has revolutionized
speech processing, setting new standards in the field. Pioneering models like Wav2vec 2.0 Baevski
et al. [2020], HuBERT [Hsu et al., 2021], and WavLM [Chen et al., 2022a] leverage unlabeled audio
data to learn rich representations of spoken language. These models are pivotal in a wide range
of applications, including Speech Recognition (ASR) [Chang et al., 2021], Speaker Verification
(SV) [Chen et al., 2022b, Tak et al., 2022], Language Identification (LID) [Bartley et al., 2023], and
Speech Translation (ST) [Tang et al., 2022]. Benchmarks such as SUPERB [Yang et al., 2021] and
ML-SUPERB [Shi et al., 2023a] have been crucial in evaluating SSL model performance, providing
standardized tasks.
Although SSLR training approaches combine speech from various sources, these models learn
representations solely from unpaired audio-only data. When extending SSLR features to multilingual
scenarios and low-resource languages, unsupervised training limits the model’s ability to distinguish
between different languages, resulting in unified features for all languages. Additionally, labeling all
SSL training data with language and speaker information requires significant human effort and is
impractical. Thus, a post-training conditioning approach is more favorable. In other fields, methods
like [Zhang et al., 2023] and IP-Adaptor [Ye et al., 2023] in image processing, and CTRL [Keskar
et al., 2019] in NLP, have successfully integrated conditioning into pretrained models, demonstrating
potential applications for speech processing.
In response to these challenges, we propose Condition-Aware Self-Supervised Learning Representation (CA-SSLR), a generalist conditioning model applicable to various speech-processing tasks such
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

