An effective framework for estimating individualized
treatment rules
Joowon Lee1 , Jared D. Huling2 , Guanhua Chen1
University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2 University of Minnesota
joowon.lee@wisc.edu, huling@umn.edu, gchen25@wisc.edu
1

Abstract
Estimating individualized treatment rules (ITRs) is fundamental in causal inference,
particularly for precision medicine applications. Traditional ITR estimation methods rely on inverse probability weighting (IPW) to address confounding factors and
L1 -penalization for simplicity and interpretability. However, IPW can introduce
statistical bias without precise propensity score modeling, while L1 -penalization
makes the objective non-smooth, leading to computational bias and requiring subgradient methods. In this paper, we propose a unified ITR estimation framework
formulated as a constrained, weighted, and smooth convex optimization problem.
The optimal ITR can be robustly and effectively computed by projected gradient
descent. Our comprehensive theoretical analysis reveals that weights that balance
the spectrum of a ‘weighted design matrix’ improve both the optimization and
likelihood landscapes, yielding improved computational and statistical estimation
guarantees. In particular, this is achieved by distributional covariate balancing
weights, which are model-free alternatives to IPW. Extensive simulations and
applications demonstrate that our framework achieves significant gains in both
robustness and effectiveness for ITR learning against existing methods.

1

Introduction

Traditional medicine often uses a "one-size-fits-all" approach where the same treatment is applied to
all patients regardless of their unique attributes, aiming to find a single optimal treatment that may be
most effective for a broad population. However, since not everyone fits the mold, precision medicine
has been popular in medical research, emphasizing personalized treatment based on a patient’s unique
characteristics [11].
One key element of precision medicine is the estimation of individualized treatment regime (ITR),
also known as treatment policy or policy. ITRs consider various factors like demographics and sociopsychological aspects to optimize treatment decisions, thereby maximizing individual outcomes.
Many frameworks have been proposed for learning ITRs [41, 54, 57, 7, 58, 60, 56] and the related
conditional average treatment effect (CATE) estimation problem [3, 53, 46, 13, 36]. For model
interpretation and other practical concerns, researchers often focus on pre-specified rule classes. For
example, the method proposed in [2] focuses on estimating ITRs using shallow-depth decision trees.
The central task in the ITR estimation is controlling confounding factors to isolate the causal effect
of treatment from other factors that may influence the outcome. A standard approach is by weighting
each sample using their inverse probability weights (IPWs), which requires specifying a propensity
score model. However, propensity score methods have long been known to be highly sensitive to
model misspecification, which yields biased estimates of causal effects [25, 30]. Distributional
covariate balancing weights (DCBWs) [24, 27] are modern alternatives to IPWs, directly minimizing
the distance between empirical covariate distributions induced by the weights.
ITR estimation can be framed as an optimization or maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) problem,
where the choice of weights directly impacts both the optimization and likelihood landscapes. This, in
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

