Automated Multi-level Preference for MLLMs
Mengxi Zhang1,2 , Wenhao Wu3 , Yu Lu4 , Yuxin Song1 , Kang Rong1 , Huanjin Yao1,5
Jianbo Zhao6 , Fanglong Liu1 , Haocheng Feng1 , Jingdong Wang1 , Yifan Sun1∗
1
Baidu Inc. 2 Tianjin University 3 The University of Sydney
4
University of Technology Sydney 5 Tsinghua University 6 Chinese Academy of Science

Abstract
Current multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) suffer from “hallucination”, occasionally generating responses that are not grounded in the input images.
To tackle this challenge, one promising path is to utilize reinforcement learning
from human feedback (RLHF), which steers MLLMs towards learning superior
responses while avoiding inferior ones. We rethink the common practice of using
binary preferences (i.e., superior, inferior), and find that adopting multi-level preferences (e.g., superior, medium, inferior) is better for two benefits: 1) It narrows
the gap between adjacent levels, thereby encouraging MLLMs to discern subtle
differences. 2) It further integrates cross-level comparisons (beyond adjacent-level
comparisons), thus providing a broader range of comparisons with hallucination examples. To verify our viewpoint, we present the Automated Multi-level Preference
(AMP) framework for MLLMs. To facilitate this framework, we first develop an
automated dataset generation pipeline that provides high-quality multi-level preference datasets without any human annotators. Furthermore, we design the Multilevel Direct Preference Optimization (MDPO) algorithm to robustly conduct complex multi-level preference learning. Additionally, we propose a new hallucination
benchmark, MRHal-Bench. Extensive experiments across public hallucination and
general benchmarks, as well as our MRHal-Bench, demonstrate the effectiveness of
our proposed method. Code is available at https://github.com/takomc/amp.

1

Introduction

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] have achieved remarkable advancement in vision-language understanding tasks, e.g., vision question answering [7], image captioning [8],
and human-machine conversation. Despite MLLMs achieving significant breakthroughs, they still
suffer from hallucinations [9, 10], referring to responses that are not accurately anchored to the
context provided by images. This problem shrinks the performance of MLLMs and draws considerable research attention. To mitigate the hallucinations, some existing methods [11, 12, 13, 14]
adopt Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) methods, which collect human/AI
preferences and integrate them into the MLLMs optimization process via reinforcement learning.
Existing RLHF methods have demonstrated that comparing superior and inferior responses within a
binary-level preference framework can improve the performance of optimized MLLMs. However,
Is a single comparison between superior and inferior responses sufficient for preference learning
in MLLMs? Upon consideration, we find that a multi-level preference framework offers greater
benefits for preference learning, primarily due to two main intuitive advantages. Firstly, reducing
the gap between adjacent levels helps mitigate the challenge of distinguishing micro hallucinations
in responses. As depicted in Fig. 1, in the baseline method (i.e., binary preference), significant
differences exist between the superior response A and the inferior response C. By introducing an
additional medium response and shifting the focus to multiple comparisons between adjacent levels
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

