Image Reconstruction Via Autoencoding Sequential
Deep Image Prior

Ismail R. Alkhouri∗ 1,2 , Shijun Liang∗ 3 ,
Evan Bell , Qing Qu2 , Rongrong Wang1,4 , Saiprasad Ravishankar1,3
1
Department of Computational Mathematics, Science, & Engineering, Michigan State University
2
Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
3
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Michigan State University
4
Department of Mathematics, Michigan State University
1

{alkhour3,liangs16,belleva1,wangron6,ravisha3}@msu.edu
{ismailal,qingqu}@umich.edu

Abstract
Recently, Deep Image Prior (DIP) has emerged as an effective unsupervised oneshot learner, delivering competitive results across various image recovery problems.
This method only requires the noisy measurements and a forward operator, relying
solely on deep networks initialized with random noise to learn and restore the
structure of the data. However, DIP is notorious for its vulnerability to overfitting due to the overparameterization of the network. Building upon insights into
the impact of the DIP input and drawing inspiration from the gradual denoising
process in cutting-edge diffusion models, we introduce Autoencoding Sequential
DIP (aSeqDIP) for image reconstruction. This method progressively denoises
and reconstructs the image through a sequential optimization of network weights.
This is achieved using an input-adaptive DIP objective, combined with an autoencoding regularization term. Compared to diffusion models, our method does not
require training data and outperforms other DIP-based methods in mitigating noise
overfitting while maintaining a similar number of parameter updates as Vanilla
DIP. Through extensive experiments, we validate the effectiveness of our method
in various image reconstruction tasks, such as MRI and CT reconstruction, as
well as in image restoration tasks like image denoising, inpainting, and non-linear
deblurring. Our code is available at the GitHub repository aSeqDIP.

1

Introduction

Inverse imaging problems arise across various real-world applications [1]. These include tasks such
as image denoising [2], image deblurring [3], restoring missing portions of images [4] (in-painting),
super-resolution [5], magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [6], and reconstructing X-ray computed
tomography (CT) scans [7]. The common challenge in these scenarios is the reconstruction of images
from limited and/or corrupted measurements.
Recently, a plethora of Deep Neural Network (DNN) techniques have emerged to solve inverse
imaging problems, including supervised models that are trained to process measurements and generate
estimates approximating the true image [8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. Generative model, such as Diffusion models
(DMs) [13], have shown state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance in various imaging inverse problems
such as the works in [14, 15, 16]. However, training diffusion models is not only computationally
expensive but also demands a significant amount of clean (or fully-sampled) data points [17], limiting
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

