You Only Cache Once:
Decoder-Decoder Architectures for Language Models

Yutao Sun∗ ‡† Li Dong∗ † Yi Zhu† Shaohan Huang†
Wenhui Wang† Shuming Ma† Quanlu Zhang† Jianyong Wang‡ Furu Wei†⋄
‡
†
Tsinghua University
Microsoft Research
https://aka.ms/GeneralAI

Abstract
We introduce a decoder-decoder architecture, YOCO, for large language models,
which only caches key-value pairs once. It consists of two components, i.e., a crossdecoder stacked upon a self-decoder. The self-decoder efficiently encodes global
key-value (KV) caches that are reused by the cross-decoder via cross-attention.
The overall model behaves like a decoder-only Transformer, although YOCO only
caches once. The design substantially reduces GPU memory demands, yet retains
global attention capability. Additionally, the computation flow enables prefilling
to early exit without changing the final output, thereby significantly speeding up
the prefill stage. Experimental results demonstrate that YOCO achieves favorable
performance compared to Transformer in various settings of scaling up model
size and number of training tokens. We also extend YOCO to 1M context length
with near-perfect needle retrieval accuracy. The profiling results show that YOCO
improves inference memory, prefill latency, and throughput by orders of magnitude
across context lengths and model sizes.

1

Introduction

Decoder-only Transformer [40] has become the de facto architecture for language models. By caching
the previously computed key/value vectors, the model can reuse them for future generation steps. The
key-value cache avoids encoding the history again for each token, greatly improving the inference
speed. The compelling feature establishes the decoder-only architecture as the standard option.
However, as the number of serving tokens increases, the key-value (KV) caches occupy a lot of
GPU memory, rendering the inference of large language models memory-bounded [29]. For the
example of a 65B-size language model (augmented with grouped-query attention [1] and 8-bit KV
quantization), 512K tokens occupy about 86GB GPU memory, which is even larger than the capacity
of one H100-80GB GPU. In addition, the prefilling latency of long-sequence input is extremely high.
For instance, using four H100 GPUs, the 7B language model (augmented with Flash-Decoding [6]
and kernel fusion) requires about 110 seconds to prefill 450K tokens, and 380 seconds for 1M length.
The above bottlenecks make it difficult to deploy long-context language models in practice.
In this work, we propose a decoder-decoder architecture, YOCO, for large language models, which
only caches KV pairs once. Specifically, we stack cross-decoder upon self-decoder. Given an input
sequence, the self-decoder utilizes efficient self-attention to obtain KV caches. Then the cross-decoder
layers employ cross-attention to reuse the shared KV caches. The decoder-decoder architecture is
conceptually similar to encoder-decoder, but the whole model behaves more like a decoder-only
model from the external view. It naturally fits into autoregressive generation tasks, such as language
∗

Equal contribution. ⋄ Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

