CALE: Continuous Arcade Learning Environment

Pablo Samuel Castro
Google DeepMind
Université de Montréal
Mila - Québec AI Institute
psc@google.com

Jesse Farebrother
McGill University
Mila - Québec AI Institute
Google DeepMind
jfarebro@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract
We introduce the Continuous Arcade Learning Environment (CALE), an extension of the well-known Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) [Bellemare et al.,
2013]. The CALE uses the same underlying emulator of the Atari 2600 gaming
system (Stella), but adds support for continuous actions. This enables the benchmarking and evaluation of continuous-control agents (such as PPO [Schulman
et al., 2017] and SAC [Haarnoja et al., 2018]) and value-based agents (such as
DQN [Mnih et al., 2015] and Rainbow [Hessel et al., 2018]) on the same environment suite. We provide a series of open questions and research directions that
CALE enables, as well as initial baseline results using Soft Actor-Critic. CALE
is available as part of the ALE at https://github.com/Farama-Foundation/
Arcade-Learning-Environment.

1

Introduction

Generally capable autonomous agents have been a principal objective of machine learning research,
and in particular reinforcement learning, for many decades. General in the sense that they can handle
a variety of challenges; capable in that they are able to “solve” or perform well on these challenges;
and they are able to learn autonomously by interacting with the system or problem by exercising their
agency (e.g. making their own decisions). While deploying and testing on real systems is the ultimate
goal, researchers usually rely on academic benchmarks to showcase their proposed methods. It is
thus crucial for academic benchmarks to be able to test generality, capability, and autonomy.
Bellemare et al. [2013] introduced the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) as one such benchmark.
The ALE is a collection of challenging and diverse Atari 2600 games where agents learn by directly
playing the games; as input, agents receive a high dimensional observation (the “pixels” on the screen),
and as output they select from one of 18 possible actions (see Section 2). While some research had
already been conducted on a few isolated Atari 2600 games [Cobo et al., 2011, Hausknecht et al.,
2012, Bellemare et al., 2012], the ALE’s significance was to provide a unified platform for research
and evaluation across more than 100 games. Using the ALE, Mnih et al. [2015] demonstrated, for
the first time, that reinforcement learning (RL) combined with deep neural networks could play
challenging Atari 2600 games with super-human performance. Much like how ImageNet [Deng et al.,
2009] ushered in the era of Deep Learning [LeCun et al., 2015], the Arcade Learning Environment
spawned the advent of Deep Reinforcement Learning.
In addition to becoming one of the most popular benchmarks for evaluating RL agents, the ALE has
also evolved with new extensions, including stochastic transitions [Machado et al., 2018], various
game modes and difficulties [Machado et al., 2018, Farebrother et al., 2018], and multi-player support
[Terry and Black, 2020]. What has remained constant is the suitability of this benchmark for testing
generality (there is a wide diversity of games), capability (many games still prove challenging for
most modern agents), and agency (learning typically occurs via playing the game).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

