Achieving Near-Optimal Convergence for Distributed
Minimax Optimization with Adaptive Stepsizes

Yan Huang
College of Control Science and Engineering
Zhejiang University, China
huangyan5616@zju.edu.cn

Xiang Li
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
xiang.li@inf.ethz.ch

Yipeng Shen
College of Control Science and Engineering
Zhejiang University, China
22332074@zju.edu.cn

Niao He
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
niao.he@inf.ethz.ch

Jinming Xu
College of Control Science and Engineering
Zhejiang University, China
jimmyxu@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we show that applying adaptive methods directly to distributed
minimax problems can result in non-convergence due to inconsistency in locally
computed adaptive stepsizes. To address this challenge, we propose D-AdaST, a
Distributed Adaptive minimax method with Stepsize Tracking. The key strategy is
to employ an adaptive stepsize tracking protocol involving the transmission of two
extra (scalar) variables. This protocol ensures the consistency among stepsizes of
nodes, eliminating the steady-state error due to the lack of coordination of stepsizes
among nodes that commonly exists in vanilla distributed adaptive methods, and
thus guarantees exact convergence. For nonconvex-strongly-concave distributed
minimax problems, we characterize the specific transient times that ensure timescale separation of stepsizes and quasi-independence
of networks, leading to a

near-optimal convergence rate of Õ ϵ−(4+δ) for any small δ > 0, matching
that of the centralized counterpart. To our best knowledge, D-AdaST is the first
distributed adaptive method achieving near-optimal convergence without knowing
any problem-dependent parameters for nonconvex minimax problems. Extensive
experiments are conducted to validate our theoretical results.

1

Introduction

Distributed optimization has seen significant research progress over the last decade, resulting in
numerous algorithms (Nedic and Ozdaglar, 2009; Yuan et al., 2016; Lian et al., 2017; Pu and Nedić,
2021). However, the traditional focus of distributed optimization has primarily been on minimization
tasks. With the rapid growth of machine learning research, various applications have emerged that go
beyond simple minimization, such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014; Gulrajani et al., 2017), robust optimization (Mohri et al., 2019; Sinha et al., 2017), adversary
training of neural networks (Wang et al., 2021), fair machine learning (Madras et al., 2018), and just
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

