Instructor-inspired Machine Learning for Robust
Molecular Property Prediction

Fang Wu1∗, Shuting Jin2 , Siyuan Li3 , Stan Z. Li3
Computer Science Department, Stanford University
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Wuhan University of Science and Technology
3
School of Engineering, Westlake University
1

Abstract
Machine learning catalyzes a revolution in chemical and biological science. However, its efficacy heavily depends on the availability of labeled data, and annotating
biochemical data is extremely laborious. To surmount this data sparsity challenge,
we present an instructive learning algorithm named InstructMol to measure pseudolabels’ reliability and help the target model leverage large-scale unlabeled data.
InstructMol does not require transferring knowledge between multiple domains,
which avoids the potential gap between the pretraining and fine-tuning stages. We
demonstrated the high accuracy of InstructMol on several real-world molecular
datasets and out-of-distribution (OOD) benchmarks.

1

Introduction

An enduring obstacle in applied chemical and biological sciences is identifying and making chemical
compounds or materials that have optimal properties for a given purpose [1, 2]. However, the vast
majority of progress in these areas is still achieved primarily through time-consuming and costly
trial-and-error experiments. Machine learning (ML) has undergone an unparalleled technological
advancement, opening up a myriad of applications across various domains. Its potential is particularly
notable in expediting the discovery and development of novel materials, pharmaceuticals, and
chemical processes [3–5]. However, ML models’ efficacy heavily relies on the availability of labeled
data and the consistency of prediction targets. Meanwhile, the cost of generating new data labels
through wet experiments is prohibitively high. Consequently, the size of labeled data in this field is
several orders of magnitude lower than the one that can inspire breakthroughs in other ML fields [6].
This data scarcity severely hampers ML in addressing scientific challenges within this realm, impeding
its ability to generalize to new molecules [7].
Biochemists have noticed this problem and propose several strategies to overcome the low data
limitation (view Fig. 1). Firstly, inspired by the remarkable success of self-supervised learning
from NLP [8] and CV [9, 10], researchers apply the pretrain and finetune paradigm [11–14] to
molecule modeling. They boost the performance of various molecular models by pretraining them
on massive unlabeled data. However, this benefit can be negligible when a large gap exists between
the sample distributions of pretraining and downstream tasks [15]. An alternative option is to use
active learning [16], which iteratively selects new data points to annotate according to the current
model’s predictions. However, auxiliary labor is still required to enrich the original database. Thirdly,
domain knowledge is incorporated to enhance molecular representations, such as providing more
high-quality hand-crafted features [17], constructing motif-based hierarchical molecular graphs [18],
and leveraging knowledge graphs [19]. However, domain knowledge can be biased and is difficult to
integrate into different training techniques universally.
∗

Corresponding Author, email: fangwu97@stanford.edu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

