3D Focusing-and-Matching Network for
Multi-Instance Point Cloud Registration

Liyuan Zhang, Le Hui∗ , Qi Liu, Bo Li, Yuchao Dai∗
School of Electronics and Information, Northwestern Polytechnical University
Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Information Acquisition and Processing
zhangliyuannpu@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, {huile, liuqi, libo, daiyuchao}@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-instance point cloud registration aims to estimate the pose of all instances of
a model point cloud in the whole scene. Existing methods all adopt the strategy of
first obtaining the global correspondence and then clustering to obtain the pose of
each instance. However, due to the cluttered and occluded objects in the scene, it
is difficult to obtain an accurate correspondence between the model point cloud
and all instances in the scene. To this end, we propose a simple yet powerful
3D focusing-and-matching network for multi-instance point cloud registration
by learning the multiple pair-wise point cloud registration. Specifically, we first
present a 3D multi-object focusing module to locate the center of each object and
generate object proposals. By using self-attention and cross-attention to associate
the model point cloud with structurally similar objects, we can locate potential
matching instances by regressing object centers. Then, we propose a 3D dualmasking instance matching module to estimate the pose between the model point
cloud and each object proposal. It performs instance mask and overlap mask masks
to accurately predict the pair-wise correspondence. Extensive experiments on two
public benchmarks, Scan2CAD and ROBI, show that our method achieves a new
state-of-the-art performance on the multi-instance point cloud registration task.
The project page is at https://npucvr.github.io/3DFMNet/.

1

Introduction

Point cloud registration, a fundamental process in computer vision, involves aligning two point
clouds through estimating a rigid transformation. In practical applications like robotic bin picking,
multi-instance registration emerges as a critical need, demanding the alignment of a model’s point
cloud with multiple instances within the scene. This task presents heightened complexity compared
to single-point cloud registration, primarily due to challenges such as the uncertain number of
instances and inter-instance occlusions. These complexities are particularly pronounced in cluttered
environments, where precise alignment becomes pivotal for effective robotic operations. Therefore,
how to improve the accuracy of multi-instance point cloud registration is still a challenging issue.
There are a few efforts for tackling multi-instance point cloud registration. Existing pipelines can
be roughly divided into two types: two-stage and one-stage. For the two-stage process, we first
extract point correspondences between the model point cloud and scene point clouds, and then
recover per-instance transformations through multi-model fitting [24, 36, 48]. Although two-stage
methods are simple and feasible, the success of these methods largely depends on the quality of the
∗

Corresponding authors.
Liyuan Zhang, Le Hui, Qi Liu, Bo Li, and Yuchao Dai are with the Key Lab of Shaanxi Key Laboratory of
Information Acquisition and Processing, School of Electronics And Information, Northwestern Polytechnical
University, China.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

