The Power of Extrapolation in Federated Learning

Kirill Acharya‡
GenAI Center of Excellence
KAUST, Saudi Arabia
acharya.kk@phystech.edu

Hanmin Li
GenAI Center of Excellence
KAUST, Saudi Arabia
hanmin.li@kaust.edu.sa

Peter Richtárik
GenAI Center of Excellence
KAUST, Saudi Arabia
peter.richtarik@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
We propose and study several server-extrapolation strategies for enhancing the
theoretical and empirical convergence properties of the popular federated learning
optimizer FedProx [Li et al., 2020]. While it has long been known that some form
of extrapolation can help in the practice of FL, only a handful of works provide any
theoretical guarantees. The phenomenon seems elusive, and our current theoretical
understanding remains severely incomplete. In our work, we focus on smooth
convex or strongly convex problems in the interpolation regime. In particular,
we propose Extrapolated FedProx (FedExProx), and study three extrapolation
strategies: a constant strategy (depending on various smoothness parameters and
the number of participating devices), and two smoothness-adaptive strategies;
one based on the notion of gradient diversity (FedExProx-GraDS), and the other
one based on the stochastic Polyak stepsize (FedExProx-StoPS). Our theory is
corroborated with carefully constructed numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) is a distributed training approach for machine learning models, where multiple
clients collaborate under the guidance of a central server to optimize a loss function [Konečný et al.,
2016, McMahan et al., 2017]. This method allows clients to contribute to model training while
keeping their data private, as it avoids the need for direct data sharing. Often, federated optimization
is formulated as the minimization of a finite-sum objective function,
(
)
n
1X
min f (x) :=
fi (x) ,
(1)
n i=1
x∈Rd
where each fi : Rd 7→ R is the empirical risk of model x associated with the i-th client. The federated
averaging method (FedAvg) is among the most favored strategies for addressing federated learning
problems, as proposed by McMahan et al. [2017], Mangasarian and Solodov [1993]. In FedAvg, the
server initiates an iteration by selecting a subset of clients for participation in a given round. Each
chosen client then proceeds with local training, employing gradient-based techniques like gradient
descent (GD) or stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with random reshuffling, as discussed by Bubeck
et al. [2015], Gower et al. [2019], Moulines and Bach [2011], Sadiev et al. [2022].
‡

Kirill was a student at MIPT during his internship at KAUST.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

