Everyday Object Meets Vision-and-Language
Navigation Agent via Backdoor
Keji He∗ 1 Kehan Chen∗2,3 Jiawang Bai† 4 Yan Huang2,3
Qi Wu5 Shu-Tao Xia6 Liang Wang†2,3
1

Shandong University
New Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Tencent
5
School of Computer Science, University of Adelaide
6
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
keji01783@gmail.com
kehan.chen@cripac.ia.ac.cn
jiawangbai@tencent.com
yhuang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au
xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
wangliang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
2

Abstract
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) requires an agent to dynamically explore
environments following natural language. The VLN agent, closely integrated into
daily lives, poses a substantial threat to the security of privacy and property upon
the occurrence of malicious behavior. However, this serious issue has long been
overlooked. In this paper, we pioneer the exploration of an object-aware backdoored
VLN, achieved by implanting object-aware backdoors during the training phase.
Tailored to the unique VLN nature of cross-modality and continuous decisionmaking, we propose a novel backdoored VLN paradigm: IPR Backdoor. This
enables the agent to act in abnormal behavior once encountering the object triggers
during language-guided navigation in unseen environments, thereby executing
an attack on the target scene. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method in both physical and digital spaces across different VLN agents, as well as
its robustness to various visual and textual variations. Additionally, our method
also well ensures navigation performance in normal scenarios with remarkable
stealthiness. The code is available at https://github.com/Chenkehan21/VLN-ATT.

1

Introduction

Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) [5] requires an agent to dynamically interact with real
environments and navigate to specified destinations following given textual instructions. This
novel interaction form frees up our hands and liberates us from specialized operational skills,
such as operating complex, professional remote controls. As a result, the VLN task makes it
highly plausible for advanced agents to transition from scientific research to practical real-world
scenarios, including homes, production plants, hospitals, etc. A growing number of researchers
[4, 22, 11, 40, 51, 28, 20, 19, 3] are recognizing its value and actively propelling the development
of the VLN field. Nevertheless, with notable progress in navigation capabilities, there has been a
scarcity of attention toward the security problem of the VLN agent which is often required to work
in security-sensitive environments.
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

