Gene-Gene Relationship Modeling Based on Genetic
Evidence for Single-Cell RNA-Seq Data Imputation

Daeho Um∗
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT)
daeho.um@samsung.com
Seong Jin Ahn
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
sja1015@kaist.ac.kr

Ji Won Yoon
Chung-Ang University
jiwonyoon@cau.ac.kr
Yunha Yeo
Korea University
serinahyeo@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) technologies enable the exploration
of cellular heterogeneity and facilitate the construction of cell atlases. However,
scRNA-seq data often contain a large portion of missing values (false zeros)
or noisy values, hindering downstream analyses. To recover these false zeros,
propagation-based imputation methods have been proposed using k-NN graphs.
However they model only associating relationships among genes within a cell,
while, according to well-known genetic evidence, there are both associating and
dissociating relationships among genes. To apply this genetic evidence to gene-gene
relationship modeling, this paper proposes a novel imputation method that newly
employs dissociating relationships in addition to associating relationships. Our
method constructs a k-NN graph to additionally model dissociating relationships
via the negation of a given cell-gene matrix. Moreover, our method standardizes the
value distribution (mean and variance) of each gene to have standard distributions
regardless of the gene. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that the
proposed method achieves exceptional performance gains over state-of-the-art
methods in both cell clustering and gene expression recovery across six scRNA-seq
datasets, validating the significance of using complete gene-gene relationships
in accordance with genetic evidence. The source code is available at https:
//github.com/daehoum1/scCR.

1

Introduction

Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) has become one of the most
widely used technologies in biomedical research due to its ability to
measure genome-wide gene expression at the single-cell level [1–3].
ScRNA-seq enables us to discover novel cell types [4], analyze cellular
trajectories [5], and improve understanding human disease [6, 7]. However, scRNA-seq analysis encounters significant challenges due to the
high rate of zero values in scRNA-seq data represented by a cell-gene
matrix. Specifically, owing to the low RNA capture rate, scRNA-seq
data often contain zero values. These zero values represent unobserved
gene expression resulting from both technical omissions (referred to as
dropouts [8]) and true biological absence. Moreover, even non-zero val- Figure 1: Within a cell,
ues in scRNA-seq data suffer from various sources of noise, such as cell there are two types of recycle effects and batch effects [9, 10].
lationships among genes.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

