DTGB: A Comprehensive Benchmark for Dynamic
Text-Attributed Graphs

Jiasheng Zhang1

Jialin Chen2 Menglin Yang2 Aosong Feng2 Shuang Liang1
Jie Shao1,3∗ Rex Ying2
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China 2 Yale University
3
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
zjss12358@std.uestc.edu.cn {shuangliang, shaojie}@uestc.edu.cn
{jialin.chen, menglin.yang, aosong.feng, rex.ying}@yale.edu

Abstract
Dynamic text-attributed graphs (DyTAGs) are prevalent in various real-world
scenarios, where each node and edge are associated with text descriptions, and
both the graph structure and text descriptions evolve over time. Despite their broad
applicability, there is a notable scarcity of benchmark datasets tailored to DyTAGs,
which hinders the potential advancement in many research fields. To address
this gap, we introduce Dynamic Text-attributed Graph Benchmark (DTGB), a
collection of large-scale, time-evolving graphs from diverse domains, with nodes
and edges enriched by dynamically changing text attributes and categories. To
facilitate the use of DTGB, we design standardized evaluation procedures based
on four real-world use cases: future link prediction, destination node retrieval,
edge classification, and textual relation generation. These tasks require models to
understand both dynamic graph structures and natural language, highlighting the
unique challenges posed by DyTAGs. Moreover, we conduct extensive benchmark
experiments on DTGB, evaluating 7 popular dynamic graph learning algorithms
and their variants of adapting to text attributes with LLM embeddings, along with
6 powerful large language models (LLMs). Our results show the limitations of
existing models in handling DyTAGs. Our analysis also demonstrates the utility of
DTGB in investigating the incorporation of structural and textual dynamics. The
proposed DTGB fosters research on DyTAGs and their broad applications. It offers
a comprehensive benchmark for evaluating and advancing models to handle the
interplay between dynamic graph structures and natural language. The dataset and
source code are available at https://github.com/zjs123/DTGB.

1

Introduction

Dynamic graphs are an essential tool for modeling a wide range of real-world systems, such as
e-commerce platforms, social networks, and knowledge graphs [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. In those dynamic
graphs, nodes and edges are typically associated with text attributes, giving rise to dynamic textattributed graphs (DyTAGs). For example, e-commerce graphs may contain items accompanied by
textual descriptions, and time-annotated edges representing user reviews or interactions with items.
Similarly, temporal knowledge graphs represent the sequential interactions among real-world entities
through textural relations. The exploration of learning methodologies applied to DyTAGs is important
to research areas such as dynamic graph modeling and natural language processing [8, 9, 10], as well
as various real-world applications, e.g., recommendation and social analysis [3, 11, 12, 13, 14].
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

