GraphMETRO: Mitigating Complex Graph
Distribution Shifts via Mixture of Aligned Experts

Shirley Wu
Stanford University
shirwu@cs.stanford.edu
Bruno Ribeiro∗
Purdue University
ribeirob@purdue.edu

Kaidi Cao
Stanford University
kaidicao@cs.stanford.edu

James Zou∗
Stanford University
jamesz@cs.stanford.edu

Jure Leskovec∗
Stanford University
jure@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Graph data are inherently complex and heterogeneous, leading to a high natural
diversity of distributional shifts. However, it remains unclear how to build machine
learning architectures that generalize to the complex distributional shifts naturally
occurring in the real world. Here, we develop GraphMETRO, a Graph Neural Network architecture that models natural diversity and captures complex distributional
shifts. GraphMETRO employs a Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architecture with a gating model and multiple expert models, where each expert model targets a specific
distributional shift to produce a referential representation w.r.t. a reference model,
and the gating model identifies shift components. Additionally, we design a novel
objective that aligns the representations from different expert models to ensure reliable optimization. GraphMETRO achieves state-of-the-art results on four datasets
from the GOOD benchmark, which is comprised of complex and natural real-world
distribution shifts, improving by 67% and 4.2% on the WebKB and Twitch datasets.
Code and data are available at https://github.com/Wuyxin/GraphMETRO.

1

Introduction

The intricate nature of real-world graph data introduces a wide variety of distribution shifts and
heterogeneous graph variations [47, 30, 43, 26]. For in𝒖
stance, in a social graph, some user nodes can experience
𝒖
reduced activity and profile alterations, while other user
nodes may see increased interactions. More broadly, such
𝒖𝟐
shifts go beyond the group-wise pattern and further contribute to the heterogeneous nature of graph data. In
Figure 1, we provide a real-world example on a webpage
𝒖𝟏
network dataset, where, besides the general distribution
shift from source to target distribution, two webpage
nodes u1 and u2 in the target domain exhibit varying degrees of change in their content features. These inherent
shifts and complexity accurately characterize the dynamics of real-world graph data, e.g., social networks [2, 19] Figure 1: An example on WebKB [51,
20]. It illustrates (1) The distribution shift
and ecommerce graphs [76].
from source to target (the thick arrow in
Above the diverse graph variants, Graph Neural Networks the upper right) and (2) Instance-wise het(GNNs) [21, 25, 10] have become a prevailing method erogeneity in the target distribution (the
for downstream graph tasks. Standard evaluation often thin arrows pointing to u1 and u2 ).
𝟐

𝟏

∗

Equal Senior Authorship

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

