HC-GAE: The Hierarchical Cluster-based Graph
Auto-Encoder for Graph Representation Learning

Lu Bai1,2 , Zhuo Xu1 , Lixin Cui3∗, Ming Li4,5 , Yue Wang3 , Edwin R. Hancock6
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China
2
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology and Educational Application,
Ministry of Education, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China
3
School of Information, Central University of Finance and Economics, Beijing 100081, China
4
Zhejiang Institute of Optoelectronicss, Jinhua 321004, China
5
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Intelligent Education Technology and Application,
Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua 321004, China
6
Department of Computer Science, University of York, York YO10 5GH, United Kingdom
1

Abstract
Graph Auto-Encoders (GAEs) are powerful tools for graph representation learning.
In this paper, we develop a novel Hierarchical Cluster-based GAE (HC-GAE), that
can learn effective structural characteristics for graph data analysis. To this end,
during the encoding process, we commence by utilizing the hard node assignment to
decompose a sample graph into a family of separated subgraphs. We compress each
subgraph into a coarsened node, transforming the original graph into a coarsened
graph. On the other hand, during the decoding process, we adopt the soft node
assignment to reconstruct the original graph structure by expanding the coarsened
nodes. By hierarchically performing the above compressing procedure during
the decoding process as well as the expanding procedure during the decoding
process, the proposed HC-GAE can effectively extract bidirectionally hierarchical
structural features of the original sample graph. Furthermore, we re-design the loss
function that can integrate the information from either the encoder or the decoder.
Since the associated graph convolution operation of the proposed HC-GAE is
restricted in each individual separated subgraph and cannot propagate the node
information between different subgraphs, the proposed HC-GAE can significantly
reduce the over-smoothing problem arising in the classical convolution-based
GAEs. The proposed HC-GAE can generate effective representations for either
node classification or graph classification, and the experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness on real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

In real-world applications, graph structure data has been widely used for characterizing pairwise
relationships among the components of complex systems. With the recent rapid development of deep
learning, the graph representation learning approaches relying on neural networks are introduced for
the analysis of various graph data, e.g., social networks [12], transportation networks [20], protein
compounds [34], 3D shape [2, 5], etc. One challenging arising in these studies is that the graph data
has a nonlinear structure defined in an irregular non-Euclidean space, and it is hard to directly employ
traditional neural networks to learn graph representations.
To overcome the above problem, there have been increasing interests to further generalize traditional
neural networks, especially the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [18], for the irregular graph
∗

Corresponding Author: cuilixin@cufe.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

