Local and Adaptive Mirror Descents in
Extensive-Form Games
Côme Fiegel
CREST - FairPlay, ENSAE Paris
Palaiseau, France
come.fiege@normalesup.org

Pierre Ménard
ENS Lyon
Lyon, France

Tadashi Kozuno
OMRON SINIC X
Tokyo, Japan

Vianney Perchet
CREST - FairPlay, ENSAE Paris, Criteo AI Lab
Paris, France

Rémi Munos
Google DeepMind
Paris, France

Michal Valko
INRIA

Abstract
We study how to learn ε-optimal strategies in zero-sum imperfect information
games (IIG) with trajectory feedback. In this setting, players update their policies
sequentially, based on their observations over a fixed number of episodes denoted
by T . As noted by Steinberger et al. (2020) and McAleer et al. (2022), most existing
procedures suffer from high variance due to the use of importance sampling over
sequences of actions. To reduce this variance, we consider a fixed sampling
approach, where players still update their policies over time, but with observations
obtained through a given fixed sampling policy. Our approach is based on an
adaptive Online Mirror Descent (OMD) algorithm that applies OMD locally to
each information set, using individually decreasing learning rates and a regularized
loss. We show that this approach guarantees a convergence rate of Õ(T −1/2 ) with
high probability and has a near-optimal dependence on the game parameters when
applied with the best theoretical choices of learning rates and sampling policies.
To achieve these results, we generalize the notion of OMD stabilization, allowing
for time-varying regularization with convex increments.

1

Introduction

The extensive-form representation of a game (Osborne & Rubinstein, 1994) can be depicted as a tree
whose nodes correspond to the game states. At each state, the players choose some available actions
and, based on these choices, the game transitions to the next state among the current state’s children.
In imperfect information games (IIGs), players may only have access to partial information about
the current game state upon taking action. Therefore, the state space is partitioned for each player
into multiple information sets, which consist of indistinguishable states from the player’s perspective.
With perfect recall (Kuhn, 1950), when players remember their previous moves, each space of
information sets also has a tree structure.
We focus more specifically on zero-sum IIGs represented in an extensive form under the perfect recall
assumption, where the gains of one player, conventionally called the max-player, are equal to the
losses of his opponent, the min-player. The primary goal is to design an algorithm learning ε-optimal
strategies (von Neumann, 1928). To achieve this, one can use the self-play framework, where an
agent controls both players for T episodes. At the beginning of each episode, the agent prescribes a
strategy for each player. The agent then observes the play and updates the players’ strategies for the
next episode based on the outcome of the game. After T episodes, this protocol returns a guess of
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

