A2PO: Towards Effective Offline Reinforcement
Learning from an Advantage-aware Perspective

Yunpeng Qing1 , Shunyu Liu2∗, Jingyuan Cong1 , Kaixuan Chen2,3 , Yihe Zhou1 , Mingli Song2,3
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University
3
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
{qingyunpeng, liushunyu, kcj51, chenkx, zhouyihe, brooksong}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning endeavors to leverage offline datasets to craft effective agent policy without online interaction, which imposes proper conservative
constraints with the support of behavior policies to tackle the out-of-distribution
problem. However, existing works often suffer from the constraint conflict issue
when offline datasets are collected from multiple behavior policies, i.e., different
behavior policies may exhibit inconsistent actions with distinct returns across the
state space. To remedy this issue, recent advantage-weighted methods prioritize
samples with high advantage values for agent training while inevitably ignoring
the diversity of behavior policy. In this paper, we introduce a novel AdvantageAware Policy Optimization (A2PO) method to explicitly construct advantage-aware
policy constraints for offline learning under mixed-quality datasets. Specifically,
A2PO employs a conditional variational auto-encoder to disentangle the action
distributions of intertwined behavior policies by modeling the advantage values
of all training data as conditional variables. Then the agent can follow such disentangled action distribution constraints to optimize the advantage-aware policy
towards high advantage values. Extensive experiments conducted on both the
single-quality and mixed-quality datasets of the D4RL benchmark demonstrate
that A2PO yields results superior to the counterparts. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Plankson/A2PO.

1

Introduction

Offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) [11, 4] aims to learn effective control policies from precollected datasets without online exploration, and has witnessed its unprecedented success in various
real-world applications, including robot control [57, 45, 24, 25], power grid control [2, 49, 26, 36],
etc. A formidable challenge of offline RL lies in the Out-Of-Distribution (OOD) problem [21],
involving the distribution shift between data induced by the learned policy and data collected by the
behavior policy. Consequently, the direct application of conventional online RL methods inevitably
exhibits extrapolation error [34], where the unseen state-action pairs are erroneously estimated. To
tackle this OOD problem, offline RL methods attempt to impose proper conservatism on the learning
agent within the distribution of the dataset, such as restricting the learned policy with a regularization
term [19, 9] or penalizing the value overestimation of OOD actions [20, 18].
Despite the promising results achieved, offline RL often encounters the constraint conflict issue when
dealing with the mixed-quality dataset [40, 12, 1, 28]. Specifically, when training data are collected
from multiple behavior policies with distinct returns, existing works still treat each sample constraint
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

