SlimSAM:
0.1% Data Makes Segment Anything Slim

Zigeng Chen, Gongfan Fang, Xinyin Ma, Xinchao Wang∗
National University of Singapore
zigeng99@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Current approaches for compressing the Segment Anything Model (SAM) yield
commendable results, yet necessitate extensive data to train a new network from
scratch. Employing conventional pruning techniques can remarkably reduce data
requirements but would suffer from a degradation in performance. To address
this challenging trade-off, we introduce SlimSAM, a novel data-efficient SAM
compression method that achieves superior performance with extremely less training data. The essence of SlimSAM is encapsulated in the alternate slimming
framework which effectively enhances knowledge inheritance under severely limited training data availability and exceptional pruning ratio. Diverging from prior
techniques, our framework progressively compresses the model by alternately
pruning and distilling distinct, decoupled sub-structures. Disturbed Taylor pruning is also proposed to address the misalignment between the pruning objective
and training target, thereby boosting the post-distillation after pruning. SlimSAM yields significant performance improvements while demanding over 10
times less training data than any other existing compression methods. Even when
compared to the original SAM, SlimSAM achieves approaching performance
while reducing parameter counts to merely 1.4% (9.1M), MACs to 0.8% (23G),
and requiring only 0.1% (10k) of the SAM training data. Code is available at
https://github.com/czg1225/SlimSAM

1

Introduction

Segment Anything Model (SAM) [25] has attracted considerable attention from the community since
its inception. A plethora of studies [48, 19, 34, 43, 31, 2, 59, 55, 18, 53, 35] have achieved substantial
progress by incorporating SAM as a fundamental component. Nevertheless, despite its remarkable
performance, SAM’s substantial model size and high computational demands render it inadequate
for practical applications on resource-constrained devices. This limitation consequently hinders the
advancement and broader application of SAM-based models.
To mitigate these constraints, many efforts [29, 62, 60, 50, 63, 45] have been made to effectively
compress SAM. Without exception, these endeavors opt to replace the originally heavyweight image
encoder with a lightweight and efficient architecture. This invariably entails training a new network
from scratch. With regard to scratch training, an unavoidable challenging trade-off arises between
training costs and model performance. Existing methods all inevitably compromise performance
when training with very limited data.
The crux of the above issue is their inability to fully exploit the capability of pre-trained SAM. To
overcome the high training data demands by reusing the robust prior knowledge of pre-trained SAM,
a straightforward strategy involves the application of pruning techniques [38, 14, 3, 52, 8] to directly
∗

Correspoding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

