UDA: A Benchmark Suite for Retrieval Augmented
Generation in Real-world Document Analysis

Yulong Hui
Tsinghua University
huiyl22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Yao Lu
National University of Singapore
luyao@comp.nus.edu.sg

Huanchen Zhang∗
Tsinghua University
huanchen@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The use of Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) has improved Large Language
Models (LLMs) in collaborating with external data, yet significant challenges
exist in real-world scenarios. In areas such as academic literature and finance
question answering, data are often found in raw text and tables in HTML or
PDF formats, which can be lengthy and highly unstructured. In this paper, we
introduce a benchmark suite, namely Unstructured Document Analysis (UDA), that
involves 2,965 real-world documents and 29,590 expert-annotated Q&A pairs. We
revisit popular LLM- and RAG-based solutions for document analysis and evaluate
the design choices and answer qualities across multiple document domains and
diverse query types. Our evaluation yields interesting findings and highlights the
importance of data parsing and retrieval. We hope our benchmark can shed light and
better serve real-world document analysis applications. The benchmark suite and
code can be found at https://github.com/qinchuanhui/UDA-Benchmark.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable success yet still face limitations [16].
One of the key challenges is to grapple with external knowledge and previously unseen data, which
is a common scenario in real-world applications such as enterprise search and data analysis. For
example, a company may need to query its proprietary technique documents; a financial expert
may need to extract insights from the latest corporate reports; and a research group may need to
assimilate cutting-edge academic papers to guide their innovations. To overcome this challenge,
retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) that incorporates relevant content from an external data source
into the LLM generation procedure, has emerged as a promising approach [30].
As shown in Figure 1, a common RAG workflow involves the following procedures: 1) parse the
external data and segment it into chunks; 2) embed the chunks into vectors and create indexes; 3)
retrieve the most relevant chunks according to the user query, and 4) assemble the prompt with
relevant chunks (i.e., context) as input for the LLM to generate the response. Recently, a multitude
of advanced RAG techniques have been proposed with improved retrieval policies [3, 64], context
chunk compression [59, 56], and pre-training strategies [49]. Furthermore, as an alternative approach
to RAG, recent advances in long-context LLMs [8, 11, 62] have empowered querying directly on
lengthy data without chunking and retrieval.
∗

Huanchen Zhang is also affiliated with the Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute. Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

