Conditional Density Estimation with Histogram Trees

Lincen Yang
Matthijs van Leeuwen
LIACS, Leiden University
Einsteinweg 55, 2333CC Leiden, The Netherlands
{l.yang, m.van.leeuwen}@liacs.leidenuniv.nl

Abstract
Conditional density estimation (CDE) goes beyond regression by modeling the
full conditional distribution, providing a richer understanding of the data than just
the conditional mean in regression. This makes CDE particularly useful in critical application domains. However, interpretable CDE methods are understudied.
Current methods typically employ kernel-based approaches, using kernel functions
directly for kernel density estimation or as basis functions in linear models. In
contrast, despite their conceptual simplicity and visualization suitability, tree-based
methods—which are arguably more comprehensible—have been largely overlooked for CDE tasks. Thus, we propose the Conditional Density Tree (CDTree),
a fully non-parametric model consisting of a decision tree in which each leaf is
formed by a histogram model. Specifically, we formalize the problem of learning a
CDTree using the minimum description length (MDL) principle, which eliminates
the need for tuning the hyperparameter for regularization. Next, we propose an
iterative algorithm that, although greedily, searches the optimal histogram for every
possible node split. Our experiments demonstrate that, in comparison to existing
interpretable CDE methods, CDTrees are both more accurate (as measured by the
log-loss) and more robust against irrelevant features. Further, our approach leads to
smaller tree sizes than existing tree-based models, which benefits interpretability.

1

Introduction

Conditional density estimation (CDE) is a crucial yet challenging task in modeling the associations
between features and a continuous target variable, which has received a lot of research interest since
the 1970s [44]. By modeling the full conditional distribution, CDE is useful when the datasets are
multi-modal, heavily skewed, or heteroscedastic. As a result, it is widely applied in various fields,
including genomics [8], astronomy [3], wind power forecasting [19], and computer networks [47].
CDE provides richer information for data understanding than regression, which only models the
conditional mean. This makes CDE desirable for well-informed decision-making in critical areas,
such as healthcare [32, 53, 14], which calls for interpretability.
Despite its importance, recent CDE research has predominantly focused on black-box models, such
as neural networks [10, 55, 39, 46, 50] and tree ensembles [13]. In contrast, intrinsically interpretable
models for CDE are understudied. Specifically, decision tree-based methods are largely neglected,
with CADET [6] being the only existing method to the best of our knowledge. However, CADET’s
assumption of a Gaussian distribution for the target variable in each leaf node limits its ability to
model complex conditional densities.
As a result, kernel-based models became the standard among ‘shallow’ models for CDE, including
methods based on kernel density estimation (KDE) [44], and linear models with the basis functions
chosen as Gaussian kernels [54, 11]. Nevertheless, kernel-based models are arguably less interpretable
than decision trees: as conditions in decision trees are directly readable, they are comprehensible to
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

