Exploring the Edges of Latent State Clusters for
Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning

Yuanlin Duan
Rutgers University
yuanlin.duan@rutgers.edu

Guofeng Cui
Rutgers University
gc669@cs.rutgers.edu

He Zhu
Rutgers University
hz375@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Exploring unknown environments efficiently is a fundamental challenge in unsupervised goal-conditioned reinforcement learning. While selecting exploratory
goals at the frontier of previously explored states is an effective strategy, the policy
during training may still have limited capability of reaching rare goals on the
frontier, resulting in reduced exploratory behavior. We propose "Cluster Edge
Exploration" (CE2 ), a new goal-directed exploration algorithm that when choosing
goals in sparsely explored areas of the state space gives priority to goal states
that remain accessible to the agent. The key idea is clustering to group states that
are easily reachable from one another by the current policy under training in a
latent space and traversing to states holding significant exploration potential on
the boundary of these clusters before doing exploratory behavior. In challenging
robotics environments including navigating a maze with a multi-legged ant robot,
manipulating objects with a robot arm on a cluttered tabletop, and rotating objects in the palm of an anthropomorphic robotic hand, CE2 demonstrates superior
efficiency in exploration compared to baseline methods and ablations.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning (GCRL) (Andrychowicz et al., 2017)
has emerged as a powerful paradigm for training agents to accomplish diverse tasks in complex
and dynamic environments. GCRL enables agents to learn goal-directed behaviors, allowing them
to achieve specific objectives in a flexible and adaptive manner. However, a central challenge in
GCRL lies in guiding agents to effectively explore their environment during training. The exploration
problem in GCRL can be viewed as the task of setting goals for the agent during training to guide
the agent’s environment navigation to collect exploratory data that improves its learning process. In
this paper, we address this critical challenge by proposing a novel strategy for selecting explorationinducing goals in GCRL.
Because goal-conditioned policies excel at reaching states encountered frequently during training,
a simple strategy is setting goals in less-visited areas of the state space to broaden the range of
reachable states. However, throughout training, goal-conditioned policies may encounter difficulties
in reaching arbitrary goals. For example, when instructed to navigate to an unexplored section of
a maze environment, a novice agent might instead revisit a previously traversed area that provides
low exploration value. To address this shortcoming, the environment exploration procedure must set
up additional mechanisms to filter out unreachable goals. A common strategy in the literature is to
select goals at the frontier of previously explored states and launch an exploration phase immediately
after these goals are achieved, adhering to a Go-Explore principle (Ecoffet et al., 2019). For example,
Skewfit (Pong et al., 2019) estimates state densities and selects goals at the frontier from the replay
buffer in inverse proportion to their density. Similarly, MEGA (Pitis et al., 2020) uses kernel density
estimates (KDE) of state densities and selects frontier goals with low density from the replay buffer.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

