Interventionally Consistent Surrogates for
Complex Simulation Models

Joel Dyer∗
University of Oxford

Nicholas Bishop
University of Oxford

Yorgos Felekis
University of Warwick

Fabio Massimo Zennaro
University of Bergen

Anisoara Calinescu
University of Oxford

Theodoros Damoulas
University of Warwick

Michael Wooldridge
University of Oxford

Abstract
Large-scale simulation models of complex socio-technical systems provide
decision-makers with high-fidelity testbeds in which policy interventions can be
evaluated and what-if scenarios explored. Unfortunately, the high computational
cost of such models inhibits their widespread use in policy-making settings. Surrogate models can address these computational limitations, but to do so they must
behave consistently with the simulator under interventions of interest. In this paper,
we build upon recent developments in causal abstractions to develop a framework
for learning interventionally consistent surrogate models for large-scale, complex
simulation models. We provide theoretical results showing that our proposed approach induces surrogates to behave consistently with high probability with respect
to the simulator across interventions of interest, facilitating rapid experimentation with policy interventions in complex systems. We further demonstrate with
empirical studies that conventionally trained surrogates can misjudge the effect
of interventions and misguide decision-makers towards suboptimal interventions,
while surrogates trained for interventional consistency with our method closely
mimic the behaviour of the original simulator under interventions of interest.

1

Introduction

Large-scale, complex simulators are powerful tools for modelling distributed socio-technical systems
and emergent phenomena across application domains, including the social sciences [Wiese et al.,
2024], epidemiology [Kerr et al., 2021], and finance [Cont, 2007]. Many such systems consist of a
multitude of autonomous, interacting, and decision-making agents, whose individual behaviours and
interactions can be captured more readily and at a higher degree of fidelity in a computer program
than through conventional modelling paradigms. This level of granularity can, in turn, allow for more
effective control of the potentially deleterious effects that can arise from the endogenous dynamics
of real-world systems by providing a testbed for experimentation with policy interventions. In
economics, for example, such interventions may take the form of limits on loan-to-value ratios in
housing markets to attenuate housing price cycles [Baptista et al., 2016], while in epidemiology they
may be (non-)pharmaceutical interventions that aim to inhibit disease transmission [Kerr et al., 2021].
Whilst simulation modelling of this kind promises many benefits, the intricacy and multi-scale nature
of the simulators that result from these modelling efforts can result in large computational costs even
∗

joel.dyer@cs.ox.ac.uk

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

