Model-free Low-Rank Reinforcement Learning
via Leveraged Entry-wise Matrix Estimation

Stefan Stojanovic
KTH, Stockholm, Sweden
stesto@kth.se

Yassir Jedra
MIT, Cambridge, USA
jedra@mit.edu

Alexandre Proutiere
KTH, Digital Futures, Stockholm, Sweden
alepro@kth.se

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning an ε-optimal policy in controlled dynamical
systems with low-rank latent structure. For this problem, we present LoRa-PI
(Low-Rank Policy Iteration), a model-free learning algorithm alternating between
policy improvement and policy evaluation steps. In the latter, the algorithm estimates the low-rank matrix corresponding to the (state, action) value function of
the current policy using the following two-phase procedure. The entries of the
matrix are first sampled uniformly at random to estimate, via a spectral method,
the leverage scores of its rows and columns. These scores are then used to extract a
few important rows and columns whose entries are further sampled. The algorithm
exploits these new samples to complete the matrix estimation using a CUR-like
method. For this leveraged matrix estimation procedure, we establish entry-wise
guarantees that remarkably, do not depend on the coherence of the matrix but only
on its spikiness. These guarantees imply that LoRa-PI learns an ε-optimal policy
S+A
e
using O(
poly(1−γ)ε2 ) samples where S (resp. A) denotes the number of states
(resp. actions) and γ the discount factor. Our algorithm achieves this order-optimal
(in S, A and ε) sample complexity under milder conditions than those assumed in
previously proposed approaches.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods when applied to dynamical systems with large state and action
spaces suffer from the curse of dimensionality. For example, learning an ε-optimal policy in tabular
discounted Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) with S states and A actions requires a number of
SA
samples scaling at least as (1−γ)
3 ε2 [17, 36]. Fortunately, many real-world systems exhibit a latent
structure that if learnt and exploited could drastically improve the statistical efficiency of RL methods
[25, 38]. In this paper, we are interested in developing methods to leverage low-rank latent structures.
These structures have attracted a lot of attention recently, see e.g. [22, 11, 15, 28, 16, 45, 39, 2, 29,
40, 32, 35, 37, 34]. Here, we consider a structure where the (state, action) value functions of policies,
viewed as S × A matrices, are low-rank. This structure has been empirically motivated and studied
in [35, 34, 43, 33]. The hope is that when exploiting it optimally, learning an ε-optimal policy would
S+A
only require O( (1−γ)
3 ε2 ) samples. Such an improvement would also imply significant statistical
gains in MDPs with continuous state and action spaces. If these spaces are of dimensions d1 and
d2 , under natural smoothness conditions and using an appropriate discretization [35], the sample
1
complexity would indeed be reduced from εd1 +d
(without structure) to εmax(d11 ,d2 )+2 .
2 +2
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

