P UTNAM B ENCH: Evaluating Neural Theorem-Provers
on the Putnam Mathematical Competition

George Tsoukalas
UT Austin
Michelle Ding
UT Austin

Jasper Lee
UT Austin

Michael Jennings
UT Austin

John Jennings
UT Austin
Amitayush Thakur
UT Austin

Jimmy Xin
UT Austin
Swarat Chaudhuri
UT Austin

Abstract
We present P UTNAM B ENCH, a new multi-language benchmark for evaluating
the ability of neural theorem-provers to solve competition mathematics problems.
P UTNAM B ENCH consists of 1692 hand-constructed formalizations of 640 theorems sourced from the William Lowell Putnam Mathematical Competition, the
premier undergraduate-level mathematics competition in North America. All the
problems have formalizations in Lean 4 and Isabelle; a substantial subset also
has Coq formalizations. P UTNAM B ENCH requires significant problem-solving
ability and proficiency in a broad range of topics taught in undergraduate mathematics courses. We use P UTNAM B ENCH to evaluate several established neural
and symbolic theorem-provers. These approaches can only solve a handful of
the P UTNAM B ENCH problems, establishing the benchmark as a difficult open
challenge for research on neural theorem-proving. P UTNAM B ENCH is available at
https://github.com/trishullab/PutnamBench.

1

Introduction

Automating mathematical reasoning is a longstanding goal in artificial intelligence (Newell et al.,
1957). A prominent line of work on the problem (Li et al., 2024) uses neural models to direct
theorem-proving in formal frameworks like Lean 4 (Moura & Ullrich, 2021), Isabelle (Wenzel et al.,
2008), and Coq (The Coq Development Team, 2023). These frameworks can “execute” proofs like
code and offer execution feedback, which simplifies the search for correct proofs.
The design of quality benchmarks is a key challenge in this research area. The two most prominent
competition-based benchmarks for neural theorem-proving are M INI F2F (Zheng et al., 2021) and
F IMO (Liu et al., 2023). The former formalizes a mix of problems from high-school level courses
and mathematics competitions such as AIME, AMC, and IMO; the latter consists of a collection of
IMO problems. Both benchmarks have limitations. For example, M INI F2F contains many problems
that can be immediately solved using an SMT solver, and F IMO only targets the Lean 3 framework,
which is no longer actively maintained.
More generally, as large language models (LLMs) grow in importance as a tool for neural theoremproving (Li et al., 2024), preventing leakage between pretraining sets and evaluation sets is more
important than ever. This makes the continued supply of new benchmarks an important goal.
In this paper, we respond to this challenge with P UTNAM B ENCH, a new hand-curated, multi-langauge
benchmark for neural theorem-provers. P UTNAM B ENCH includes 1692 formalizations of 640
problems from the William Lowell Putnam Mathematical Competition, the premier college-level
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

