Enhancing Zero-Shot Vision Models by Label-Free
Prompt Distribution Learning and Bias Correcting

Xingyu Zhu1⋆

Beier Zhu2⋆ Yi Tan1 Shuo Wang1† Yanbin Hao1 Hanwang Zhang2
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Nanyang Technological University
xingyuzhu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, shuowang.edu@gmail.com

Abstract
Vision-language models, such as CLIP, have shown impressive generalization capacities when using appropriate text descriptions. While optimizing prompts on
downstream labeled data has proven effective in improving performance, these
methods entail labor costs for annotations and are limited by their quality. Additionally, since CLIP is pre-trained on highly imbalanced Web-scale data, it suffers from
inherent label bias that leads to suboptimal performance. To tackle the above challenges, we propose a label-Free prompt distribution learning and bias correction
framework, dubbed as Frolic, which boosts zero-shot performance without the
need for labeled data. Specifically, our Frolic learns distributions over prompt prototypes to capture diverse visual representations and adaptively fuses these with the
original CLIP through confidence matching. This fused model is further enhanced
by correcting label bias via a label-free logit adjustment. Notably, our method is not
only training-free but also circumvents the necessity for hyper-parameter tuning.
Extensive experimental results across 16 datasets demonstrate the efficacy of our
approach, particularly outperforming the state-of-the-art by an average of 2.6%
on 10 datasets with CLIP ViT-B/16 and achieving an average margin of 1.5% on
ImageNet and its five distribution shifts with CLIP ViT-B/16. Codes are available
in https://github.com/zhuhsingyuu/Frolic.

1

Introduction

Vision-language models (VLMs), such as CLIP [29], which are pre-trained on large-scale datasets
using contrastive loss, effectively align visual and textual representations within a shared feature
space. This capability enables the zero-shot inference on downstream tasks through prompting and
achieves remarkable performance. For example, using a selection of 80 hand-crafted prompts, a
zero-shot CLIP ViT-B/16 achieves an accuracy of 68.7%, and with prompts generated by language
models [27], the accuracy increases to 69.9%.
The success of zero-shot capabilities heavily relies on the appropriate text descriptions of the classes,
which has gained research interest in improving prompts. Recent studies propose learning prompts
from a small set of labeled images in the downstream data [46, 45, 47]. Among these studies, Lu
et al. [18] and Wang et al. [38] have found that learning the distribution of diverse prompts, which
better captures the variance in visual representations, leads to improved performance. Although these
methods have achieved significant improvements, they still depend on artificial prior knowledge for
labeling downstream data and are limited by the quality of manual annotations, which may restrict
the scalability of the original model.
⋆
†

Equal contributions
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

