Evidence of Learned Look-Ahead
in a Chess-Playing Neural Network

Erik Jenner1
UC Berkeley
Cameron Allen
UC Berkeley

Shreyas Kapur
UC Berkeley

Vasil Georgiev
Independent

Scott Emmons
UC Berkeley

Stuart Russell
UC Berkeley

Abstract
Do neural networks learn to implement algorithms such as look-ahead or search “in
the wild”? Or do they rely purely on collections of simple heuristics? We present
evidence of learned look-ahead in the policy and value network of Leela Chess
Zero, the currently strongest deep neural chess engine. We find that Leela internally
represents future optimal moves and that these representations are crucial for its
final output in certain board states. Concretely, we exploit the fact that Leela is a
transformer that treats every chessboard square like a token in language models,
and give three lines of evidence: (1) activations on certain squares of future moves
are unusually important causally; (2) we find attention heads that move important
information “forward and backward in time,” e.g., from squares of future moves
to squares of earlier ones; and (3) we train a simple probe that can predict the
optimal move 2 turns ahead with 92% accuracy (in board states where Leela finds a
single best line). These findings are clear evidence of learned look-ahead in neural
networks and might be a step towards a better understanding of their capabilities.

1

Introduction

Can neural networks learn to use algorithms such as look-ahead or search internally? Or are they
better thought of as vast collections of simple heuristics or memorized data? Answering this question
might help us anticipate neural networks’ future capabilities and give us a better understanding of how
they work internally. Recent work has found interesting cases of learned optimization or reasoning in
neural networks (von Oswald et al., 2023a,b; Akyürek et al., 2023; Brinkmann et al., 2024). However,
these works focus on simple algorithmic domains, with models that are trained specifically for those
research purposes. Instead, we ask: what computations do networks learn to perform “in the wild” in
more complex domains?
We study this question in the microcosm of chess. Neural networks are surprisingly strong at chess,
arguably approaching grandmaster level (Ruoss et al., 2024)—how do they achieve that performance?
Both reasoning and heuristics are plausible mechanisms. For example, human players and manually
designed chess engines perform look-ahead—they reason about which moves they will make in
the future. On the other hand, a network might simply learn heuristics based on the current state,
such as playing knight “fork” attacks—which are often advantageous—purely based on what they
look like geometrically. There is evidence that residual networks (such as transformers) tend to
additively aggregate results from many shallow circuits (Veit et al., 2016) and incrementally improve
their predictions (nostalgebraist, 2020; Belrose et al., 2023; Din et al., 2023), lending credence to
this idea that networks might implement a large collection of heuristics. Since we know how to
1

Corresponding email: jenner@berkeley.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

