Private Attribute Inference from Images with
Vision-Language Models

Batuhan Tömekçe, Mark Vero, Robin Staab, Martin Vechev
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
tbatuhan@ethz.ch
{mark.vero,robin.staab,martin.vechev}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
As large language models (LLMs) become ubiquitous in our daily tasks and digital
interactions, associated privacy risks are increasingly in focus. While LLM privacy
research has primarily focused on the leakage of model training data, it has recently
been shown that LLMs can make accurate privacy-infringing inferences from
previously unseen texts. With the rise of vision-language models (VLMs), capable
of understanding both images and text, a key question is whether this concern
transfers to the previously unexplored domain of benign images posted online. To
answer this question, we compile an image dataset with human-annotated labels
of the image owner’s personal attributes. In order to understand the privacy risks
posed by VLMs beyond traditional human attribute recognition, our dataset consists
of images where the inferable private attributes do not stem from direct depictions
of humans. On this dataset, we evaluate 7 state-of-the-art VLMs, finding that they
can infer various personal attributes at up to 77.6% accuracy. Concerningly, we
observe that accuracy scales with the general capabilities of the models, implying
that future models can be misused as stronger inferential adversaries, establishing
an imperative for the development of adequate defenses.

1

Introduction

Since the release of ChatGPT [1], large language model-based (LLM-based) applications and chatbots
have enjoyed a rapid adoption, surpassing hundreds of millions of daily active users [2]. Towards
making these models universally applicable, there has been a recent push for vision-language models
(VLMs) capable of understanding not only text but also reasoning over text and images jointly [3, 4].
The rapid adoption of LLM-based applications and the concurrent advances in the underlying models’
capabilities raises several safety and privacy concerns among the general public, researchers, and
regulators alike [3, 5–7]. In response, model providers are under increasing pressure from existing
data protection regulations, such as the EU’s GDPR [8] and the California Consumer Privacy Act
(CCPA) [9], as well as from substantial ongoing regulatory efforts directly concerning AI [10, 11].
For instance, in 2023, Italy temporarily banned ChatGPT, citing data protection and privacy concerns
[12]. As such, exploring the potential privacy concerns of VLMs is a crucial first step towards a wider
deployment of VLM applications that are privacy-preserving and regulation-compliant.
Privacy Implications of LLMs Weidinger et al. [6] lay out the privacy implications of LLMs
from two separate perspectives: (i) memorization and (ii) inference. Although several works
have examined private information memorization and leakage in LLMs [13–15], until recently,
inference has remained unexplored. Enabled by the strong inferential capabilities [16] and
vast world-knowledge [17] of current frontier models, Staab et al. [18] were first to examine
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

