Reinforcement Learning Policy as Macro Regulator
Rather than Macro Placer
Ke Xue1,2 , Ruo-Tong Chen1,2 , Xi Lin1,2 , Yunqi Shi1,2 ,
Shixiong Kai3 , Siyuan Xu3 , Chao Qian∗ 1,2
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
In modern chip design, placement aims at placing millions of circuit modules,
which is an essential step that significantly influences power, performance, and
area (PPA) metrics. Recently, reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a
promising technique for improving placement quality, especially macro placement.
However, current RL-based placement methods suffer from long training times,
low generalization ability, and inability to guarantee PPA results. A key issue lies
in the problem formulation, i.e., using RL to place from scratch, which results in
limits useful information and inaccurate rewards during the training process. In
this work, we propose an approach that utilizes RL for the refinement stage, which
allows the RL policy to learn how to adjust existing placement layouts, thereby
receiving sufficient information for the policy to act and obtain relatively dense
and precise rewards. Additionally, we introduce the concept of regularity during
training, which is considered an important metric in the chip design industry but is
often overlooked in current RL placement methods. We evaluate our approach on
the ISPD 2005 and ICCAD 2015 benchmark, comparing the global half-perimeter
wirelength and regularity of our proposed method against several competitive
approaches. Besides, we test the PPA performance using commercial software,
showing that RL as a regulator can achieve significant PPA improvements. Our RL
regulator can fine-tune placements from any method and enhance their quality. Our
work opens up new possibilities for the application of RL in placement, providing
a more effective and efficient approach to optimizing chip design. Our code is
available at https://github.com/lamda-bbo/macro-regulator.

1

Introduction

In the complex and evolving landscape of modern chip design, placement is a pivotal process that
significantly influences the power, performance, and area (PPA) metrics of the final chip [21, 22].
A modern chip typically comprises thousands of macros (i.e., individual building blocks such as
memories) and millions of standard cells (i.e., smaller basic components like logic gates). The
macro placement result provides a fundamental solution for the subsequent processes (e.g., standard
cells placement and routing), thus playing an important role [32]. For example, macro placement
influences the placement of standard cells, and poor macro placement might make it challenging
to place these cells optimally, leading to an unsatisfactory chip performance [33]. Moreover, an
inappropriate macro placement can result in macro blockage in the core center, which harms the
overall chip performance by causing unwanted effects such as routing congestion, inferior wirelength,
and timing performance issues [26].
∗

Correspondence to Chao Qian <qianc@nju.edu.cn>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

