A Unified Debiasing Approach for Vision-Language
Models across Modalities and Tasks
Hoin Jung, Taeuk Jang, Xiaoqian Wang∗
Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
{jung414, jang141, joywang}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Recent advancements in Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have enabled complex
multimodal tasks by processing text and image data simultaneously, significantly
enhancing the field of artificial intelligence. However, these models often exhibit
biases that can skew outputs towards societal stereotypes, thus necessitating debiasing strategies. Existing debiasing methods focus narrowly on specific modalities or
tasks, and require extensive retraining. To address these limitations, this paper introduces Selective Feature Imputation for Debiasing (SFID), a novel methodology
that integrates feature pruning and low confidence imputation (LCI) to effectively
reduce biases in VLMs. SFID is versatile, maintaining the semantic integrity
of outputs and costly effective by eliminating the need for retraining. Our experimental results demonstrate SFID’s effectiveness across various VLMs tasks
including zero-shot classification, text-to-image retrieval, image captioning, and
text-to-image generation, by significantly reducing gender biases without compromising performance. This approach not only enhances the fairness of VLMs
applications but also preserves their efficiency and utility across diverse scenarios.
The code is available on GitHub.

1

Introduction

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have revolutionized the way we handle multimodal tasks by
enabling simultaneous processing of text and image data. Models such as CLIP [31] and XVLM
[43] serve as foundation models [41] for various downstream tasks demonstrating the remarkable
versatility of these systems such as zero-shot classification and text-to-image retrieval. Additionally,
models like BLIP [25] and CoDi [37] enhance this spectrum by facilitating tasks such as image
captioning and text-to-image generation. These examples highlight the diverse capabilities of VLMs
in adapting to various specific multimodal interactions.
Despite their remarkable capabilities, VLMs have a critical bias issues, often skewing the model
outputs in ways that reflect societal stereotypes [21] such as gender [46] or racial [45] biases
in assigning professions or describing scenarios. For example, studies have identified biases in
multi-class zero-shot classification [17], where models might disproportionately associate certain
professions with specific genders. Similarly, biases in text-to-image retrieval [18, 39] can lead to
the preferential retrieval of images that reinforce stereotypical narratives. The implications of these
biases extend to image captioning [45, 20] and text-to-image generation [10], where the descriptive
and generative capacities of VLMs may perpetuate and even amplify existing societal prejudices.
These issues highlight a critical need for effective debiasing strategies that can ensure the fairness of
VLMs applications.
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

