Decision-Focused Learning with Directional Gradients

Michael Huang
CUNY Baruch Zicklin School of Business
New York, NY 10010
michael.huang@baruch.cuny.edu

Vishal Gupta
USC Marshall School of Business
Los Angeles, CA 90029
guptavis@usc.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel family of decision-aware surrogate losses, called Perturbation
Gradient (PG) losses, for the predict-then-optimize framework. The key idea is to
connect the expected downstream decision loss with the directional derivative of a
particular plug-in objective, and then approximate this derivative using zeroth order
gradient techniques. Unlike the original decision loss which is typically piecewise
constant and discontinuous, our new PG losses is a Lipschitz continuous, difference
of concave functions that can be optimized using off-the-shelf gradient-based
methods. Most importantly, unlike existing surrogate losses, the approximation
error of our PG losses vanishes as the number of samples grows. Hence, optimizing
our surrogate loss yields a best-in-class policy asymptotically, even in misspecified
settings. This is the first such result in misspecified settings, and we provide
numerical evidence confirming our PG losses substantively outperform existing
proposals when the underlying model is misspecified.

1

Introduction

We study the contextual optimization problem
π ∗ (X) ∈ arg min f ∗ (X)⊤ z, f ∗ (X) ≡ E [Y | X] ,
z∈Z

(1)

where (X, Y ) ∈ X × Y are random variables, and Z ⊆ Rd is a known, potentially non-convex
feasible region. We work in a data-driven setting in which f ∗ is unknown, but we observe i.i.d.
draws {(Xi , Yi ) : i = 1, . . . , n} of (X, Y ). Problem (1) models applications in which we observe
a potentially informative context X before selecting the decision π(X) such as vehicle routing,
portfolio allocation, and inventory management [7, 5, 32]. Problem (1) has also been used as an
“optimization layer" in neural network architectures to model combinatorial decisions [26]. Through
a suitable transformation, it can also represent some, but not all, nonlinear problems like personalized
pricing (see Appendix A).
The predict-then-optimize framework focuses on plug-in policies for Problem (1). Given a function
f : X 7→ Y, the corresponding plug-in policy is
π̂(f (X)) ∈ arg min f (X)⊤ z,
z∈Z

(2)

with ties broken by some pre-specified tie-breaking rule. Plug-in policies are attractive because they
separate the prediction procedure (f ) from the optimization procedure (Problem (2)). This decoupling
is especially useful when i) decisions z must satisfy hard constraints (enforced by Z), or ii) one has a
specialized algorithm for solving instances of Problem (2) (e.g., a custom vehicle-routing solver).
Given the form of π ∗ , a natural approach might be to learn an estimate fˆ of f ∗ from the data, e.g.,
by minimizing the mean-squared error, and then compute π̂(fˆ(X)). Such procedures are called
decision-blind since they do not leverage Problem (1) when learning fˆ.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

