Low Precision Local Training is Enough for Federated
Learning

1

Zhiwei Li1,∗ Yiqiu Li1,∗ Binbin Lin2,4 Zhongming Jin3 Weizhong Zhang1,†
Fudan University 2 Zhejiang University 3 Alibaba Cloud Computing 4 Fullong Inc.
{zwli23, yiqiuli22}@m.fudan.edu.cn
binbinlin@zju.edu.cn
zhongming.jinzm@alibaba-inc.com
weizhongzhang@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) is a prevalent machine learning paradigm designed to
address challenges posed by heterogeneous client data while preserving data privacy.
Unlike distributed training, it typically orchestrates resource-constrained edge
devices to communicate via a low-bandwidth communication network with a
central server. This urges the development of more computation and communication
efficient training algorithms. In this paper, we propose an efficient FL paradigm,
where the local models in the clients are trained with low-precision operations
and communicated with the server in low precision format, while only the model
aggregation in the server is performed with high-precision computation. We
surprisingly find that high precision models can be recovered from the low precision
local models with proper aggregation in the server. In this way, both the workload
in the client-side and the communication cost can be significantly reduced. We
theoretically show that our proposed paradigm can converge to the optimal solution
as the training goes on, which demonstrates that low precision local training
is enough for FL. Our paradigm can be integrated with existing FL algorithms
flexibly. Experiments across extensive benchmarks are conducted to showcase the
effectiveness of our proposed method. Notably, the models trained by our method
with the precision as low as 8 bits are comparable to those from the full precision
training. As a by-product, we show that low precision local training can relieve the
over-fitting issue in local training, which under heterogeneous client data can cause
the client models drift further away from each other and lead to the failure in model
aggregation. Code is released at https://github.com/digbangbang/LPT-FL.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) [3, 15, 22, 36] is a popular privacy preserving machine learning paradigm
to collaboratively learn a global model over the decentralized data. In FL paradigm, the clients
are responsible for local training and only have access to their private datasets, while the server
plays an essential role in aggregating the clients’ updates into a global model. Unlike large-scaled
distributed training, FL typically orchestrates resource-constrained edge devices to communicate
via a low-bandwidth communication network with a central server. This urges the development
of more computation and communication efficient optimization algorithms. The most prevalent
approach in FL is developed based on local-SGD [26], which is referred to as FedAvg. In each
communication round, the clients individually train their local models for multiple steps and then
send them to the server for aggregation. It can be expected that if longer local training process one
uses, the greater communication cost saving one can achieve. However, long time local training
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author: weizhongzhang@fudan.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

