M3 GPT: An Advanced Multimodal, Multitask Framework
for Motion Comprehension and Generation

Mingshuang Luo1,2,3 , Ruibing Hou1∗ , Zhuo Li4 , Hong Chang1,3 ,
Zimo Liu2 , Yaowei Wang2,5 , Shiguang Shan1,3
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, China, 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
4
WeChat, Tencent Inc, 5 Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen

mingshuang.luo@vipl.ict.ac.cn,{houruibing,changhong,sgshan}@ict.ac.cn
albertzli@tencent.com,liuzm@pcl.ac.cn,wangyaowei@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper presents M3 GPT, an advanced Multimodal, Multitask framework for
Motion comprehension and generation. M3 GPT operates on three fundamental
principles. The first focuses on creating a unified representation space for various
motion-relevant modalities. We employ discrete vector quantization for multimodal
conditional signals, such as text, music and motion/dance, enabling seamless integration into a large language model (LLM) with a single vocabulary. The second
involves modeling motion generation directly in the raw motion space. This strategy circumvents the information loss associated with a discrete tokenizer, resulting
in more detailed and comprehensive motion generation. Third, M3 GPT learns to
model the connections and synergies among various motion-relevant tasks. Text,
the most familiar and well-understood modality for LLMs, is utilized as a bridge to
establish connections between different motion tasks, facilitating mutual reinforcement. To our knowledge, M3 GPT is the first model capable of comprehending and
generating motions based on multiple signals. Extensive experiments highlight
M3 GPT’s superior performance across various motion-relevant tasks and its powerful zero-shot generalization capabilities for extremely challenging tasks. Project
page: https://luomingshuang.github.io/M3GPT/.

Can you generate a motion for the caption
that a person performs a knee tuck to kick L?
Can you translate the motion into a caption?

A person is performing a Hip Bounce Wrist Circle
movement.

Can you generate a dance for the music?

Can you generate a music for the dance?

M3GPT

Can you predict a motion for a given motion?

Can you fullfill the following motion?

Figure 1: M3 GPT can handle core motion comprehension and generation tasks, including text-to-motion, motionto-text, music-to-dance, dance-to-music, motion prediction, and motion in-between. The motion sequences
within the dashed-line areas are masked in the input.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

