Learning Cut Generating Functions for Integer
Programming

Hongyu Cheng
Dept. of Applied Mathematics & Statistics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
hongyucheng@jhu.edu

Amitabh Basu
Dept. of Applied Mathematics & Statistics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
basu.amitabh@jhu.edu

Abstract
The branch-and-cut algorithm is the method of choice to solve large scale integer
programming problems in practice. A key ingredient of branch-and-cut is the use
of cutting planes which are derived constraints that reduce the search space for an
optimal solution. Selecting effective cutting planes to produce small branch-and-cut
trees is a critical challenge in the branch-and-cut algorithm. Recent advances have
employed a data-driven approach to select good cutting planes from a parameterized
family, aimed at reducing the branch-and-bound tree size (in expectation) for
a given distribution of integer programming instances. We extend this idea to
the selection of the best cut generating function (CGF), which is a tool in the
integer programming literature for generating a wide variety of cutting planes
that generalize the well-known Gomory Mixed-Integer (GMI) cutting planes. We
provide rigorous sample complexity bounds for the selection of an effective CGF
from certain parameterized families that provably performs well for any specified
distribution on the problem instances. Our empirical results show that the selected
CGF can outperform the GMI cuts for certain distributions. Additionally, we
explore the sample complexity of using neural networks for instance-dependent
CGF selection.

1

Introduction

Integer linear programming is an optimization framework that has diverse applications in logistics [Arntzen et al., 1995, Sinha et al., 1995, Hane et al., 1995], finance [Bertsimas et al., 1999],
engineering [Grossmann and Kravanja, 1995], national defense [Gryffenberg et al., 1997, Jiang et al.,
2014], healthcare [Ajayi et al., 2024, Valeva et al., 2023], statistics [Bertsimas et al., 2016, Dash et al.,
2018, Wei et al., 2019] and machine learning [Bertsimas and Dunn, 2017, Chen et al., 2021, Malioutov
et al., 2023], to give a small sample of applications and related literature. The method of choice for
solving integer programming problems is the well-known branch-and-cut paradigm [Schrijver, 1986,
Nemhauser and Wolsey, 1988, Conforti et al., 2014]. This procedure has two critical ingredients:
branching, which is a way to subdivide the problem into smaller subproblems, and the use of cutting
planes which is a way to reduce the feasible region of a (sub)problem by deriving additional linear
constraints that are implicitly implied by the integrality of the decision variables. To get to a concrete
algorithm from this high level framework, one needs to make certain choices (such as how to branch,
which cutting plane to use etc.) Thus, at a high level, the branch-and-cut method is really a collection
of algorithms equipped with a common set of “tunable parameters". Upon a specific choice of values
for these parameters, one actually obtains a well-defined algorithm that one can deploy on instances
of the problem.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

