Group-wise oracle-efficient algorithms for
online multi-group learning

Samuel Deng
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
samdeng@cs.columbia.edu

Daniel Hsu
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
djhsu@cs.columbia.edu

Jingwen Liu
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
jingwenliu@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of online multi-group learning, a learning model in which
an online learner must simultaneously achieve small prediction regret on a large
collection of (possibly overlapping) subsequences corresponding to a family of
groups. Groups are subsets of the context space, and in fairness applications, they
may correspond to subpopulations defined by expressive functions of demographic
attributes. In contrast to previous work on this learning model, we consider
scenarios in which the family of groups is too large to explicitly enumerate, and
hence we seek algorithms that only access groups via an optimization oracle. In
this paper, we design such oracle-efficient algorithms with sublinear regret under a
variety of settings, including: (i) the i.i.d. setting, (ii) the adversarial setting with
smoothed context distributions, and (iii) the adversarial transductive setting.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of online multi-group learning, originally introduced by [BL20] (adapting the
specialists/time-selection setup of [Blu97; Fre+97; BM07]). In this learning model, we consider a
collection of groups G, which are (possibly intersecting) subsets of a context space X , as well as
a hypothesis class H of functions defined on X . Contexts x1 , x2 , . . . , xT arrive one-by-one over a
sequence of T rounds, and the learner must make a prediction associated with each xt . The learner’s
goal is to perform well on every subsequence of rounds corresponding to each group g ∈ G. Here,
performance is measured relative to the predictions of the best-in-hindsight hypothesis h ∈ H for the
specific subsequence under consideration.
A common interpretation of multi-group learning—which is natural when considering fairness in
machine learning (ML)—identifies contexts x ∈ X with individuals, each group g ∈ G with a
subpopulation (perhaps defined by a combination of various demographic features such as age and
gender), and each hypothesis h ∈ H with a classifier that makes predictions about individuals [RY21].
The goal of the learner, then, is to predict as well as the best subpopulation-specific hypothesis, for
all subpopulations simultaneously.
The standard benchmark in online learning is regret, which compares the performance of the learner
on all rounds to that of the single best hypothesis in hindsight. But such a benchmark is only
meaningful if there is a hypothesis that performs well in all contexts. At the other extreme, we
may hope that the learner performs as well as using the best context-specific hypothesis in every
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

