EEGPT: Pretrained Transformer for Universal and
Reliable Representation of EEG Signals

Guagnyu Wang
Faculty of Computing
Harbin Institute of Technology
wangguangyu@stu.hit.edu.cn

Wenchao Liu
Faculty of Computing
Harbin Institute of Technology
23b903096@stu.hit.edu.cn

Yuhong He
Faculty of Computing
Harbin Institute of Technology
19S003002@stu.hit.edu.cn

Cong Xu
Faculty of Computing
Harbin Institute of Technology
congxu@hit.edu.cn

Lin Ma
Faculty of Computing
Harbin Institute of Technology
malin_li@hit.edu.cn

Haifeng Li∗
Faculty of Computing
Harbin Institute of Technology
lihaifeng@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Electroencephalography (EEG) is crucial for recording brain activity, with applications in medicine, neuroscience, and brain-computer interfaces (BCI). However,
challenges such as low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), high inter-subject variability, and channel mismatch complicate the extraction of robust, universal EEG
representations. We propose EEGPT, a novel 10-million-parameter pretrained
transformer model designed for universal EEG feature extraction. In EEGPT, a
mask-based dual self-supervised learning method for efficient feature extraction
is designed. Compared to other mask-based self-supervised learning methods,
EEGPT introduces spatio-temporal representation alignment. This involves constructing a self-supervised task based on EEG representations that possess high
SNR and rich semantic information, rather than on raw signals. Consequently,
this approach mitigates the issue of poor feature quality typically extracted from
low SNR signals. Additionally, EEGPT’s hierarchical structure processes spatial
and temporal information separately, reducing computational complexity while
increasing flexibility and adaptability for BCI applications. By training on a
large mixed multi-task EEG dataset, we fully exploit EEGPT’s capabilities. The
experiment validates the efficacy and scalability of EEGPT, achieving state-ofthe-art performance on a range of downstream tasks with linear-probing. Our
research advances EEG representation learning, offering innovative solutions for
bio-signal processing and AI applications. The code for this paper is available at:
https://github.com/BINE022/EEGPT.

1

Introduction

Electroencephalography (EEG) dynamically reflects the brain’s functional state by recording electrical
signals from the cerebral cortex [1]. EEG is essential for studying brain activity and is pivotal in
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

