Evaluating language models as risk scores

André F. Cruz1,2
Moritz Hardt1,2
Celestine Mendler-Dünner1,2,3
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
2
Tübingen AI Center 3 ELLIS Institute Tübingen

Abstract
Current question-answering benchmarks predominantly focus on accuracy in realizable prediction tasks. Conditioned on a question and answer-key, does the most
likely token match the ground truth? Such benchmarks necessarily fail to evaluate
LLMs’ ability to quantify ground-truth outcome uncertainty. In this work, we focus
on the use of LLMs as risk scores for unrealizable prediction tasks. We introduce
folktexts, a software package to systematically generate risk scores using
LLMs, and evaluate them against US Census data products. A flexible API enables
the use of different prompting schemes, local or web-hosted models, and diverse
census columns that can be used to compose custom prediction tasks. We evaluate
17 recent LLMs across five proposed benchmark tasks. We find that zero-shot risk
scores produced by multiple-choice question-answering have high predictive signal
but are wildly miscalibrated. Base models consistently overestimate outcome
uncertainty, while instruction-tuned models underestimate uncertainty and produce
over-confident risk scores. In fact, instruction-tuning polarizes answer distribution
regardless of true underlying data uncertainty. This reveals a general inability of
instruction-tuned models to express data uncertainty using multiple-choice answers.
A separate experiment using verbalized chat-style risk queries yields substantially
improved calibration across instruction-tuned models. These differences in ability
to quantify data uncertainty cannot be revealed in realizable settings, and highlight
a blind-spot in the current evaluation ecosystem that folktexts covers.

1

Introduction

Fueled by the success of large language models (LLMs), it is increasingly tempting for practitioners
to use such models for risk assessment and decision making in consequential domains [1–4]. Given
the CV of a job applicant, for example, some might prompt a model, what are the chances that the
employee will perform well on the job? The true answer is likely uncertain. Some applicants of
the same features will do well, others won’t. A good statistical model should faithfully reflect such
outcome uncertainty.
Calibration is perhaps the most basic kind of uncertainty quantification to ask for. A calibrated
model, on average, reflects the true frequency of outcomes in a population. Calibrated models must
therefore give at least some indication of uncertainty. Fundamental to statistical practice across the
board, calibration has also been a central component in the debate around the ethics and fairness of
consequential risk scoring in recent years [5–8].
The evaluation of LLMs to date, however, has predominantly focused on accuracy metrics, often in
realizable tasks where there is a unique correct label for each data point. Such benchmarks necessarily
cannot speak to the use of language models as risk score estimators. A model can have high utility
in well-defined question-answering tasks while being wildly miscalibrated. In fact, while accuracy
corresponds to knowledge of the expected answer, proper uncertainty quantification corresponds to
knowledge of the variance over answers.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

