OneRef: Unified One-tower Expression Grounding
and Segmentation with Mask Referring Modeling

Linhui Xiao1,2,3 , Xiaoshan Yang1,2,3 , Fang Peng1,2,3 , Yaowei Wang2,4 , Changsheng Xu1,2,3∗
1
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Pengcheng Laboratory
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
{xiaolinhui16, pengfang21}@mails.ucas.ac.cn,
{xiaoshan.yang, csxu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, wangyw@pcl.ac.cn

Abstract
Constrained by the separate encoding of vision and language, existing grounding
and referring segmentation works heavily rely on bulky Transformer-based fusion
en-/decoders and a variety of early-stage interaction technologies. Simultaneously,
the current mask visual language modeling (MVLM) fails to capture the nuanced
referential relationship between image-text in referring tasks. In this paper, we
propose OneRef, a minimalist referring framework built on the modality-shared
one-tower transformer that unifies the visual and linguistic feature spaces. To
modeling the referential relationship, we introduce a novel MVLM paradigm called
Mask Referring Modeling (MRefM), which encompasses both referring-aware
mask image modeling and referring-aware mask language modeling. Both modules not only reconstruct modality-related content but also cross-modal referring
content. Within MRefM, we propose a referring-aware dynamic image masking
strategy that is aware of the referred region rather than relying on fixed ratios
or generic random masking schemes. By leveraging the unified visual language
feature space and incorporating MRefM’s ability to model the referential relations,
our approach enables direct regression of the referring results without resorting
to various complex techniques. Our method consistently surpasses existing approaches and achieves SoTA performance on both grounding and segmentation
tasks, providing valuable insights for future research. Our code and models are
available at https://github.com/linhuixiao/OneRef.

1

Introduction

Visual Grounding (VG) aims to ground a region referred by a expression query text in a specific image.
The generalized VG / referring tasks include Referring Expression Comprehension (REC) [69, 62, 101,
31, 14, 91, 90, 48], Phrase Grounding (PG) [1, 74], and Referring Expression/Image Segmentation
(RES/RIS) [69, 94, 89]. In REC/PG, the grounding region is represented by a rectangular boundary
box, while in RES/RIS, it is represented by an irregular fine-grained segmented mask of the referred
object. Unlike object detection [57, 58] or instance segmentation [26], which usually relies on a
close-set of categories to detect or segment multiple regions that satisfy the object label, visual
grounding is not limited to fixed categories. It requires understanding the semantics of the query text
and then grounding or segmenting specific areas. Therefore, visual grounding is a task that strongly
relies on the multimodal interaction and alignment of visual and linguistic features.
Since the introduction of BERT [16] and ViT [19, 7], the state-of-the-art (SoTA) grounding works
have widely adopted a pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm. As illustrated in Fig. 1, existing studies
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

