In-Context Symmetries: Self-Supervised
Learning through Contextual World Models

Sharut Gupta* , Chenyu Wang* , Yifei Wang* , Tommi Jaakkola
MIT CSAIL
{sharut, wangchy, yifei_w, jaakkola}@mit.edu

Stefanie Jegelka
TU Munich, MIT CSAIL
stefje@mit.edu

Abstract
At the core of self-supervised learning for vision is the idea of learning invariant
or equivariant representations with respect to a set of data transformations. This
approach, however, introduces strong inductive biases, which can render the representations fragile in downstream tasks that do not conform to these symmetries.
In this work, drawing insights from world models, we propose to instead learn
a general representation that can adapt to be invariant or equivariant to different
transformations by paying attention to context — a memory module that tracks
task-specific states, actions, and future states. Here, the action is the transformation,
while the current and future states respectively represent the input’s representation
before and after the transformation. Our proposed algorithm, Contextual SelfSupervised Learning (C ONTEXT SSL), learns equivariance to all transformations
(as opposed to invariance). As a result, the model learns to encode all relevant
features as general representations while, importantly, it can adapt to restrict to
task-wise symmetries when given a few examples as the context. Empirically, we
demonstrate significant performance gains over existing methods on equivariancerelated tasks, supported by both qualitative and quantitative evaluations. Code is
available at https://github.com/Sharut/In-Context-Symmetries.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning (SSL) of image representations has made remarkable progress in recent
years [9, 6, 47, 31, 18, 3, 19, 20, 38, 34, 10, 26, 11, 46, 39, 48], achieving competitive performance
to its supervised counterparts on various downstream tasks, such as image classification.
Most of these works are based on the joint-embedding architecture (as shown in Figure 2(a)) which
encourages the representations of semantically similar (positive) pairs to be close, and those of
dissimilar (negative) pairs to be more orthogonal. Typically, positive pairs are generated by classic
data augmentation techniques that correspond to common pretext tasks, e.g., randomizing color,
texture, orientation, and cropping. The alignment of representations for positive pairs can be guided
by either invariance [9, 6, 11, 26, 46, 20], which promotes insensitivity to these augmentations, or
equivariance [22, 13, 12, 16, 1, 17], which maintains sensitivity to them. However, enforcing invariance or equivariance to a pre-defined set of augmentations introduces strong inductive priors which
are far from universal across a range of downstream tasks. For example, invariance to image flipping
is useful for image classification but can significantly hurt performance on image segmentation, where
retaining sensitivity to flipping is crucial. This often results in brittle representations that necessitate
retraining the model with different augmentations tailored to each downstream task [42, 12].
* Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

