AGILE: A Novel Reinforcement Learning Framework
of LLM Agents

Peiyuan Feng∗1 Yichen He∗1 Guanhua Huang∗†2 Yuan Lin∗1
Hanchong Zhang∗†3 Yuchen Zhang∗1 Hang Li1
1
ByteDance Research 2 University of Science and Technology of China
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{fpy,hyc,linyuan.0,zhangyuchen.zyc,lihang.lh}@bytedance.com,
guanhuahuang@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhanghanchong@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
We introduce a novel reinforcement learning framework of LLM agents named
AGILE (AGent that Interacts and Learns from Environments) designed to perform
complex conversational tasks with users, leveraging LLMs, memory, tools, and
interactions with experts. The agent possesses capabilities beyond conversation,
including reflection, tool usage, and expert consultation. We formulate the construction of such an LLM agent as a reinforcement learning (RL) problem, in
which the LLM serves as the policy model. We fine-tune the LLM using labeled
data of actions and the PPO algorithm. We focus on question answering and
release a dataset for agents called ProductQA, comprising challenging questions
in online shopping. Our extensive experiments on ProductQA, MedMCQA and
HotPotQA show that AGILE agents based on 7B and 13B LLMs trained with
PPO can outperform GPT-4 agents. Our ablation study highlights the indispensability of memory, tools, consultation, reflection, and reinforcement learning in
achieving the agent’s strong performance. Datasets and code are available at
https://github.com/bytarnish/AGILE.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have exhibited remarkable capabilities such as instruction following,
reasoning, and zero-shot learning [3, 45, 20, 26], which have greatly catalyzed the development
of autonomous agents based on LLMs [28, 30, 2], also known as LLM agents. Recent works
propose several essential components or workflows to enhance the abilities of LLM agents, such as
planning [45, 51, 39], reflection [21, 40], tool-use [29, 36, 48] and life-long learning [42]. However,
it remains unclear how to integrate all components into a unified framework and optimize them
end-to-end.
In this paper, we introduce a novel reinforcement learning framework for LLM agents to unify various
components and streamline their learning and operation processes. As shown in Figure 1(a), the
architecture of the agent system, named AGILE, comprises four modules: LLM, memory, tools, and
executor. Furthermore, the agent can interact with both users and experts. The LLM, functioning as
the predictor of all actions, generates instructions and processes responses. The executor, working as
the controller of all actions, interprets the LLM instructions to activate the corresponding modules and
collects their responses for the LLM. For example, the executor can fetch a text from the memory and
append it to the context of LLM, or extract an excerpt from the context and append it to the memory.
∗
†

Equal contribution. Alphabet order.
Work done during ByteDance Research internship.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

