Amortized Fourier Neural Operators

Zipeng Xiao1 , Siqi Kou1 , Zhongkai Hao2 , Bokai Lin1 , Zhijie Deng1∗
1
Qing Yuan Research Institute, SEIEE, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Tsinghua University
{xiaozp_25, happy-karry}@sjtu.edu.cn, hzj21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
{19821172068,zhijied}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Fourier Neural Operators (FNOs) have shown promise for solving partial differential equations (PDEs). Typically, FNOs employ separate parameters for different
frequency modes to specify tunable kernel integrals in Fourier space, which, yet, results in an undesirably large number of parameters when solving high-dimensional
PDEs. A workaround is to abandon the frequency modes exceeding a predefined
threshold, but this limits the FNOs’ ability to represent high-frequency details and
poses non-trivial challenges for hyper-parameter specification. To address these,
we propose AMortized Fourier Neural Operator (AM-FNO), where an amortized
neural parameterization of the kernel function is deployed to accommodate arbitrarily many frequency modes using a fixed number of parameters. We introduce
two implementations of AM-FNO, based on the recently developed, appealing Kolmogorov–Arnold Network (KAN) and Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) equipped
with orthogonal embedding functions respectively. We extensively evaluate our
method on diverse datasets from various domains and observe up to 31% average
improvement compared to competing neural operator baselines.

1

Introduction

Neural operators (NOs) have been extensively studied for their potential in accelerating the solving
of partial differential equations (PDEs) in science and engineering fields [19, 20, 18, 24, 25, 2].
In contrast to approaches limited to specific discretizations or PDE instances [8, 36, 28, 29], NOs
characterize the solving operator of a family of PDEs across different discretizations and hence enjoy
higher efficiency and usability, e.g., for weather forecasting [26] and material analysis [5].
Fourier neural operator (FNO) [18] and its variants [17, 33, 31, 35] stand out as a significant subclass
of NOs, which explore the convolution theorem and Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) to efficiently
performs kernel integral, a central module for the learning operator of PDEs. Typically, FNO
separately parameterizes the values of the Fourier-transformed kernel function for different frequency
modes, and hinges on frequency truncation—abandons the parameters corresponding to frequencies
exceeding some threshold—to reduce modeling costs, particularly for high-dimensional PDEs.
Frequency truncation can be problematic when solving PDE systems with intense high-frequency
components. To address this, IFNO dynamically adjusts the threshold for frequency truncation during
training, though it still experiences exponential parameter growth with increasing dimensionality [35].
This complexity can result in substantial memory consumption and hinder the development of largescale pretrained models [9]. Conversely, AFNO [7] employs a shared MLP to transform the outcomes
of FFT, but the uniform treatment of frequency modes may constrain expressiveness and lead to
suboptimal performance.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

