Conformalized Credal Set Predictors
Alireza Javanmardi
LMU Munich, MCML
Munich, Germany
alireza.javanmardi@ifi.lmu.de

David Stutz
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarbrücken, Germany
david.stutz@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Eyke Hüllermeier
LMU Munich, MCML
Munich, Germany
eyke@ifi.lmu.de

Abstract
Credal sets are sets of probability distributions that are considered as candidates
for an imprecisely known ground-truth distribution. In machine learning, they have
recently attracted attention as an appealing formalism for uncertainty representation,
in particular, due to their ability to represent both the aleatoric and epistemic
uncertainty in a prediction. However, the design of methods for learning credal
set predictors remains a challenging problem. In this paper, we make use of
conformal prediction for this purpose. More specifically, we propose a method
for predicting credal sets in the classification task, given training data labeled by
probability distributions. Since our method inherits the coverage guarantees of
conformal prediction, our conformal credal sets are guaranteed to be valid with high
probability (without any assumptions on model or distribution). We demonstrate
the applicability of our method on ambiguous classification tasks for uncertainty
quantification.

1

Introduction

Representing and quantifying uncertainty is becoming increasingly important in machine learning
(ML), particularly as ML models are employed in safety-critical application domains such as medicine
or autonomous driving. In such domains, a distinction between so-called aleatoric uncertainty (AU)
and epistemic uncertainty (EU) is often useful [21]. Broadly speaking, aleatoric uncertainty is due to
the inherent randomness of the data-generating process, whereas epistemic uncertainty stems from
the learner’s lack of knowledge about the best predictive model. Thus, while the former is irreducible,
the latter can, in principle, be reduced through additional information, e.g., by gathering additional
data to learn from.
Representation of aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty requires formalism more expressive than
standard probability distributions [22]. One such formalism which prevails in the recent ML literature
is second-order probability distributions. Essentially, in a classification setting, these are distributions
over distributions over classes. Models producing second-order distributions as predictions can be
learned in a classical Bayesian way [16, 25] or using more recent approaches such as evidential
deep learning [44]. Yet, approaches of that kind are not unproblematic and have been subject to
criticism [8, 9]. Specifically, such approaches have been shown to misrepresent epistemic uncertainty.
Another formalism suitable for representing both types of uncertainty is the concept of a credal
set, which is well-established in the field of imprecise probability theory [58] and meanwhile also
attracted attention in ML [23, 46]. Credal sets are (convex) sets of probability distributions that can
be considered as candidates for an imprecisely known ground-truth distribution.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

