The Evolution of Statistical Induction Heads:
In-Context Learning Markov Chains

Ezra Edelman∗
University of Pennsylvania
ezrae@cis.upenn.edu
Benjamin L. Edelman
Harvard University
bedelman@g.harvard.edu

Nikolaos Tsilivis∗
New York University†
nt2231@nyu.edu

Eran Malach
Harvard University
emalach@g.harvard.edu

Surbhi Goel
University of Pennsylvania
surbhig@cis.upenn.edu

Abstract
Large language models have the ability to generate text that mimics patterns in their
inputs. We introduce a simple Markov Chain sequence modeling task in order to
study how this in-context learning capability emerges. In our setting, each example
is sampled from a Markov chain drawn from a prior distribution over Markov
chains. Transformers trained on this task form statistical induction heads which
compute accurate next-token probabilities given the bigram statistics of the context.
During the course of training, models pass through multiple phases: after an initial
stage in which predictions are uniform, they learn to sub-optimally predict using
in-context single-token statistics (unigrams); then, there is a rapid phase transition
to the correct in-context bigram solution. We conduct an empirical and theoretical
investigation of this multi-phase process, showing how successful learning results
from the interaction between the transformer’s layers, and uncovering evidence
that the presence of the simpler unigram solution may delay formation of the
final bigram solution. We examine how learning is affected by varying the prior
distribution over Markov chains, and consider the generalization of our in-context
learning of Markov chains (ICL-MC) task to n-grams for n > 2.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) exhibit a remarkable ability to perform in-context learning (ICL)
from patterns in their input context [12, 16]. The ability of LLMs to adaptively learn from context is
profoundly useful, yet the underlying mechanisms of this emergent capability are not fully understood.
In an effort to better understand ICL, some recent works propose to study ICL in controlled synthetic
settings—in particular, training transformers on mathematically defined tasks which require learning
from the input context. For example, a recent line of works studies the ability of transformers
to perform ICL of standard supervised learning problems such as linear regression [3, 20, 26,
41]. Studying these well-understood synthetic learning tasks enables fine-grained control over
the data distribution, allows for comparisons with established supervised learning algorithms, and
facilitates the examination of the in-context “algorithm” implemented by the network. That said,
these supervised settings are reflective specifically of few-shot learning, which is only a special case
of the more general phenomenon of networks incorporating patterns from their context into their
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Work done while visiting Harvard University.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

