Improving Neural Network Surface Processing with
Principal Curvatures

Josquin Harrison
Inria
Sophia Antipolis
josquin.harrison@inria.fr

James Benn
Inria
Sophia Antipolis
james.benn@inria.fr

Maxime Sermesant
Inria
Sophia Antipolis
maxime.sermesant@inria.fr

Abstract
The modern study and use of surfaces is a research topic grounded in centuries of
mathematical and empirical inquiry. From a mathematical point of view, curvature
is an invariant that characterises the intrinsic geometry and the extrinsic shape of
a surface. Yet, in modern applications the focus has shifted away from finding
expressive representations of surfaces, and towards the design of efficient neural
network architectures to process them. The literature suggests a tendency to
either overlook the representation of the processed surface, or use overcomplicated
representations whose ability to capture the essential features of a surface is opaque.
We propose using curvature as the input of neural network architectures for surface
processing, and explore this proposition through experiments making use of the
shape operator. Our results show that using curvature as input leads to significant
a increase in performance on segmentation and classification tasks, while allowing
far less computational overhead than current methods.

1

Introduction

Surfaces are a natural representation for many real world objects ranging from organs and organisms
to archaeological artefacts. They are also a central tool in virtual environments such as computer
games, or computer-aided design. This ubiquity has resulted in a large body of work dedicated to
mathematical methods developed for the efficient use of surfaces, as well as their analysis.
The goal of traditional computational surface analysis is to find a representation of a surface that
is expressive enough to capture details relevant for the problem or task at hand, while being computationally light-weight. However, the effectiveness of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) in
image processing opened new doors to surface processing. The design of efficient convolution-like
operations to adapt neural networks (NN) to surfaces alleviated the need for complex and detailed representations, to the point where most state of the art architectures use extrinsic vertex coordinates as
input, letting the NN models learn the surface structure at multiple scales. While some attempts were
made to use well known representations as inputs, yielding some increase in performance [38, 35],
the general consensus is that the model should be able to learn it by itself [25]. While it is true that
neural networks are efficient at capturing surface features at multiple scales, the use of a local surface
representation that is more expressive and more natural to interpret than extrinsic coordinates should
naturally improve the performance of the network. The optimal choice of representation should be
somewhere between coarse extrinsic vertex coordinates, and more complex representations.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

