LookHere: Vision Transformers with Directed
Attention Generalize and Extrapolate

Anthony Fuller, Daniel G. Kyrollos, Yousef Yassin, James R. Green
Department of Systems and Computer Engineering
Carleton University
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
∗
anthony.fuller@carleton.ca

Abstract
High-resolution images offer more information about scenes that can improve
model accuracy. However, the dominant model architecture in computer vision, the
vision transformer (ViT), cannot effectively leverage larger images without finetuning — ViTs poorly extrapolate to more patches at test time, although transformers
offer sequence length flexibility. We attribute this shortcoming to the current patch
position encoding methods, which create a distribution shift when extrapolating.
We propose a drop-in replacement for the position encoding of plain ViTs that
restricts attention heads to fixed fields of view, pointed in different directions, using
2D attention masks. Our novel method, called LookHere, provides translationequivariance, ensures attention head diversity, and limits the distribution shift
that attention heads face when extrapolating. We demonstrate that LookHere
improves performance on classification (avg.↑ 1.6%), against adversarial attack
(avg.↑ 5.4%), and decreases calibration error (avg.↓ 1.5%) — on ImageNet without
extrapolation. With extrapolation, LookHere outperforms the current SoTA position
encoding method, 2D-RoPE, by 21.7% on ImageNet when trained at 2242 px and
tested at 10242 px. Additionally, we release a high-resolution test set to improve
the evaluation of high-resolution image classifiers, called ImageNet-HR.

1

Introduction

There is a decades-long trend in computer vision towards higher-resolution imagery, which contains
more detailed scene information. Increasing resolution is a reliable way to improve model accuracy
[13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20], but this comes at a cost; training models for hundreds of epochs
on large-scale datasets is expensive, especially at high-resolutions. There are two ways to reduce
this cost and still see accuracy benefits from high-resolutions: 1 high-resolution finetuning, which
pretrains models at a lower resolution, like 2242 px, then finetunes them at a higher resolution, like
3842 px; and 2 extrapolating, which deploys models at a higher resolution, without further training.
Of these two options, we should aim for models that can effectively extrapolate, as it presents a
zero-cost solution that does not require finetuning at every target resolution. Finetuning costs aside,
improvements to extrapolation should benefit high-resolution finetuning since models that are better
at extrapolating can adapt to higher resolutions more easily. Although extrapolation is a significant
and exciting challenge, state-of-the-art (SoTA) model architectures extrapolate poorly.
Vision transformers (ViTs [9]) offer SoTA performance on many computer vision tasks. ViTs
are simple; they split images into non-overlapping patches, linearly project pixels to form patch
embeddings, and process these “tokens” with a stack of architecturally identical transformer layers —
maintaining a constant feature map size throughout. This non-hierarchical design enables learning
patch representations, which are useful for dense prediction tasks [21, 22, 23] and are fundamental
∗
AF, DGK, and YY made significant technical contributions. AF and DGK initiated the project. AF and JRG
led the project. Code and data are available at: https://github.com/GreenCUBIC/lookhere

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

