Forgetting, Ignorance or Myopia: Revisiting Key
Challenges in Online Continual Learning

Xinrui Wang1,2
1

Chuanxing Geng1,2

Wenhai Wan3

Shao-yuan Li1,2

Songcan Chen1,2†

College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Online continual learning (OCL) requires the models to learn from constant, endless streams of data. While significant efforts have been made in this field, most
were focused on mitigating the catastrophic forgetting issue to achieve better classification ability, at the cost of a much heavier training workload. They overlooked
that in real-world scenarios, e.g., in high-speed data stream environments, data do
not pause to accommodate slow models. In this paper, we emphasize that model
throughput– defined as the maximum number of training samples that a model
can process within a unit of time – is equally important. It directly limits how
much data a model can utilize and presents a challenging dilemma for current
methods. With this understanding, we revisit key challenges in OCL from both
empirical and theoretical perspectives, highlighting two critical issues beyond the
well-documented catastrophic forgetting: (i) Model’s ignorance: the single-pass
nature of OCL challenges models to learn effective features within constrained
training time and storage capacity, leading to a trade-off between effective learning
and model throughput; (ii) Model’s myopia: the local learning nature of OCL on
the current task leads the model to adopt overly simplified, task-specific features
and excessively sparse classifier, resulting in the gap between the optimal solution
for the current task and the global objective. To tackle these issues, we propose the
Non-sparse Classifier Evolution framework (NsCE) to facilitate effective global
discriminative feature learning with minimal time cost. NsCE integrates non-sparse
maximum separation regularization and targeted experience replay techniques with
the help of pre-trained models, enabling rapid acquisition of new globally discriminative features. Extensive experiments demonstrate the substantial improvements
of our framework in performance, throughput and real-world practicality.

1

Introduction

Online continual learning (OCL) is the learning paradigm that enables models to learn continuously
Nt
from a dynamic data stream D = {D1 , D2 , . . . , Dt , . . .}, where Dt = {xi , yi }i=1
is the dataset of
task t sampled from distribution µt . Existing OCL methods are designed to promote effective learning
by mitigating catastrophic forgetting and improving model plasticity through various techniques
like gradient regularization[41], contrastive learning[31], experience replay[16, 10] and knowledge
distillation[1]. However, these methods often fail to consider the assessment of model throughput, an
essential metric especially crucial for managing data streams with varying arrival speeds.
According to [1, 81], a model’s throughput is defined as the maximum number of training sample data
that a model can process within a unit of time. When the training speed of the model is slower than
the speed that data stream arrives, the model is forced to discard some training data which wastes data
†
Corresponding author. Code link: https://github.com/wxr99/Forgetting-Ignorance-or-Myopia-RevisitingKey-Challenges-in-Online-Continual-Learning

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

