D ISCOVERY W ORLD: A Virtual Environment for
Developing and Evaluating Automated Scientific
Discovery Agents

Peter Jansen∗‡ , Marc-Alexandre Côté† , Tushar Khot∗ Erin Bransom∗ , Bhavana Dalvi Mishra∗ ,
Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder∗ , Oyvind Tafjord∗ , Peter Clark∗
∗
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence † Microsoft Research ‡ University of Arizona
peterj@allenai.org

Abstract
Automated scientific discovery promises to accelerate progress across scientific
domains. However, developing and evaluating an AI agent’s capacity for endto-end scientific reasoning is challenging as running real-world experiments is
often prohibitively expensive or infeasible. In this work we introduce D ISCOVERY W ORLD , the first virtual environment for developing and benchmarking an
agent’s ability to perform complete cycles of novel scientific discovery. D ISCOVERY W ORLD contains a variety of different challenges, covering topics as diverse
as radioisotope dating, rocket science, and proteomics, to encourage development
of general discovery skills rather than task-specific solutions. D ISCOVERY W ORLD
itself is an inexpensive, simulated, text-based environment (with optional 2D visual
overlay). It includes 120 different challenge tasks, spanning eight topics each with
three levels of difficulty and several parametric variations. Each task requires an
agent to form hypotheses, design and run experiments, analyze results, and act
on conclusions. D ISCOVERY W ORLD further provides three automatic metrics
for evaluating performance, based on (a) task completion, (b) task-relevant actions taken, and (c) the discovered explanatory knowledge. We find that strong
baseline agents, that perform well in prior published environments, struggle on
most D ISCOVERY W ORLD tasks, suggesting that D ISCOVERY W ORLD captures
some of the novel challenges of discovery, and thus that D ISCOVERY W ORLD
may help accelerate near-term development and assessment of scientific discovery
competency in agents. Code available at github.com/allenai/discoveryworld.1

1

Introduction

A long-standing dream of AI has been to build systems that can perform scientific discovery, potentially leading to new breakthroughs for the benefit of humanity [13]. Recently, with the rise of
neural techniques, there have been several successful discovery systems developed for specialized
problems such as protein folding [10, 15], mathematics [22], and material science [24]. However,
while the results have been impressive, these systems (deliberately) bypass the full discovery process
of ideation, hypothesis formation, experiment design, etc., and instead (expertly) perform systematic
searches over a pre-defined hypothesis space, with pre-defined goals. This raises the question: how
much more can be achieved if AI is applied to the broader scientific process? Some works have
indeed developed early systems for this, for example, in chemistry [1], and genetics [12]. These
systems can also generate hypotheses, design experiments, and execute them (via robotics) in real
environments. However, operating in real environments is expensive and complex, creating a barrier
1

Released under Apache-2.0 license.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

