Superposed Decoding: Multiple Generations from a
Single Autoregressive Inference Pass

Ethan Shen⋄ Alan Fan⋄ Sarah Pratt⋄ Jae Sung Park⋄ Matthew Wallingford⋄
Sham Kakade† Ari Holtzman‡ Ranjay Krishna⋄ Ali Farhadi⋄ Aditya Kusupati⋄∗
⋄
University of Washington † Harvard University ‡ University of Chicago
{ethans03, kusupati}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Many applications today provide users with multiple auto-complete drafts as
they type, including GitHub’s code completion, Gmail’s smart compose, and
Apple’s messaging auto-suggestions. Under the hood, language models support
this by running an autoregressive inference pass to provide a draft. Consequently,
providing k drafts to the user requires running an expensive language model k
times. To alleviate the computation cost of running k inference passes, we propose
Superposed Decoding, a new decoding algorithm that generates k drafts at the
computation cost of one autoregressive inference pass. We achieve this by feeding
a superposition of the most recent token embeddings from the k drafts as input
to the next decoding step of the language model. At every inference step we
combine the k drafts with the top-k tokens to get k 2 new drafts and cache the k
most likely options, using an n-gram interpolation with minimal compute overhead
to filter out incoherent generations. Our experiments show that k drafts from
Superposed Decoding are at least as coherent and factual as Nucleus Sampling and
Greedy Decoding respectively, while being at least 2.44× faster for k ≥ 3. In a
compute-normalized setting, user evaluations demonstrably favor text generated
by Superposed Decoding over Nucleus Sampling. Superposed Decoding can also
be combined with other decoding strategies, resulting in universal coverage gains
when scaling inference time compute. Code and more examples open-sourced at
https://github.com/RAIVNLab/SuperposedDecoding.

1

Introduction

Commercial surveys find that 80% of e-commerce websites provide autocomplete as a feature [21].
With the proliferation of large language models, autocomplete drafts are now ubiquitous in an even
wider range of applications. Examples include short draft suggestions in Gmail Smart Compose [8]
and code snippets in GitHub Copilot [7]. These options provide users with the ability to consider
different phrasings and increase the likelihood of having at least one suggestion that reflects their
intent. While language models (LMs) [34] now power these multiple suggestions, each additional
suggestion necessitates another inference pass (batch size = 1), making it computationally expensive.
Language models use autoregressive inference to generate a plausible sequence of next tokens for
a given prefix [40]. The next token generated depends on the prefix and the previously generated
tokens. Decoding algorithms like Greedy Decoding, Top-k Sampling [12], Beam Search, and Nucleus
Sampling [18] present various ways of obtaining generations during autoregressive inference. For a
prefix, Greedy (maximum likelihood) Decoding picks the most probable token at every autoregressive
timestep, eventually generating only one auto-completion suggestion. Instead of making a greedy
∗

AK is currently at Google DeepMind

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

