Personalized Instance-based Navigation Toward
User-Specific Objects in Realistic Environments

Luca Barsellotti∗ Roberto Bigazzi∗
Marcella Cornia Lorenzo Baraldi Rita Cucchiara
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy
{firstname.lastname}@unimore.it
Project page: aimagelab.github.io/pin

Abstract
In the last years, the research interest in visual navigation towards objects in indoor
environments has grown significantly. This growth can be attributed to the recent
availability of large navigation datasets in photo-realistic simulated environments,
like Gibson and Matterport3D. However, the navigation tasks supported by these
datasets are often restricted to the objects present in the environment at acquisition
time. Also, they fail to account for the realistic scenario in which the target object
is a user-specific instance that can be easily confused with similar objects and may
be found in multiple locations within the environment. To address these limitations,
we propose a new task denominated Personalized Instance-based Navigation (PIN),
in which an embodied agent is tasked with locating and reaching a specific personal
object by distinguishing it among multiple instances of the same category. The task
is accompanied by PInNED, a dedicated new dataset composed of photo-realistic
scenes augmented with additional 3D objects. In each episode, the target object
is presented to the agent using two modalities: a set of visual reference images
on a neutral background and manually annotated textual descriptions. Through
comprehensive evaluations and analyses, we showcase the challenges of the PIN
task as well as the performance and shortcomings of currently available methods
designed for object-driven navigation, considering modular and end-to-end agents.

Where is my Teddy Bear?
Visual References

Distractors

Textual References
▪ a white teddy bear sitting on its hind legs
▪ a beige and grey teddy bear
▪ a cream colored teddy bear with light
blue nose and small black rounded eyes

Figure 1: We introduce the PIN task, where the agent is asked to navigate toward a personalized
object instance using multimodal references and distinguish it from distractors (i.e., other objects of
the same category as the target or of other categories). The target object, same category distractors,
and other distractors are circled, respectively, in green, orange, and red. The total number of available
objects in the dataset is 338, corresponding to different instances of 18 object categories.
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

