Pretrained Optimization Model for Zero-Shot Black
Box Optimization

Xiaobin Li
Xidian University
22171214784@stu.xidian.edu.cn
Yujian Betterrest Li
Xidian University
bebetterest@outlook.com

Kai Wu∗
Xidian University
kwu@xidian.edu.cn

Xiaoyu Zhang
Xidian University
xiaoyuzhang@xidian.edu.cn

Handing Wang
Xidian University
hdwang@xidian.edu.cn

Jing Liu
Xidian University
neouma@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Zero-shot optimization involves optimizing a target task that was not seen during
training, aiming to provide the optimal solution without or with minimal adjustments to the optimizer. It is crucial to ensure reliable and robust performance
in various applications. Current optimizers often struggle with zero-shot optimization and require intricate hyperparameter tuning to adapt to new tasks. To
address this, we propose a Pretrained Optimization Model (POM) that leverages
knowledge gained from optimizing diverse tasks, offering efficient solutions to
zero-shot optimization through direct application or fine-tuning with few-shot
samples. Evaluation on the BBOB benchmark and two robot control tasks demonstrates that POM outperforms state-of-the-art black-box optimization methods,
especially for high-dimensional tasks. Fine-tuning POM with a small number
of samples and budget yields significant performance improvements. Moreover,
POM demonstrates robust generalization across diverse task distributions, dimensions, population sizes, and optimization horizons. For code implementation, see
https://github.com/ninja-wm/POM/.

1

Introduction

Black box optimization, including tasks like hyperparameter optimization (HPO) [1], neuroevolution
[2–4], neural architecture search (NAS) [5], and algorithm selection [6], is very important. In
these scenarios, the algorithm can evaluate f (x) for any solution x; however, access to additional
information about f , such as the Hessian and gradients, is unavailable.
Addressing diverse BBO problems necessitates the tailored design of specific algorithms to achieve
satisfactory performance. Crafting these algorithms typically demands substantial expertise. Therefore, it is crucial to ensure reliable and robust performance of the optimizer in various applications,
called zero-shot optimization. Zero-shot optimization involves optimizing a target task that was not
seen during training, aiming to provide the optimal solution without or with minimal adjustments to
the optimizer.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

