Approximated Orthogonal Projection Unit: Stabilizing
Regression Network Training Using Natural Gradient

†

Shaoqi Wang†
Chunjie Yang†
Siwei Lou†
Zhejiang University, China, {sq_w,cjyang999,swlou}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Neural networks (NN) are extensively studied in cutting-edge soft sensor models
due to their feature extraction and function approximation capabilities. Current
research into network-based methods primarily focuses on models’ offline accuracy. Notably, in industrial soft sensor context, online optimizing stability and
interpretability are prioritized, followed by accuracy. This requires a clearer understanding of network’s training process. To bridge this gap, we propose a novel
NN named the Approximated Orthogonal Projection Unit (AOPU) which has solid
mathematical basis and presents superior training stability. AOPU truncates the
gradient backpropagation at dual parameters, optimizes the trackable parameters
updates, and enhances the robustness of training. We further prove that AOPU
attains minimum variance estimation (MVE) in NN, wherein the truncated gradient
approximates the natural gradient (NG). Empirical results on two chemical process
datasets clearly show that AOPU outperforms other models in achieving stable
convergence, marking a significant advancement in soft sensor field.

1

Introduction

Deep learning methods have achieved recent success in many regression areas such as natural
language processing, protein structure prediction, and building energy consumption forecasting.
However, for these methods to be useful in the industrial soft sensor field, which demands higher
immediacy and stability, further research into model structure and the stability of the training process
is necessary [1, 2, 3]. The safety and economic impact of factory impose stringent requirements
on soft sensor models deployed online [4, 5]. For example, each mini-batch update must not cause
significant performance fluctuations to ensure that downstream controllers and monitors do not
execute erroneous actions; soft sensor models must be deployed online to avoid fluctuations due
to changes in operating conditions and model switching [6]. Common network’s training tricks
are not suitable for soft sensor contexts. For example, it’s not feasible to use checkpoints for early
stopping but to always use the latest updated checkpoint; there wouldn’t be adaptive learning rate
changes but rather a constant learning rate maintained throughout. Experimental results demonstrate
that such differences lead to a substantial decline in performance. These constraints necessitate
the development of better-suited network architectures for regression task that ensure more stable
optimization during training [7, 6].
MVE is the best unbiased estimator under the Mean Squared Error (MSE) criterion, essentially
representing the performance ceiling for regression models [8]. Unfortunately, directly applying
MVE to NN is challenging due to the difficulty in obtaining the likelihood distribution p(y|x) of
inputs x and outputs y [9]. Traditional research on MVE has focused on techniques like Kalman
filtering [10, 11], algorithms based on Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) [12, 13], and other system
identification research [14, 15, 16] which operate under linear and convex conditions. These methods,
while effective within their scope, have limited expressive power [17].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

