SD-Eval: A Benchmark Dataset for Spoken Dialogue
Understanding Beyond Words

Junyi Ao1∗, Yuancheng Wang1∗, Xiaohai Tian2 , Dekun Chen1 ,
Jun Zhang2 , Lu Lu2 , Yuxuan Wang2 , Haizhou Li1 , Zhizheng Wu1†
1
School of Data Science, SRIBD,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518172, China
2
Bytedance

Abstract
Speech encompasses a wealth of information, including but not limited to content, paralinguistic, and environmental information. This comprehensive nature of
speech significantly impacts communication and is crucial for human-computer
interaction. Chat-Oriented Large Language Models (LLMs), known for their
general-purpose assistance capabilities, have evolved to handle multi-modal inputs,
including speech. Although these models can be adept at recognizing and analyzing
speech, they often fall short of generating appropriate responses. We argue that this
is due to the lack of principles on task definition and model development, which
requires open-source datasets and metrics suitable for model evaluation. To bridge
the gap, we present SD-Eval, a benchmark dataset aimed at multidimensional
evaluation of spoken dialogue understanding and generation. SD-Eval focuses
on paralinguistic and environmental information and includes 7,303 utterances,
amounting to 8.76 hours of speech data. The data is aggregated from eight public
datasets, representing four perspectives: emotion, accent, age, and background
sound. To assess the SD-Eval benchmark dataset, we implement three different
models and construct a training set following a process similar to that of SD-Eval.
The training set contains 1,052.72 hours of speech data and 724.4k utterances.
We also conduct a comprehensive evaluation using objective evaluation methods
(e.g. BLEU and ROUGE), subjective evaluations and LLM-based metrics for the
generated responses. Models conditioned with paralinguistic and environmental
information outperform their counterparts in both objective and subjective measures. Moreover, experiments demonstrate that LLM-based metrics show a higher
correlation with human evaluation compared to traditional metrics. We open-source
SD-Eval at https://github.com/amphionspace/SD-Eval.

1

Introduction

Speech contains rich information and plays a crucial role in human-computer interaction [12, 14, 41].
Besides relying on the content information, speech also conveys paralinguistic and environmental information, which can significantly influence conversations. More specifically, the information carried
in speech can be categorized into three classes: content information, environmental information and
paralinguistic information, as illustrated in Figure 1(a).
The content information refers to the “choice of words”, representing the explicit meaning and
linguistic structure of the speech. Environmental information pertains to “location of conversation”,
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author: wuzhizheng@cuhk.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

