Heterogeneity-Guided Client Sampling: Towards Fast
and Efficient Non-IID Federated Learning

Huancheng Chen
University of Texas at Austin
huanchengch@utexas.edu

Haris Vikalo
University of Texas at Austin
hvikalo@ece.utexas.edu

Abstract
Statistical heterogeneity of data present at client devices in a federated learning
(FL) system renders the training of a global model in such systems difficult. Particularly challenging are the settings where due to communication resource constraints
only a small fraction of clients can participate in any given round of FL. Recent
approaches to training a global model in FL systems with non-IID data have focused on developing client selection methods that aim to sample clients with more
informative updates of the model. However, existing client selection techniques
either introduce significant computation overhead or perform well only in the
scenarios where clients have data with similar heterogeneity profiles. In this paper,
we propose HiCS-FL (Federated Learning via Hierarchical Clustered Sampling), a
novel client selection method in which the server estimates statistical heterogeneity of a client’s data using the client’s update of the network’s output layer and
relies on this information to cluster and sample the clients. We analyze the ability
of the proposed techniques to compare heterogeneity of different datasets, and
characterize convergence of the training process that deploys the introduced client
selection method. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that in non-IID settings HiCS-FL achieves faster convergence than state-of-the-art FL client selection
schemes. Notably, HiCS-FL drastically reduces computation cost compared to
existing selection schemes and is adaptable to different heterogeneity scenarios.

1

Introduction

The federated learning (FL) framework enables privacy-preserving collaborative training of machine
learning (ML) models across a number of devices (clients) by avoiding the need to collect private
data stored at those devices. The participating clients typically experience both the system as well as
statistical heterogeneity [18]. The former describes settings where client devices have varying degree
of computational resources, communication bandwidth and fault tolerance, while the latter refers to
the fact that the data owned by the clients may be drawn from different distributions. In this paper, we
focus on FL under statistical heterogeneity and leave studies of system heterogeneity to future work.
An early FL method, FedAvg [21], performs well in the settings where the devices train on independent and identically distributed (IID) data. However, compared to the IID scenario, training on
non-IID data is detrimental to the convergence speed, variance and accuracy of the learned model.
This has motivated numerous studies aiming to reduce the variance and improve convergence of FL
on non-IID data [6, 9, 14, 17, 19, 30].
On another note, constraints on communication resources and therefore on the number of clients
that may participate in training additionally complicate implementation of FL schemes. It would
be particularly unrealistic to require regular contributions to training from all the clients in a largescale cross-device FL system. Instead, only a fraction of clients participate in any given training
round; unfortunately, this further aggravates detrimental effects of statistical heterogeneity. Selecting
informative clients in non-IID FL settings is an open problem that has received considerable attention
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

