An Analytical Study of Utility Functions in
Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning

Manel Rodriguez-Soto
Artificial Intelligence
Research Institute (IIIA-CSIC)
Bellaterra, Spain
manel.rodriguez@iiia.csic.es

Juan A. Rodriguez-Aguilar
Artificial Intelligence
Research Institute (IIIA-CSIC)
Bellaterra, Spain
jar@iiia.csic.es

Maite Lopez-Sanchez
Universitat de Barcelona (UB)
Barcelona, Spain
maite_lopez@ub.edu

Abstract
Multi-objective reinforcement learning (MORL) is an excellent framework for
multi-objective sequential decision-making. MORL employs a utility function to
aggregate multiple objectives into one that expresses a user’s preferences. However,
MORL still misses two crucial theoretical analyses of the properties of utility
functions: (1) a characterisation of the utility functions for which an associated
optimal policy exists, and (2) a characterisation of the types of preferences that can
be expressed as utility functions. In this paper, we contribute to both theoretical
analyses. As a result, we formally characterise the families of preferences and
utility functions that MORL should focus on: those for which an optimal policy is
guaranteed to exist. We expect our theoretical results to foster the development of
novel MORL algorithms that exploit our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Sequential decision-making problems are ubiquitous, impacting areas like autonomous driving [6],
robotics [35], finance [3] and healthcare [4], to name a few. Recently, Reinforcement Learning (RL)
has emerged as a pivotal framework for addressing sequential decision-making tasks [11, 13]. Most
of the RL literature has focused on problems for which an agent deals with a single objective (e.g.
get rich in finance, win a race). However, real-world scenarios often present multiple, conflicting
objectives [32] (e.g., a self-driving car must ensure safety, efficiency, and passenger comfort).
Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning (MORL) has developed as one of the most promising
frameworks for addressing multi-objective decision-making [19, 18, 22]. Despite its novelty compared
to single-objective RL, the current state of the art in MORL shows promising results for tackling
real-world problems that are inherently multi-objective [10, 32]. Most MORL approaches are utilitybased and assume that there exists a utility function [10] that combines all objectives into a single
one, allowing the learning agent to ponder between them. However, deciding the most appropriate
utility function is a problem in itself. Given that, the literature on MORL focuses on learning a set of
candidate policies, called the undominated set [10], which maximise all possible utility functions. In
that way, once a utility function is decided, the decision-maker can directly select the policy from the
undominated set that maximises it.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

