A Consistency-Aware Spot-Guided Transformer for
Versatile and Hierarchical Point Cloud Registration

Renlang Huang
Yufan Tang
Jiming Chen
Liang Li∗
College of Control Science and Engineering
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China
{renlanghuang,tyfan,cjm,liang.li}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep learning-based feature matching has shown great superiority for point cloud
registration in the absence of pose priors. Although coarse-to-fine matching approaches are prevalent, the coarse matching of existing methods is typically sparse
and loose without consideration of geometric consistency, which makes the subsequent fine matching rely on ineffective optimal transport and hypothesis-andselection methods for consistency. Therefore, these methods are neither efficient
nor scalable for real-time applications such as odometry in robotics. To address
these issues, we design a consistency-aware spot-guided Transformer (CAST),
which incorporates a spot-guided cross-attention module to avoid interfering with
irrelevant areas, and a consistency-aware self-attention module to enhance matching capabilities with geometrically consistent correspondences. Furthermore, a
lightweight fine matching module for both sparse keypoints and dense features can
estimate the transformation accurately. Extensive experiments on both outdoor
LiDAR point cloud datasets and indoor RGBD point cloud datasets demonstrate
that our method achieves state-of-the-art accuracy, efficiency, and robustness. Our
code is available at https://github.com/RenlangHuang/CAST.

1

Introduction

Point cloud registration is a fundamental yet crucial task for a variety of 3D vision and robotic
applications, such as simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) [1], object pose estimation [2]
and structure from motion (SfM) [3]. Aiming at aligning two partially overlapped point clouds,
the typical approach involves a two-stage pipeline: data association which establishes reliable
point correspondences, and pose estimation. However, establishing these correspondences has been
challenging due to the noisy, irregular, non-uniform, and textureless nature of 3D point clouds.
Feature matching has long been the mainstream of data association without pose priors. Extensive
research has made advances in distinctive local feature representations, ranging from hand-crafted
descriptors [4, 5, 6] to recent learning-based descriptors [7, 8, 9]. Although the emerging learningbased descriptors significantly improve the reliability of correspondences, the inlier ratio still falls
short of what is required for robust and efficient pose estimation. Recently, coarse-to-fine matching is
a thriving framework for 2D-2D [10], 3D-3D [11, 12, 13], and even 2D-3D [14] data association. It
has been a consensus that Transformers stacked by alternate self-attention and cross-attention modules
are effective for coarse matching, which are inspired by human visual processes. Typically, humans
may first scan through the point clouds to identify and match salient landmarks across different point
clouds reliably. For less salient points, the geometric relationships between them and those salient
landmarks would be utilized to revisit their potential correspondences. The correspondences will
eventually be established for the entire point cloud after several iterations of this process.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

