Understanding Emergent Abilities of Language
Models from the Loss Perspective

Zhengxiao Du1,2 , Aohan Zeng1,2 , Yuxiao Dong2 , Jie Tang2
1
Zhipu AI 2 Tsinghua University
{zx-du20,zah22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent studies have put into question the belief that emergent abilities [58] in
language models are exclusive to large models. This skepticism arises from two
observations: 1) smaller models can also exhibit high performance on emergent
abilities and 2) there is doubt on the discontinuous metrics used to measure these
abilities. In this paper, we propose to study emergent abilities in the lens of pretraining loss, instead of model size or training compute. We demonstrate that
the Transformer models with the same pre-training loss, but different model and
data sizes, generate the same performance on various downstream tasks, with a
fixed data corpus, tokenization, and model architecture. We also discover that a
model exhibits emergent abilities on certain tasks—regardless of the continuity
of metrics—when its pre-training loss falls below a specific threshold. Before
reaching this threshold, its performance remains at the level of random guessing.
This inspires us to redefine emergent abilities as those that manifest in models with
lower pre-training losses, highlighting that these abilities cannot be predicted by
merely extrapolating the performance trends of models with higher pre-training
losses.

1

Introduction

Scaling of language modes (LMs) on both model and data sizes has been shown to be effective
for improving the performance on a wide range of tasks [42, 6, 23, 8, 65, 55, 36], leading to the
widespread adoption of LM applications, e.g., ChatGPT. The success of such scaling is guided by
scaling laws [22, 28, 10, 23], which study the predictability of pre-training loss given the model and
data sizes.
While scaling laws focus on the pre-training loss, the scaling effect on the performance of downstream
tasks has thus far less studied. Emergent abilities [58] are defined as abilities that present in larger
LMs but not present in smaller one. The existence of such abilities is recently challenged for two
reasons. First, small LMs trained on a sufficient amount of high-quality data can outperform large
models on tasks with claimed emergent abilities [55, 56, 26]. For example, LLaMA-13B with
less compute [55] can outperform GPT-3 (175B) on MMLU [21], due to more training tokens and
improved data-filtering methods. Second, Schaeffer et al. [46] claim that emergent abilities appear
due to the nonlinear or discontinuous metrics selected to evaluate certain datasets, rather than from a
fundamental change in larger models.
The Chinchilla scaling laws [23] show that different combinations of model sizes and data sizes
can lead to different pre-training losses even with the same training compute. Consequently, the
pre-training loss can naturally better represent the learning status of LMs than the model or data sizes.
However, the relationship between the loss of an LM and its performance on downstream tasks is not
yet well understood. Existing literature has either focused on the transfer learning paradigm [33, 54]
or constrained its study to single models, tasks, or prompting methods [49, 61].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

