Gradient Rewiring for Editable Graph Neural
Network Training

Zhimeng Jiang1 , Zirui Liu2 , Xiaotian Han3 , Qizhang Feng1 , Hongye Jin1 ,
Qiaoyu Tan4 , Kaixiong Zhou5 , Na Zou6 , Xia Hu7
1
Texas A&M University, 2 University of Minnesota, 3 Case Western Reserve University,
4
NYU Shanghai, 5 North Carolina State University, 6 University of Houston, 7 Rice University

Abstract
Deep neural networks are ubiquitously adopted in many applications, such as
computer vision, natural language processing, and graph analytics. However, welltrained neural networks can make prediction errors after deployment as the world
changes. Model editing involves updating the base model to correct prediction
errors with less accessible training data and computational resources. Despite
recent advances in model editors in computer vision and natural language processing, editable training in graph neural networks (GNNs) is rarely explored. The
challenge with editable GNN training lies in the inherent information aggregation across neighbors, which can lead model editors to affect the predictions of
other nodes unintentionally. In this paper, we first observe the gradient of crossentropy loss for the target node and training nodes with significant inconsistency,
which indicates that directly fine-tuning the base model using the loss on the target
node deteriorates the performance on training nodes. Motivated by the gradient
inconsistency observation, we propose a simple yet effective Gradient Rewiring
method for Editable graph neural network training, named GRE. Specifically,
we first store the anchor gradient of the loss on training nodes to preserve the
locality. Subsequently, we rewire the gradient of the loss on the target node to
preserve performance on the training node using anchor gradient. Experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of GRE on various model architectures and graph
datasets in terms of multiple editing situations. The source code is available at
https://github.com/zhimengj0326/Gradient_rewiring_editing.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have demonstrated exemplary performance for graph learning tasks,
such as recommendation, link prediction, molecule property analysis [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. With
message passing, GNNs learn node representations by recursively aggregating the neighboring nodes’
representations. Once trained, GNN models are deployed to handle various high-stake tasks, such
as credit risk assessment in financial networks [8] and fake news detection in social networks [9].
However, the impact of erroneous decisions in such influential applications can be substantial. For
instance, misplaced credit trust in undetected fake news can lead to severe financial loss.
An ideal approach to tackle such errors should possess the following properties: 1) the ability to
rectify severe errors in the model’s predictions, 2) the capacity to generalize these corrections to
other similar instances of misclassified samples, and 3) the ability to preserve the model’s prediction
accuracy for all other unrelated inputs. To achieve these goals, various model editing frameworks
have been developed to rectify errors by dynamically adjusting the model’s behavior when errors are
detected [10, 11]. The core principle is to implement minimal changes to the model to correct the
error while keeping the rest of the model’s behavior intact. However, model editing is not a simple
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

