Direct Unlearning Optimization
for Robust and Safe Text-to-Image Models

Yong-Hyun Park∗1 , Sangdoo Yun3,6 , Jin-Hwa Kim3,6 , Junho Kim3 , Geonhui Jang2 ,
Yonghyun Jeong4 , Junghyo Jo†1,5 , Gayoung Lee†3 ,
1
Department of Physics Education, Seoul National University
2
School of Industrial and Management Engineering, Korea University
3
NAVER AI Lab
4
NAVER Cloud
5
Korea Institute for Advanced Study (KIAS)
6
AI Institute of Seoul National University or SNU AIIS

Abstract
Recent advancements in text-to-image (T2I) models have unlocked a wide range of
applications but also present significant risks, particularly in their potential to generate unsafe content. To mitigate this issue, researchers have developed unlearning
techniques to remove the model’s ability to generate potentially harmful content.
However, these methods are easily bypassed by adversarial attacks, making them
unreliable for ensuring the safety of generated images. In this paper, we propose
Direct Unlearning Optimization (DUO), a novel framework for removing Not Safe
For Work (NSFW) content from T2I models while preserving their performance on
unrelated topics. DUO employs a preference optimization approach using curated
paired image data, ensuring that the model learns to remove unsafe visual concepts
while retaining unrelated features. Furthermore, we introduce an output-preserving
regularization term to maintain the model’s generative capabilities on safe content.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that DUO can robustly defend against various
state-of-the-art red teaming methods without significant performance degradation
on unrelated topics, as measured by FID and CLIP scores. Our work contributes to
the development of safer and more reliable T2I models, paving the way for their
responsible deployment in both closed-source and open-source scenarios.
CAUTION: This paper includes model-generated content that may contain offensive or distressing material.

1

Introduction

In recent years, text-to-image (T2I) models [22, 47, 45, 40, 8, 7] have experienced significant
advancements thanks to large-scale data and diffusion models. However, the large-scale web-crawled
data such as LAION [51] often include a significant amount of inappropriate and objectionable
material, so T2I models trained on such data may pose a potential risk of generating harmful content
including Not Safe For Work (NSFW) content, copyright infringement, and a violation of privacy
[46, 4]. Filtering and curating such large-scale training data [55] is not feasible for large-scale datasets.
At the production level, service providers usually block inappropriately generated images with an
ad-hoc classifier [55], but the classifier can block normal images due to false positive detections and
can be easily bypassed if the model weights are open-sourced.
∗
†

Work done during an internship at NAVER AI Lab
Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

