Dissect Black Box: Interpreting for Rule-Based
Explanations in Unsupervised Anomaly Detection

Yu Zhang♭♯§∗ , Ruoyu Li♯¶∗, Nengwu Wu, Qing Li♯†, Xinhan Lin♭ , Yang Hu§ , Tao Li△ , Yong Jiang♮
♭
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, China; ♯ Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
¶
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
§
Tsinghua University, China; ♮ Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, China;
△
Hunan University of Science and Technology, China
yu-zhang23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; liruoyu0401@outlook.com; wnw@mail.hnust.edu.cn
liq@pcl.ac.cn; hu_yang@tsinghua.edu.cn; tlee@hnust.edu.cn; linxinhan@pjlab.org.cn;
jiangy@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn;

Abstract
In high-stakes sectors such as network security, IoT security, accurately distinguishing between normal and anomalous data is critical due to the significant
implications for operational success and safety in decision-making. The complexity is exacerbated by the presence of unlabeled data and the opaque nature of
black-box anomaly detection models, which obscure the rationale behind their predictions. In this paper, we present a novel method to interpret the decision-making
processes of these models, which are essential for detecting malicious activities
without labeled attack data. We put forward the Segmentation Clustering Decision
Tree (SCD-Tree), designed to dissect and understand the structure of normal data
distributions. The SCD-Tree integrates predictions from the anomaly detection
model into its splitting criteria, enhancing the clustering process with the model’s
insights into anomalies. To further refine these segments, the Gaussian Boundary
Delineation (GBD) algorithm is employed to define boundaries within each segmented distribution, effectively delineating normal from anomalous data points.
At this point, this approach addresses the curse of dimensionality by segmenting
high-dimensional data and ensures resilience to data variability and perturbations
through flexible boundary fitting. We transform the intricate operations of anomaly
detection into an interpretable rule’s format, constructing a comprehensive set of
rules for understanding. Our method’s evaluation on diverse datasets and models
demonstrates superior explanation accuracy, fidelity, and robustness over existing
method, proving its efficacy in environments where interpretability is paramount.

1

Introduction

Anomaly detection, particularly in its unsupervised form, holds significant promise by leveraging
advanced machine learning to identify outliers or unusual patterns without labeled datasets [1] in
the ML and DL domains. However, this promise is often hindered by the “black-box” nature of
many models, which, while adept at detecting anomalies, provide little insight into the “why” behind
their judgments [2]. This opacity poses a substantial barrier to trust between AI systems and human
experts, fostering uncertainty and potentially leading to delays or errors, thereby undermining the
reliability and efficiency these systems are designed to enhance [3].
∗
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author: Qing Li.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

