TaskBench: Benchmarking Large Language
Models for Task Automation
Yongliang Shen1 , Kaitao Song2† , Xu Tan2 , Wenqi Zhang1 ,
Kan Ren2 , Siyu Yuan3 , Weiming Lu1† , Dongsheng Li2 , Yueting Zhuang1†
Zhejiang University1 , Microsoft Research Asia2 , Fudan University3
{syl,luwm,zhangwenqi}@zju.edu.cn, syyuan21@m.fudan.edu.cn
{kaitaosong, xuta, dongsli}@microsoft.com
https://github.com/microsoft/JARVIS

Abstract
In recent years, the remarkable progress of large language models (LLMs) has
sparked interest in task automation, which involves decomposing complex tasks
described by user instructions into sub-tasks and invoking external tools to execute
them, playing a central role in autonomous agents. However, there is a lack of
systematic and standardized benchmarks to promote the development of LLMs in
task automation. To address this, we introduce TASK B ENCH, a comprehensive
framework to evaluate the capability of LLMs in task automation. Specifically,
task automation can be divided into three critical stages: task decomposition,
tool selection, and parameter prediction. To tackle the complexities inherent in
these stages, we introduce the concept of Tool Graph to represent decomposed
tasks and adopt a back-instruct method to generate high-quality user instructions.
We propose TASK E VAL, a multi-faceted evaluation methodology that assesses
LLM performance across these three stages. Our approach combines automated
construction with rigorous human verification, ensuring high consistency with
human evaluation. Experimental results demonstrate that TASK B ENCH effectively
reflects the capabilities of various LLMs in task automation. It provides insights
into model performance across different task complexities and domains, pushing
the boundaries of what current models can achieve. TASK B ENCH offers a scalable,
adaptable, and reliable benchmark for advancing LLM-based autonomous agents 1 .

1

Introduction

Due to the recent advances of large language models (LLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6], LLM-empowered
autonomous agents [7, 8, 9, 10] have unveiled remarkable potential towards artificial general intelligence and become a new rising trend in the realm of AI research. Generally, within the realm of
LLM-empowered autonomous agents, task automation is considered as the most important component, which aims to leverage LLMs to autonomously analyze user instructions and accomplish
their objectives. Consequently, many researchers attempt to delve deeper into LLM to enable more
intelligent task automation [11, 12, 13, 14]. However, it is worth noting that a critical challenge in
advancing this area is the lack of a systematic and standardized benchmark to thoroughly evaluate the
capability of LLMs in automating tasks. Therefore, creating such a benchmark to facilitate research
in this area has become an urgent need.
†
1

Corresponding author.
https://github.com/microsoft/JARVIS/tree/main/taskbench

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

