DiMSUM
: Diffusion Mamba - A Scalable and
Unified Spatial-Frequency Method for Image
Generation
Hao Phung∗13†
Quan Dao∗12†
Trung Dao1
4
2
Hoang Phan
Dimitris N. Metaxas
Anh Tran1
1
2
3
4
VinAI Research
Rutgers University
Cornell University
New York University
htp26@cornell.edu
hvp2011@nyu.edu

quan.dao@rutgers.edu
dnm@cs.rutgers.edu

v.trungdt21@vinai.io
v.anhtt152@vinai.io

Abstract
We introduce a novel state-space architecture for diffusion models, effectively
harnessing spatial and frequency information to enhance the inductive bias towards local features in input images for image generation tasks. While state-space
networks, including Mamba, a revolutionary advancement in recurrent neural
networks, typically scan input sequences from left to right, they face difficulties in designing effective scanning strategies, especially in the processing of
image data. Our method demonstrates that integrating wavelet transformation
into Mamba enhances the local structure awareness of visual inputs and better
captures long-range relations of frequencies by disentangling them into wavelet
subbands, representing both low- and high-frequency components. These waveletbased outputs are then processed and seamlessly fused with the original Mamba
outputs through a cross-attention fusion layer, combining both spatial and frequency information to optimize the order awareness of state-space models which
is essential for the details and overall quality of image generation. Besides, we
introduce a globally-shared transformer to supercharge the performance of Mamba,
harnessing its exceptional power to capture global relationships. Through extensive
experiments on standard benchmarks, our method demonstrates superior results
compared to DiT and DIFFUSSM, achieving faster training convergence and delivering high-quality outputs. The codes and pretrained models are released at
https://github.com/VinAIResearch/DiMSUM.git.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [58, 22] are a trending generative model technique that has gained significant
attention in machine learning and computer vision. The core idea behind diffusion models is to
learn how to reverse the diffusion process by gradually transforming a simple initial distribution, like
Gaussian noise, into a complex data distribution. The flexibility, robust performance, and high-quality
outputs make them powerful tools for advancing the state-of-the-art in generative modeling, and large
diffusion-based generators have revolutionized the field of image [51, 3], video [23, 21], and 3D
synthesis [50, 62, 61]. While diffusion models initially rely on UNet architectures, recent methods
have shifted gear to build upon transformer backbones. A line of works [48, 14, 11] have shown
that transformer-based diffusion models are scalable and consistently offer higher generation quality
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Work done while at VinAI.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

