Nearly Optimal Approximation of Matrix Functions
by the Lanczos Method

Noah Amsel∗ Tyler Chen∗ Anne Greenbaum† Cameron Musco‡ Christopher Musco∗

Abstract
Approximating the action of a matrix function 𝑓 (A) on a vector b is an increasingly important primitive in machine learning, data science, and statistics, with
applications such as sampling high dimensional Gaussians, Gaussian process regression and Bayesian inference, principle component analysis, and approximating Hessian spectral densities. Over the past decade, a number of algorithms enjoying strong theoretical guarantees have been proposed for this task. Many of the
most successful belong to a family of algorithms called Krylov subspace methods.
Remarkably, a classic Krylov subspace method, called the Lanczos method for
matrix functions (Lanczos-FA), frequently outperforms newer methods in practice. Our main result is a theoretical justification for this finding: we show that,
for a natural class of rational functions, Lanczos-FA matches the error of the best
possible Krylov subspace method up to a multiplicative approximation factor. The
approximation factor depends on the degree of 𝑓 (𝑥)’s denominator and the condition number of A, but not on the number of iterations 𝑘. Our result provides
a strong justification for the excellent performance of Lanczos-FA, especially on
functions that are well approximated by rationals, such as the matrix square root.

1

Introduction

Given a symmetric matrix A ∈ R𝑑×𝑑 with eigendecomposition A =
𝑓 (A) corresponding to a scalar function 𝑓 : R → R is defined as
𝑓 (A) :=

𝑑
∑︁

T
𝑖=1 𝜆 𝑖 u𝑖 u𝑖 , the matrix function

Í𝑑

𝑓 (𝜆𝑖 )u𝑖 uT𝑖 .

(1)

𝑖=1

Matrix functions arise throughout machine learning, data science, and statistics. For instance, the
matrix square root is used in sampling Gaussians, Bayesian modeling, and Gaussian processes [4, 5,
59], general fractional matrix powers are used in Markov chain modeling and Rényi entropy estimation [68, 42, 43, 19], the matrix logarithm is used for determinantal point processes, kernel learning,
and approximating log-determinants for Gaussian process regression and Bayesian inference [17,
39, 31], the matrix sign is used in principal components regression and spectral density estimation
[29, 18, 44, 58, 32, 69, 13, 7, 14], and the matrix exponential is used in network science [3, 67, 48].
In many of these applications, we do not need to compute the matrix 𝑓 (A) itself, but rather its action
on a vector b ∈ R𝑑 ; i.e., 𝑓 (A)b. This task can be performed much more efficiently than computing
an eigendecomposition of A and forming 𝑓 (A) using (1).
Perhaps the first general purpose method for approximating 𝑓 (A)b is the Lanczos method for matrix
function approximation (Lanczos-FA) [22, 30], which is the focus of the present paper. Over the past
decade, a number of special purpose algorithms, designed for a single function or class of functions,
∗ New York University (noah.amsel@nyu.edu, tyler.chen@nyu.edu, cmusco@nyu.edu)
† University of Washington (greenbau@uw.edu)
‡ University of Massachusetts Amherst (cmusco@cs.umass.edu)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

