Elucidating the Design Space of Dataset Condensation

Shitong Shao†♢ , Zikai Zhou†♢ , Huanran Chen†‡ , Zhiqiang Shen†∗
†
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI, ‡ Tsinghua University
♢
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
{1090784053sst,choukai003}@gmail.com, huanran_chen@outlook.com
zhiqiang.shen@mbzuai.ac.ae, ∗: Corresponding author

Abstract
Dataset condensation, a concept within data-centric learning, aims to efficiently
transfer critical attributes from an original dataset to a synthetic version, meanwhile
maintaining both diversity and realism of syntheses. This approach can significantly
improve model training efficiency and is also adaptable for multiple application
areas. Previous methods in dataset condensation have faced several challenges:
some incur high computational costs which limit scalability to larger datasets (e.g.,
MTT, DREAM, and TESLA), while others are restricted to less optimal design
spaces, which could hinder potential improvements, especially in smaller datasets
(e.g., SRe2 L, G-VBSM, and RDED). To address these limitations, we propose
a comprehensive designing-centric framework that includes specific, effective
strategies like implementing soft category-aware matching, adjusting the learning
rate schedule and applying small batch-size. These strategies are grounded in both
empirical evidence and theoretical backing. Our resulting approach, Elucidate
Dataset Condensation (EDC), establishes a benchmark for both small and largescale dataset condensation. In our testing, EDC achieves state-of-the-art accuracy,
reaching 48.6% on ImageNet-1k with a ResNet-18 model at an IPC of 10, which
corresponds to a compression ratio of 0.78%. This performance surpasses those of
SRe2 L, G-VBSM, and RDED by margins of 27.3%, 17.2%, and 6.6%, respectively.

1

Introduction

Dataset condensation, also known as dataset distillation, has emerged in response to the everincreasing training demands of advanced deep learning models (He et al., 2016a,b; Brown et al.,
2020). This task addresses the challenge of requiring massive amount of data to train high-precision
models while also being bounded by resource constraints (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020; Shao et al., 2024).
In the conventional setup of this problem, the original dataset acts as a “teacher”, distilling and
preserving essential information into a smaller, surrogate “student” dataset. The ultimate goal of this
technique is to achieve comparable performance of models trained on the original and condensed
datasets from scratch. This task has become popular in various downstream applications, including
continual learning (Masarczyk and Tautkute, 2020; Sangermano et al., 2022; Zhao and Bilen, 2021),
neural architecture search (Such et al., 2020; Zhao and Bilen, 2023; Zhao et al., 2021), and trainingfree network slimming (Liu et al., 2017).
However, the common solution in traditional dataset distillation methods of bi-level optimization requires prohibitively expensive computation, which limits the practical usage, as in prior
works (Cazenavette et al., 2022; Sajedi et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023a). This has become more severe
particularly when being applied to large-scale datasets like ImageNet-1k (Russakovsky et al., 2015).
In response, the uni-level optimization paradigm has gained significant attention as an alternative
solution, with recent contributions from the research community (Yin et al., 2023; Yin and Shen,
2024; Shao et al., 2023) highlighting its applicability. These methods primarily leverage the rich
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

