Label Noise Robustness for Domain-Agnostic Fair
Corrections via Nearest Neighbors Label Spreading

Nathan Stromberg
Arizona State University
nstrombe@asu.edu

Rohan Ayyagari
Arizona State University
rayyaga2@asu.edu

Richard Nock
Google Research
richardnock@google.com

Sanmi Koyejo
Stanford University
sanmi@cs.stanford.edu

Lalitha Sankar
Arizona State University
lsankar@asu.edu

Abstract
Last-layer retraining methods have emerged as an efficient framework for correcting
existing base models. Within this framework, several methods have been proposed
to deal with correcting models for subgroup fairness with and without group
membership information. Importantly, prior work has demonstrated that many
methods are susceptible to noisy labels. To this end, we propose a drop-in correction
for label noise in last-layer retraining, and demonstrate that it achieves state-ofthe-art worst-group accuracy for a broad range of symmetric label noise and
across a wide variety of datasets exhibiting spurious correlations. Our proposed
approach uses label spreading on a latent nearest neighbors graph and has minimal
computational overhead compared to existing methods.

1

Introduction

In order to ensure fairness between subpopulations, an important metric to consider is the lowest
accuracy amongst all subpopulations, often referred to as worst-group accuracy (WGA). State-of-theart methods for optimizing WGA utilize group membership information to modify the training loss
[1, 12, 21, 20, 22] or the distribution of the training data [10, 6, 11] in order to account for imbalance
amongst groups and successfully train a classifier which is fair across groups.
While these methods can achieve astounding WGA, many have significant computational and
data costs. Last-layer retraining (LLR) has emerged as a popular method to adapt existing deep
models with minimal overhead while ensuring fairness [10, 11, 22, 20]. Additionally, the necessity
of group membership information has been relaxed as new methods infer group membership by
utilizing auxiliary classifiers to detect minority groups (generally known as two-stage methods)
[11, 6, 12, 16, 22]. Taken together, it is now possible to correct powerful deep models for worst-group
accuracy with low computational and data cost. Two methods using this approach are SELF [11] and
RAD [22].
Unfortunately, class labels are often noisy [25] in practice. Further, Oh et al. [16] demonstrated
just how fragile most two-stage model corrections are in the face of this issue. While Oh et al. [16]
presented a method with improved robustness to label noise, their method requires fully retraining
the base model and cannot match the performance of existing methods at low noise levels. To
address these issues, we connect the existing literature on label propagation and worst-group accuracy
correction, i.e., we utilize label spreading on the latent nearest neighbors graph to correct for noisy
labels and two-stage LLR methods to maximize WGA without domain annotations. We list our main
contributions below.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

