Aligner-Encoders:
Self-Attention Transformers Can Be Self-Transducers
Adam Stooke
Google, USA
astooke@google.com

Rohit Prabhavalkar
Google, USA

Khe Chai Sim
Google, USA

Pedro Moreno Mengibar∗

Abstract
Modern systems for automatic speech recognition, including the RNN-Transducer
and Attention-based Encoder-Decoder (AED), are designed so that the encoder is
not required to alter the time-position of information from the audio sequence into
the embedding; alignment to the final text output is processed during decoding.
We discover that the transformer-based encoder adopted in recent years is actually
capable of performing the alignment internally during the forward pass, prior to
decoding. This new phenomenon enables a simpler and more efficient model, the
“Aligner-Encoder”. To train it, we discard the dynamic programming of RNN-T
in favor of the frame-wise cross-entropy loss of AED, while the decoder employs
the lighter text-only recurrence of RNN-T without learned cross-attention—it
simply scans embedding frames in order from the beginning, producing one token
each until predicting the end-of-message. We conduct experiments demonstrating
performance remarkably close to the state of the art, including a special inference
configuration enabling long-form recognition. In a representative comparison, we
measure the total inference time for our model to be 2x faster than RNN-T and
16x faster than AED. Lastly, we find that the audio-text alignment is clearly visible
in the self-attention weights of a certain layer, which could be said to perform
“self-transduction”.

1

Introduction

The task of sequence transduction requires mapping from an input sequence to an output sequence.
It appears in several widespread applications including machine translation and automatic speech
recognition (ASR). In ASR, which is the focus of this paper, the two sequences lie in completely
different modalities, and the audio input representation is typically much longer than the output text.
Thus, in addition to identifying and converting speech sounds, the model must find an “alignment”
that moves information from wherever it appears in the input sequence to wherever it belongs in
the output. Among other issues, the many possible variations in the pace of pronunciation make
transduction a challenging problem.
More than a decade ago, and almost a decade apart, two powerful algorithms relying on dynamic
programming were developed to perform the sequence transduction task with recurrent neural networks (RNNs). The motivation behind these algorithms was that RNNs require training every output
frame in the sequence—with one output per input frame, they needed to be trained with alignments
already prepared. The new algorithms allowed training without prepared alignments by computing
the probability of the label marginalized over all possible alignments as the optimization objective.
The differences in sequence length are accommodated by learning to output “blank” symbols in
between true labels and post-processing them out at inference time. The first algorithm, Connectionist
Temporal Classification (CTC) [1], models the output frames as conditionally independent, and this
∗

Work performed while at Google, USA.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

