PrivacyLens: Evaluating Privacy Norm Awareness of
Language Models in Action

Yijia Shao
Stanford University
shaoyj@stanford.edu

Tianshi Li
Northeastern University
tia.li@northeastern.edu

Yanchen Liu
Harvard University
yanchenliu@g.harvard.edu

Weiyan Shi∗
Northeastern University
we.shi@northeastern.edu

Diyi Yang
Stanford University
diyiy@stanford.edu

https://salt-nlp.github.io/PrivacyLens

Abstract
As language models (LMs) are widely utilized in personalized communication
scenarios (e.g., sending emails, writing social media posts) and endowed with a
certain level of agency, ensuring they act in accordance with the contextual privacy
norms becomes increasingly critical. However, quantifying the privacy norm
awareness of LMs and the emerging privacy risk in LM-mediated communication
is challenging due to (1) the contextual and long-tailed nature of privacy-sensitive
cases, and (2) the lack of evaluation approaches that capture realistic application
scenarios. To address these challenges, we propose PrivacyLens, a novel framework
designed to extend privacy-sensitive seeds into expressive vignettes and further
into agent trajectories, enabling multi-level evaluation of privacy leakage in LM
agents’ actions. We instantiate PrivacyLens with a collection of privacy norms
grounded in privacy literature and crowdsourced seeds. Using this dataset, we
reveal a discrepancy between LM performance in answering probing questions and
their actual behavior when executing user instructions in an agent setup. State-ofthe-art LMs, like GPT-4 and Llama-3-70B, leak sensitive information in 25.68%
and 38.69% of cases, even when prompted with privacy-enhancing instructions.
We also demonstrate the dynamic nature of PrivacyLens by extending each seed
into multiple trajectories to red-team LM privacy leakage risk. Dataset and code
are available at https://github.com/SALT-NLP/PrivacyLens.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in language models (LMs) have led to new applications, such as LM
agents [16, 36] that can assist users in handling everyday communication tasks (e.g., sending emails,
making social media posts, etc. [34, 49]). Equipped with tool use or retrieval-augmented generation
capabilities, LMs can access sensitive data at inference time. Consequently, their unawareness of
the privacy norms, i.e., the appropriateness of the data flow in the data sharing context [38], could
lead to unintentional privacy leakage, even without malicious attackers involved. For example,
as illustrated in Figure 1, it is undesirable for an LM agent to share the information that John is
“talking to a few companies about switching jobs” when assisting John in sending an “email” to
“John’s manager” without John’s explicit consent. It is challenging to balance the LM’s agency with
users’ privacy expectations, because the privacy management process may involve respecting privacy
norms in context and taking into account individual preferences and knowledge [53]. This raises an
∗

The work started when the author was a postdoc at Stanford.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

