µP2: Effective Sharpness Aware Minimization
Requires Layerwise Perturbation Scaling

Moritz Haas1

Jin Xu2

Volkan Cevher3,4

University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center∗
LIONS, EPFL∗

Leena Chennuru Vankadara4

1

2

3

4

University of Oxford∗
AGI Foundations, Amazon

Abstract
Sharpness Aware Minimization (SAM) enhances performance across various
neural architectures and datasets. As models are continually scaled up to improve
performance, a rigorous understanding of SAM’s scaling behaviour is paramount.
To this end, we study the infinite-width limit of neural networks trained with SAM,
using the Tensor Programs framework. Our findings reveal that the dynamics
of standard SAM effectively reduce to applying SAM solely in the last layer
in wide neural networks, even with optimal hyperparameters. In contrast, we
identify a stable parameterization with layerwise perturbation scaling, which we
call Maximal Update and Perturbation Parameterization (µP2 ), that ensures all
layers are both feature learning and effectively perturbed in the limit. Through
experiments with MLPs, ResNets and Vision Transformers, we empirically
demonstrate that µP2 achieves hyperparameter transfer of the joint optimum of
learning rate and perturbation radius across model scales. Moreover, we provide
an intuitive condition to derive µP2 for other perturbation rules like Adaptive SAM
and SAM-ON, also ensuring balanced perturbation effects across all layers.

1

Introduction

Sharpness Aware Minimization (SAM) (Foret et al., 2021) and its variants (Kwon et al., 2021; Müller
et al., 2024) improves generalization performance across a wide range of neural architectures and
datasets (Chen et al., 2021; Kaddour et al., 2022). In the SAM formulation, we minimize a given
loss L between our prediction and the data y as a function of the architecture’s weights W , where an
adversary simultaneously maximizes the same loss by perturbing the weights within a budget ρ.
A standard SAM update for an L-hidden layer multi layer perceptron (MLP) is given by
l
Wt+1
= Wtl − ηl ∇W l L (f (ξt ; Wt + εt ) , yt ) , with εlt = ρ ·

∇W l L(f (ξt ; Wt ), yt )
, (SAM)
∥∇W L(f (ξt ; Wt ), yt )∥F

where W = [W 1 , . . . , W L+1 ], t is the iteration count and εlt denotes the perturbation in the l-th
MLP layer with width n ∈ N, and where we define an L-hidden layer MLP iteratively via
h1 (ξ) := W 1 ξ,

xl (ξ) := ϕ(hl (ξ)),

hl+1 (ξ) := W l+1 xl (ξ),

f (ξ) := W L+1 xL (ξ),

for inputs ξ ∈ Rdin with trainable weight matrices W 1 ∈ Rn×din , W l ∈ Rn×n for l ∈ [2, L], and
W L+1 ∈ Rdout ×n . We call hl preactivations, xl activations, and f (ξ) output function. Despite the
inherent difficulty of non-convex, non-concave optimization, SAM is quite successful in practice.
∗
This work was conducted during Moritz’, Jin’s and Volkan’s time at Amazon. Correspondence to:
mo.haas@uni-tuebingen.de

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

