SELMA: Learning and Merging Skill-Specific
Text-to-Image Experts with Auto-Generated Data

Jialu Li∗

Jaemin Cho∗

Yi-Lin Sung
Jaehong Yoon
Mohit Bansal
UNC Chapel Hill
{jialuli, jmincho, ylsung, jhyoon, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu
https://selma-t2i.github.io

Abstract
Recent text-to-image (T2I) generation models have demonstrated impressive capabilities in creating images from text descriptions. However, these T2I generation
models often fail to generate images that precisely match the details of the text
inputs, such as incorrect spatial relationship or missing objects. In this paper,
we introduce SELMA: Skill-Specific Expert Learning and Merging with AutoGenerated Data, a novel paradigm to improve the faithfulness of T2I models by
fine-tuning models on automatically generated, multi-skill image-text datasets,
with skill-specific expert learning and merging. First, SELMA leverages an LLM’s
in-context learning capability to generate multiple datasets of text prompts that can
teach different skills, and then generates the images with a T2I model based on the
prompts. Next, SELMA adapts the T2I model to the new skills by learning multiple single-skill LoRA (low-rank adaptation) experts followed by expert merging.
Our independent expert fine-tuning specializes multiple models for different skills,
and expert merging helps build a joint multi-skill T2I model that can generate
faithful images given diverse text prompts, while mitigating the knowledge conflict
from different datasets. We empirically demonstrate that SELMA significantly
improves the semantic alignment and text faithfulness of state-of-the-art T2I diffusion models on multiple benchmarks (+2.1% on TIFA and +6.9% on DSG),
human preference metrics (PickScore, ImageReward, and HPS), as well as human
evaluation. Moreover, fine-tuning with image-text pairs auto-collected via SELMA
shows comparable performance to fine-tuning with ground truth data. Lastly, we
show that fine-tuning with images from a weaker T2I model can help improve the
generation quality of a stronger T2I model, suggesting promising weak-to-strong
generalization in T2I models.

1

Introduction

Text-to-Image (T2I) generation models have shown impressive development in recent years [61; 59;
50; 30; 57; 85; 10]. Although these approaches can generate high-quality images based on textual
inputs, they still struggle to capture all semantics in the given textual prompts, such as failing to
compose multiple subjects [85; 22; 40] and generate correct spatial relationships [48].
Many recent works have been proposed to tackle these challenges in text-to-image generation, aiming
to enhance the faithfulness of T2I models to textual inputs. One line of research focuses on supervised
fine-tuning on high-quality image-text datasets with human annotations [18] or image-text pairs with
re-captioned text prompts [65; 5], as shown in Fig. 1 (a). Another line of research is based on aligning
T2I models with human preference annotations [82; 52; 21; 33; 76], as shown in Fig. 1 (b). Other
∗

equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

