Real-time Stereo-based 3D Object Detection for
Streaming Perception

Changcai Li1,2

Zonghua Gu3 Gang Chen1,2,∗ Libo Huang4
Wei Zhang2 Huihui Zhou2
1
Sun Yat-sen University 2 Pengcheng Laboratory
3
Hofstra University 4 National University of Defense Technology
lichc5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn zonghua.gu@hofstra.edu cheng83@mail.sysu.edu.cn#
libohuang@nudt.edu.cn zhangwei1213052@126.com zhouhh@pcl.ac.cn

Abstract
The ability to promptly respond to environmental changes is crucial for the perception system of autonomous driving. Recently, a new task called streaming
perception was proposed. It jointly evaluates the latency and accuracy into a single
metric for video online perception. In this work, we introduce StreamDSGN, the
first real-time stereo-based 3D object detection framework designed for streaming perception. StreamDSGN is an end-to-end framework that directly predicts
the 3D properties of objects in the next moment by leveraging historical information, thereby alleviating the accuracy degradation of streaming perception.
Further, StreamDSGN applies three strategies to enhance the perception accuracy: (1) A feature-flow-based fusion method, which generates a pseudo-next
feature at the current moment to address the misalignment issue between feature
and ground truth. (2) An extra regression loss for explicit supervision of object
motion consistency in consecutive frames. (3) A large kernel backbone with a
large receptive field for effectively capturing long-range spatial contextual features caused by changes in object positions. Experiments on the KITTI Tracking
dataset show that, compared with the strong baseline, StreamDSGN significantly
improves the streaming average precision by up to 4.33%. Our code is available at
https://github.com/weiyangdaren/streamDSGN-pytorch.

1

Introduction

Stereo-based 3D object detection [53, 6, 7] presents a notable advantage of low-cost in the deployment
compared to LiDAR-based methods. However, existing stereo-based methods encounter challenges
in delivering timely responses due to the intensive computations. Although there have been efforts
towards lightweight approaches [35, 38], the latency of the inference process is still non-negligible.
This is because the latency will lead to the misalignment between the prediction of the latest frame
and the real-time changing scene, as shown in Figure 1.
Recently, a new metric [30, 52] named streaming accuracy was proposed for real-time online
perception. Different from previous offline metrics [10, 3, 50] which only emphasize the detection
accuracy, it simultaneously considers both accuracy and latency in the performance evaluation. With
this metric, the model is forced to evaluate the processed world state against the prediction of the
received frame. Hence, many high-accuracy but low-efficiency detectors [33, 17] will result in
significant performance degradation for real-time perception applications.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

