Unsupervised Discovery of Formulas for Mathematical
Constants
Michael Shalyt∗ Uri Seligmann∗ Itay Beit Halachmi Ofir David
Rotem Elimelech Ido Kaminer
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 3200003, Israel
shalyt@technion.ac.il, uri.seligmann@gmail.com
itaybe@campus.technion.ac.il, eofirdavid@gmail.com
rotem.eli@campus.technion.ac.il, kaminer@technion.ac.il

1

Abstract

Ongoing efforts that span over decades show a rise of AI methods for accelerating scientific discovery
[Fajtlowicz, 1988, Petkovsek et al., 1996, Wolfram et al., 2002, Buchberger et al., 2006, Bailey
et al., 2007, Raayoni et al., 2021, Davies et al., 2021, Fawzi et al., 2022], yet accelerating discovery
in mathematics remains a persistent challenge for AI. Specifically, AI methods were not effective
in creation of formulas for mathematical constants because each such formula must be correct for
infinite digits of precision, with “near-true” formulas providing no insight toward the correct ones.
Consequently, formula discovery lacks a clear distance metric needed to guide automated discovery
in this realm. In this work, we propose a systematic methodology for categorization, characterization,
and pattern identification of such formulas. The key to our methodology is introducing metrics based
on the convergence dynamics of the formulas, rather than on the numerical value of the formula.
These metrics enable the first automated clustering of mathematical formulas. We demonstrate this
methodology on Polynomial Continued Fraction formulas, which are ubiquitous in their intrinsic
connections to mathematical constants [Lagarias, 2013, Bowman and McLaughlin, 2002, Laughlin
and Wyshinski, 2004], and generalize many mathematical functions and structures. We test our
methodology on a set of 1,768,900 such formulas, identifying many known formulas for mathematical constants, and discover previously unknown formulas for π, ln(2), Gauss’, and Lemniscate’s
constants. The uncovered patterns enable a direct generalization of individual formulas to infinite
families, unveiling rich mathematical structures. This success paves the way towards a generative
model that creates formulas fulfilling specified mathematical properties, accelerating the rate of
discovery of useful formulas.

2

Introduction

Historically, formulas of mathematical constants were a symbol of aesthetics and beauty. Continued
fraction formulas such as those for the golden ratio ϕ and for tan(x)
1+

1
1 + 1+ 1 1

1+···

=ϕ

x
1−

x2
x2
3− 5−···

= tan(x)

(1)

enable calculating infinitely many digits for these constants. Discovering such formulas often
leads to profound revelations regarding the properties and underlying structure of fundamental
constants. For example, the continued fraction formula for tan(x), shown in Eq. 1, was used by
Johann Heinrich Lambert in the first proof of the irrationality of Pi [Lambert, 1768][Berggren et al.,
2004]. Unfortunately, such formulas are notoriously hard to find on-demand, often relying on a
mathematician’s profound intuition. Part of the challenge is the lack of a well-defined ‘distance’, or a
∗

Equal contribution.
Project repository: https://github.com/RamanujanMachine/Blind-Delta-Algorithm

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

