Fine-Tuning Large Vision-Language Models as
Decision-Making Agents via Reinforcement Learning

Yuexiang Zhai1∗ Hao Bai2† Zipeng Lin1† Jiayi Pan1† Shengbang Tong3† Yifei Zhou1†
Alane Suhr1 Saining Xie3 Yann LeCun3 Yi Ma1 Sergey Levine1
1

Environments

UC Berkeley

2

UIUC

3

NYU

Batch Observations & Rewards

+

You are a blackjack player. You are observing the current game
state, you can choose between ['stand', 'hit']. 

concat Please first describe the current state, then output the action.

Pretrained

Vision Language Model

RL  

Fine-Tuning

"thoughts": "I have 20 points in total. The dealer has at least 10
points. My total points are large, I should stand."

"action": "stand"

Actions
Figure 1: Method overview. We propose a framework for training large Vision-Language Models (VLM) with
Reinforcement Learning (RL). At each time step, the VLM takes the current observation and a predesigned
prompt as input and outputs an utterance containing a chain of thought reasoning and a text action. The text
action is parsed into the environment for generating task rewards. Finally, we apply RL with the task reward to
fine-tune the entire VLM.

Abstract
Large vision-language models (VLMs) fine-tuned on specialized visual instructionfollowing data have exhibited impressive language reasoning capabilities across
various scenarios. However, this fine-tuning paradigm may not be able to efficiently learn optimal decision-making agents in multi-step goal-directed tasks from
interactive environments. To address this challenge, we propose an algorithmic
framework that fine-tunes VLMs with reinforcement learning (RL). Specifically,
our framework provides a task description and then prompts the VLM to generate chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning, enabling the VLM to efficiently explore
intermediate reasoning steps that lead to the final text-based action. Next, the
open-ended text output is parsed into an executable action to interact with the environment to obtain goal-directed task rewards. Finally, our framework uses these
task rewards to fine-tune the entire VLM with RL. Empirically, we demonstrate
that our proposed framework enhances the decision-making capabilities of VLM
∗
†

Project Lead, email: simonzhai@berkeley.edu. Project page: https://rl4vlm.github.io/
Equal contribution, listed in alphabetical order, see Appendix A for list of contributions.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

