On the Benefits of Public Representations
for Private Transfer Learning under Distribution Shift

Pratiksha Thaker
Carnegie Mellon University
pthaker@andrew.cmu.edu

Amrith Setlur
Carnegie Mellon University
asetlur@andrew.cmu.edu

Zhiwei Steven Wu
Carnegie Mellon University
zstevenwu@andrew.cmu.edu

Virginia Smith
Carnegie Mellon University
smithv@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Public pretraining is a promising approach to improve differentially private model
training. However, recent work has noted that many positive research results
studying this paradigm only consider in-distribution tasks, and may not apply to
settings where there is distribution shift between the pretraining and finetuning
data—a scenario that is likely when finetuning private tasks due to the sensitive
nature of the data. In this work, we show empirically across three tasks that even in
settings with large distribution shift, where both zero-shot performance from public
data and training from scratch with private data give unusably weak results, public
features can in fact improve private training accuracy by up to 67% over private
training from scratch. We provide a theoretical explanation for this phenomenon,
showing that if the public and private data share a low-dimensional representation,
public representations can improve the sample complexity of private training even
if it is impossible to learn the private task from the public data alone. Altogether, our
results provide evidence that public data can indeed make private training practical
in realistic settings of extreme distribution shift.

1

Introduction

Learning models from user data can potentially disclose sensitive user information, violating privacy
constraints [1–3]. Differential privacy is a standard framework that can be used when learning models
from sensitive data to mitigate the risk of leaking private information [4]. However, differentially
private learning may significantly degrade accuracy, which remains a barrier to adoption [5]. This
has motivated recent works to explore the benefits of incorporating publicly available data into
private training, e.g., by pretraining a model on public data and then finetuning it using private data.
Empirically, this paradigm has been shown to substantially improve performance on private tasks
relative to fully-private training [6–13].
While these results are encouraging, Tramèr et al. [14] point out that much of the existing work focuses
on in-distribution tasks, where the public and private tasks are very similar. For example, many private
vision models [15–19] use public features pretrained on ImageNet [20], CIFAR-10 or CIFAR-100
[21], but these works also simulate private transfer performance by finetuning on one of these datasets.
In fact, Tramèr et al. [14] point out that “every single class contained in the CIFAR-10 dataset has
an identical class label in the ImageNet dataset!” This is particularly problematic when attempting
to understand the utility of public pretraining for private tasks, because in practice the private task is
likely to contain sensitive data that is not perfectly represented by public data, such as in applications in
medicine [22] or law [23]. Indeed, if data is already well-represented in a public dataset, the zero-shot
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

