Lexicon3D: Probing Visual Foundation Models for
Complex 3D Scene Understanding

1

Yunze Man1

Shuhong Zheng1

Zhipeng Bao2

Martial Hebert2

Liang-Yan Gui1

Yu-Xiong Wang1

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

2

Carnegie Mellon University

https://yunzeman.github.io/Lexicon3D

Abstract
Complex 3D scene understanding has gained increasing attention, with scene
encoding strategies built on top of visual foundation models playing a crucial
role in this success. However, the optimal scene encoding strategies for various
scenarios remain unclear, particularly compared to their image-based counterparts.
To address this issue, we present the first comprehensive study that probes various
visual encoding models for 3D scene understanding, identifying the strengths and
limitations of each model across different scenarios. Our evaluation spans seven
vision foundation encoders, including image, video, and 3D foundation models.
We evaluate these models in four tasks: Vision-Language Scene Reasoning, Visual
Grounding, Segmentation, and Registration, each focusing on different aspects of
scene understanding. Our evaluation yields key intriguing findings: Unsupervised
image foundation models demonstrate superior overall performance, video models
excel in object-level tasks, diffusion models benefit geometric tasks, languagepretrained models show unexpected limitations in language-related tasks, and
the mixture-of-vision-expert (MoVE) strategy leads to consistent performance
improvement. These insights challenge some conventional understandings, provide
novel perspectives on leveraging visual foundation models, and highlight the
need for more flexible encoder selection in future vision-language and scene
understanding tasks.

1

Introduction

Recently, complex 3D scene understanding has emerged as a pivotal area in computer vision,
encompassing tasks such as scene generation [25, 26, 27, 34, 77, 96], reasoning [5, 36, 55, 58], and
interaction [37, 112]. Leveraging large-scale vision foundation models, many approaches [44, 67,
71, 87, 94] have achieved promising results in various downstream tasks, thereby enabling a wide
range of real-world applications, from autonomous driving [57, 78, 82, 117], robotics [60, 112], to
multimodal agents [1, 81].
While numerous studies [6, 70, 103] have provided guidance on the use of vision foundation models
for 2D image-based tasks, the strategies for 3D scenarios remain unclear. A systematic understanding
of complex real-world scenarios involves not only semantic and depth awareness [6], which is
possible to evaluate within the 2D domain, but also geometric awareness and the ability to align with
multimodal information for reasoning and grounding tasks. To address this gap, our work evaluates
the use of different types of visual foundation models for complex scene understanding and seeks to
identify the strengths and limitations of each model in different scenarios. Ultimately, this study aims
to contribute to the development of more effective and efficient scene understanding systems.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

