Invariant Tokenization of Crystalline Materials for
Language Model Enabled Generation

Keqiang Yan1 , Xiner Li1 , Hongyi Ling1 , Kenna Ashen1 , Carl Edwards2 ,
Raymundo Arróyave1 , Marinka Zitnik3 , Heng Ji2 , Xiaofeng Qian1 , Xiaoning Qian1 ,
Shuiwang Ji1
1
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, USA
2
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL 61820, USA
3
Harvard University, Boston, MA 02115, USA
{keqiangyan,lxe,hongyiling,kashen13,rarroyave,feng,xqian,sji}@tamu.edu
{cne2,hengji}@illinois.edu
marinka@hms.harvard.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of crystal materials generation using language models (LMs). A key step is to convert 3D crystal structures into 1D sequences to
be processed by LMs. Prior studies used the crystallographic information framework (CIF) file stream, which fails to ensure SE(3) and periodic invariance and
may not lead to unique sequence representations for a given crystal structure. Here,
we propose a novel method, known as Mat2Seq, to tackle this challenge. Mat2Seq
converts 3D crystal structures into 1D sequences and ensures that different mathematical descriptions of the same crystal are represented in a single unique sequence,
thereby provably achieving SE(3) and periodic invariance. Experimental results
show that, with language models, Mat2Seq achieves promising performance in
crystal structure generation as compared with prior methods.

1

Introduction

Discovering crystalline materials with desired properties is valuable for advancing a variety of
technological sectors [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. However, current materials discovery relies on trialand-error wet-lab experimental methods that are time-consuming and expensive. Computational
methods based on advanced quantum mechanical approaches such as first-principles density functional
theory (DFT) have sped up this process in the last two decades. Nevertheless, the high computational
cost of these methods ranging from O(n3 ) to O(n7 ), where n is number of electrons in a material
system, poses a significant challenge for high-throughput screening of the infinite materials space.
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have showcased substantial capabilities in realtime question answering and image generation. However, the application of these models to atomistic
systems, including molecular and material structures, remains relatively underexplored. Specifically,
while recent studies have attempted to represent molecules and crystals using XYZ and CIF structure
file formats [10, 11, 12], they have not adequately addressed the critical issues of uniqueness and
invariance in sequence representations of 3D crystal structures, which play key roles for successful
LLM-based discovery of novel crystalline materials with discussions provided in Sec. 2.2.
The concept of uniqueness [13, 14] in crystal sequences mandates a bijective relationship between
crystal structures and their sequence representations. Current approaches using CIF files directly in
crystal LLMs violate this uniqueness criterion, leading to significantly varied sequences for identical
crystals, particularly in terms of atom ordering and fractional coordinates within the unit cell as
illustrated in Figure 1. This lack of unique sequence representations means that an infinite number of
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

