Text to Blind Motion
Hee Jae Kim1

Kathakoli Sengupta1
Hernisa Kacorri3

1

Boston University

2

Masaki Kuribayashi2

Eshed Ohn-Bar1

Waseda University

3

University of Maryland, College Park

Abstract
People who are blind perceive the world differently than those who are sighted,
which can result in distinct motion characteristics. For instance, when crossing at
an intersection, blind individuals may have different patterns of movement, such as
veering more from a straight path or using touch-based exploration around curbs
and obstacles. These behaviors may appear less predictable to motion models
embedded in technologies such as autonomous vehicles. Yet, the ability of 3D
motion models to capture such behavior has not been previously studied, as existing
datasets for 3D human motion currently lack diversity and are biased toward people
who are sighted. In this work, we introduce BlindWays, the first multimodal
motion benchmark for pedestrians who are blind. We collect 3D motion data using
wearable sensors with 11 blind participants navigating eight different routes in a
real-world urban setting. Additionally, we provide rich textual descriptions that
capture the distinctive movement characteristics of blind pedestrians and their
interactions with both the navigation aid (e.g., a white cane or a guide dog) and the
environment. We benchmark state-of-the-art 3D human prediction models, finding
poor performance with off-the-shelf and pre-training-based methods for our novel
task. To contribute toward safer and more reliable systems that can seamlessly
reason over diverse human movements in their environments, our text-and-motion
benchmark is available at https://blindways.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Computational modeling of people and their 3D motion has been studied extensively by the machine
learning community over the past decades [2, 11, 12, 25, 44, 49, 54]. More recently, the field has
been moving beyond single actors performing contrived actions to model interactive behaviors, i.e.,
incorporating objects and surrounding people. However, the scope and diversity of the datasets
associated with this prior work remain limited to a simulation [53], a lab [27, 43], or simplified
layouts [19, 23, 28, 40].
Efforts for accurately capturing and modeling natural and subtle 3D human motion in more realistic
setups, such as [1, 57, 65, 66], are still lacking in complex and safety-critical urban scenes that
comprise dynamic intersections, intricate layouts, and dense social settings. Even more noticeably,
there has not been a single 3D human motion dataset released that comprises mobility data from
individuals with disabilities. Hence, while most human motion models are developed with assistive
and interactive applications in mind, such as social robots and autonomous driving, those who could
benefit the most from these technologies are not included. Such severe biases in existing benchmarks
can carry broader societal implications. It can exacerbate already widespread concerns in accessibility,
where autonomous vehicles fail to accurately predict and safely respond to movements of people
with disabilities [64]; a population that is already disproportionately impacted by motorists’ lack of
awareness [21, 36, 37, 46]. In this work, we address this current gap in literature through a novel
benchmark featuring people who are blind navigating real-world urban settings.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

