Inferring Neural Signed Distance Functions by
Overfitting on Single Noisy Point Clouds through
Finetuning Data-Driven based Priors

Chao Chen1
Yu-Shen Liu1∗ Zhizhong Han2
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA
chenchao19@tsinghua.org.cn liuyushen@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
h312h@wayne.edu
1

Abstract
It is important to estimate an accurate signed distance function (SDF) from a point
cloud in many computer vision applications. The latest methods learn neural SDFs
using either a data-driven based or an overfitting-based strategy. However, these two
kinds of methods are with either poor generalization or slow convergence, which
limits their capability under challenging scenarios like highly noisy point clouds.
To resolve this issue, we propose a method to promote pros of both data-driven
based and overfitting-based methods for better generalization, faster inference, and
higher accuracy in learning neural SDFs. We introduce a novel statistical reasoning
algorithm in local regions which is able to finetune data-driven based priors without
signed distance supervision, clean point cloud, or point normals. This helps our
method start with a good initialization, and converge to a minimum in a much
faster way. Our numerical and visual comparisons with the state-of-the-art methods
show our superiority over these methods in surface reconstruction and point cloud
denoising on widely used shape and scene benchmarks. The code is available at
https://github.com/chenchao15/LocalN2NM.

1

Introduction

It is an important task to estimate an implicit function from a point cloud in computer graphics,
computer vision, and robotics. An implicit function, such as a signed distance function (SDF),
describes a continuous 3D distance field to indicate distances to the nearest surfaces at arbitrary
locations. Since point clouds are easy to obtain, they are widely used as an information source to
estimate SDFs, particularly without using normals that are not available for most scenarios. The
challenge for SDF estimation mainly comes from the difficulty of bridging the gap between the
discreteness of point clouds and the continuity of implicit functions.
Recent methods [62, 64, 29, 14, 95, 80, 58, 74] overcome this challenge using either a data-driven
based or an overfitting-based strategy. To map a point cloud to a signed distance field, the data-driven
based methods [60, 27, 36, 45, 81, 79, 22, 42, 92, 83] rely on a prior learned with signed distance
supervision from a large-scale dataset, while the overfitting-based methods [28, 1, 102, 2, 99, 4, 21,
50, 18, 88] do not need signed distance supervision and just use the point cloud to infer a signed
distance field. However, both of the two kinds of methods have pros and cons. The data-driven based
methods can do inference fast but suffers from the need of large-scale training samples and poor
∗

The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu. This work was supported by National Key R&D Program of
China (2022YFC3800600), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62272263, 62072268), and
in part by Tsinghua-Kuaishou Institute of Future Media Data.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

