Mutual Information Estimation via Normalizing Flows

Butakov I. D.
Skoltech∗, MIPT†, Sirius‡,
butakov.id@phystech.su

Tolmachev A. D.
Skoltech, MIPT
tolmachev.ad@phystech.su

Malanchuk S. V.
MIPT, Skoltech
malanchuk.sv@phystech.su

Neopryatnaya A. M.
MIPT, Skoltech
neopryatnaya.am@phystech.su

Frolov A. A.
Skoltech
al.frolov@skoltech.ru

Abstract
We propose a novel approach to the problem of mutual information (MI) estimation
via introducing a family of estimators based on normalizing flows. The estimator
maps original data to the target distribution, for which MI is easier to estimate. We
additionally explore the target distributions with known closed-form expressions
for MI. Theoretical guarantees are provided to demonstrate that our approach yields
MI estimates for the original data. Experiments with high-dimensional data are
conducted to highlight the practical advantages of the proposed method.
fX
(diffeomorphism)
(unknown)

I(X;Y )

fX

ξ∼qξ

(diffeomorphism)

I(ξ;η) (easy to estimate)

fY
(diffeomorphism)

η∼qη

(unknown)

(ξ,η)∼qξ,η

(a) MIENF (general base distribution).

I(X;Y )

ξ∼N (0,Idξ )

I(ξ;η) (tractable)

fY
(diffeomorphism)

η∼N (0,Idη )

(ξ,η)∼N (0,Σ)

(b) N -MIENF (Gaussian base distribution).

Figure 1: We propose transforming a pair of random vectors (RVs) via a Cartesian product of learnable
diffeomorphisms to facilitate mutual information (MI) estimation. Ideally, we achieve tractable MI in
the latent space. As diffeomorphisms preserve information, MI between latent representations equals
MI between the original RVs.

1

Introduction

Information-theoretic analysis of deep neural networks (DNN) has attracted recent interest due to
intriguing fundamental results and new hypotheses. Applying information theory to DNNs may
provide novel tools for explainable AI via estimation of information flows [1–5], as well as new
ways to encourage models to extract and generalize information [1, 6–8]. Useful applications of
information theory to the classical problem of independence testing are also worth noting [9–11].
∗

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology
‡
Sirius University of Science and Technology
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

