Efficient Minimum Bayes Risk Decoding using
Low-Rank Matrix Completion Algorithms

Firas Trabelsi
Google
firast@google.com

David Vilar
Google
vilar@google.com

Mara Finkelstein
Google
marafin@google.com

Markus Freitag
Google
freitag@google.com

Abstract
Minimum Bayes Risk (MBR) decoding is a powerful decoding strategy widely
used for text generation tasks, but its quadratic computational complexity limits
its practical application. This paper presents a novel approach for approximating
MBR decoding using matrix completion techniques, focusing on the task of machine translation. We formulate MBR decoding as a matrix completion problem,
where the utility metric scores between candidate hypotheses and pseudo-reference
translations form a low-rank matrix. First, we empirically show that the scores matrices indeed have a low-rank structure. Then, we exploit this by only computing a
random subset of the scores and efficiently recover the missing entries in the matrix
by applying the Alternating Least Squares (ALS) algorithm, thereby enabling a fast
approximation of the MBR decoding process. Our experimental results on machine
translation tasks demonstrate that the proposed method requires 1/16 utility metric
computations compared to vanilla MBR decoding while achieving equal translation
quality measured by C OMET 22 on the WMT22 dataset (en ↔de, en ↔ru). We
also benchmark our method against other approximation methods and we show
gains in quality when comparing to them.

1

Introduction

The generation process in most conditional natural language processing tasks is usually guided
by the maximum-a-posteriori (MAP) rule: given an input x, generate the output ŷ that maximizes
the posterior probability distribution: ŷ = argmaxy p(y|x). It can be shown that MAP decoding
is optimal under a 0-1 loss criterion. However for more nuanced tasks, where different outputs
can be considered correct, and the quality of the output is not just a binary decision between
“right” and “wrong”, MAP decoding is no longer optimal. Neural Machine Translation (NMT) is
a prominent example of these types of tasks. For NMT, a system is trained to generate a sentence
in a target language given a source sentence in another language. For a given sentence, there exists
a variety of possible translations, each of which has a different quality level. Eikema and Aziz
(2020) demonstrated that MAP decoding methods are suboptimal for NMT, and showed that other
generation strategies may be preferred. Furthermore, NMT models often assign human translations
lower probabilities than their own beam search outputs, due to model calibration issues (Ott et al.,
2018; Freitag et al., 2020).
As an alternative, Eikema and Aziz (2020, 2022) applied MBR decoding for NMT models. MBR
decoding follows a two-step approach, where a model is used to generate a list of candidate translations
and a list of pseudo-references (which may be the same as the list of candidates). The candidates
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

