Safe Time-Varying Optimization based on Gaussian
Processes with Spatio-Temporal Kernel

Jialin Li
ETH Zürich (currently with UIUC)
lijial@ethz.ch

Marta Zagorowska
NTNU (currently with TU Delft)
m.a.zagorowska@tudelft.nl

Giulia De Pasquale
Eindhoven Univeristy of Technology
g.de.pasquale@tue.nl

Alisa Rupenyan
Zürich University of Applied Sciences
alisa.rupenyan@zhaw.ch

John Lygeros
ETH Zürich
jlygeros@ethz.ch

Abstract
Ensuring safety is a key aspect in sequential decision making problems, such
as robotics or process control. The complexity of the underlying systems often
makes finding the optimal decision challenging, especially when the safety-critical
system is time-varying. Overcoming the problem of optimizing an unknown
time-varying reward subject to unknown time-varying safety constraints, we propose TVSAFEOPT, a new algorithm built on Bayesian optimization with a spatiotemporal kernel. The algorithm is capable of safely tracking a time-varying safe
region without the need for explicit change detection. Optimality guarantees are
also provided for the algorithm when the optimization problem becomes stationary.
We show that TVSAFEOPT compares favorably against SAFEOPT on synthetic
data, both regarding safety and optimality. Evaluation on a realistic case study
with gas compressors confirms that TVSAFEOPT ensures safety when solving
time-varying optimization problems with unknown reward and safety functions.

1

Introduction

We seek to interactively optimize an unknown time-varying reward function f : X × T → R, where
X is a finite set of decisions, and T := {0, 1, 2, . . . , T }, T ∈ N+ denotes the discretized time
domain. We assume that the optimization problem is safety-critical, that is, there are constraints that
evaluated decisions must satisfy with high probability. Similar to the reward, the constraints are also
unknown and potentially time-varying, encoded through ci : X × T → R, i ∈ Ic := {1, 2, . . . , m},
where m ∈ N+ denotes the number of safety constraints. The optimization problem at time t is
max f (x, t)
x∈X

subject to ci (x, t) ≥ 0, i ∈ Ic

(1)

Both the reward function and the safety constraints are assumed to be unknown but can be evaluated.
This is a plausible setting, for example, for UAV that need to perform rescue missions in dangerous
and poorly lit environments.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

