Grid4D: 4D Decomposed Hash Encoding for
High-Fidelity Dynamic Gaussian Splatting

Jiawei Xu1 †, Zexin Fan1 †, Jian Yang1 § ∗, Jin Xie2 3 ‡ ∗
PCA Lab, VCIP, College of Computer Science, Nankai University
2
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
3
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, Suzhou, China
†
{jiaweixu, zexin_fan}@mail.nankai.edu.cn ‡ csjxie@nju.edu.cn § csjyang@nankai.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Recently, Gaussian splatting has received more and more attention in the field
of static scene rendering. Due to the low computational overhead and inherent
flexibility of explicit representations, plane-based explicit methods are popular
ways to predict deformations for Gaussian-based dynamic scene rendering models.
However, plane-based methods rely on the inappropriate low-rank assumption and
excessively decompose the space-time 4D encoding, resulting in overmuch feature
overlap and unsatisfactory rendering quality. To tackle these problems, we propose
Grid4D, a dynamic scene rendering model based on Gaussian splatting and employing a novel explicit encoding method for the 4D input through the hash encoding.
Different from plane-based explicit representations, we decompose the 4D encoding into one spatial and three temporal 3D hash encodings without the low-rank
assumption. Additionally, we design a novel attention module that generates the
attention scores in a directional range to aggregate the spatial and temporal features.
The directional attention enables Grid4D to more accurately fit the diverse deformations across distinct scene components based on the spatial encoded features.
Moreover, to mitigate the inherent lack of smoothness in explicit representation
methods, we introduce a smooth regularization term that keeps our model from
the chaos of deformation prediction. Our experiments demonstrate that Grid4D
significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art models in visual quality and rendering
speed. Project page: https://jiaweixu8.github.io/Grid4D-web/.

1

Introduction

Dynamic scene rendering aims to construct dynamic scenes from images with specific camera poses
and timestamps, allowing rendering from arbitrary viewpoints and moments. Traditional methods
use Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [26] and deformation fields to reconstruct dynamic scenes for
arbitrary rendering. However, these works rely on predicting deformations with the over-smooth
full Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) [31, 40, 48, 10, 19, 28, 55, 47, 16, 5, 18, 1, 38, 23, 45, 21, 4, 53],
resulting in slow training speeds and artifacts in rendering quality. To address these challenges,
explicit representations such as planes [3] and hash encoding [27] have been introduced to enhance
the rendering of dynamic scenes [33, 9, 2, 46, 8, 41, 11, 35, 36]. The explicit representations store the
intermediate features generated by the partial forward propagation process in a grid-like format. This
approach allows us to obtain intermediate features by directly interpolating the cached features based
on the input, bypassing the need for the full forward propagation process. In addition to reducing
computing resource consumption, the inherent flexibility of explicit representation offers advantages
in rendering more complex scenes.
* Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

