Robust Sleep Staging over Incomplete Multimodal
Physiological Signals via Contrastive Imagination

1

Qi Shen1 , Junchang Xin2 , Bing Tian Dai3 , Shudi Zhang1 , Zhiqiong Wang1∗
College of Medicine and Biological Information Engineering, Northeastern University, China
2
College of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, China
3
School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore
2210521@stu.neu.edu.cn, xinjunchang@mail.neu.edu.cn, btdai@smu.edu.sg,
2310535@stu.neu.edu.cn, wangzq@bmie.neu.edu.cn

Abstract
Multimodal physiological signals, such as EEG, EOG and EMG, provide rich and
reliable physiological information for automated sleep staging (ASS). However,
in the real world, the completeness of various modalities is difficult to guarantee,
which seriously affects the performance of ASS based on multimodal learning.
Furthermore, the exploration of temporal context information within PSs is also
a serious challenge. To this end, we propose a robust multimodal sleep staging
framework named contrastive imagination modality sleep network (CIMSleepNet).
Specifically, CIMSleepNet handles the issue of arbitrary modal missing through
the combination of modal awareness imagination module (MAIM) and semantic
& modal calibration contrastive learning (SMCCL). Among them, MAIM can
capture the interaction among modalities by learning the shared representation
distribution of all modalities. Meanwhile, SMCCL introduces prior information
of semantics and modalities to check semantic consistency while maintaining
the uniqueness of each modality. Utilizing the calibration of SMCCL, the data
distribution recovered by MAIM is aligned with the real data distribution. We
further design a multi-level cross-branch temporal attention mechanism, which can
facilitate the mining of cross-scale temporal context representations at both the
intra-epoch and inter-epoch levels. Extensive experiments on five multimodal sleep
datasets demonstrate that CIMSleepNet remarkably outperforms other competitive
methods under various missing modality patterns. The source code is available at:
https://github.com/SQAIYY/CIMSleepNet.

1

Introduction

Automated sleep staging (ASS) is essential to promote sleep quality assessment and sleep disorder
diagnosis, providing convenience for the public in the daily monitoring of sleep within their home
environment. Many machine learning algorithms, including feature engineering and deep learning,
have been proposed for ASS [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. In particular, deep learning methods represented by
convolutional neural network (CNN) have achieved remarkable results in the field of ASS [6].
Compared with feature engineering, deep learning does not require the guidance of prior knowledge
and has the advantage of automatically extracting physiological signals (PSs) features.
In clinical applications, due to the complexity of human physiological states, subjects usually need to
wear multiple sensors to obtain more comprehensive and integrated physiological information from
multimodal PSs collected from different sources [7]. Hence, several multimodal fusion algorithms
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

