Learning Frequency-Adapted Vision Foundation
Model for Domain Generalized Semantic Segmentation

Qi Bi1∗, Jingjun Yi2 , Hao Zheng2 , Haolan Zhan3 , Yawen Huang2 ,
Wei Ji4 , Yuexiang Li5 , Yefeng Zheng1
1
Westlake University, China, 2 Jarvis Research Center, Tencent Youtu Lab, China,
3
Monash University, Australia, 4 Yale University, United States,
5
University of Macau, Macau
howzheng@tencent.com, yuexiang.li@ieee.org
zhengyefeng@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
The emerging vision foundation model (VFM) has inherited the ability to generalize
to unseen images. Nevertheless, the key challenge of domain-generalized semantic
segmentation (DGSS) lies in the domain gap attributed to the cross-domain styles,
e.g., the variance of urban landscape and environment dependencies. Hence,
maintaining the style-invariant property with varying domain styles becomes the
key bottleneck in harnessing VFM for DGSS. The frequency space after Haar
wavelet transform provides a feasible way to decouple the style information from
the domain-invariant content, since the content and style information is retained in
the low- and high-frequency components of the space, respectively. To this end,
we propose a novel Frequency-Adapted (FADA) learning scheme to advance the
frontier. Its overall idea is to separately tackle the content and style information by
frequency tokens throughout the learning process. Particularly, the proposed FADA
consists of two branches, i.e., low- and high-frequency branches. The former is able
to stabilize the scene content, while the latter learns the scene styles and eliminates
its impact to DGSS. Experiments conducted on various DGSS settings show the
state-of-the-art performance of our FADA and its versatility to a variety of VFMs.
Source code is available at https://github.com/BiQiWHU/FADA.

1

Introduction

Most existing semantic segmentation tasks assume that the training and inference images follow
the independent and identical distribution (i.i.d.) [12, 13, 36, 35, 34, 81, 54, 44, 74], which is far
from reality. Domain-generalized semantic segmentation (DGSS) aims to infer robust pixel-wise
semantic predictions on arbitrary unseen target domains when a segmentation model is trained on
the source domain (as illustrated in Fig. 1a). Compared with general domain generalization tasks,
the feature distribution discrepancy between the source domain and unseen target domains in the
context of DGSS holds some unique factors. Specifically, the cross-domain images in DGSS usually
share the same content information (i.e., common semantic categories in driving scenes), while the
cross-domain styles (i.e., urban landscape, weather, lighting conditions, etc.) mainly account for the
feature distribution difference [65, 49, 18, 11, 72, 6, 23, 43, 24].
Existing DGSS methods can be summarized into three categories. The first category intends to
decouple the style information from the scene representation [55, 30, 14, 56, 78, 71, 58], but does not
∗
Qi Bi is affiliated with University of Amsterdam. This research was conducted with Westlake University
and Tencent Youtu Lab.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

