Bidirectional Recurrence for Cardiac Motion Tracking
with Gaussian Process Latent Coding

Jiewen Yang Yiqun Lin Bin Pu Xiaomeng LiB
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{jyangcu, ylindw}@connect.ust.hk {eebinpu, eexmli}@ust.hk

Abstract
Quantitative analysis of cardiac motion is crucial for assessing cardiac function.
This analysis typically uses imaging modalities such as MRI and Echocardiograms
that capture detailed image sequences throughout the heartbeat cycle. Previous
methods predominantly focused on the analysis of image pairs lacking consideration of the motion dynamics and spatial variability. Consequently, these methods
often overlook the long-term relationships and regional motion characteristic of
cardiac. To overcome these limitations, we introduce the GPTrack, a novel unsupervised framework crafted to fully explore the temporal and spatial dynamics
of cardiac motion. The GPTrack enhances motion tracking by employing the
sequential Gaussian Process in the latent space and encoding statistics by spatial
information at each time stamp, which robustly promotes temporal consistency
and spatial variability of cardiac dynamics. Also, we innovatively aggregate sequential information in a bidirectional recursive manner, mimicking the behavior
of diffeomorphic registration to better capture consistent long-term relationships
of motions across cardiac regions such as the ventricles and atria. Our GPTrack
significantly improves the precision of motion tracking in both 3D and 4D medical images while maintaining computational efficiency. The code is available at:
https://github.com/xmed-lab/GPTrack.

1

Introduction

Cardiac motion tracking from Cardiac Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and Echocardiograms is
crucial in quantitative cardiac image processing. These imaging techniques provide comprehensive
image sequences that cover an entire heartbeat cycle, allowing for detailed analysis of cardiac
dynamics. Conventional non-parametric cardiac motion tracking approaches, such as B-splines [1],
Demons algorithms [2] and optical-flow based methods [3, 4, 5], are commonly utilized due to
their flexibility and ability to align detailed structures within images. However, these methods
face significant challenges in motion tracking because they lack topology-preserving constraints
and temporal coherence. The diffeomorphic registration method [6, 7, 8], which formulates the
registration process as a group of diffeomorphisms in Lagrangian dynamics, is a nice candidate
for topology-preserving motion tracking. However, traditional optimization-based diffeomorphic
registration methods are computationally intensive and sensitive to noises, hindering their applications
in efficient cardiac motion tracking.
Current deep learning-based techniques [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16] employ these advanced
imaging modalities to register image pairs within the same patient, and some [14, 15, 16] adopt the
diffeomorphic routine and learn the Lagrangian strain to describe the motion relationship between the
reference frame and subsequent frames, aggregating dynamic information into consecutive cardiac
motions as Lagrangian displacements. Although the above diffeomorphic methods better model the
dynamic and continuous nature of cardiac motion, they still have room for improvement in handling
the long-term temporal relationship in videos. For example, the approach [14] requires segmentation
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

