SLTrain: a sparse plus low-rank approach
for parameter and memory efficient pretraining

Andi Han1 Jiaxiang Li2 Wei Huang1 Mingyi Hong2 Akiko Takeda1,3
Pratik Jawanpuria4 Bamdev Mishra4
1
RIKEN AIP (andi.han@riken.jp, wei.huang.vr@riken.jp)
2
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities (li003755@umn.edu, mhong@umn.edu)
3
University of Tokyo (takeda@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
4
Microsoft, India (pratik.jawanpuria@microsoft.com, bamdevm@microsoft.com)

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have shown impressive capabilities across various
tasks. However, training LLMs from scratch requires significant computational
power and extensive memory capacity. Recent studies have explored low-rank
structures on weights for efficient fine-tuning in terms of parameters and memory,
either through low-rank adaptation or factorization. While effective for fine-tuning,
low-rank structures are generally less suitable for pretraining because they restrict
parameters to a low-dimensional subspace. In this work, we propose to parameterize the weights as a sum of low-rank and sparse matrices for pretraining, which we
call SLTrain. The low-rank component is learned via matrix factorization, while
for the sparse component, we employ a simple strategy of uniformly selecting the
sparsity support at random and learning only the non-zero entries with the fixed
support. While being simple, the random fixed-support sparse learning strategy
significantly enhances pretraining when combined with low-rank learning. Our
results show that SLTrain adds minimal extra parameters and memory costs compared to pretraining with low-rank parameterization, yet achieves substantially
better performance, which is comparable to full-rank training. Remarkably, when
combined with quantization and per-layer updates, SLTrain can reduce memory
requirements by up to 73% when pretraining the LLaMA 7B model.

1

Introduction

Large foundation models have achieved tremendous success in various domains, including linguistics,
computer vision and biology. In particular, large language models (LLMs), such as the GPT series
[39, 5] and the LLaMA family [51, 52] have reshaped the perception of how machine understands
human languages. The predominant success of these models is primarily due to the model size,
usually scaling to hundreds of billions of parameters. The scaling laws seem to suggest the capacity
of LLMs grows with the model size [25], but nonetheless requiring massive amount of resources for
pre-training, storing, and fine-tuning. Particularly, memory requirement for training an LLM imposes
a hard barrier for model deployment on commercial GPUs. For example, the LLaMA 7B model
requires a minimum memory cost of approximately 42G under 16-bit floating point, including 14G
of parameter state and 28G of optimizer state for momentum-based optimizers, like Adam [59, 28].
Building an LLM (from scratch) for downstream tasks typically involves two phases, i.e., pretraining and fine-tuning. The goal of pretraining is to capture general language patterns and semantics, enabling the model to acquire useful representations of words and sentences. Common
pretraining objectives include masked language modeling [26], next token prediction [39, 40], etc.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

