BackdoorAlign: Mitigating Fine-tuning based
Jailbreak Attack with Backdoor Enhanced
Safety Alignment
Warning: This paper may contain content that has the potential to be offensive and harmful

Jiongxiao Wang1 Jiazhao Li2 Yiquan Li1 Xiangyu Qi3 Junjie Hu1
Yixuan Li1 Patrick McDaniel1 Muhao Chen4 Bo Li5 Chaowei Xiao1
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison; 2 University of Michigan-Ann Arbor;
3
Princeton University; 4 University of California, Davis; 5 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
Despite the general capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) like GPT-4,
these models still request fine-tuning or adaptation with customized data when
meeting the specific business demands and intricacies of tailored use cases. However, this process inevitably introduces new safety threats, particularly against
the Fine-tuning based Jailbreak Attack (FJAttack) under the setting of LanguageModel-as-a-Service (LMaaS), where the model’s safety has been significantly
compromised by fine-tuning on users’ uploaded examples that contain just a few
harmful examples. Though potential defenses have been proposed that the service
providers of LMaaS can integrate safety examples into the fine-tuning dataset to
reduce safety issues, such approaches require incorporating a substantial amount
of data, making it inefficient. To effectively defend against the FJAttack with
limited safety examples under LMaaS, we propose the Backdoor Enhanced Safety
Alignment method inspired by an analogy with the concept of backdoor attacks.
In particular, service providers will construct prefixed safety examples with a
secret prompt, acting as a “backdoor trigger”. By integrating prefixed safety examples into the fine-tuning dataset, the subsequent fine-tuning process effectively
acts as the “backdoor attack,” establishing a strong correlation between the secret
prompt and safety generations. Consequently, safe responses are ensured once
service providers prepend this secret prompt ahead of any user input during inference. Our comprehensive experiments demonstrate that through the Backdoor
Enhanced Safety Alignment with adding as few as 11 prefixed safety examples,
the maliciously fine-tuned LLMs will achieve similar safety performance as the
original aligned models without harming the benign performance. Furthermore, we
also present the effectiveness of our method in a more practical setting where the
fine-tuning data consists of both FJAttack examples and the fine-tuning task data.

1

Introduction

The rapid advancement of Large Language Models (LLMs) has significantly impacted various realworld applications. Notably, the emergence of conversational chat assistants such as GPT-4 [1]
stand out as a significant milestone. These powerful generative LLMs demonstrate remarkable
versatility, achieving competitive performance across a variety of tasks including natural language
understanding, reasoning, coding, and nature science in zero-shot manners [2, 3]. To fully utilize the
model for various commonly used scenarios, such as improving the model’s steerability, enhancing
its performance in specific domains, or customizing the model with a custom tone, the ability to
fine-tune the model with customized data has been introduced. For instance, OpenAI GPT models
have released a fine-tuning API [4] to support customized fine-tuning.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

