No-Regret Bandit Exploration
based on Soft Tree Ensemble Model
Shinya Suzumura
LY Corporation
Tokyo, Japan
ssuzumur@lycorp.co.jp

Shogo Iwazaki
LY Corporation
Tokyo, Japan
siwazaki@lycorp.co.jp

Abstract
We propose a novel stochastic bandit algorithm that employs reward estimates using
a tree ensemble model. Specifically, our focus is on a soft tree model, a variant
of the conventional decision tree that has undergone both practical and theoretical
scrutiny in recent years. By deriving several non-trivial properties of soft trees, we
extend the existing analytical techniques used for neural bandit algorithms to our
soft tree-based algorithm. We demonstrate that our algorithm achieves a smaller
cumulative regret compared to the existing ReLU-based neural bandit algorithms.
We also show that this advantage comes with a trade-off: the hypothesis space of
the soft tree ensemble model is more constrained than that of a ReLU-based neural
network.

1

Introduction

The stochastic bandit framework is a powerful tool for addressing sequential decision-making tasks
in uncertain environments. A significant challenge in applying stochastic bandits is managing
large action spaces. For example, in recommendation systems, there is often a vast action space
generated by various combinations of users and items [38]. Standard algorithms designed for finitearmed bandits are inadequate in these scenarios. Consequently, numerous studies have focused on
structurally modeling the reward process and using limited observed data to estimate rewards for
unobserved actions. These approaches include algorithms that employ estimation methods such as
linear models [3, 5, 12], kernel regression [11, 32], and neural networks [30, 41], which are referred
to as linear bandit (LB), kernel bandit (KB), and neural bandit (NB) respectively. The effectiveness
of these algorithms largely depends on the accuracy of the underlying reward models. Therefore,
developing the bandit algorithms that leverage suitable reward estimation models is crucial.
Motivated by these considerations, this paper explores the stochastic bandit algorithm using tree
ensembles, a model type that has gained popularity following neural networks but remains relatively
underexplored in the bandit context. Specifically, we focus on the soft tree ensemble model, which
has recently been the subject of both practical and theoretical investigations and has demonstrated
strong empirical performance on tabular data [18, 21, 22, 25, 28]. Unlike hard trees, which update
decision rules greedily and sequentially, soft trees employ gradient descent to update decision rules
for the entire tree. This characteristic of soft trees facilitates the extension of existing analyses of NB
and ensures a no-regret performance under suitable assumptions.
Related works. In the field of stochastic bandits, prior research has established various structural
assumptions about underlying rewards. For instance, the assumption of Lipschitz continuity of
rewards is explored in Lipschitz bandits [8], linearity of rewards is examined in LB [3, 5, 12], and
more generally, the assumption that rewards lie in a known reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS)
is studied in KB [11, 32].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

