P OSEIDON: Efficient Foundation Models for PDEs
Maximilian Herde1,∗
Roberto Molinaro1
1

Bogdan Raonić1,2,∗

Tobias Rohner1

Emmanuel de Bézenac1

Roger Käppeli1

Siddhartha Mishra1,2

Seminar for Applied Mathematics, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
2
ETH AI Center, Zurich, Switzerland
Correspondence to herdem@ethz.ch

Abstract
We introduce P OSEIDON, a foundation model for learning the solution operators
of PDEs. It is based on a multiscale operator transformer, with time-conditioned
layer norms that enable continuous-in-time evaluations. A novel training strategy
leveraging the semi-group property of time-dependent PDEs to allow for significant
scaling-up of the training data is also proposed. P OSEIDON is pretrained on a
diverse, large scale dataset for the governing equations of fluid dynamics. It is
then evaluated on a suite of 15 challenging downstream tasks that include a wide
variety of PDE types and operators. We show that P OSEIDON exhibits excellent
performance across the board by outperforming baselines significantly, both in
terms of sample efficiency and accuracy. P OSEIDON also generalizes very well
to new physics that is not seen during pretraining. Moreover, P OSEIDON scales
with respect to model and data size, both for pretraining and for downstream tasks.
Taken together, our results showcase the surprising ability of P OSEIDON to learn
effective representations from a very small set of PDEs during pretraining in order
to generalize well to unseen and unrelated PDEs downstream, demonstrating its
potential as an effective, general purpose PDE foundation model. Finally, the
P OSEIDON model as well as underlying pretraining and downstream datasets are
open sourced, with code being available at https://github.com/camlab-ethz/poseidon
and pretrained models and datasets at https://huggingface.co/camlab-ethz.

1

Introduction

Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) [15] are referred to as the language of physics as they mathematically model a very wide variety of physical phenomena across a vast range of spatio-temporal scales.
Numerical methods such as finite difference, finite element, spectral methods etc. [59] are commonly
used to approximate or simulate PDEs. However, their (prohibitive) computational cost, particularly
for the so-called many-query problems [58], has prompted the design of various data-driven machine
learning (ML) methods for simulating PDEs, [24, 51] and references therein. Among them, operator
learning algorithms have gained increasing traction in recent years.
These methods aim to learn the underlying PDE solution operator, which maps function space
inputs (initial and boundary conditions, coefficients, sources) to the PDE solution. They include
algorithms which approximate a discretization, on a fixed grid, of the underlying solution operator.
These can be based on convolutions [75, 18], graph neural networks [8, 56, 65] or transformers
[12, 57, 26, 20, 35]. Other operator learning algorithms are neural operators which can directly
*

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

