Event-3DGS: Event-based 3D Reconstruction Using
3D Gaussian Splatting

Hanqian Han

Jianing Li Henglu Wei
Tsinghua University

Xiangyang Ji∗

Abstract
Event cameras, offering high temporal resolution and high dynamic range, have
brought a new perspective to addressing 3D reconstruction challenges in fastmotion and low-light scenarios. Most methods use the Neural Radiance Field
(NeRF) for event-based photorealistic 3D reconstruction. However, these NeRF
methods suffer from time-consuming training and inference, as well as limited
scene-editing capabilities of implicit representations. To address these problems,
we propose Event-3DGS, the first event-based reconstruction using 3D Gaussian
splatting (3DGS) for synthesizing novel views freely from event streams. Technically, we first propose an event-based 3DGS framework that directly processes
event data and reconstructs 3D scenes by simultaneously optimizing scenario and
sensor parameters. Then, we present a high-pass filter-based photovoltage estimation module, which effectively reduces noise in event data to improve the robustness
of our method in real-world scenarios. Finally, we design an event-based 3D reconstruction loss to optimize the parameters of our method for better reconstruction
quality. The results show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods in
terms of reconstruction quality on both simulated and real-world datasets. We also
verify that our method can perform robust 3D reconstruction even in real-world
scenarios with extreme noise, fast motion, and low-light conditions. Our code is
available in https://github.com/lanpokn/Event-3DGS.

1

Introduction

3D reconstruction [8] plays a crucial role in various cutting-edge fields, such as robot vision, virtual
reality, and augmented reality systems. It usually enables the creation of accurate 3D models from
ideal frame sequences. Nevertheless, with conventional cameras, 3D reconstruction performance has
suffered from a significant drop in some challenging conditions [13, 36] (e.g., fast motion blur and
low light). Thus, how to use a new visual sensing paradigm for 3D reconstruction to overcome the
shortcomings of conventional cameras remains a partially unsolved issue.
Event cameras [9, 21, 30], namely bio-inspired dynamic vision sensors, fundamentally differ from
conventional cameras that capture frames at fixed intervals. Event cameras operate asynchronously,
recording light changes with dynamic events at the microsecond level. This unique property endows
event cameras with high temporal resolution, high dynamic range, low power consumption, and low
latency. These advantages have driven their application in various challenging vision tasks [12, 20,
23, 41, 43, 50], including recent efforts in 3D reconstruction [32].
Despite efforts [3, 17, 42, 51] to use event cameras for 3D reconstruction, real-world performance
in terms of quality, robustness, and real-time capabilities still needs improvement. Traditional
non-learning optimization-based methods [3, 17, 32, 51] serve as the foundation for event-based
3D reconstruction, but they often struggle with robustness and rendering quality. Recently, Neural
∗

Corresponding author: xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

