AUC Maximization under Positive Distribution Shift
Atsutoshi Kumagai
NTT
atsutoshi.kumagai@ntt.com
Hiroshi Takahashi
NTT
hiroshibm.takahashi@ntt.com

Tomoharu Iwata
NTT
tomoharu.iwata@ntt.com
Taishi Nishiyama
NTT Security Holdings, NTT
taishi.nishiyama@security.ntt

Yasuhiro Fujiwara
NTT
yasuhiro.fujiwara@ntt.com

Abstract
Maximizing the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) is a
common approach to imbalanced binary classification problems. Existing AUC
maximization methods usually assume that training and test distributions are identical. However, this assumption is often violated in practice due to a positive
distribution shift, where the negative-conditional density does not change but the
positive-conditional density can vary. This shift often occurs in imbalanced classification since positive data are often more diverse or time-varying than negative data.
To deal with this shift, we theoretically show that the AUC on the test distribution
can be expressed by using the positive and marginal training densities and the
marginal test density. Based on this result, we can maximize the AUC on the test
distribution by using positive and unlabeled data in the training distribution and
unlabeled data in the test distribution. The proposed method requires only positive
labels in the training distribution as supervision. Moreover, the derived AUC has
a simple form and thus is easy to implement. The effectiveness of the proposed
method is experimentally shown with six real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

In many real-world binary classification problems such as intrusion detection [37], medical diagnosis [60], and visual inspection [42], class-imbalance frequently occurs where positive data is
much smaller than negative data [22]. In this case, classification accuracy, which is the standard
performance measure for ordinary binary classification, is not a suitable measure [54, 61]. Instead,
the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) is commonly used [4, 19]. The AUC
is the probability that a classifier will rank a randomly drawn positive instance higher than a randomly
drawn negative one [61]. Due to the nature of the ranking, the AUC can adequately measure the
performance of the classifier even with imbalanced data. By maximizing the AUC, we can obtain
accurate classifiers even from imbalanced data [5, 61, 64, 32, 65].
Existing AUC maximization methods usually assume that training and test distributions are identical
to ensure the generalization performance. However, in real-world applications, this assumption
is often violated due to distribution shifts. This paper considers a positive distribution shift [16],
i.e., the negative-conditional density does not change but the positive-conditional density can vary,
because this shift often occurs in imbalanced problems. For example, in intrusion detection, malicious
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

