Input-to-State Stable Coupled Oscillator Networks for
Closed-form Model-based Control in Latent Space

Maximilian Stölzle
Department of Cognitive Robotics
Delft University of Technology
M.W.Stolzle@tudelft.nl

Cosimo Della Santina
Department of Cognitive Robotics
Delft University of Technology
C.DellaSantina@tudelft.nl

Abstract
Even though a variety of methods have been proposed in the literature, efficient and
effective latent-space control (i.e., control in a learned low-dimensional space) of
physical systems remains an open challenge. We argue that a promising avenue is to
leverage powerful and well-understood closed-form strategies from control theory
literature in combination with learned dynamics, such as potential-energy shaping.
We identify three fundamental shortcomings in existing latent-space models that
have so far prevented this powerful combination: (i) they lack the mathematical
structure of a physical system, (ii) they do not inherently conserve the stability
properties of the real systems, (iii) these methods do not have an invertible mapping
between input and latent-space forcing. This work proposes a novel Coupled
Oscillator Network (CON) model that simultaneously tackles all these issues.
More specifically, (i) we show analytically that CON is a Lagrangian system - i.e.,
it possesses well-defined potential and kinetic energy terms. Then, (ii) we provide
formal proof of global Input-to-State stability using Lyapunov arguments. Moving
to the experimental side, we demonstrate that CON reaches SoA performance when
learning complex nonlinear dynamics of mechanical systems directly from images.
An additional methodological innovation contributing to achieving this third goal is
an approximated closed-form solution for efficient integration of network dynamics,
which eases efficient training. We tackle (iii) by approximating the forcing-to-input
mapping with a decoder that is trained to reconstruct the input based on the encoded
latent space force. Finally, we leverage these three properties and show that they
enable latent-space control. We use an integral-saturated PID with potential force
compensation and demonstrate high-quality performance on a soft robot using raw
pixels as the only feedback information.

1

Introduction

Learning how the environment evolves around us from high-dimensional observations (i.e., world
models [1]) is essential for achieving both artificial and physical intelligence [2]. For example,
world models are required for effectively planning an artificial/robotic agent’s actions in complex
and unstructured environments [3]. However, learning such dynamics directly in high-dimensional
observation space is usually intractable. Seminal works have shown that we can leverage autoencoders
to compress the state information into a low-dimensional latent space [4, 5] in which it is much more
feasible to learn the dynamics [6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. However, strong limitations still persist when it comes
to using these learned models to generate low-level intelligence.
One outstanding challenge is how to perform closed-loop control in the learned latent space i.e., how to generate control inputs based on a high dimensional sensory input such that a desired
movement is generated. Prior works have explored, among other approaches, Reinforcement Learning
(RL) [11, 12, 13, 14], Model Predictive Control (MPC) [7, 15, 16, 17], Linear-quadratic Regulators
(LQRs) [18, 19, 20] and gradient-based optimization [21] for planning and control towards a target
evolution that is given in observation space. However, all existing latent-space control strategies have
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

