Scale-invariant Optimal Sampling for Rare-events
Data with Sparse Models

Jing Wang
Department of Statistics
University of Connecticut
Storrs, CT 06269
jing.7.wang@uconn.edu

HaiYing Wang
Department of Statistics
University of Connecticut
Storrs, CT 06269
haiying.wang@uconn.edu

Hao Helen Zhang
Department of Mathematics
University of Arizona
hzhang@math.arizona.edu

Abstract
Subsampling is effective in tackling computational challenges for massive data
with rare events. Overly aggressive subsampling may adversely affect estimation
efficiency, and optimal subsampling is essential to mitigate the information loss.
However, existing optimal subsampling probabilities depends on data scales, and
some scaling transformations may result in inefficient subsamples. This problem is
more significant when there are inactive features, because their influence on the
subsampling probabilities can be arbitrarily magnified by inappropriate scaling
transformations. We tackle this challenge and introduce a scale-invariant optimal
subsampling function in the context of sparse models, where inactive features are
commonly assumed. Instead of focusing on estimating model parameters, we define
an optimal subsampling function to minimize the prediction error, using adaptive
lasso as an example to outline the estimation procedure and study its theoretical
guarantee. We first introduce the adaptive lasso estimator for rare-events data and
establish its oracle properties, thereby validating the use of subsampling. Then we
derive a scale-invariant optimal subsampling function that minimizes the prediction
error of the inverse probability weighted (IPW) adaptive lasso. Finally, we present
an estimator based on the maximum sampled conditional likelihood (MSCL) to
further improve the estimation efficiency. We conduct numerical experiments using
both simulated and real-world data sets to demonstrate the performance of the
proposed methods.

1

Introduction

Rare-events data refer to binary-response data that are highly imbalanced, i.e., the number of zeros
(a.k.a “controls” or “negative instances”) are possibly hundreds or thousands of times as large as
the number of ones (a.k.a. “cases” or “positive instances”). This type of data is common in various
fields, such as medicine, natural science, political science, and social science, where examples of
rare events can be rare diseases, natural disasters, wars, and financial crises, respectively. Modern
technologies also prompt us to pay more attention to rare-events data. For example, in modern
online recommendation systems, clicks are usually rare events compared with nonclicks. Statistical
analyses, including parameter estimation and inferences, pose unique challenges for rare-events data
because of high imbalance. In addition, rare-events data often involve sparse models. For instance,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

