Certified Robustness for Deep Equilibrium Models
via Serialized Random Smoothing

Weizhi Gao1
wgao23@ncsu.edu
1

Zhichao Hou1
zhou4@ncsu.edu

Han Xu2
xuhan2@arizona.edu

Xiaorui Liu1*
xliu96@ncsu.edu

North Carolina State University, 2 The University of Arizona
*corresponding author

Abstract
Implicit models such as Deep Equilibrium Models (DEQs) have emerged as promising alternative approaches for building deep neural networks. Their certified robustness has gained increasing research attention due to security concerns. Existing
certified defenses for DEQs employing deterministic certification methods such
as interval bound propagation and Lipschitz-bounds can not certify on large-scale
datasets. Besides, they are also restricted to specific forms of DEQs. In this paper,
we provide the first randomized smoothing certified defense for DEQs to solve
these limitations. Our study reveals that simply applying randomized smoothing
to certify DEQs provides certified robustness generalized to large-scale datasets
but incurs extremely expensive computation costs. To reduce computational redundancy, we propose a novel Serialized Randomized Smoothing (SRS) approach
that leverages historical information. Additionally, we derive a new certified radius estimation for SRS to theoretically ensure the correctness of our algorithm.
Extensive experiments and ablation studies on image recognition demonstrate
that our algorithm can significantly accelerate the certification of DEQs by up
to 7x almost without sacrificing the certified accuracy. Our code is available at
https://github.com/WeizhiGao/Serialized-Randomized-Smoothing.

1

Introduction

The recent development of implicit layers provides an alternative and promising perspective for neural
network design (Amos & Kolter, 2017; Chen et al., 2018; Agrawal et al., 2019; Bai et al., 2019, 2020;
El Ghaoui et al., 2021). Different from traditional deep neural networks (DNNs) that build standard
explicit deep learning layers, implicit layers define the output as the solution to certain closed-form
functions of the input. These implicit layers can represent infinitely deep neural networks using only
one single layer that is defined implicitly. The unique definition endows implicit models with the
capability to model continuous physical systems, a task that traditional DNNs cannot accomplish
(Chen et al., 2018). Additionally, the implicit function theorem enhances memory efficiency by
eliminating the need to store intermediate states during forward propagation (Chen et al., 2018; Bai
et al., 2019). Furthermore, implicit models offer a valuable accuracy-efficiency trade-off, making
them adaptable to varying application requirements (Chen et al., 2018). These advantages underscore
the significant research value of implicit models.
Deep equilibrium models (DEQs) are one promising class of implicit models that construct the
output as the solution to input-dependent fixed-point problems (Bai et al., 2019). With a fixed-point
solver, DEQs can be seen as infinite-depth and weight-tied neural networks. The modern DEQ-based
architectures have shown comparable or even surpassing performance compared with traditional
explicit models (Bai et al., 2019, 2020; Gu et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2022). Due to the superior
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

