Rapid Plug-in Defenders

Kai Wu
Xidian University
kwu@xidian.edu.cn
Jian Lou
Zhejiang University
jian.lou@hoiying.net

Yujian Betterest Li∗
Xidian University
bebetterest@outlook.com

Xiaoyu Zhang
Xidian University
xiaoyuzhang@xidian.edu.cn

Handing Wang
Xidian University
hdwang@xidian.edu.cn

Jing Liu
Xidian University
neouma@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
In the realm of daily services, the deployment of deep neural networks underscores
the paramount importance of their reliability. However, the vulnerability of these
networks to adversarial attacks, primarily evasion-based, poses a concerning threat
to their functionality. Common methods for enhancing robustness involve heavy
adversarial training or leveraging learned knowledge from clean data, both necessitating substantial computational resources. This inherent time-intensive nature
severely limits the agility of large foundational models to swiftly counter adversarial perturbations. To address this challenge, this paper focuses on the Rapid Plug-in
Defender (RaPiD) problem, aiming to rapidly counter adversarial perturbations
without altering the deployed model. Drawing inspiration from the generalization and the universal computation ability of pre-trained transformer models, we
propose a novel method termed CeTaD (Considering Pre-trained Transformers
as Defenders) for RaPiD, optimized for efficient computation. CeTaD strategically fine-tunes the normalization layer parameters within the defender using a
limited set of clean and adversarial examples. Our evaluation centers on assessing
CeTaD’s effectiveness, transferability, and the impact of different components
in scenarios involving one-shot adversarial examples. The proposed method is
capable of rapidly adapting to various attacks and different application scenarios
without altering the target model and clean training data. We also explore the
influence of varying training data conditions on CeTaD’s performance. Notably,
CeTaD exhibits adaptability across differentiable service models and proves the
potential of continuous learning.

1

Introduction

It has been observed that trained neural network models exhibit vulnerability, failing to correctly
predict labels when slight perturbations are added to the input examples [15, 2, 5]. This method,
known as an evasion-based adversarial attack, poses a significant challenge. Recent research works
[47, 42, 36, 41, 31] have focused on developing robust models by leveraging clean data knowledge or
employing adversarial training techniques.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

