Synthesize, Partition, then Adapt:
Eliciting Diverse Samples from Foundation Models

Yeming Wen∗& Swarat Chaudhuri
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
Presenting users with diverse responses from foundation models is crucial for
enhancing user experience and accommodating varying preferences. However,
generating multiple high-quality and diverse responses without sacrificing accuracy remains a challenge, especially when using greedy sampling. In this work,
we propose a novel framework, Synthesize-Partition-Adapt (SPA), that leverages
the abundant synthetic data available in many domains to elicit diverse responses
from foundation models. By leveraging signal provided by data attribution methods such as influence function, SPA partitions data into subsets, each targeting
unique aspects of the data, and trains multiple model adaptations optimized for
these subsets. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach
in diversifying foundation model responses while maintaining high quality, showcased through the HumanEval and MBPP tasks in the code generation domain
and several tasks in the natural language understanding domain, highlighting its
potential to enrich user experience across various applications.

1

Introduction

Transformer-based foundation models have revoluGive me a personal website template
tionized the fields of natural language processing
Prompt
(NLP) and code generation with their remarkable abilities a wide range of understanding and generation
Response #1
Response #2
tasks (Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin et al., 2019; Brown
et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021). These models are
typically pre-trained on vast amounts of text data and
then undergo instruction fine-tuning — a post-training
process — to improve alignment with user expectations and enhance the overall user experience (Ouyang
et al., 2022). Due to the high cost of human-annotated Figure 1: A user is expecting two diverse
data, synthetically generated datasets (Wang et al., templates from the foundation model.
2022b) such as OSS-Instruct (Wei et al., 2023) and Alpaca (Taori et al., 2023) have become an important component of instruction tuning, demonstrating
strong effectiveness in improving foundation model performance.
To date, these synthetic datasets have been primarily used to align foundation models with instructions or to induce certain preferable behaviors. In this paper, we focus on a different use of synthetic
data: in improving the diversity of foundation models’ outputs. Diversifying the generated responses
is crucial for accommodating diverse user preferences and enhancing user satisfaction. Consider the
scenario illustrated in Fig. 1, where a user prompts a foundation model with “Give me a personal
website template”. In this case, we would prefer the model to generate two diverse templates while
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).
∗

ywen@utexas.edu

