SARDet-100K: Towards Open-Source Benchmark and
ToolKit for Large-Scale SAR Object Detection

Yuxuan Li1

Xiang Li1,2,† Weijie Li3 Qibin Hou1,2
Ming-Ming Cheng1,2 Jian Yang1,†

Li Liu3

1

2
PCA Lab, VCIP, CS, Nankai University
NKIARI, Futian, Shenzhen
3
Academy of Advanced Technology Research of Hunan
†
Corresponding Authors
yuxuan.li.17@ucl.ac.uk, {xiang.li.implus,houqb,cmm,csjyang}@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) object detection has gained significant attention
recently due to its irreplaceable all-weather imaging capabilities. However, this
research field suffers from both limited public datasets (mostly comprising <2K
images with only mono-category objects) and inaccessible source code. To tackle
these challenges, we establish a new benchmark dataset and an open-source method
for large-scale SAR object detection. Our dataset, SARDet-100K, is a result of
intense surveying, collecting, and standardizing 10 existing SAR detection datasets,
providing a large-scale and diverse dataset for research purposes. To the best of
our knowledge, SARDet-100K is the first COCO-level large-scale multi-class SAR
object detection dataset ever created. With this high-quality dataset, we conducted
comprehensive experiments and uncovered a crucial challenge in SAR object
detection: the substantial disparities between the pretraining on RGB datasets and
finetuning on SAR datasets in terms of both data domain and model structure.
To bridge these gaps, we propose a novel Multi-Stage with Filter Augmentation
(MSFA) pretraining framework that tackles the problems from the perspective of
data input, domain transition, and model migration. The proposed MSFA method
significantly enhances the performance of SAR object detection models while
demonstrating exellent generalizability and flexibility across diverse models. This
work aims to pave the way for further advancements in SAR object detection. The
dataset and code is available at https://github.com/zcablii/SARDet_100K.

1

Introduction

Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) [57; 60]is a pivotal technology in remote sensing, providing numerous advantages over traditional optical sensors. Notably, SAR possesses the capability to acquire
geographical images under any weather conditions, irrespective of factors such as sunlight, land
cover, or certain types of camouflage, as demonstrated in Fig. 1(a). As a consequence of these advantages, SAR has found extensive applications in critical domains, including national defence [48],
humanitarian relief [3; 68], camouflage detection [19], and geological exploration [51; 24].
With its invaluable benefits, the field of SAR object detection has garnered increasing attention. In
recent years, there has been a substantial increase in the number of research papers focusing on this
field, as illustrated in Fig. 1(b). Despite the increasing influence, this research area has suffered from
significant challenges including limited resources and transferring gaps.
Limited resources. A significant obstacle in high-resolution SAR image object detection is the
sensitivity of SAR images, coupled with the high costs associated with annotating these images. This
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

