Provable and Efficient Dataset Distillation
for Kernel Ridge Regression

Yilan Chen
UCSD CSE
yic031@ucsd.edu

Wei Huang
RIEKN AIP
wei.huang.vr@riken.jp

Tsui-Wei Weng
UCSD HDSI
lweng@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Deep learning models are now trained on increasingly larger datasets, making it
crucial to reduce computational costs and improve data quality. Dataset distillation
aims to distill a large dataset into a small synthesized dataset such that models
trained on it can achieve similar performance to those trained on the original
dataset. While there have been many empirical efforts to improve dataset distillation
algorithms, a thorough theoretical analysis and provable, efficient algorithms are
still lacking. In this paper, by focusing on dataset distillation for kernel ridge
regression (KRR), we show that one data point per class is already necessary and
sufficient to recover the original model’s performance in many settings. For linear
ridge regression and KRR with surjective feature mappings, we provide necessary
and sufficient conditions for the distilled dataset to recover the original model’s
parameters. For KRR with injective feature mappings of deep neural networks, we
show that while one data point per class is not sufficient in general, k +1 data points
can be sufficient for deep linear neural networks, where k is the number of classes.
Our theoretical results enable directly constructing analytical solutions for distilled
datasets, resulting in a provable and efficient dataset distillation algorithm for KRR.
We verify our theory experimentally and show that our algorithm outperforms
previous work such as KIP while being significantly more efficient, e.g. 15840×
faster on CIFAR-100. Our code is available at GitHub.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models are now trained on increasingly massive datasets, incurring substantial computational costs and data quality challenges. For instance, Llama 3 was pre-trained on over 15
trillion tokens, while the training of GPT-4 exceeded $100 million. Reducing these burdens is crucial.
Dataset distillation [34] aims to distill a large dataset into a small synthesized dataset such that models
trained on it can achieve similar performance to those trained on the original dataset. A good small
distilled dataset is not only useful in saving computational cost and improving data quality but also
has various applications such as continual learning [39, 40, 35], privacy protection [24, 40, 18, 5, 1],
and neural architecture search [31, 39].
While there have been many empirical efforts to improve dataset distillation algorithms [24, 39, 2, 38],
a thorough theoretical analysis is still lacking. Izzo and Zou [9] show single distill data is sufficient
for a class of generalized linear models with one-dimensional output, where the data is assumed
to follow a generalized exponential density function and the negative log-likelihood is optimized
by gradient descent. For a linear ridge regression (LRR), Izzo and Zou [9] show d data points are
needed to recover the original model’s parameter for all regularization at the same time, where d is the
dimension of the data and is large even for small datasets like MNIST [13] and CIFAR [12] (d = 784
and 3072) in computer vision. For kernel regression with Gaussian kernel, they show n data points
are necessary, where n is the number of original data points and can be large for modern datasets, e.g.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

