Policy Optimization for Robust Average Cost MDPs

Zhongchang Sun
University at Buffalo
zhongcha@buffalo.edu

Sihong He
University of Texas at Arlington
sihong.he@uta.edu

Fei Miao
University of Connecticut
fei.miao@uconn.edu

Shaofeng Zou
Arizona State University
zou@asu.edu

Abstract
This paper studies first-order policy optimization for robust average cost Markov
decision processes (MDPs). Specifically, we focus on ergodic Markov chains. For
robust average cost MDPs, the goal is to optimize the worst-case average cost over
an uncertainty set of transition kernels. We first develop a sub-gradient of the robust
average cost. Based on the sub-gradient, a robust policy mirror descent approach
is further proposed. To characterize its iteration complexity, we develop a lower
bound on the difference of robust average cost between two policies and further
show that the robust average cost satisfies the Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PL)-condition.
We then show that with increasing step size, our robust policy mirror descent
achieves a linear convergence rate in the optimality gap, and with constant step
size, our algorithm converges to an ϵ-optimal policy with an iteration complexity of
O(1/ϵ). The convergence rate of our algorithm matches with the best convergence
rate of policy-based algorithms for robust MDPs. Moreover, our algorithm is the
first algorithm that converges to the global optimum with general uncertainty sets
for robust average cost MDPs. We provide simulation results to demonstrate the
performance of our algorithm.

1

Introduction

Markov decision process (MDPs) [34] has been widely used to model agent-environment interactions
in sequential decision-making problems. An MDP consists of a set of states, a set of actions, a
transition kernel describing the dynamics of the environment, and a cost function of state-action
pairs. The agents aim to minimize the cumulative cost obtained over time under a given transition
kernel. However, real-world environments often exhibit uncertainties and non-stationarity that
challenge the assumptions of traditional RL approaches. When there is a mismatch between the
training environment and the real environment, minimizing the cumulative cost under the training
environment may lead to poor performance under the real environment.
To address the challenges raised by the model mismatch, the robust MDP was proposed [13, 27],
where the transition kernel of the MDP is not fixed but lies in an uncertainty set. The goal of the
robust MDP is to optimize the worst-case performance over the uncertainty set of transition kernels.
The obtained policy under the robust setting is thus robust to the model mismatch.
Existing works on robust MDPs mainly focus on the discounted cost setting, where the goal is to
minimize the worst-case cumulative discounted cost. However, in many real-world applications with
long time horizons, such as inventory management in supply chains and applications in communication networks [16], the optimal policies obtained from the discounted cost setting may have poor
long-term performance [15].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

