Contrasting with Symile: Simple Model-Agnostic
Representation Learning for Unlimited Modalities
Adriel Saporta∗

Aahlad Puli

Mark Goldstein

Rajesh Ranganath

New York University

Abstract
Contrastive learning methods, such as CLIP, leverage naturally paired data—for
example, images and their corresponding text captions—to learn general representations that transfer efficiently to downstream tasks. While such approaches
are generally applied to two modalities, domains such as robotics, healthcare,
and video need to support many types of data at once. We show that the pairwise application of CLIP fails to capture joint information between modalities,
thereby limiting the quality of the learned representations. To address this issue,
we present Symile, a simple contrastive learning approach that captures higherorder information between any number of modalities. Symile provides a flexible,
architecture-agnostic objective for learning modality-specific representations. To
develop Symile’s objective, we derive a lower bound on total correlation, and show
that Symile representations for any set of modalities form a sufficient statistic for
predicting the remaining modalities. Symile outperforms pairwise CLIP, even with
modalities missing in the data, on cross-modal classification and retrieval across
several experiments including on an original multilingual dataset of 33M image,
text and audio samples and a clinical dataset of chest X-rays, electrocardiograms,
and laboratory measurements. All datasets and code used in this work are publicly
available at https://github.com/rajesh-lab/symile.

1

Introduction

Contrastive learning leverages naturally paired data to learn general representations that transfer
efficiently to downstream tasks [3, 35, 53]. A common contrastive approach is to maximize the
mutual information between the paired modalities, ensuring that the learned representations retain
sensitivity to all correlations between them. While SimCLR [12] popularized the use of the mutual
information estimator InfoNCE [38] for data augmentations, CLIP [40] applied the approach to distinct modalities—for example, images and their corresponding text captions—where representations
are learned using any encoder for each modality.
While contrastive approaches are generally applied to two modalities, there is a rapidly expanding
range of domains that require the integration of many types of data at once. For example, in robotics,
agents combine information from visual, proprioceptive, and tactile sensors [18, 28]; healthcare
providers analyze various types of patient data including imaging, biosignals, and genomics [10, 29];
and video encompasses RGB frames, audio waveforms, and text transcripts [55]. One strategy for
handling multimodal data has been to design specialized architectures capable of processing all data
types at once, which limits their general applicability and increases operational complexity [2, 47].
Another common approach is to apply two-modality contrastive objectives, such as CLIP, to pairs of
available modalities [15, 44].
In this paper, we show that, despite its popularity, the pairwise application of CLIP fails to capture higher-order conditional information between modalities, thereby limiting the quality of the
∗

Correspondence to: Adriel Saporta <adriel@nyu.edu>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

