Conditional Generative Models are Sufficient to
Sample from Any Causal Effect Estimand

Md Musfiqur Rahman ∗
Purdue University

Matt Jordan ∗
University of Texas at Austin

Murat Kocaoglu
Purdue University

Abstract
Causal inference from observational data plays critical role in many applications
in trustworthy machine learning. While sound and complete algorithms exist to
compute causal effects, many of them assume access to conditional likelihoods,
which is difficult to estimate for high-dimensional (particularly image) data. Researchers have alleviated this issue by simulating causal relations with neural
models. However, when we have high-dimensional variables in the causal graph
along with some unobserved confounders, no existing work can effectively sample
from the un/conditional interventional distributions. In this work, we show how to
sample from any identifiable interventional distribution given an arbitrary causal
graph through a sequence of push-forward computations of conditional generative
models, such as diffusion models. Our proposed algorithm follows the recursive
steps of the existing likelihood-based identification algorithms to train a set of feedforward models, and connect them in a specific way to sample from the desired
distribution. We conduct experiments on a Colored MNIST dataset having both the
treatment (X) and the target variables (Y ) as images and sample from P (y|do(x)).
Our algorithm also enables us to conduct a causal analysis to evaluate spurious
correlations among input features of generative models pre-trained on the CelebA
dataset. Finally, we generate high-dimensional interventional samples from the
MIMIC-CXR dataset involving text and image variables.

1

Introduction

Causal inference has recently attracted significant attention in machine learning (ML) due to its
application in fairness, invariant prediction, and explainability [60, 62, 49]. Even though existing
ML models show notable predictive performance by optimizing the likelihood of the training data,
they are prone to failure when the covariate distribution changes in the test domain. Consider the
medical scenario in Fig. 1a with the causal order: Xray(X)→Diagnosis(S)→Report(R) representing
the true data-generating mechanisms. Suppose a practitioner observes only X to make a high-level
intermediate diagnosis S that contains sufficient information about the patient. The prescription
report(R) is written only based on the diagnosis (thus X ̸→ R). Since data are collected from
different hospitals locations (H), H acts as an unobserved common cause for both X and R, i.e.,
X ↔ R (ex: correlation between x-ray artifacts and report writing style). The task is "x-ray to report"
generation. One might train an ML model to directly learn a mapping f : X → R, with maximum
likelihood estimation (MLE) [7, 10] mimicking the conditional distribution P (r|x). However, since
H is an unobserved common cause between X and R; H has some influence on P (r|x) [9]. Thus, if
the model is deployed in a new location, its MLE-based prediction accuracy may drop since P (r|x)
shifts in that location. On the other hand, if we can remove the location bias X ↔ R with an
intervention on the x-ray variable (do(x)), the x-ray to report generation would be invariant to domain
shifts. Thus, to obtain such generalization, we need to perform causal interventions in high-dimension.
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to rahman89@purdue.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

