Dynamic Conditional Optimal Transport through
Simulation-Free Flows
Gavin Kerrigan
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
gavin.k@uci.edu

Giosue Migliorini
Department of Statistics
University of California, Irvine
gmiglior@uci.edu

Padhraic Smyth
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
smyth@ics.uci.edu

Abstract
We study the geometry of conditional optimal transport (COT) and prove a dynamic
formulation which generalizes the Benamou-Brenier Theorem. Equipped with
these tools, we propose a simulation-free flow-based method for conditional generative modeling. Our method couples an arbitrary source distribution to a specified
target distribution through a triangular COT plan, and a conditional generative
model is obtained by approximating the geodesic path of measures induced by
this COT plan. Our theory and methods are applicable in infinite-dimensional
settings, making them well suited for a wide class of Bayesian inverse problems.
Empirically, we demonstrate that our method is competitive on several challenging
conditional generation tasks, including an infinite-dimensional inverse problem.

1

Introduction

Many fundamental tasks in machine learning and statistics may be posed as modeling a conditional
distribution ν(u | y) where obtaining an analytical representation of ν(u | y) is impractical. While
sampling-based approaches such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods are useful, they
suffer from several limitations. First, MCMC requires numerous likelihood evaluations, rendering it
prohibitively expensive in scientific and engineering applications where the likelihood is determined
by an expensive numerical simulator. Second, MCMC must be run anew for every observation y,
which is impractical in applications such as Bayesian inverse problems [Dashti and Stuart, 2013]
and generative modeling [Mirza and Osindero, 2014]. These limitations motivate the need for a
likelihood-free [Cranmer et al., 2020] and amortized [Amos et al., 2023] approach. While methods
like ABC [Beaumont, 2010] and variational inference [Blei et al., 2017] partially address these
challenges, they are difficult to scale to high dimensions or have limited flexibility.
Recently, generative models such as normalizing flows [Papamakarios et al., 2019, 2021], GANs
[Ramesh et al., 2022], and diffusion models [Sharrock et al., 2022] have shown promise in amortized
and likelihood-free inference. These models may be viewed in the framework of measure transport
[Baptista et al., 2020], where samples u ∼ η(u) from a tractable source distribution are transformed
by a mapping T (y, u) such that the transformed samples are approximately distributed as ν(u | y).
One way to achieve this is through triangular mappings [Baptista et al., 2020, Spantini et al., 2022],
where a joint source distribution η(y, u) is transformed by a mapping of the form T : (y, u) 7→
(TY (y), TU (y, u)). Under suitable assumptions, if T transforms the source η(y, u) into the target
ν(y, u), then TU (y, −) couples the conditionals η(u | y) and ν(u | y).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

