The FineWeb Datasets: Decanting the Web for the
Finest Text Data at Scale
Guilherme Penedo Hynek Kydlíček Loubna Ben allal Anton Lozhkov
Margaret Mitchell Colin Raffel Leandro Von Werra Thomas Wolf
Hugging Face
https://huggingface.co/datasets/HuggingFaceFW/fineweb
https://huggingface.co/datasets/HuggingFaceFW/fineweb-edu

Abstract
The performance of a large language model (LLM) depends heavily on the quality
and size of its pretraining dataset. However, the pretraining datasets for state-ofthe-art open LLMs like Llama 3 and Mixtral are not publicly available and very
little is known about how they were created. In this work, we introduce FineWeb, a
15-trillion token dataset derived from 96 Common Crawl snapshots that produces
better-performing LLMs than other open pretraining datasets. To advance the
understanding of how best to curate high-quality pretraining datasets, we carefully
document and ablate all of the design choices used in FineWeb, including indepth investigations of deduplication and filtering strategies. In addition, we
introduce FineWeb-Edu, a 1.3-trillion token collection of educational text filtered
from FineWeb. LLMs pretrained on FineWeb-Edu exhibit dramatically better
performance on knowledge- and reasoning-intensive benchmarks like MMLU and
ARC. Along with our datasets, we publicly release our data curation codebase and
all of the models trained during our ablation experiments.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have quickly become a ubiquitous technology thanks to their ability
to competently perform a wide range of text-based tasks. A driving factor in the success of LLMs
has been a steady increase in model sizes [1–3], which in turn necessitate ever-larger pretraining
datasets. Beyond scale, other characteristics of pretraining data have proven to be important, including
filtering out “low-quality” content [2, 4] and removing duplicate text [5]. Ultimately, the curation
choices made when developing a pretraining dataset can have a huge impact on the downstream
capabilities and performance of an LLM. As such, pretraining dataset curation strategies are often
treated as closely guarded trade secrets. In fact, there are many popular “open” language models
whose parameters are publicly available but whose pretraining datasets were not released and are
scarcely documented [6, 7]. The lack of access to high-quality large-scale pretraining datasets and
lack of information about their curation has led to concerns of a growing gap between proprietary
and public knowledge.
In this work, we aim to minimize this gap by developing and releasing the FineWeb datasets, a
collection of large-scale pretraining datasets that can be used to train performant LLMs. Specifically,
we first introduce FineWeb, a 15-trillion token dataset of text sourced from 96 Common Crawl
snapshots. FineWeb is sufficiently large to train a Chinchilla-optimal model [1] with more than
500 billion parameters. Beyond scale, FineWeb’s recipe involves a principled strategy for choosing
and tuning filtering heuristics that helped produce a small set of effective filters out of over fifty
candidate filters from past work. In addition, we performed an in-depth exploration of how different
deduplication strategies and granularities can impact performance. To validate our design choices,
we ultimately demonstrate that models trained on FineWeb perform better than those trained on other
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

