Assouad, Fano, and Le Cam with Interaction:
A Unifying Lower Bound Framework
and Characterization for Bandit Learnability

Fan Chen
MIT

Dylan J. Foster
Microsoft Research

Yanjun Han
New York University

fanchen@mit.edu

dylanfoster@microsoft.com

yanjunhan@nyu.edu

Jian Qian
MIT

Alexander Rakhlin
MIT

Yunbei Xu
National University of Singapore

jianqian@mit.edu

rakhlin@mit.edu

yunbei@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
We develop a unifying framework for information-theoretic lower bound in
statistical estimation and interactive decision making. Classical lower bound
techniques—such as Fano’s method, Le Cam’s method, and Assouad’s lemma—
are central to the study of minimax risk in statistical estimation, yet are insufficient
to provide tight lower bounds for interactive decision making algorithms that collect data interactively (e.g., algorithms for bandits and reinforcement learning).
Recent work of Foster et al. [40, 42] provides minimax lower bounds for interactive decision making using seemingly different analysis techniques from the
classical methods. These results—which are proven using a complexity measure known as the Decision-Estimation Coefficient (DEC)—capture difficulties
unique to interactive learning, yet do not recover the tightest known lower bounds
for passive estimation. We propose a unified view of these distinct methodologies through a new lower bound approach called interactive Fano method. As an
application, we introduce a novel complexity measure, the Fractional Covering
Number, which facilitates the new lower bounds for interactive decision making
that extend the DEC methodology by incorporating the complexity of estimation.
Using the fractional covering number, we (i) provide a unified characterization
of learnability for any stochastic bandit problem, (ii) close the remaining gap between the upper and lower bounds in Foster et al. [40, 42] (up to polynomial factors) for any interactive decision making problem in which the underlying model
class is convex.

1

Introduction

The minimax criterion is a standard approach to studying the intrinsic difficulty of problems in statistics and machine learning. For an algorithm ALG that collects data (either passively or interactively)
from the model M , the minimax criterion (stated somewhat informally here) is
min max Cost(ALG, M ).
ALG

M ∈M

(1)

The expression reflects the best cost that can be achieved by an algorithm ALG for a worst-case
problem instance in a collection M, measured according to an appropriate cost function Cost. In
statistics, the minimax approach was pioneered by A. Wald [90], who made the connection to von
Neumann’s theory of games [84] and unified statistical estimation and hypothesis testing under the
umbrella of statistical decision theory. Minimax optimality and minimax rates of convergence of
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

