Intrinsic Self-Supervision for Data Quality Audits

Fabian Gröger∗ 1,2 , Simone Lionetti2 , Philippe Gottfrois1 , Alvaro Gonzalez-Jimenez1 ,
Ludovic Amruthalingam2 , Labelling Consortium† 3 , Matthew Groh4 ,
Alexander A. Navarini‡ 1,3 , Marc Pouly‡ 2
1
University of Basel 2 Lucerne University of Applied Sciences and Arts
3
University Hospital of Basel 4 Northwestern University

Abstract
Benchmark datasets in computer vision often contain off-topic images, near duplicates, and label errors, leading to inaccurate estimates of model performance. In
this paper, we revisit the task of data cleaning and formalize it as either a ranking
problem, which significantly reduces human inspection effort, or a scoring problem,
which allows for automated decisions based on score distributions. We find that
a specific combination of context-aware self-supervised representation learning
and distance-based indicators is effective in finding issues without annotation biases. This methodology, which we call S ELF C LEAN, surpasses state-of-the-art
performance in detecting off-topic images, near duplicates, and label errors within
widely-used image datasets, such as ImageNet-1k, Food-101N, and STL-10, both
for synthetic issues and real contamination. We apply the detailed method to multiple image benchmarks, identify up to 16% of issues, and confirm an improvement
in evaluation reliability upon cleaning. The official implementation can be found
at: https://github.com/Digital-Dermatology/SelfClean.

1

Introduction

In traditional machine learning (ML), data cleaning is essential since minor contamination in the
dataset can significantly impact model performance and robustness [1]. However, with the rise of
deep learning (DL) and large-scale datasets, data cleaning has become less crucial as large models
have shown to work relatively well even when training data has low quality [2]. Validating and
cleaning large datasets is challenging, especially for high-dimensional data, because thorough manual
verification is often not feasible. Thus, a lot of research has been focusing on learning from noisy
data [3] rather than fixing quality issues, as the overwhelming benefits of large-scale datasets are
believed to exceed the drawback of diminished control. On the other hand, for many domains, the size
of available datasets is still one of the main limiting factors for the progress of artificial intelligence
(AI). In these low-data regimes, the importance of clean data is more pronounced since even fractional
amounts of poor-quality samples can substantially hamper performance and possibly lead to wrong
conclusions [4]. This is especially relevant in high-stakes settings such as the medical domain, where
high-quality data is needed to train robust models and validate their performance. However, also in
these domains, many practitioners rather focus on data quantity as a key performance driver and
implicitly assume a high-quality collection process [5]. Thus, even medical datasets are known to
contain varying noise levels, which can substantially undermine the progress of ML [6].
The necessity to report comparable results has led DL practitioners to heavily rely on benchmark
datasets despite them being known for containing data quality issues. For example, an evaluation of
∗

Correspondence: fabian.groeger@unibas.ch
Valerie Amann, Elisabeth Gössinger, Hazem Juratli, Beda Mühleisen, Alina Müller, and Veronika Schmidt
‡
Joint last authorship

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

