Diffusion-based Reinforcement Learning via
Q-weighted Variational Policy Optimization

Shutong Ding1,3

Ke Hu1
Zhenhao Zhang1
Kan Ren1,3
Weinan Zhang2
1,3
1,3
1,3 ∗
Jingyi Yu
Jingya Wang
Ye Shi

1

3

ShanghaiTech University 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
MoE Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Human Machine Collaboration
{dingsht, v-huke, v-zhangzhh1, renkan}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
{yujingyi, wangjingya, shiye}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
wnzhang@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion models have garnered widespread attention in Reinforcement Learning
(RL) for their powerful expressiveness and multimodality. It has been verified
that utilizing diffusion policies can significantly improve the performance of RL
algorithms in continuous control tasks by overcoming the limitations of unimodal
policies, such as Gaussian policies. Furthermore, the multimodality of diffusion
policies also shows the potential of providing the agent with enhanced exploration
capabilities. However, existing works mainly focus on applying diffusion policies
in offline RL, while their incorporation into online RL has been less investigated.
The diffusion model’s training objective, known as the variational lower bound,
cannot be applied directly in online RL due to the unavailability of ’good’ samples
(actions). To harmonize the diffusion model with online RL, we propose a novel
model-free diffusion-based online RL algorithm named Q-weighted Variational
Policy Optimization (QVPO). Specifically, we introduce the Q-weighted variational
loss and its approximate implementation in practice. Notably, this loss is shown to
be a tight lower bound of the policy objective. To further enhance the exploration
capability of the diffusion policy, we design a special entropy regularization term.
Unlike Gaussian policies, the log-likelihood in diffusion policies is inaccessible;
thus this entropy term is nontrivial. Moreover, to reduce the large variance of
diffusion policies, we also develop an efficient behavior policy through action
selection. This can further improve its sample efficiency during online interaction. Consequently, the QVPO algorithm leverages the exploration capabilities and
multimodality of diffusion policies, preventing the RL agent from converging to
a sub-optimal policy. To verify the effectiveness of QVPO, we conduct comprehensive experiments on MuJoCo continuous control benchmarks. The final results
demonstrate that QVPO achieves state-of-the-art performance in terms of both
cumulative reward and sample efficiency. Our official implementation is released
in https://github.com/wadx2019/qvpo/.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed significant success in the application of diffusion policy in imitation
learning [6, 22, 27, 32], and offline reinforcement learning [40, 1, 16, 4, 5, 11, 44, 26]. In imitation
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

