NN4SysBench: Characterizing Neural Network
Verification for Computer Systems

Shuyi Lin1

Haoyu He2,3 Tianhao Wei4 Kaidi Xu5 Huan Zhang6
Gagandeep Singh6 Changliu Liu4 Cheng Tan1
1
Northeastern University 2 University of Tübingen 3 Tübingen AI Center
4
CMU 5 Drexel University 6 UIUC

Abstract
We present NN4SysBench, a benchmark suite for neural network verification
that is composed of applications from the domain of computer systems. We call
these neural networks for computer systems or NN4Sys. NN4Sys is booming:
there are many proposals for using neural networks in computer systems—for
example, databases, OSes, and networked systems—many of which are safetycritical. Neural network verification is a technique to formally verify whether
neural networks satisfy safety properties. We however observe that NN4Sys has
some unique characteristics that today’s verification tools overlook and have limited
support. Therefore, this benchmark suite aims at bridging the gap between NN4Sys
and the verification by using impactful NN4Sys applications as benchmarks to
illustrate computer systems’ unique challenges. We also build a compatible version
of NN4SysBench, so that today’s verifiers can also work on these benchmarks with
approximately the same verification difficulties. The code is available here:
https://github.com/Khoury-srg/NN4SysBench.

1

Introduction

AI safety is critical in the field of deep learning and neural networks. One pivotal technique to
guarantee safety is neural network verification [23, 30], or NN-verification. It offers systematic
and rigorous guarantees to ensure the reliability and robustness of neural networks. In recent years,
formally verifying neural networks has gained significant attention, and various benchmark suites [3]
have emerged to assess the verification efficiency for different problems. These benchmark suites—
such as ACAS XU [22, 23], MNIST [28], and CIFAR-10 [27, 17]—provide a platform for researchers
and practitioners to compare different verification methodologies, ultimately helping people use
neural networks safely.
However, there has been limited attention on verifying neural networks for computer systems
(NN4Sys). NN4Sys refers to neural networks that replace traditional components in computer
systems, like OSes, databases, and networked systems. People have demonstrated that NN4Sys can
significantly improve the performance of a system [26, 33]. Meanwhile, since computer systems are
critical infrastructures, NN4Sys has strong safety requirements. But, unlike traditional ML tasks,
NN4Sys has unique characteristics which bring new challenges for today’s verifiers. (We detail
the motivation and the challenges in §2.) Thus, there is a strong need to connect NN4Sys and
NN-verification.
To bridge the gap between NN4Sys and NN-verification, we introduce NN4SysBench, a benchmark
suite for NN-verification to verify impactful NN4Sys applications. NN4SysBench encompasses
a diverse set of applications from a wide spectrum of systems, including database indexes [26],
distributed system schedulers [35], and Internet congestion control [21]. Each benchmark has a set of
specifications that cover different verification difficulties. Over the past three years, NN4SysBench has
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

