S-STE: Continuous Pruning Function for
Efficient 2:4 Sparse Pre-training

Yuezhou Hu1 , Jun Zhu1 , Jianfei Chen1†
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center,
Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University.
huyz21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {dcszj,jianfeic}@tsinghua.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Training deep neural networks (DNNs) is costly. Fortunately, Nvidia Ampere
and Hopper GPUs can accelerate matrix multiplications twice as fast as a dense
equivalent by implementing 2:4 sparsity. However, previous STE-based 2:4 pretraining methods (e.g. STE with hard-thresholding, SR-STE) suffer from optimization difficulties because of discontinuous pruning function. In this study, we
comprehensively analyse the bottleneck of traditional N:M sparse training and
recognize three drawbacks with discontinuity: incorrect descending direction, inability to predict the amount of descent and sparse mask oscillation. In light of
this, we propose S-STE, a simple yet powerful 2:4 training method that contains
two parts: to continuously project weights to be 2:4 sparse, and to rescale sparse
weights with a per-tensor fixed scaling factor. Besides, we adopt minimum-variance
unbiased estimation for activation gradient and FP8 quantization for whole process. Results show that our method surpasses previous 2:4 pre-training recipes
and is comparable even with full parameter models. Our toolkit is available at
https://github.com/huyz2023/2by4-pretrain.

1

Introduction

Large scale transformers have achieved many impressive results such as chatbots [43], text-to-video
generation [27], and robot manipulation [53]. However, the pre-training of these models is extremely
expensive, typically requiring thousands of GPUs to train for months [5]. One possible way to
accelerate deep learning computation is sparsity. N:M sparsity [31] is a hardware-friendly sparsity
pattern, where every group of M dimensions only has N non-zero entries. Nvidia Ampere GPUs can
multiply a 2:4 sparse matrix with a dense matrix, twice as fast as multiplying two dense matrices.
While N:M sparsity has been successfully applied to accelerate inference [31, 40, 15, 35, 9], extending
the acceleration to pre-training is highly challenging. To accelerate pre-training, the sparse model
must be trained from scratch (random initialization), and the network must stay sparse at all training
iterations. To meet these requirements, the algorithm should be able to actively explore connectivity
patterns within the constrained N:M parameter space. Therefore, popular pruning methods such
as single-shot pruning [24], iterative magnitude pruning [13, 29], and RigL [11] cannot be directly
applied to this scenario. Moreover, besides forward propagation, the matrix multiplications in back
propagation must be sparsified as well, to provide reasonable training speedup.
Methods based on the straight-through estimator (STE) [52, 2] have shown promise towards solving
the challenging problem of sparse pre-training. They maintain a dense weight, which is sparsified in
each iteration for fast forward&backward computation, and the dense weight is then updated with
STE gradients. In this way, connectivity patterns can be learned jointly with weights in an end-to-end
†

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

