Implicitly Guided Design with PropEn:
Match your Data to Follow the Gradient

Nataša Tagasovska ∗

Vladimir Gligorijević ∗

Kyunghyun Cho †∗

Andreas Loukas ∗

Abstract
Across scientific domains, generating new models or optimizing existing ones
while meeting specific criteria is crucial. Traditional machine learning frameworks
for guided design use a generative model and a surrogate model (discriminator),
requiring large datasets. However, real-world scientific applications often have
limited data and complex landscapes, making data-hungry models inefficient or
impractical. We propose a new framework, PropEn, inspired by “matching”, which
enables implicit guidance without training a discriminator. By matching each sample with a similar one that has a better property value, we create a larger training
dataset that inherently indicates the direction of improvement. Matching, combined
with an encoder-decoder architecture, forms a domain-agnostic generative framework for property enhancement. We show that training with a matched dataset
approximates the gradient of the property of interest while remaining within the
data distribution, allowing efficient design optimization. Extensive evaluations in
toy problems and scientific applications, such as therapeutic protein design and
airfoil optimization, demonstrate PropEn’s advantages over common baselines. Notably, the protein design results are validated with wet lab experiments, confirming
the competitiveness and effectiveness of our approach. Our code is available at
https://github.com/prescient-design/propen.

1

Introduction

Navigating the complex world of design is a challenge in many fields, from engineering [35] to
material science [33, 40] and life sciences [6]. In life sciences, the goal may be to refine molecular
structures for drug discovery [6], focusing on properties like binding affinity or stability. In engineering, optimizing the shapes of aircraft wings or windmill blades to achieve desired aerodynamic
traits like lift and drag forces is crucial [35]. The common thread in these fields is the design cycle:
experts start with an initial design and aim to improve a specific property. Guided by intuition and
expertise, they make adjustments and evaluate the changes. If the property improves, they continue
this iterative optimization process. This cycle is repeated multiple times, making it time-consuming
and resource-intensive. ML holds promise to reduce these costs, speed up design cycles, and create
better-performing designs [3, 31, 44, 22].
Yet, progress in ML methods for design is hindered by practical challenges. The first challenge is
limited data availability. Since gathering label measurements is resource intensive [46, 28, 50, 19],
designers are more often than not constrained to very small-scale datasets. In addition, there are often
non-smooth functional dependencies between the features and outcome, complicating approximation,
even for deep neural networks [30, 45]. Traditional methods use two part frameworks, requiring
discriminators to guide the property enhancement for examples produced by a generative model.
Such discriminators should be able to reliably predict the property of interest given some training
data or its latent representations. Because of the dependency on training a discriminator for guidance,
∗
†

Prescient/MLDD, Genentech Research and Early Development
Department of Computer Science, Center for Data Science, New York University

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

