Decision Mamba: A Multi-Grained State Space Model
with Self-Evolution Regularization for Offline RL

1

Qi Lv1 2 Xiang Deng1 † Gongwei Chen1 Michael Yu Wang2 Liqiang Nie1 †
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
2
School of Engineering, Great Bay University
lvqi@stu.hit.edu.cn

Abstract
While the conditional sequence modeling with the transformer architecture has
demonstrated its effectiveness in dealing with offline reinforcement learning (RL)
tasks, it is struggle to handle out-of-distribution states and actions. Existing work
attempts to address this issue by data augmentation with the learned policy or
adding extra constraints with the value-based RL algorithm. However, these studies still fail to overcome the following challenges: (1) insufficiently utilizing the
historical temporal information among inter-steps, (2) overlooking the local intrastep relationships among return-to-gos (RTGs), states and actions, (3) overfitting
suboptimal trajectories with noisy labels. To address these challenges, we propose
Decision Mamba (DM), a novel multi-grained state space model (SSM) with a selfevolving policy learning strategy. DM explicitly models the historical hidden state
to extract the temporal information by using the mamba architecture. To capture
the relationship among RTG-state-action triplets, a fine-grained SSM module is
designed and integrated into the original coarse-grained SSM in mamba, resulting
in a novel mamba architecture tailored for offline RL. Finally, to mitigate the
overfitting issue on noisy trajectories, a self-evolving policy is proposed by using
progressive regularization. The policy evolves by using its own past knowledge to
refine the suboptimal actions, thus enhancing its robustness on noisy demonstrations. Extensive experiments on various tasks show that DM outperforms other
baselines substantially.

1

Introduction

Offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) [13, 27, 29, 38] has attracted great attention due to its remarkable successes in the fields of robotic control [5, 36] and games [3, 32, 50]. As transformer [49] has
exhibited powerful sequential modeling abilities in natural language processing [4, 43] and computer
vision [10, 42], many efforts [6, 8, 25, 61] have been made on applying this architecture to offline
RL tasks. Transformer-based methods view the reward/return-to-go (RTG), state, and action as a
sequence, and then predict actions by using the transformer encoder. However, it often fails to make
correct decisions when encountering out-of-distribution states or actions, showing limited robustness.
Previous work attempts to address this issue from the perspective of data augmentation [51, 64]
and objective constraints [6, 53, 61]. However, they introduce a significant number of noises or
the overestimation bias. Thus, how to enhance model robustness remains a highly challenging and
insufficiently explored issue.
In this study, we offer two novel perspectives on improving model robustness through both the
model architecture and learning strategy. In terms of the model architecture, (1) although previous
†

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

