FNP: Fourier Neural Processes for
Arbitrary-Resolution Data Assimilation

Kun Chen 1,2

Peng Ye 1,2

Hao Chen 2

Wanli Ouyang 2
1

Fudan University

kunchen22@m.fudan.edu.cn

Kang Chen 2

Tao Chen 1,∗
2

Tao Han 2

Lei Bai 2,∗

Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
eetchen@fudan.edu.cn

baisanshi@gmail.com

Abstract
Data assimilation is a vital component in modern global medium-range weather
forecasting systems to obtain the best estimation of the atmospheric state by
combining the short-term forecast and observations. Recently, AI-based data
assimilation approaches have attracted increasing attention for their significant
advantages over traditional techniques in terms of computational consumption.
However, existing AI-based data assimilation methods can only handle observations with a specific resolution, lacking the compatibility and generalization
ability to assimilate observations with other resolutions. Considering that complex
real-world observations often have different resolutions, we propose the Fourier
Neural Processes (FNP) for arbitrary-resolution data assimilation in this paper.
Leveraging the efficiency of the designed modules and flexible structure of neural processes, FNP achieves state-of-the-art results in assimilating observations
with varying resolutions, and also exhibits increasing advantages over the counterparts as the resolution and the amount of observations increase. Moreover,
our FNP trained on a fixed resolution can directly handle the assimilation of observations with out-of-distribution resolutions and the observational information
reconstruction task without additional fine-tuning, demonstrating its excellent generalization ability across data resolutions as well as across tasks. Code is available
at https://github.com/OpenEarthLab/FNP.

1

Introduction

Accurately estimating the true state of complex and chaotic Earth systems is an important and
challenging task, which can contribute to a better understanding of nature and improve forecasting
by reducing the error of initial conditions. The most accurate human knowledge of the Earth’s state
comes from observations, which are inherently limited in their scopes due to practical constraints.
Data assimilation, based on limited observational information and short-term forecasts (referred to as
the background), serves as the primary approach for state estimation [38, 21, 32]. Traditional data
assimilation methods employed in operational systems include Kalman filters based on minimum
variance estimation and variational methods based on maximum likelihood estimation [4, 8, 49].
Taking 3D variational (3D-Var) data assimilation as an example, data assimilation is regarded as
an optimization problem under given conditions, aiming to find the analysis xa that minimizes the
∗

Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

