Learn more, but bother less: parameter efficient
continual learning

Fuli Qiao
Pennsylvania State University
fvq5015@psu.edu

Mehrdad Mahdavi
Pennsylvania State University
mzm616@psu.edu

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated profound capabilities due to
their extensive pre-training on diverse corpora. However, LLMs often struggle with
catastrophic forgetting when engaged in sequential task learning. In this paper,
we propose a novel parameter-efficient approach for continual learning in LLMs,
which empirically investigates knowledge transfer from previously learned tasks to
new tasks through low-rank matrix parameters, enhancing the learning of new tasks
without significant interference. Our method employs sensitivity-based analysis
of low-rank matrix parameters to identify knowledge-specific parameters between
sequential tasks, which are used to initialize the low-rank matrix parameters in
new tasks. To maintain orthogonality and minimize forgetting, we further involve
the gradient projection technique that keeps the low-rank subspaces of each new
task orthogonal to those of previous tasks. Our experimental results on continual
learning benchmarks validate the efficacy of our proposed method, which outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods in reducing forgetting, enhancing task
performance, and preserving the model’s ability to generalize to unseen tasks.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) [1, 5, 32, 40] have demonstrated exceptional performance across a
broad spectrum of tasks, significantly revolutionizing the landscape in diverse areas driven by artificial
intelligence. Full fine-tuning all the parameters of the pre-trained models becomes prohibitive in
adapting pre-trained models to a large number of downstream tasks. Thus, following LoRA [11],
multiple variants [24, 50] of low-rank adaptation have been proposed to prompt parameter-efficient
learning for LLMs. AdaLoRA [50] enhances the flexibility of low-rank matrices for various device
budgets by parameterizing the increments through singular value decomposition. It generalizes the
matrices, enabling layer-specific rank adjustments to meet different parameter constraints.
Despite the tremendous success of pre-trained models on static tasks, learning multiple sequential
tasks, known as continual learning (CL), still poses significant challenges [45]. There are two primary
challenges: (i) overcoming catastrophic forgetting, where a model’s performance on previous tasks
significantly deteriorates upon training with new data [28, 34], and (ii) facilitating forward transfer,
where knowledge from old tasks is harnessed to enhance the learning of new tasks. In the context of
LLMs, continual learning extends beyond merely enhancing linguistic and reasoning capabilities and
it encompasses a multi-faceted process, including continual pertaining [12], continual instruction [52],
and continual alignment [49].
While existing parameter-efficient tuning (PET) methods for CL [27, 31, 39, 43] have primarily
focused on mitigating the forgetting issue, they often overlook the equally important objective of
facilitating forward knowledge transfer. This transfer is crucial as it allows the model to leverage
previously acquired knowledge to better generalize to new tasks or domains. For instance, OLoRA [43], operating within the PET framework, proposes an orthogonal low-rank adaptation
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

