Subwords as Skills: Tokenization for
Sparse-Reward Reinforcement Learning

David Yunis
TTI-Chicago
Chicago, IL

Justin Jung∗
Springtail.ai
San Francisco, CA

Falcon Z. Dai†
Symbolica AI
San Francisco, CA

Matthew R. Walter
TTI-Chicago
Chicago, IL

dyunis@ttic.edu

justin@springtail.ai

falcon@symbolica.ai

mwalter@ttic.edu

Abstract
Exploration in sparse-reward reinforcement learning (RL) is difficult due to the
need for long, coordinated sequences of actions in order to achieve any reward.
Skill learning, from demonstrations or interaction, is a promising approach to
address this, but skill extraction and inference are expensive for current methods.
We present a novel method to extract skills from demonstrations for use in sparsereward RL, inspired by the popular Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE) algorithm in natural
language processing. With these skills, we show strong performance in a variety
of tasks, 1000× acceleration for skill-extraction and 100× acceleration for policy
inference. Given the simplicity of our method, skills extracted from 1% of the
demonstrations in one task can be transferred to a new loosely related task. We
also note that such a method yields a finite set of interpretable behaviors. Our code
is available at https://github.com/dyunis/subwords_as_skills.

(a) AntMaze

(b) Kitchen

Figure 1: A sample of some “skills” that our method identifies for the (a) AntMaze and (b) Kitchen
environments, where color is darker for poses earlier in the trajectory. Skills consist of linear motion
and turning in AntMaze, and reaching and pulling motions in Kitchen. Our method discovers a finite
inventory of skills, so it is possible to visualize and interpret them.

1

Introduction

The reinforcement learning (RL) paradigm, that allows an agent to interact with an a priori unknown
environment and collect its own data, is a promising approach to learning in many domains where
high-quality data collection is financially too expensive or otherwise intractable. Though it began with
dynamic programming in tabular settings, the recent use of neural networks as function approximators
has led to great success on many challenging learning tasks [47, 71, 26]. Typically, these successes
owe to particular properties of the tasks. In some cases, it is simple to define a reward function
that provides an informative learning signal at every step of interaction (the dense-reward setting),
∗
†

Work done while at University of Chicago.
Work done while at Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago (TTI-Chicago).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

