FINALLY: fast and universal speech enhancement
with studio-like quality

Nicholas Babaev∗
Samsung Research

Kirill Tamogashev∗
Samsung Research

Azat Saginbaev
Samsung Research

Ivan Shchekotov
Samsung Research

Hanbin Bae
Samsung Research

Hosang Sung
Samsung Research

WonJun Lee
Samsung Reseach

Hoon-Young Cho
Samsung Research

Pavel Andreev∗
Samsung Research

Abstract
In this paper, we address the challenge of speech enhancement in real-world
recordings, which often contain various forms of distortion, such as background
noise, reverberation, and microphone artefacts. We revisit the use of Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) for speech enhancement and theoretically show
that GANs are naturally inclined to seek the point of maximum density within
the conditional clean speech distribution, which, as we argue, is essential for the
speech enhancement task. We study various feature extractors for perceptual loss
to facilitate the stability of adversarial training, developing a methodology for
probing the structure of the feature space. This leads us to integrate WavLM-based
perceptual loss into MS-STFT adversarial training pipeline, creating an effective
and stable training procedure for the speech enhancement model. The resulting
speech enhancement model, which we refer to as FINALLY, builds upon the HiFi++
architecture, augmented with a WavLM encoder and a novel training pipeline.
Empirical results on various datasets confirm our model’s ability to produce clear,
high-quality speech at 48 kHz, achieving state-of-the-art performance in the field of
speech enhancement. Demo page: https://samsunglabs.github.io/FINALLY-page/

1

Introduction

Speech recordings are often contaminated with background noise, reverberation, reduced frequency
bandwidth, and other distortions. Unlike classical speech enhancement (Ephraim & Malah, 1984;
Pascual et al., 2017), which considers each task separately, universal speech enhancement (Serrà
et al., 2022; Su et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022) aims to restore speech from all types of distortions
simultaneously. Thus, universal speech enhancement seeks to generalize across a wide range of
distortions, making it more suitable for real-world applications where multiple distortions may
coexist.
Recent studies have categorized the problem of speech enhancement as a task of learning the clean
speech distribution conditioned on degraded signals (Lemercier et al., 2023; Serrà et al., 2022; Richter
et al., 2023). This problem is often addressed using diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al.,
2020), which are renowned for their exceptional ability to learn distributions. Diffusion models
have recently achieved state-of-the-art results in universal speech enhancement (Serrà et al., 2022).
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to p.andreev@samsung.com.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

