Are Language Models Actually Useful for
Time Series Forecasting?

Mingtian Tan
University of Virginia
wtd3gz@virginia.edu

Mike A. Merrill
University of Washington
mikeam@cs.washington.edu

Tim Althoff
University of Washington
althoff@cs.washington

Vinayak Gupta
University of Washington
vinayak@cs.washington.edu

Thomas Hartvigsen
University of Virginia
hartvigsen@virginia.edu

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) are being applied to time series forecasting. But
are language models actually useful for time series? In a series of ablation studies
on three recent and popular LLM-based time series forecasting methods, we find
that removing the LLM component or replacing it with a basic attention layer does
not degrade forecasting performance—in most cases, the results even improve!
We also find that despite their significant computational cost, pretrained LLMs
do no better than models trained from scratch, do not represent the sequential
dependencies in time series, and do not assist in few-shot settings. Additionally, we
explore time series encoders and find that patching and attention structures perform
similarly to LLM-based forecasters.1

1

Introduction

Time series analysis is a critical problem across many domains, including disease propagation
forecasting [8], retail sales analysis [3], healthcare [26, 17] and finance [31]. A great deal of
recent work in time series analysis (constituting repositories with more than 1200 total stars on
GitHub) has focused on adapting pretrained large language models (LLMs) to classify, forecast, and
detect anomalies in time series [15, 50, 22, 4, 5, 32, 14, 44, 16]. These papers posit that language
models, being advanced models for sequential dependencies in text, may generalize to the sequential
dependencies in time series data. This hypothesis is unsurprising given language models are now
pervasive in machine learning research. However, direct connections between language modeling
and time series forecasting remain largely undefined. So to what extent is language modeling really
beneficial for traditional time series tasks?
Our claim is simple but profound: popular LLM-based time series forecasters perform the same or
worse than basic LLM-free ablations, yet require orders of magnitude more compute. Derived
from extensive ablations, this reveals a worrying trend in contemporary time series forecasting
literature. Our goal is not to imply that language models will never be useful for time series. In fact,
recent works point to many exciting and promising ways that language and time series interact, like
time series reasoning [25, 7, 45, 42, 37], social understanding [6] and financial reasoning [36, 20].
Rather, we aim to highlight surprising findings that existing methods do very little to use the innate
reasoning power of pretrained language models on established time series tasks.
We substantiate our claim by performing three ablations of three popular and recent LLM-based
forecasting methods [50, 15, 22] using eight standard benchmark datasets from reference methods
1

All resources needed to reproduce our work are available:
LLMsForTimeSeries

https://github.com/BennyTMT/

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

