Distribution Guidance Network for Weakly Supervised
Point Cloud Semantic Segmentation

Zhiyi Pan
SECE, Peking University
Peng Cheng Laboratory
panzhiyi@stu.pku.edu.cn

Wei Gao
SECE, Peking University
gaowei262@pku.edu.cn

Shan Liu
Media Laboratory, Tencent
shanl@tencent.com

Ge Li∗
SECE, Peking University
geli@ece.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite alleviating the dependence on dense annotations inherent to fully supervised methods, weakly supervised point cloud semantic segmentation suffers from
inadequate supervision signals. In response to this challenge, we introduce a novel
perspective that imparts auxiliary constraints by regulating the feature space under
weak supervision. Our initial investigation identifies which distributions accurately
characterize the feature space, subsequently leveraging this priori to guide the alignment of the weakly supervised embeddings. Specifically, we analyze the superiority
of the mixture of von Mises-Fisher distributions (moVMF) among several common
distribution candidates. Accordingly, we develop a Distribution Guidance Network
(DGNet), which comprises a weakly supervised learning branch and a distribution
alignment branch. Leveraging reliable clustering initialization derived from the
weakly supervised learning branch, the distribution alignment branch alternately
updates the parameters of the moVMF and the network, ensuring alignment with
the moVMF-defined latent space. Extensive experiments validate the rationality
and effectiveness of our distribution choice and network design. Consequently,
DGNet achieves state-of-the-art performance under multiple datasets and various
weakly supervised settings.

1

Introduction

As a fundamental task in 3D scene understanding, point cloud semantic segmentation [42, 32, 29] is
widely entrenched in 3D applications, such as 3D reconstruction [15, 33], autonomous driving [20],
and embodied intelligence [14, 50]. Despite significant accomplishments in tackling the disorder
and disorganization, point cloud semantic segmentation remains annotation-intensive, hindering
its expansion in big datasets and large models. For this reason, the academic community explores
achieving point cloud semantic segmentation in a weakly supervised manner. However, due to the
lack of supervision signals, learning point cloud segmentation on sparse annotations is nontrivial.
In recent years, considerable effort has been made to pursue additional constraints in weak supervision.
As shown in Fig. 1, representative work can be broadly categorized into several paradigms: 1)
Contrastive Learning / Perturbation Consistency imposes contrastive loss or consistency constraint
between network embeddings of original and perturbed point clouds, respectively. 2) Self-training
progressively enhances segmentation quality by treating reliable predictions as pseudo-labels, with
∗

Ge Li is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

