Construction and Application of Materials Knowledge
Graph in Multidisciplinary Materials Science via
Large Language Model
Yanpeng Ye1,2,† , Jie Ren2,3,† , Shaozhou Wang2,* , Yuwei Wan2,4 , Imran Razzak1 , Bram Hoex5 ,
Haofeng Wang6 , Tong Xie2,5,* , and Wenjie Zhang1,*
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales
2
GreenDynamics
3
Department of Materials Science and Engineering, City University of Hong Kong
4
Department of Linguistics and Translation, City University of Hong Kong
5
School of Photovoltaic and Renewable Energy Engineering, University of New South Wales
6
College of Design & Innovation, Tongji University

Abstract
Knowledge in materials science is widely dispersed across extensive scientific
literature, posing significant challenges to the efficient discovery and integration of
new materials. Traditional methods, often reliant on costly and time-consuming
experimental approaches, further complicate rapid innovation. Addressing these
challenges, the integration of artificial intelligence with materials science has
opened avenues for accelerating the discovery process, though it also demands
precise annotation, data extraction, and traceability of information. To tackle
these issues, this article introduces the Materials Knowledge Graph (MKG), which
utilizes advanced natural language processing techniques integrated with large
language models to extract and systematically organize a decade’s worth of highquality research into structured triples, contains 162,605 nodes and 731,772 edges.
MKG categorizes information into comprehensive labels such as Name, Formula,
and Application, structured around a meticulously designed ontology, thus enhancing data usability and integration. By implementing network-based algorithms,
MKG not only facilitates efficient link prediction but also significantly reduces
reliance on traditional experimental methods. This structured approach not only
streamlines materials research but also lays the groundwork for more sophisticated
science knowledge graphs.

1

Introduction

In the contemporary information era, despite notable advancements, the creation and advancement of
novel materials still heavily rely on traditional, time-consuming trial-and-error methods intertwined
with chemical and physical intuitions. These conventional research approaches significantly impede
the life-cycle of high-performance material research. Given the specialization, inherent complexity,
and vast knowledge base of material science, researchers focusing on a single direction often struggle
to efficiently access and understand material knowledge from multidisciplinary studies. For instance,
researchers in solar cell development might not fully comprehend studies related to solid-state
* Corresponding authors:
shaozhou@greendynamics.com.au;
jie.zhang@unsw.edu.au
†
These authors contributed equally to this work.

tong@greendynamics.com.au;

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

wen-

