Outlier-Robust Distributionally Robust Optimization
via Unbalanced Optimal Transport

Zifan Wang
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
zifanw@kth.se

Yi Shen
Duke University
yi.shen478@duke.edu

Michael M. Zavlanos
Duke University
michael.zavlanos@duke.edu

Karl H. Johansson
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
kallej@kth.se

Abstract
Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO) accounts for uncertainty in data distributions by optimizing the model performance against the worst possible distribution
within an ambiguity set. In this paper, we propose a DRO framework that relies
on a new distance inspired by Unbalanced Optimal Transport (UOT). The proposed UOT distance employs a soft penalization term instead of hard constraints,
enabling the construction of an ambiguity set that is more resilient to outliers.
Under smoothness conditions, we establish strong duality of the proposed DRO
problem. Moreover, we introduce a computationally efficient Lagrangian penalty
formulation for which we show that strong duality also holds. Finally, we provide
empirical results that demonstrate that our method offers improved robustness to
outliers and is computationally less demanding for regression and classification
tasks.

1

Introduction

Consider a stochastic optimization problem that aims to find a decision variable θ ∈ Θ that minimizes
the expected loss function Eξ∼P∗ [l(ξ, θ)] [1], where the random samples ξ ∈ Ξ are drawn from a
fixed distribution P∗ and Θ ⊂ Rd is a compact and convex set. In many applications, the distribution
of interest P∗ is not precisely known; yet datasets that contain finite samples independently drawn
from the distribution P∗ are often available, which yield an empirical distribution estimate P̂. For
instance, in image classification problems, P∗ can represent the joint distribution of the features and
the labels, and P̂ can represent the empirical distribution of a dataset that is annotated by humans
[2]; in portfolio optimization problems, P∗ captures the uncertainty of a set of financial products in
the future months and P̂ contains historical prices of all the products [3]; in healthcare applications,
P∗ can represent the feature distribution of a population of interest, and P̂ represent the available
electronic health record data [4].
The above stochastic optimization problem is often solved using empirical risk minimization (ERM)
[5], which searches for the best decision variable θ that minimizes the expected loss function with
respect to the empirical distribution, i.e., θERM = arg minθ∈Θ Eξ∼P̂ [l(ξ, θ)]. However, ERM is not
guaranteed to provide good out-of-sample performance, i.e., the value of Eξ∼P∗ [l(ξ, θERM )] is high
when the empirical estimate P̂ is not close to the true distribution P∗ . For example, in the presence
of distribution shifts or contaminated datasets, the out-of-sample performance cannot be improved
by increasing the sample size. To enhance the out-of-sample performance of the decision variable,
researchers have developed methods that use distributionally robust optimization (DRO) to address
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

