Black-Box Forgetting

Yusuke Kuwana
Tokyo University of Science
4624513@ed.tus.ac.jp

Yuta Goto
Tokyo University of Science
4623511@ed.tus.ac.jp

Takashi Shibata
NEC Corporation
t.shibata@ieee.org

Go Irie
Tokyo University of Science
goirie@ieee.org

Abstract
Large-scale pre-trained models (PTMs) provide remarkable zero-shot classiﬁcation capability covering a wide variety of object classes. However, practical
applications do not always require the classiﬁcation of all kinds of objects, and
leaving the model capable of recognizing unnecessary classes not only degrades
overall accuracy but also leads to operational disadvantages. To mitigate this
issue, we explore the selective forgetting problem for PTMs, where the task is
to make the model unable to recognize only the speciﬁed classes while maintaining accuracy for the rest. All the existing methods assume “white-box” settings, where model information such as architectures, parameters, and gradients
is available for training. However, PTMs are often “black-box,” where information on such models is unavailable for commercial reasons or social responsibilities. In this paper, we address a novel problem of selective forgetting for
black-box models, named Black-Box Forgetting, and propose an approach to the
problem. Given that information on the model is unavailable, we optimize the input prompt to decrease the accuracy of speciﬁed classes through derivative-free
optimization. To avoid difﬁcult high-dimensional optimization while ensuring
high forgetting performance, we propose Latent Context Sharing, which introduces common low-dimensional latent components among multiple tokens for
the prompt. Experiments on four standard benchmark datasets demonstrate the
superiority of our method with reasonable baselines. The code is available at
https://github.com/yusukekwn/Black-Box-Forgetting.

1

Introduction

Large-scale pre-trained models (PTMs) such as CLIP [Radford et al., 2021] and ALIGN [Jia et al.,
2021] have strong capabilities of zero-shot classiﬁcation for everyday objects. Nevertheless, in practical applications, the classiﬁcation of all kinds of object classes is rarely required. For example, in
an autonomous driving system, it would be sufﬁcient to recognize limited classes of objects such
as cars, pedestrians, and trafﬁc signs. We would not need to recognize food, furniture, or animal
species. Retaining the classes that do not need to be recognized may decrease overall classiﬁcation
accuracy, as well as cause operational disadvantages such as the waste of computational resources
and the risk of information leakage. In this paper, we address the problem of selective forgetting of
speciﬁed classes [Shibata et al., 2021, Graves et al., 2021, Ye et al., 2022, Tarun et al., 2023], i.e.,
tuning a pre-trained model to reduce the classiﬁcation accuracy for only the speciﬁed classes with-

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

