Just Add $100 More: Augmenting Pseudo-LiDAR
Point Cloud for Resolving Class-imbalance Problem

Mincheol Chang†,∗
Korea University
m1ncheoree@korea.ac.kr

Siyeong Lee†
NAVER LABS
siyeong.lee@naverlabs.com

Jinkyu Kim
Korea University
jinkyukim@korea.ac.kr

Namil Kim‡
NAVER LABS
namil.kim@naverlabs.com

Abstract
Typical LiDAR-based 3D object detection models are trained with real-world data
collection, which is often imbalanced over classes. To deal with it, augmentation
techniques are commonly used, such as copying ground truth LiDAR points and
pasting them into scenes. However, existing methods struggle with the lack of
sample diversity for minority classes and the limitation of suitable placement. In
this work, we introduce a novel approach that utilizes pseudo LiDAR point clouds
generated from low-cost miniatures or real-world videos, which is called Pseudo
Ground Truth augmentation (PGT-Aug). PGT-Aug involves three key steps: (i)
volumetric 3D instance reconstruction using a 2D-to-3D view synthesis model,
(ii) object-level domain alignment with LiDAR intensity simulation, and (iii) a
hybrid context-aware placement method from ground and map information. We
demonstrate the superiority and generality of our method through performance
improvements in extensive experiments conducted on popular benchmarks, i.e.,
nuScenes, KITTI, and Lyft, especially for the datasets with large domain gaps
captured by different LiDAR configurations. The project webpage is https://justadd-100-more.github.io.

1

Introduction
Existing Methods

LiDAR-based 3D object detection has garnered
Copy
Paste
growing interest thanks to its wide applications,
including fully autonomous vehicles (or robots)
Limited
😰
Fixed 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑙, 𝑤, ℎ, 𝜃
Input Scene
LiDAR Scene
Placeability
where the LiDAR point cloud is a main reliOur Method
able source for 3D scene understanding. There
exists a large volume of literature on LiDARGenerate
Paste
based 3D object detection models [1–7], and
they have achieved remarkable performance imAny 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑙, 𝑤, ℎ, 𝜃
Miniatures
Flexible 😊
Input Scene
& Web Videos
Placeability
provements via better model architectures and
efficient LiDAR points representation. Still, we
observe that these models often suffer from the Figure 1: Overview. We present PGT-Aug, a novel
so-called class imbalance problem – they tend cost-effective pipeline that generates and augments
to be overfitted to frequently observed objects pseudo-LiDAR samples (from miniatures and web
videos) to effectively reduce the performance gap
∗
between majority-class vs. minority-class objects.
Work done during intern at NAVER LABS
†

Equal contribution, ‡ Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

