EGonc : Energy-based Open-Set Node Classification
with substitute Unknowns
Qin Zhang1

Zelin Shi1 Shirui Pan2 Junyang Chen1 Huisi Wu1 Xiaojun Chen1∗
1Shenzhen University 2Griffith University
qinzhang@szu.edu.cn, shizelin2021@email.szu.edu.cn,
s.pan@griffith.edu.cn, {junyangchen,hswu,xjchen}@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
Open-set Classification (OSC) is a critical requirement for safely deploying machine learning models in the open world, which aims to classify samples from
known classes and reject samples from out-of-distribution (OOD). Existing methods exploit the feature space of trained network and attempt at estimating the
uncertainty in the predictions. However, softmax-based neural networks are found
to be overly confident in their predictions even on data they have never seen before and the immense diversity of the OOD examples also makes such methods
fragile. To this end, we follow the idea of estimating the underlying density of
the training data to decide whether a given input is close to the in-distribution
(IND) data and adopt Energy-based models (EBMs) as density estimators. A novel
energy-based generative open-set node classification method, EGonc, is proposed
to achieve open-set graph learning. Specifically, we generate substitute unknowns
to mimic the distribution of real open-set samples firstly, based on the information
of graph structures. Then, an additional energy logit representing the virtual OOD
class is learned from the residual of the feature against the principal space, and
matched with the original logits by a constant scaling. This virtual logit serves as
the indicator of OOD-ness. EGonc has nice theoretical properties that guarantee
an overall distinguishable margin between the detection scores for IND and OOD
samples. Comprehensive experimental evaluations of EGonc also demonstrate its
superiority.

1

Introduction

Learning on graphs, where instance nodes are inter-connected, has become one of the central problems
for deep learning, as relational structures are pervasive and induce data inter-dependence which
hinders trivial adaptation of existing approaches that assume inputs to be i.i.d. sampled [56]. However,
current models mostly focus on improving testing performance of in-distribution (IND) data and
largely ignore the potential risk w.r.t. out-of-distribution (OOD) testing samples that may cause
negative outcome if the prediction is overconfident on them [31].
Real-world applications often require machine learning systems to interact with an open world,
violating the common assumption that testing and training distributions are identical. This urges the
community to devote increasing efforts on how to enhance models’ generalization [9] and reliability
[47] w.r.t. out-of-distribution data, by classifying samples from known classes and rejecting samples
from out-of-distribution.
Existing methods in addressing this task normally are achieved by assuming that a model is more
confident in its predictions for closed-set samples than for open-set samples [55, 8]. Based on this
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

