Decoupling Semantic Similarity from Spatial
Alignment for Neural Networks

Tassilo Wald∗,1,2,3 , Constantin Ulrich1,4,7 , Gregor Köhler 1,3 ,
David Zimmerer 1,2 , Stefan Denner 1,3 , Michael Baumgartner 1,3 ,
Fabian Isensee 1,2 , Priyank Jaini†,5 , Klaus H. Maier-Hein†,1,2,3,4,6
1
Division of Medical Image Computing,
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany
2
Helmholtz Imaging, DKFZ, Heidelberg, Germany
3
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science,
University of Heidelberg, Germany
4
Medical Faculty Heidelberg, University of Heidelberg, Germany
5
Google Deepmind
6
Pattern Analysis and Learning Group, Department of Radiation Oncology
7
National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT) Heidelberg, Germany

Abstract
What representation do deep neural networks learn? How similar are images
to each other for neural networks? Despite the overwhelming success of
deep learning methods key questions about their internal workings still
remain largely unanswered, due to their internal high dimensionality and
complexity. To address this, one approach is to measure the similarity of
activation responses to various inputs. Representational Similarity Matrices
(RSMs) distill this similarity into scalar values for each input pair. These
matrices encapsulate the entire similarity structure of a system, indicating
which input leads to similar responses. While the similarity between
images is ambiguous, we argue that the spatial location of semantic objects
does neither influence human perception nor deep learning classifiers.
Thus this should be reflected in the definition of similarity between image
responses for computer vision systems. Revisiting the established similarity
calculations for RSMs we expose their sensitivity to spatial alignment. In
this paper, we propose to solve this through semantic RSMs, which are
invariant to spatial permutation. We measure semantic similarity between
input responses by formulating it as a set-matching problem. Further, we
quantify the superiority of semantic RSMs over spatio-semantic RSMs through
image retrieval and by comparing the similarity between representations to
the similarity between predicted class probabilities.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are trained to extract powerful feature representations for a wide
range of downstream tasks. Despite this, their inner workings are highly-complex, making
understanding how networks solve tasks and what they learn challenging. To obtain a better
understanding of these fundamental questions, researchers in the fields of neuroscience,
∗
†

Corresponding author: tassilo.wald@dkfz-heidelberg.de
Shared last authorship.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

