Optimal Transport-based Labor-free Text Prompt
Modeling for Sketch Re-identification

Rui Li∗, Tingting Ren∗, Jie Wen†, Jinxing Li†
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
lrhit@stu.hit.edu.cn, {rentt0410,lijinxing158}@gmail.com, jiewen_pr@126.com

Abstract
Sketch Re-identification (Sketch Re-ID), which aims to retrieve target person from
an image gallery based on a sketch query, is crucial for criminal investigation, law
enforcement, and missing person searches. Existing methods aim to alleviate the
modality gap by employing semantic metrics constraints or auxiliary modal guidance. However, they incur expensive labor costs and inevitably omit fine-grained
modality-consistent information due to the abstraction of sketches. To address this
issue, this paper proposes a novel Optimal Transport-based Labor-free Text Prompt
Modeling (OLTM) network, which hierarchically extracts coarse- and fine-grained
similarity representations guided by textual semantic information without any additional annotations. Specifically, multiple target attributes are flexibly obtained
by a pre-trained visual question answering (VQA) model. Subsequently, a text
prompt reasoning module employs learnable prompt strategy and optimal transport
algorithm to extract discriminative global and local text representations, which
serve as a bridge for hierarchical and multi-granularity modal alignment between
sketch and image modalities. Additionally, instead of measuring the similarity of
two samples by only computing their distance, a novel triplet assignment loss is
further proposed, in which the whole data distribution also contributes to optimizing the inter/intra-class distances. Extensive experiments conducted on two public
benchmarks consistently demonstrate the robustness and superiority of our OLTM
over state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

With the growing need for urban public safety, traditional
person re-identification (Re-ID) methods [1, 2, 3] are gradually becoming inadequate for criminal investigations and
missing person tracking, as the individuals of interest may witness
not have been captured by surveillance cameras. To bolster social security management and combat criminal activities, sketch person re-identification (Sketch Re-ID), which
utilizes eyewitness clues to draw professional sketches as
queries and match target images in a photo gallery database, police
gallery
has received widespread attention from researchers and
scholars [4, 5, 6], as shown in Fig. 1. Nonetheless, due
to the considerable disparity in modal heterogeneity result- Figure 1: The illustration of sketch
ing from the varied sketch styles of different artists and the Re-ID. Different artists create sketches
based on clues provided by witness to
assist the police in identifying targets.
∗
Equal Contribution.
†

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

