Prediction with Action:
Visual Policy Learning via Joint Denoising Process

Yanjiang Guo12∗ , Yucheng Hu13∗ , Jianke Zhang1 , Yen-Jen Wang14 , Xiaoyu Chen12 ,
Chaochao Lu3† , Jianyu Chen12†
∗

Equal Contribution † Corresponding Author
IIIS, Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai Qizhi Institute
3
Shanghai AI Lab 4 University of California, Berkeley
{guoyj22, huyc24}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
1

Abstract

Success Rate

Diffusion models have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in image generation
tasks, including image editing and video creation, representing a good understanding of the physical world. On the other line, diffusion models have also shown
promise in robotic control tasks by denoising actions, known as diffusion policy.
Although the diffusion generative model and diffusion policy exhibit distinct capabilities—image prediction and robotic action, respectively—they technically follow
a similar denoising process. In robotic tasks, the ability to predict future images and
generate actions is highly correlated since they share the same underlying dynamics
of the physical world. Building on this insight, we introduce PAD, a novel visual
policy learning framework that unifies image Prediction and robot Action within a
joint Denoising process. Specifically, PAD utilizes Diffusion Transformers (DiT)
to seamlessly integrate images and robot states, enabling the simultaneous prediction of future images and robot actions. Additionally, PAD supports co-training
on both robotic demonstrations and large-scale video datasets and can be easily
extended to other robotic modalities, such as depth images. PAD outperforms
previous methods, achieving a significant 26.3% relative improvement on the full
Metaworld benchmark, by utilizing a single text-conditioned visual policy within
a data-efficient imitation learning setting. Furthermore, PAD demonstrates superior generalization to unseen tasks in real-world robot manipulation settings with
28.0% success rate increase compared to the strongest baseline. Project page at
https://sites.google.com/view/pad-paper.

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

Diffusion Policy

Metaworld
(All tasks)

SuSIE

RT-1

RT-2*

Real-world Panda
(Seen Tasks)

GR-1

PAD(ours)

Real-world Panda
(Unseen Tasks)

Figure 1: Multi-task performance comparisons in two domains.

1

Introduction

Making predictions and taking actions are critical human capabilities, allowing individuals to foresee
the change of their surroundings and behave appropriately in response [1, 2]. Despite prediction
and action seeming like two distinct abilities, they are highly coupled since they share the same
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

