Unified Graph Augmentations for Generalized
Contrastive Learning on Graphs

Jiaming Zhuo1 , Yintong Lu1 , Hui Ning1 , Kun Fu1 , Bingxin Niu1 , Dongxiao He2 ,
Chuan Wang3 , Yuanfang Guo4 , Zhen Wang5 , Xiaochun Cao6 , Liang Yang1∗
1
Hebei Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Calculation,
School of Artificial Intelligence, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, China
2
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing JiaoTong University, Beijing, China
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
5
School of Artificial Intelligence, OPtics and ElectroNics (iOPEN),
School of Cybersecurity, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
6
School of Cyber Science and Technology,
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
jiaming.zhuo@outlook.com, 202332803037@stu.hebut.edu.cn,
ninghui048@163.com, fukun@hebut.edu.cn, niubingxin666@163.com,
hedongxiao@tju.edu.cn, wangchuan@iie.ac.cn, andyguo@buaa.edu.cn,
w-zhen@nwpu.edu.cn, caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn, yangliang@vip.qq.com

Abstract
In real-world scenarios, networks (graphs) and their tasks possess unique characteristics, requiring the development of a versatile graph augmentation (GA) to meet
the varied demands of network analysis. Unfortunately, most Graph Contrastive
Learning (GCL) frameworks are hampered by the specificity, complexity, and incompleteness of their GA techniques. Firstly, GAs designed for specific scenarios
may compromise the universality of models if mishandled. Secondly, the process
of identifying and generating optimal augmentations generally involves substantial
computational overhead. Thirdly, the effectiveness of the GCL, even the learnable
ones, is constrained by the finite selection of GAs available. To overcome the above
limitations, this paper introduces a novel unified GA module dubbed UGA after
reinterpreting the mechanism of GAs in GCLs from a message-passing perspective.
Theoretically, this module is capable of unifying any explicit GAs, including node,
edge, attribute, and subgraph augmentations. Based on the proposed UGA, a novel
generalized GCL framework dubbed Graph cOntrastive UnifieD Augmentations
(GOUDA) is proposed. It seamlessly integrates widely adopted contrastive losses
and an introduced independence loss to fulfill the common requirements of consistency and diversity of augmentation across diverse scenarios. Evaluations across
various datasets and tasks demonstrate the generality and efficiency of the proposed
GOUDA over existing state-of-the-art GCLs.

1

Introduction

Owing to their effectiveness and efficiency, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have become a standard
toolkit for processing various graph tasks such as node classification and graph classification [17, 34,
41, 40]. They typically follow a message-passing paradigm [10], where the representation of each
node is updated by aggregating the representations of its adjacent nodes and subsequently combining
∗

corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

