HourVideo: 1-Hour Video-Language Understanding

Keshigeyan Chandrasegaran Agrim Gupta Lea M. Hadzic Taran Kota Jimming He
Cristobal Eyzaguirre Zane Durante Manling Li Jiajun Wu Li Fei-Fei
hourvideo.stanford.edu
Stanford University

Abstract
We present HourVideo, a benchmark dataset for hour-long video-language understanding. Our dataset consists of a novel task suite comprising summarization,
perception (recall, tracking), visual reasoning (spatial, temporal, predictive, causal,
counterfactual), and navigation (room-to-room, object retrieval) tasks. HourVideo
includes 500 manually curated egocentric videos from the Ego4D dataset, spanning durations of 20 to 120 minutes, and features 12,976 high-quality, five-way
multiple-choice questions. Benchmarking results reveal that multimodal models, including GPT-4 and LLaVA-NeXT, achieve marginal improvements over
random chance. In stark contrast, human experts significantly outperform the
state-of-the-art long-context multimodal model, Gemini Pro 1.5 (85.0% vs. 37.3%),
highlighting a substantial gap in multimodal capabilities. Our benchmark, evaluation toolkit, prompts, and documentation are available at hourvideo.stanford.edu.

1

Introduction

Humans demonstrate a remarkable ability to process visual stimuli over long time horizons, enabling
them to perceive, plan and act in the real world. Consider the routine task of cooking a meal. This
activity involves a continuous and adaptive visual process: identifying and using ingredients and
tools, monitoring state changes of various dishes, and adjusting cooking duration/techniques based
on visual cues such as color and texture. Such sustained visual processing is crucial to achieving the
desired culinary outcomes. Naturally, endowing autonomous agents with this capability has been a
long-standing goal in the field of Artificial Intelligence.
In recent years, large multimodal models [1–3] have emerged as a promising approach toward
achieving this goal. Typically, these models are evaluated using multiple datasets that test capabilities
such as object recognition [4, 5], image comprehension [6–8], and action recognition [9]. However,
these benchmarks are often restricted to single images or short video clips, usually lasting from a
few seconds to no more than three minutes [9–12]. While these benchmarks have spurred significant
advancements, a deeper exploration into long-form video-language understanding is essential to
develop multimodal systems that can form the basis for future autonomous agents and assistants.
A significant challenge in evaluating long-form video-language understanding capabilities is designing tasks that genuinely necessitate long-term comprehension, i.e., tasks that require long-range
dependencies. Merely posing questions that can be answered by watching a brief segment of a
lengthy video effectively reduces the task to a combination of temporal localization and short-clip
understanding. Furthermore, while intriguing narrative inquiries can certainly be formulated for
long-form videos such as television shows and films, it is imperative to ensure that the questions are
not trivially answerable due to the vast prior knowledge encoded in modern large language models.
In this work, we introduce HourVideo—a benchmark dataset designed for long-form video-language
understanding. To design tasks that require long-term comprehension, we first propose a novel task
Correspondence to {keshik,agrim}@stanford.edu
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

