Metric Flow Matching for Smooth Interpolations on
the Data Manifold
Kacper Kapuśniak1∗, Peter Potaptchik1 , Teodora Reu1 , Leo Zhang1 ,
Alexander Tong2,3 , Michael Bronstein1,4 , Avishek Joey Bose1,2 , Francesco Di Giovanni1
1
University of Oxford, 2 Mila, 3 Université de Montréal, 4 AITHYRA

Abstract
Matching objectives underpin the success of modern generative models and rely
on constructing conditional paths that transform a source distribution into a target
distribution. Despite being a fundamental building block, conditional paths have
been designed principally under the assumption of Euclidean geometry, resulting in
straight interpolations. However, this can be particularly restrictive for tasks such as
trajectory inference, where straight paths might lie outside the data manifold, thus
failing to capture the underlying dynamics giving rise to the observed marginals.
In this paper, we propose M ETRIC F LOW M ATCHING (MFM), a novel simulationfree framework for conditional flow matching where interpolants are approximate
geodesics learned by minimizing the kinetic energy of a data-induced Riemannian
metric. This way, the generative model matches vector fields on the data manifold,
which corresponds to lower uncertainty and more meaningful interpolations. We
prescribe general metrics to instantiate MFM, independent of the task, and test it on
a suite of challenging problems including LiDAR navigation, unpaired image translation, and modeling cellular dynamics. We observe that MFM outperforms the Euclidean baselines, particularly achieving SOTA on single-cell trajectory prediction.

1

Introduction

A central task in many natural and scientific domains entails the inference of system dynamics of
an underlying (physical) process from noisy measurements. A core challenge, in these application
domains such as biomedical ones—e.g. tracking health metrics [Oeppen and Vaupel, 2002] or
diseases [Hay et al., 2021]—is that one typically lacks access to entire time-trajectories and can only
leverage cross-sectional samples. An even more poignant example is the case of single-cell RNA
sequencing [Macosko et al., 2015, Klein et al., 2015], where measurements are sparse and static, due
to the procedure being expensive and destructive. Consequently, the nature of these tasks demands
the design of frameworks capable of reconstructing the temporal dynamics of a system (e.g. cells)
from observed time marginals that contain finite samples. This overarching problem specification
is referred to as trajectory inference [Hashimoto et al., 2016, Lavenant et al., 2021].
To address this challenge, we rely on matching objectives, a powerful generative modeling paradigm
encompassing successful approaches including diffusion models [Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015, Song
et al., 2021], flow matching [Lipman et al., 2023, Liu et al., 2022, Albergo and Vanden-Eijnden,
2022], and finding a Schrödinger Bridge [Schrödinger, 1932, Léonard, 2013]. Specifically, to
reconstruct the unknown dynamics t 7→ p∗t between observed time marginals p0 and p1 , we leverage
Conditional Flow Matching (CFM) [Tong et al., 2023b], a simulation-free framework which
constructs a probability path pt through interpolants xt connecting samples of p0 to samples of
p1 . In general, xt is designed under the assumption of Euclidean geometry, resulting in straight
∗

Corresponding author: kacper.kapusniak@cs.ox.ac.uk
Code is available at https://github.com/kksniak/metric-flow-matching

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

