Visual CoT: Advancing Multi-Modal Language Models
with a Comprehensive Dataset and Benchmark for
Chain-of-Thought Reasoning

Hao Shao1,2
Zhuofan Zong1
1

Shengju Qian1
Letian Wang3

Han Xiao1
Yu Liu2

Guanglu Song2
Hongsheng Li1,4

2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
SenseTime Research
3
4
University of Toronto
HKGAI under InnoHK

Abstract
Multi-Modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have demonstrated impressive
performance in various VQA tasks. However, they often lack interpretability and
struggle with complex visual inputs, especially when the resolution of the input
image is high or when the interested region that could provide key information for
answering the question is small. To address these challenges, we collect and introduce the large-scale Visual CoT dataset comprising 438k question-answer pairs,
annotated with intermediate bounding boxes highlighting key regions essential for
answering the questions. Additionally, about 98k pairs of them are annotated with
detailed reasoning steps. Importantly, we propose a multi-turn processing pipeline
that dynamically focuses on visual inputs and provides interpretable thoughts. We
also introduce the related benchmark to evaluate the MLLMs in scenarios requiring
specific local region identification. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework and shed light on better inference strategies. The Visual
CoT dataset, benchmark, and pre-trained models are available on this webpage to
support further research in this area.

1

Introduction

With the success of large language models (LLMs) like GPT-4 [1] and Gemini [63], researchers
are enhancing these models by incorporating visual understanding capabilities. This enthusiasm
has led to the emergence of multi-modal large language models (MLLM), such as LLaVA [39, 40],
SPHINX [17, 37], and Qwen-VL [3]. Involving the extraction of visual tokens from input images,
these MLLMs mostly follow a two-stage schedule: first the alignment of these tokens with linguistic
modalities, and then the joint processing in LLMs. MLLMs have demonstrated viability in various
scenarios, such as image captioning, visual question answering, and optical character recognition,
owing to their ability to generate plausible outputs and leverage the extensive knowledge of LLMs.
However, many popular MLLMs [47, 58, 23, 85, 7, 9, 76, 75, 83] and related benchmarks [35, 8, 22,
73, 74] are primarily trained to respond to instructions based on visual inputs, employing a decoderonly autoregressive design as a single black box. While these models exhibit impressive generation
capabilities, they suffer from inaccurate information [36] and even hallucinations [18]. Moreover, the
black-box design hinders the interpretability of visual-language models. Additionally, the potential
of multi-turn in-context capability and the advantages of chain-of-thought [70, 89, 81] for LLMs
have not been extensively explored in MLLMs. Some recent works, such as multimodal-CoT [90]
Corresponding author.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

