On provable privacy vulnerabilities of
graph representations
Ruofan Wu∗§ , Guanhua Fang∗ ‡ ,
Mingyang Zhang , Qiying Pan¶ , Tengfei Liu§†1 , and Weiqiang Wang§
§

§

Ant Group
Fudan University
¶
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
‡

{ruofan.wrf, zhangmingyang.zmy, aaron.ltf, weiqiang.wwq}@antgroup.com
fanggh@fudan.edu.cn, sim10_arity@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph representation learning (GRL) is critical for extracting insights from complex network structures, but it also raises security concerns due to potential privacy
vulnerabilities in these representations. This paper investigates the structural vulnerabilities in graph neural models where sensitive topological information can be
inferred through edge reconstruction attacks. Our research primarily addresses the
theoretical underpinnings of similarity-based edge reconstruction attacks (SERA),
furnishing a non-asymptotic analysis of their reconstruction capacities. Moreover,
we present empirical corroboration indicating that such attacks can (almost) perfectly reconstruct sparse graphs as graph size increases. Conversely, we establish
that sparsity is a critical factor for SERA’s effectiveness, as demonstrated through
analysis and experiments on (dense) stochastic block models. Finally, we explore
the resilience of private graph representations produced via noisy aggregation
(NAG) mechanism against SERA. Through theoretical analysis and empirical
assessments, we affirm the mitigation of SERA using NAG. In parallel, we also
empirically delineate instances wherein SERA demonstrates both efficacy and
deficiency in its capacity to function as an instrument for elucidating the trade-off
between privacy and utility. 1

1

Introduction

With the surging developments of graph representation learning (GRL) [15], there has been growing
apprehensions concerning the security challenges associated with the deployment of graph neural
models in real-world scenarios [10]. GRL models harness the topological information of the underlying graph for producing high-quality predictions or graph representations. Meanwhile, these
models bear the risk of inadvertently divulging the same topological information through the graph
representations they produce. Such kind of security risks have been empirically validated through the
examination of the attacking performance of edge reconstruction algorithms [11, 17, 34, 46], among
which a simple form of attack based solely on the representation similarity of node pairs is shown to
achieve strikingly strong performance, without the requirement of additional knowledge like encoder
architecture or auxiliary datasets [17].
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding author: aaron.ltf@antgroup.com
1
Code available at https://github.com/Rorschach1989/gnn_privacy_attack

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

