Identifying General Mechanism Shifts in Linear
Causal Representations

Tianyu Chen∗ Kevin Bello†‡ Francesco Locatello⋄ Bryon Aragam† Pradeep Ravikumar‡
∗
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences, University of Texas at Austin
†
Booth School of Business, University of Chicago
‡
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University
⋄
Institute of Science and Technology Austria

Abstract
We consider the linear causal representation learning setting where we observe a
linear mixing of d unknown latent factors, which follow a linear structural causal
model. Recent work has shown that it is possible to recover the latent factors as well
as the underlying structural causal model over them, up to permutation and scaling,
provided that we have at least d environments, each of which corresponds to perfect
interventions on a single latent node (factor). After this powerful result, a key open
problem faced by the community has been to relax these conditions: allow for
coarser than perfect single-node interventions, and allow for fewer than d of them,
since the number of latent factors d could be very large. In this work, we consider
precisely such a setting, where we allow a smaller than d number of environments,
and also allow for very coarse interventions that can very coarsely change the
entire causal graph over the latent factors. On the flip side, we relax what we
wish to extract to simply the list of nodes that have shifted between one or more
environments. We provide a surprising identifiability result that it is indeed possible,
under some very mild standard assumptions, to identify the set of shifted nodes. Our
identifiability proof moreover is a constructive one: we explicitly provide necessary
and sufficient conditions for a node to be a shifted node, and show that we can check
these conditions given observed data. Our algorithm lends itself very naturally to
the sample setting where instead of just interventional distributions, we are provided
datasets of samples from each of these distributions. We corroborate our results
on both synthetic experiments as well as an interesting psychometric dataset. The
code can be found at https://github.com/TianyuCodings/iLCS.

1

Introduction

The objective of learning disentangled representations is to separate the different factors that contribute
to the variation in the observed data, resulting in a representation that is easier to understand and
manipulate [3]. Traditional methods for disentanglement [e.g., 19, 20, 7, 9, 26] aim to make the
latent variables independent of each other.
Consider the setting of linear independent component analysis (ICA) [19], that is, the observed
variables X ∈ Rp are generated through the process X = GZ, where Z ∈ Rd are latent factors,
and G ∈ Rp×d is an unknown “mixing” matrix. Under the key assumption that Z has statistically
independent components, and under some additional mild assumptions, landmark results in linear
ICA show that it is possible to recover the latent variables Z up to permutation and scaling [13, 19].
1

Emails: tianyuchen@utexas.edu, kbello@cs.cmu.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

