Learning Commonality, Divergence and Variety for
Unsupervised Visible-Infrared Person Re-identification

Jiangming Shi1,3∗, Xiangbo Yin2∗ , Yachao Zhang2 , Zhizhong Zhang4,5
Yuan Xie3,4† , Yanyun Qu1,2†
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University
2
School of Informatics, Xiamen University
3
Shanghai Innovation Institute
4
East China Normal University
5
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Computer Software Evaluating and Testing
jiangming.shi@outlook.com yxie@cs.ecnu.edu.cn yyqu@xmu.edu.cn
Code: https://github.com/shijiangming1/PCLHD

Abstract
Unsupervised visible-infrared person re-identification (USVI-ReID) aims to match
specified persons in infrared images to visible images without annotations, and
vice versa. USVI-ReID is a challenging yet underexplored task. Most existing
methods address the USVI-ReID through cluster-based contrastive learning, which
simply employs the cluster center to represent an individual. However, the cluster
center primarily focuses on commonality, overlooking divergence and variety. To
address the problem, we propose a Progressive Contrastive Learning with Hard
and Dynamic Prototypes for USVI-ReID. In brief, we generate the hard prototype
by selecting the sample with the maximum distance from the cluster center. We
reveal that the inclusion of the hard prototype in contrastive loss helps to emphasize
divergence. Additionally, instead of rigidly aligning query images to a specific
prototype, we generate the dynamic prototype by randomly picking samples within
a cluster. The dynamic prototype is used to encourage variety. Finally, we introduce
a progressive learning strategy to gradually shift the model’s attention towards
divergence and variety, avoiding cluster deterioration. Extensive experiments
conducted on the publicly available SYSU-MM01 and RegDB datasets validate
the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1

Introduction

Visible-infrared person re-identification (VI-ReID) aims at matching the same person captured in
one modality with their counterparts in another modality [1–3]. It has recently gained attention
in computer vision applications like video surveillance [4] and image retrieval [5–7]. With the
development of deep learning [8–11], VI-ReID has achieved remarkable advancements [12–14].
However, the development of existing VI-ReID methods is still limited due to the requirement
for expensive-annotated training data [15, 16]. To mitigate the problem of annotating large-scale
cross-modality data, some semi-supervised VI-ReID methods [17–19] are proposed to learn modalityinvariant and identity-related discriminative representations by utilizing both labeled and unlabeled
data. For this purpose, OTLA [17] proposed an optimal transport label assignment mechanism to
assign pseudo-labels for unlabeled infrared images while ignoring how to calibrate noise pseudolabels. DPIS [18] integrates two pseudo-labels generated by distinct models into a hybrid pseudo-label
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024), Vancouver.

