DoFIT: Domain-aware Federated Instruction Tuning
with Alleviated Catastrophic Forgetting
Binqian Xu1 , Xiangbo Shu1,* , Haiyang Mei2 , Zechen Bai2 , Basura Fernando3 ,
Mike Zheng Shou2 , and Jinhui Tang1
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology 2 Show Lab, National University of Singapore
3
Institute of High-Performance Computing, A*STAR
https://github.com/1xbq1/DoFIT

Abstract
Federated Instruction Tuning (FIT) advances collaborative training on decentralized data, crucially enhancing model’s capability and safeguarding data privacy.
However, existing FIT methods are dedicated to handling data heterogeneity across
different clients (i.e., client-aware data heterogeneity), while ignoring the variation
between data from different domains (i.e., domain-aware data heterogeneity). When
scarce data needs supplementation from related fields, these methods lack the ability
to handle domain heterogeneity in cross-domain training. This leads to domaininformation catastrophic forgetting in collaborative training and therefore makes
model perform sub-optimally on the individual domain. To address this issue, we
introduce DoFIT, a new Domain-aware FIT framework that alleviates catastrophic
forgetting through two new designs. First, to reduce interference information from
the other domain, DoFIT finely aggregates overlapping weights across domains on
the inter-domain server side. Second, to retain more domain information, DoFIT
initializes intra-domain weights by incorporating inter-domain information into a
less-conflicted parameter space. Experimental results on diverse datasets consistently demonstrate that DoFIT excels in cross-domain collaborative training and
exhibits significant advantages over conventional FIT methods in alleviating catastrophic forgetting. Code is available at https://github.com/1xbq1/DoFIT.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have attracted significant attention due to their remarkable comprehension and reasoning capabilities, coupled with their vast potential for a wide array of applications [27]. This attention has spurred the development of various Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning
(PEFT) methods [13, 15, 14, 6], aimed at efficiently adapting these powerful models to specific tasks
under constrained computational resources [21]. Among them, LoRA [6] stands out as one of the
most popular, due to its lower number of trainable parameters and the absence of additional inference
computations. While LoRA significantly alleviates the computational burden associated with tuning
LLMs, substantial challenges persist at the data level [28, 31], particularly in domains involving
privacy concerns, where there is a lack of high-quality for cultivating a strong model [26, 29].
Towards this issue, some Federated Instruction-Tuning (FIT) methods have been explored by combining LLM instruction-tuning using LoRA with Federated Learning (FL) in recent years [37, 35,
38, 11, 34, 4, 9, 24]. In such FIT methods, the server side coordinates multi-round training among
clients without sharing data for boosting model capability and protecting data privacy. Specifically,
each round consists of four steps: global LoRA downloads from the server back to the clients, local
*

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

