One-shot Federated Learning via Synthetic
Distiller-Distillate Communication
Junyuan Zhang1,2 Songhua Liu1 Xinchao Wang1∗
National University of Singapore1 Beihang University2
junyuanpk@gmail.com, songhua.liu@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
One-shot Federated learning (FL) is a powerful technology facilitating collaborative
training of machine learning models in a single round of communication. While its
superiority lies in communication efficiency and privacy preservation compared to
iterative FL, one-shot FL often compromises model performance. Prior research
has primarily focused on employing data-free knowledge distillation to optimize
data generators and ensemble models for better aggregating local knowledge
into the server model. Prior research has primarily focused on employing datafree knowledge distillation to optimize data generators and ensemble models
for better aggregating local knowledge into the server model. However, these
methods typically struggle with data heterogeneity, where inconsistent local data
distributions can cause teachers to provide misleading knowledge. Additionally,
they may encounter scalability issues with complex datasets due to inherent twostep information loss: first, during local training (from data to model), and second,
when transferring knowledge to the server model (from model to inversed data).
In this paper, we propose FedSD2C, a novel and practical one-shot FL framework
designed to address these challenges. FedSD2C introduces a distiller to synthesize
informative distillates directly from local data to reduce information loss and
proposes sharing synthetic distillates instead of inconsistent local models to tackle
data heterogeneity. Our empirical results demonstrate that FedSD2C consistently
outperforms other one-shot FL methods with more complex and real datasets,
achieving up to 2.6 × the performance of the best baseline. Code: https://
github.com/Carkham/FedSD2C

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) has emerged as a cutting-edge technology that enables training a global
model across multiple clients without sharing their raw data [1]. Original FL requires multiple
communication rounds for exchanging information between clients and servers. While this paradigm
yields a better global model by frequent communication, such high communication costs along with
the risk of connection drop errors make it impractical and intolerable in real-world FL applications [2,
3, 4]. Moreover, frequent communication poses security risks such as man-in-the-middle attacks [5]
and privacy concerns [6].
To address these issues, one-shot FL [7] has been proposed, requiring only a single communication
round, significantly reducing communication costs and concurrently diminishing vulnerability to
malicious interception. Due to one communication round property, One-shot FL can also be easily
scaled up to large-scale client scenarios, especially for cross-device settings [3]. Despite its sufficient
benefits, the limitation of a single communication round makes one-shot FL fall short in accuracy
compared to conventional multiple-round FL.
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

