CodeRosetta: Pushing the Boundaries of Unsupervised Code
Translation for Parallel Programming

Ali TehraniJamsaz, Arijit Bhattacharjee, Le Chen, Nesreen K. Ahmed♢
Amir Yazdanbakhsh♠ , Ali Jannesari
Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, USA
{tehrani, arbhatt9, lechen, jannesari}@iastate.edu
♢
Cisco Outshift, San Jose, CA, USA
nesahmed@cisco.com
♠
Google DeepMind, Mountain View, CA, USA
ayazdan@google.com

Abstract
Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) have renewed interest in
automatic programming language translation. Encoder-decoder transformer models,
in particular, have shown promise in translating between different programming
languages. However, translating between a language and its high-performance computing (HPC) extensions remains underexplored due to challenges such as complex
parallel semantics. In this paper, we introduce CodeRosetta, an encoder-decoder
transformer model designed specifically for translating between programming
languages and their HPC extensions. CodeRosetta is evaluated on C++ ↔ CUDA
and Fortran ↔ C++ translation tasks. It uses a customized learning framework
with tailored pretraining and training objectives to effectively capture both code
semantics and parallel structural nuances, enabling bidirectional translation. Our
results show that CodeRosetta outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in C++ to
CUDA translation by 2.9 BLEU and 1.72 CodeBLEU points while improving compilation accuracy by 6.05%. Compared to general closed-source LLMs, our method
improves C++ to CUDA translation by 22.08 BLEU and 14.39 CodeBLEU, with
2.75% higher compilation accuracy. Finally, CodeRosetta exhibits proficiency
in Fortran to parallel C++ translation, marking it, to our knowledge, as the first
encoder-decoder model for this complex task, improving CodeBLEU by at least
4.63 points compared to closed-source and open-code LLMs.1

1

Introduction

Automatic code translation between programming languages offers numerous benefits, such as
modernizing legacy systems, enabling cross-platform development, and refactoring sequential code
into parallel high-performance versions. However, this task poses significant challenges, primarily
due to the scarcity of parallel corpora—paired datasets of the same applications written in different
languages (e.g., C++ ↔ CUDA or Fortran ↔ C++). This lack of data limits the effectiveness of
supervised learning approaches. While recent advances in code LLMs have shown promise in general
code translation, translating code that involves parallel programming paradigms (e.g., C++ to CUDA)
remains largely unexplored. That is primarily due to the inherent complexities in capturing and
correctly replicating parallel code semantics [28].
TransCoder [36] and its follow-up works [37, 39] have demonstrated the potential of unsupervised
learning for code translation. However, these methods often struggle with the complexities of
1

Code: https://coderosetta.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

