Parameter-Inverted Image Pyramid Networks

Xizhou Zhu2,1∗ , Xue Yang1∗ , Zhaokai Wang3,1∗ , Hao Li4,1
Wenhan Dou2,5 , Junqi Ge2,5 , Lewei Lu5 , Yu Qiao1 , Jifeng Dai2,1†
3

1
OpenGVLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 Tsinghua University
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
5
SenseTime Research

https://github.com/OpenGVLab/PIIP

Abstract
Image pyramids are commonly used in modern computer vision tasks to obtain
multi-scale features for precise understanding of images. However, image pyramids process multiple resolutions of images using the same large-scale model,
which requires signiﬁcant computational cost. To overcome this issue, we propose a novel network architecture known as the Parameter-Inverted Image Pyramid Networks (PIIP). Our core idea is to use models with different parameter sizes
to process different resolution levels of the image pyramid, thereby balancing computational efﬁciency and performance. Speciﬁcally, the input to PIIP is a set of
multi-scale images, where higher resolution images are processed by smaller networks. We further propose a feature interaction mechanism to allow features of
different resolutions to complement each other and effectively integrate information from different spatial scales. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the PIIP
achieves superior performance in tasks such as object detection, segmentation, and
image classiﬁcation, compared to traditional image pyramid methods and singlebranch networks, while reducing computational cost. Notably, when applying our
method on a large-scale vision foundation model InternViT-6B, we improve its
performance by 1%-2% on detection and segmentation with only 40%-60% of the
original computation. These results validate the effectiveness of the PIIP approach
and provide a new technical direction for future vision computing tasks.

1

Introduction

In modern computer vision, high-performance image perception systems increasingly rely on largescale pre-trained models. These models typically consume tens of thousands to millions of GPU
hours during pre-training [43, 44, 41]. To adapt these expensively pre-trained models for ﬁnegrained image perception tasks (e.g., detection [4, 63, 57, 56] and segmentation [19, 50]), researchers
usually combine them with image pyramids [40, 37] or feature pyramids [27, 42, 34]. This combination is crucial for constructing multi-scale features essential for image understanding.
However, integrating these pre-trained models with image pyramids results in signiﬁcant computational overhead. Image pyramids process the same image at multiple resolutions with the same
large-scale model, causing the computational demands to increase quadratically with the image resolutions across all scales. Although feature pyramids [27, 16, 42] aim to reduce this overhead, in
MS COCO challenges [28], most top-performing models [48, 14, 64, 7] still rely on image pyramids
due to their superior performance. Therefore, it is necessary to reduce the computing resources for
building image pyramids while maintaining high performance.
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author: Jifeng Dai <daijifeng@tsinghua.edu.cn>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

