Language Generation in the Limit

Jon Kleinberg
Departments of Computer Science
and Information Sciene
Cornell University
Ithaca NY

Sendhil Mullainathan
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
Chicago IL

Abstract
Although current large language models are complex, the most basic specifications
of the underlying language generation problem itself are simple to state: given a
finite set of training samples from an unknown language, produce valid new strings
from the language that don’t already appear in the training data. Here we ask what
we can conclude about language generation using only this specification, without
further assumptions. In particular, suppose that an adversary enumerates the strings
of an unknown target language L that is known only to come from one of a possibly
infinite list of candidates. A computational agent is trying to learn to generate from
this language; we say that the agent generates from L in the limit if after some finite
point in the enumeration of L, the agent is able to produce new elements that come
exclusively from L and that have not yet been presented by the adversary. Our main
result is that there is an agent that is able to generate in the limit for every countable
list of candidate languages. This contrasts dramatically with negative results due
to Gold and Angluin in a well-studied model of language learning where the goal
is to identify an unknown language from samples; the difference between these
results suggests that identifying a language is a fundamentally different problem
than generating from it.

1

Introduction

The recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have been remarkable, sparking active lines
of theoretical work into their performance. These investigations implicitly revolve around two
fundamental questions: how do we formally reason about the effectiveness of LLMs; and within such
a framework, what are the core ideas at a mathematical level that enable their performance?
Answers to these questions must begin by formalizing the specification for what a generative algorithm
for language should be doing. Here, we propose starting from a very basic, assumption-free, statement
for such a specification: there is an unknown target language L, over time the algorithm sees a
sequence of strings from L, and eventually we would like the algorithm to generate new strings from
L that it has not seen before.1
Viewed this way, it is also clear why it seems so remarkable for LLMs to be doing well at such a
problem. The fully general statement of the problem feels unsolvable: if we know nothing about the
unknown target language L, then how can a generative algorithm reliably produce valid strings from
L that it hasn’t seen before?
1

We will formalize these concepts more precisely below, but for now we can think of a language as simply any
set of strings over a fixed alphabet; for example, the strings of the language could be the set of all grammatical
sentences (or all well-formed expressions) according to a given grammar.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

