On-Road Object Importance Estimation: A New
Dataset and A Model with Multi-Fold
Top-Down Guidance
Zhixiong Nan1 , Yilong Chen1 , Tianfei Zhou ∗ 2 , and Tao Xiang1
2

1
College of Computer Science, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China.
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China.
nanzx@cqu.edu.cn, chenyilong@stu.cqu.edu.cn, tfzhou@bit.edu.cn,
txiang@cqu.edu.cn †

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of on-road object importance estimation, which
utilizes video sequences captured from the driver’s perspective as the input. Although this problem is significant for safer and smarter driving systems, the exploration of this problem remains limited. On one hand, publicly-available large-scale
datasets are scarce in the community. To address this dilemma, this paper contributes a new large-scale dataset named Traffic Object Importance (TOI). On
the other hand, existing methods often only consider either bottom-up feature or
single-fold guidance, leading to limitations in handling highly dynamic and diverse
traffic scenarios. Different from existing methods, this paper proposes a model that
integrates multi-fold top-down guidance with the bottom-up feature. Specifically,
three kinds of top-down guidance factors (i.e., driver intention, semantic context,
and traffic rule) are integrated into our model. These factors are important for
object importance estimation, but none of the existing methods simultaneously
consider them. To our knowledge, this paper proposes the first on-road object
importance estimation model that fuses multi-fold top-down guidance factors with
bottom-up feature. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our model outperforms
state-of-the-art methods by large margins, achieving 23.1% Average Precision (AP)
improvement compared with the recently proposed model (i.e., Goal).

1

Introduction

According to the World Health Statistics of WHO (34), road traffic injuries account for a significant
29% of all injury deaths, with nearly 1.3 million people losing their lives in traffic accidents annually.
Accurately estimating the importance of on-road objects can pave the way for safer (e.g., automatic
emergency braking (45; 39)) and smarter driving systems (32; 25; 38; 49; 4; 36; 11), potentially
preventing numerous accidents.
Although on-road object importance estimation presents significant research value, it has not been
widely explored. One main reason is the scarcity of publicly-available large-scale datasets in the
community. Specific for the on-road object importance estimation task, the only one publiclyavailable dataset is Ohn-Bar et al. (33), which contains 3,187 frames, 8 scenes, and 16,076 object
importance annotations. Such small-scale dataset supports to train small and less complex models.
∗

Corresponding author.
This work is supported by Chongqing Natural Science Foundation Innovation and Development Joint Fund
(CSTB2023NSCQ-LZX0109).
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

