Dual-frame Fluid Motion Estimation with Test-time
Optimization and Zero-divergence Loss

Yifei Zhang
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
zhangyifei21a@mails.ucas.ac.cn
Zhou Jiang
Beijing Institute of Technology
jzian@bit.edu.cn

Huan-ang Gao
AIR, Tsinghua University
gha24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Hao Zhao
AIR, Tsinghua University
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
zhaohao@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
3D particle tracking velocimetry (PTV) is a key technique for analyzing turbulent
flow, one of the most challenging computational problems of our century. At the
core of 3D PTV is the dual-frame fluid motion estimation algorithm, which tracks
particles across two consecutive frames. Recently, deep learning-based methods
have achieved impressive accuracy in dual-frame fluid motion estimation; however,
they exploit a supervised scheme that heavily depends on large volumes of labeled
data. In this paper, we introduce a new method that is completely self-supervised
and notably outperforms its supervised counterparts while requiring only 1%
of the training samples (without labels) used by previous methods. Our method
features a novel zero-divergence loss that is specific to the domain of turbulent
flow. Inspired by the success of splat operation in high-dimensional filtering and
random fields, we propose a splat-based implementation for this loss which is
both efficient and effective. The self-supervised nature of our method naturally
supports test-time optimization, leading to the development of a tailored Dynamic
Velocimetry Enhancer (DVE) module. We demonstrate that strong cross-domain
robustness is achieved through test-time optimization on unseen leave-one-out
synthetic domains and real physical/biological domains. Code, data and models
are available at https://github.com/Forrest-110/FluidMotionNet.

1

Introduction

Measuring and understanding turbulent fluid flow is a crucial problem as it is ubiquitous in various
aspects of our lives, both in nature [27; 37; 20] and within our engineered society [28; 81; 35; 26; 69;
101; 68; 93]. Throughout history, flow visualization techniques have played a vital role in quantifying
and analyzing turbulent flow [4; 60; 16; 76]. Among existing flow visualization techniques, 3D
particle tracking velocimetry (3D PTV), which tracks individual particles between consecutive frames,
distinguishes itself with high spatial resolution and precise measurement of velocity vectors [32; 3].
Before the advent of deep learning, PTV algorithms primarily focus on designing hand-crafted
features for particle matching [62; 12; 99]. With the onset of deep learning, deep neural networks
(like DeepPTV [50] and GotFlow3D [53]) have been introduced to solve this task. The core algorithm
of 3D PTV is dual-frame fluid motion estimation, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
However, it is important to note that existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) dual-frame fluid motion estimation algorithms (shown in left two panels of Fig. 1) have a limitation: they require a large amount
of fully annotated data. It is known that deep learning generally requires a substantial amount of
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

