M EDI Q: Question-Asking LLMs and a Benchmark
for Reliable Interactive Clinical Reasoning

Shuyue Stella Li1 Vidhisha Balachandran2 Shangbin Feng1 Jonathan S. Ilgen1
Emma Pierson3 Pang Wei Koh1,4 Yulia Tsvetkov1
1
University of Washington 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Cornell Tech
4
Allen Institute for AI
stelli@cs.washington.edu
https://github.com/stellalisy/mediQ
https://huggingface.co/datasets/stellalisy/mediQ

Abstract
Users typically engage with LLMs interactively, yet most existing benchmarks
evaluate them in a static, single-turn format, posing reliability concerns in interactive scenarios. We identify a key obstacle towards reliability: LLMs are trained to
answer any question, even with incomplete context or insufficient knowledge. In
this paper, we propose to change the static paradigm to an interactive one, develop
systems that proactively ask questions to gather more information and respond reliably, and introduce an benchmark—M EDI Q—to evaluate question-asking ability
in LLMs. M EDI Q simulates clinical interactions consisting of a Patient System
and an adaptive Expert System; with potentially incomplete initial information, the
Expert refrains from making diagnostic decisions when unconfident, and instead
elicits missing details via follow-up questions. We provide a pipeline to convert
single-turn medical benchmarks into an interactive format. Our results show that
directly prompting state-of-the-art LLMs to ask questions degrades performance,
indicating that adapting LLMs to proactive information-seeking settings is nontrivial. We experiment with abstention strategies to better estimate model confidence
and decide when to ask questions, improving diagnostic accuracy by 22.3%; however, performance still lags compared to an (unrealistic in practice) upper bound
with complete information upfront. Further analyses show improved interactive
performance with filtering irrelevant contexts and reformatting conversations. Overall, we introduce a novel problem towards LLM reliability, an interactive M EDI Q
benchmark and a novel question-asking system, and highlight directions to extend
LLMs’ information-seeking abilities in critical domains.

1

Introduction

General-purpose large language models (LLMs) are designed to serve a broad audience by following
instructions and providing the most likely and general answers (Brown et al., 2020; Ouyang et al.,
2022). However, in high-stakes decision making scenarios such as clinical conversations, LLM
assistants can be harmful if they provide general responses instead of gathering missing information
to make informed decisions. As shown in Figure 1, standard medical question-answering (QA)
tasks are formulated in a single-turn setup where all necessary information is provided upfront, and
the model is not expected to interact with users (Jin et al., 2021; Pal et al., 2022; Jin et al., 2019;
Hendrycks et al., 2020). This QA paradigm diverges from real-world scenarios, where users may
provide incomplete information, and effective decision-making often requires an investigative
process involving follow-up questions to clarify and gather necessary details (Trimble & Hamilton,
2016; Bornstein & Emler, 2001; Masic, 2022).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

