ComBack: A Versatile Dataset for Enhancing
Compiler Backend Development Efficiency

Ming Zhong1,2 , Fang Lyu1∗, Lulin Wang1 , Hongna Geng1,2 , Lei Qiu1,2
Huimin Cui1,2∗ , Xiaobing Feng1,2
1

SKLP, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China

2

UCAS, Beijing, China

{zhongming21s, flv, wanglulin, genghongna, qiulei21b, cuihm, fxb}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Compiler backends are tasked with generating executable machine code for processors. With the proliferation of diverse processors, it is imperative for programmers to tailor specific compiler backends to accommodate each one. Meanwhile,
compiler backend development is a laborious and time-consuming task, lacking effective automation methods. Although language models have demonstrated strong
abilities in code related tasks, the lack of appropriate datasets for compiler backend
development limits the application of language models in this field.
In this paper, we introduce ComBack, the first public dataset designed for improving compiler backend development capabilities of language models. ComBack includes 178 backends for mainstream compilers and three tasks including statement-level completion, next-statement suggestion and code generation,
representing common development scenarios. We conducted experiments by
fine-tuning six pre-trained language models with ComBack, demonstrating its
effectiveness in enhancing model accuracy across the three tasks. We further
evaluated the top-performing model (CodeT5+) across the three tasks for new
targets, comparing its accuracy with conventional methods (Fork-Flow), ChatGPT3.5-Turbo, and Code-LLaMA-34B-Instruct. Remarkably, fine-tuned CodeT5+
with only 220M parameters on ComBack outperformed Fork-Flow methods
significantly and surpassed ChatGPT and Code-LLaMA, suggesting potential
efficiency improvements in compiler development. ComBack is avaliable at
https://huggingface.co/datasets/docz1105/ComBack.

1

Introduction

A compiler is a fundamental computer software which translates source code from high-level programming language into low-level machine code, e.g., assembly code, for target machines (referred
to as "target" for simplicity).
As shown in Fig. 1, mainstream compilers like GCC [18] and LLVM [30] are divided into three parts:
frontend, middle-end and backend. Specifically, the frontend related to programming languages, while
the middle-end comprises of target-independent optimizations, and backend converts intermediate
representation produced by the middle-end into machine code for various targets. The flourishing
development of new processors nowadays demands continuous development for backends.
Compiler backend development necessitates a profound understanding of the target characteristics and
the compiler infrastructure [19]. Thus, it entails prolonged development cycles and substantial manual
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

