ElasTST: Towards Robust Varied-Horizon
Forecasting with Elastic Time-Series Transformer
Jiawen Zhang∗
DSA, HKUST(GZ)
Guangzhou, China
jiawe.zh@gmail.com
Xiaofang Zhou
CSE, HKUST
Hong Kong SAR, China
zxf@ust.hk

Shun Zheng†
Microsoft Research Asia
Beijing, China
shun.zheng@microsoft.com

Xumeng Wen
Microsoft Research Asia
Beijing, China
xumengwen@microsoft.com

Jiang Bian
Microsoft Research Asia
Beijing, China
jiang.bian@microsoft.com

Jia Li†
DSA, HKUST(GZ)
Guangzhou, China
jialee@ust.hk

Abstract
Numerous industrial sectors necessitate models capable of providing robust forecasts across various horizons. Despite the recent strides in crafting speciﬁc architectures for time-series forecasting and developing pre-trained universal models, a comprehensive examination of their capability in accommodating variedhorizon forecasting during inference is still lacking. This paper bridges this
gap through the design and evaluation of the Elastic Time-Series Transformer
(ElasTST). The ElasTST model incorporates a non-autoregressive design with
placeholders and structured self-attention masks, warranting future outputs that
are invariant to adjustments in inference horizons. A tunable version of rotary
position embedding is also integrated into ElasTST to capture time-series-speciﬁc
periods and enhance adaptability to different horizons. Additionally, ElasTST
employs a multi-scale patch design, effectively integrating both ﬁne-grained and
coarse-grained information. During the training phase, ElasTST uses a horizon
reweighting strategy that approximates the effect of random sampling across multiple horizons with a single ﬁxed horizon setting. Through comprehensive experiments and comparisons with state-of-the-art time-series architectures and contemporary foundation models, we demonstrate the efﬁcacy of ElasTST’s unique
design elements. Our ﬁndings position ElasTST as a robust solution for the
practical necessity of varied-horizon forecasting. ElasTST is open-sourced at
https://github.com/microsoft/ProbTS/tree/elastst.

1

Introduction

Time-series forecasting plays a crucial role in diverse industries, where it is essential to provide
forecasts over various time horizons, accommodating both short-term and long-term planning requirements. This includes predicting COVID-19 cases and fatalities one and four weeks ahead to
allocate public health resources [7], estimating future electricity demand on an hourly, weekly, or
monthly basis to optimize power management [16], and projecting both immediate and long-term
trafﬁc conditions for efﬁcient road management [2, 27], among others.
∗
†

This work was done during the internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

