S IRIUS: Contextual Sparsity with Correction
for Efficient LLMs
Yang Zhou1 , Zhuoming Chen1 , Zhaozhuo Xu2 , Xi Victoria Lin3 , Beidi Chen1,3
1
Carnegie Mellon Univeristy
2
Stevens Institute of Technology
3
FAIR at Meta
{yangzho6, zhuominc, beidic}@andrew.cmu.edu
zxu79@stevens.edu victorialin@meta.com

Abstract
With the blossom of large language models (LLM), inference efficiency becomes
increasingly important. Various approximate methods are proposed to reduce the
cost at inference time. Contextual Sparsity (CS) is appealing for its training-free
nature and its ability to reach a higher compression ratio seemingly without
significant performance degradation. However, after a comprehensive evaluation
of contextual sparsity methods on various complex generation tasks, we find that
although CS succeeds in prompt-understanding tasks, it significantly degrades
the model performance for reasoning, deduction, and knowledge-based tasks.
Despite the gap in end-to-end accuracy, we observed that sparse models and original
models often share the general problem-solving logic and require only a few token
corrections to recover the original model performance. This paper introduces
S IRIUS1 , an efficient correction mechanism, which significantly boosts CS models
on reasoning tasks while maintaining its efficiency gain. S IRIUS is evaluated on
6 models with 8 difficult generation tasks in reasoning, deduction, and coding
and shows consistent effectiveness and efficiency. Also, we carefully develop a
system implementation for S IRIUS and show that S IRIUS delivers theoretical latency
reduction with roughly 20% reduction in latency for 8B model on-chip and 35%
reduction in latency for 70B model offloading. We open-source our implementation
of Sirius at https://github.com/Infini-AI-Lab/Sirius.git.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLM), such as OpenAI et al. (2024) (GPT-4), Team et al. (2024) (Gemini),
and Touvron et al. (2023) (Llama) have demonstrated their proficiency in a wide range of natural
language processing applications such as content creation, summarization, and impressive and complex
reasoning tasks. However, their deployment is very challenging, especially in latency-sensitive
settings (Kaplan et al., 2020). Exploiting the model sparsity is a natural way to reduce the model
parameter size and computational cost with a long history (LeCun et al., 1989; Tibshirani, 1996). More
recently, many studies have shown that contextual sparsity (Liu et al., 2023b; Li et al., 2022; Dong
et al., 2024; Lee et al., 2024), which highly correlates to the prompt or the context, can greatly speed
up LLM inference without quality degradation.
However, in this paper, we first demonstrate a critical and fundamental problem with contextual
sparsity (CS): while generally robust in classification tasks and generation tasks that mainly rely on
prompt understanding (e.g., summarization, chat question-answering), we found that CS models
struggle at high-level reasoning and understanding tasks.
1
We draw inspiration from the astronomical concept, in which S IRIUS refers to a two-body star system, where
one is the brightest star ever detected, while the other is a dim star.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

