B I VLC: Extending Vision-Language Compositionality
Evaluation with Text-to-Image Retrieval

Imanol Miranda Ander Salaberria Eneko Agirre Gorka Azkune
HiTZ Center – Ixa, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU)
{imanol.miranda, ander.salaberria, e.agirre, gorka.azcune}@ehu.eus

Abstract
Existing Vision-Language Compositionality (VLC) benchmarks like S UGAR C REPE are formulated as image-to-text retrieval problems, where, given an image,
the models need to select between the correct textual description and a synthetic
hard negative text. In this work, we present the Bidirectional Vision-Language Compositionality (B I VLC) dataset. The novelty of B I VLC is to add a synthetic hard
negative image generated from the synthetic text, resulting in two image-to-text
retrieval examples (one for each image) and, more importantly, two text-to-image
retrieval examples (one for each text). Human annotators filter out ill-formed examples ensuring the validity of the benchmark. The experiments on B I VLC uncover
a weakness of current multimodal models, as they perform poorly in the text-toimage direction. In fact, when considering both retrieval directions, the conclusions
obtained in previous works change significantly. In addition to the benchmark, we
show that a contrastive model trained using synthetic images and texts significantly
improves over the base model in S UGAR C REPE and in B I VLC for both retrieval directions. The gap to human performance in B I VLC confirms that Vision-Language
Compositionality is still a challenging problem. B I VLC and code are available at
https://imirandam.github.io/BiVLC_project_page.

1

Introduction

Vision-Language Compositionality (VLC) refers to the ability to discern whether the composition
of a given set of elements is the same for an image and a text. For example, assuming an image
depicts a black dog and a white cat, but the text states that there is a white dog and a black cat,
both compositions do not match. VLC performance is usually evaluated on image-to-text retrieval
datasets[Hsieh et al., 2024, Ma et al., 2023, Yuksekgonul et al., 2022]: given an image and some
textual descriptions, a model has to retrieve the description which matches the image. The candidates
include hard negative distractors which differ from the correct description only in compositional
details. However, there is no theoretical reason to favour image-to-text retrieval over text-to-image
retrieval. The dominant use of the former lies probably on practical reasons, i.e. it is much easier to
collect hard negative texts than hard negative images.
In this paper, we propose a semi-automatic method to generate an evaluation dataset for VLC that
includes image-to-text and text-to-image retrieval (referred as I2T and T2I respectively). We refer
to this problem bidirectional Vision-Language Compositionality, since it combines both retrieval
directions. For that purpose, we extend the S UGAR C REPE dataset [Hsieh et al., 2024], the reference
benchmark for image-to-text retrieval-based VLC. We leverage the hard negative textual descriptions
provided in the dataset and, for every hard negative text, we generate four candidate images using
off-the-shelf text-to-image generators. We ask human annotators to select the image that better
describes the text and to discard those instances where no image is correct. In a second annotation
step, we ask annotators to remove instances where the generated image matches both captions,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

