Robust Neural Contextual Bandit against
Adversarial Corruptions

Yunzhe Qi, Yikun Ban, Arindam Banerjee, Jingrui He
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Champaign, IL 61820
{yunzheq2,yikunb2,arindamb,jingrui}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Contextual bandit algorithms aim to identify the optimal arm with the highest
reward among a set of candidates, based on the accessible contextual information.
Among these algorithms, neural contextual bandit methods have shown generally
superior performances against linear and kernel ones, due to the representation
power of neural networks. However, similar to other neural network applications,
neural bandit algorithms can be vulnerable to adversarial attacks or corruptions on
the received labels (i.e., arm rewards), which can lead to unexpected performance
degradation without proper treatments. As a result, it is necessary to improve the robustness of neural bandit models against potential reward corruptions. In this work,
we propose a novel neural contextual bandit algorithm named R-NeuralUCB, which
utilizes a novel context-aware Gradient Descent (GD) training strategy to improve
the robustness against adversarial reward corruptions. Under over-parameterized
neural network settings, we provide regret analysis for R-NeuralUCB to quantify
reward corruption impacts, without the commonly adopted arm separateness assumption in existing neural bandit works. We also conduct experiments against
baselines on real data sets under different scenarios, in order to demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposed R-NeuralUCB.

1

Introduction

Contextual bandits refer to one specific type of multi-armed bandit (MAB) problems, where the
learner can access the arm context information during the decision-making process. Contextual bandit
algorithms have been commonly applied in various real-world applications, including online content
recommendation [59, 79, 8], and medical experiments [30, 73, 7]. While these algorithms have been
proved effective for numerous online learning tasks, they can be susceptible to the malicious feedback
from the environment, such as malicious user feedback in recommender systems [64], and corrupted
labels under active learning settings [61]. This can potentially impair the model performance and
interfere with the internal decision-making logic. One renowned research direction formulates this
problem as contextual bandits with adversarial corruptions [57, 42, 16], where received arm rewards
can be potentially “corrupted” by the unknown adversary. In this case, bandit algorithms need to be
robust against such adversarial corruptions, otherwise they can lead to sub-optimal results. Existing
works on contextual bandits with corruptions are mainly based on linear [17, 29, 57] and kernelized
bandits [15, 16], where the unknown reward mapping function is assumed to be linear, or lies in
a specified Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS). However, one key challenge is that these
assumptions can evidently fail under real-world application scenarios [86], when we have little prior
knowledge regarding this mapping function, or it becomes increasingly complex.
In the face of this challenge, neural bandit algorithms [86, 84, 11, 12] have been proposed to relax the
assumptions on reward functions. By leveraging the representation power of neural networks, neural
contextual bandit algorithms are able to deal with complex reward functions irrespective of whether
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

