MMSite: A Multi-modal Framework for the
Identification of Active Sites in Proteins
Song Ouyang1 Huiyu Cai2,3,4 Yong Luo1∗ Kehua Su1∗ Lefei Zhang1 Bo Du1
School of Computer Science, National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software
and Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University, China
2
BioGeometry, China 3 Mila - Québec AI Institute, Canada 4 Université de Montréal, Canada
{ouyangsong,luoyong,skh,zhanglefei,dubo}@whu.edu.cn
huiyu.cai@mila.quebec
1

Abstract
The accurate identification of active sites in proteins is essential for the advancement of life sciences and pharmaceutical development, as these sites are of critical
importance for enzyme activity and drug design. Recent advancements in protein
language models (PLMs), trained on extensive datasets of amino acid sequences,
have significantly improved our understanding of proteins. However, compared
to the abundant protein sequence data, functional annotations, especially precise
per-residue annotations, are scarce, which limits the performance of PLMs. On
the other hand, textual descriptions of proteins, which could be annotated by human experts or a pretrained protein sequence-to-text model, provide meaningful
context that could assist in the functional annotations, such as the localization
of active sites. This motivates us to construct a ProTein-Attribute text Dataset
(ProTAD), comprising over 570,000 pairs of protein sequences and multi-attribute
textual descriptions. Based on this dataset, we propose MMSite, a multi-modal
framework that improves the performance of PLMs to identify active sites by leveraging biomedical language models (BLMs). In particular, we incorporate manual
prompting and design a MACross module to deal with the multi-attribute characteristics of textual descriptions. MMSite is a two-stage (“First Align, Then Fuse”)
framework: first aligns the textual modality with the sequential modality through
soft-label alignment, and then identifies active sites via multi-modal fusion. Experimental results demonstrate that MMSite achieves state-of-the-art performance
compared to existing protein representation learning methods. The dataset and code
implementation are available at https://github.com/Gift-OYS/MMSite.

1

Introduction

The identification of active sites in proteins is crucial for advancing fields such as life sciences
and pharmaceutical development. Active sites are specific regions within a protein where substrate
molecules undergo chemical transformations. Understanding these sites is essential for elucidating enzyme mechanisms, designing inhibitors, and developing novel drugs. Traditionally, the recognition of
these sites relied on crystallographic techniques, mass spectrometry, and other labor-intensive experiments. Recently, the advent of deep learning has marked in a new era of bioinformatics, significantly
enhancing the capabilities for predicting and analyzing protein functions computationally.
Recent advancements in natural language processing (NLP), particularly with the introduction of
large-scale language models (LLMs) [39] [54] [53], have revolutionized the interpretation of complex
data. Inspired by these developments, protein language models [12] [2], trained on extensive datasets
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

