Separation and Bias of Deep Equilibrium Models on
Expressivity and Learning Dynamics

Zhoutong Wu1
ztwu@stu.pku.edu.cn

Yimu Zhang2
zym24@stu.pku.edu.cn

†

†

Cong Fang2,3
fangcong@pku.edu.cn

2

Zhouchen Lin2,3,4
zlin@pku.edu.cn

1
Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University
State Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
4
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu), Guangzhou, Guangdong, China

Abstract
The deep equilibrium model (DEQ) generalizes the conventional feedforward
neural network by fixing the same weights for each layer block and extending
the number of layers to infinity. This novel model directly finds the fixed points
of such a forward process as features for prediction. Despite empirical evidence
showcasing its efficacy compared to feedforward neural networks, a theoretical
understanding for its separation and bias is still limited. In this paper, we take a
step by proposing some separations and studying the bias of DEQ in its expressive
power and learning dynamics. The results include: (1) A general separation is
proposed, showing the existence of a width-m DEQ that any fully connected neural
networks (FNNs) with depth O(mα ) for α ∈ (0, 1) cannot approximate unless
its width is sub-exponential in m; (2) DEQ with polynomially bounded size and
magnitude can efficiently approximate certain steep functions (which has very large
derivatives) in L∞ norm, whereas FNN with bounded depth and exponentially
bounded width cannot unless its weights magnitudes are exponentially large; (3)
The implicit regularization caused by gradient flow from a diagonal linear DEQ
is characterized, with specific examples showing the benefits brought by such
regularization. From the overall study, a high-level conjecture from our analysis
and empirical validations is that DEQ has potential advantages in learning certain
high-frequency components.

1

Introduction

Implicit deep learning [1], a paradigm that generalizes the recursive principles of traditional explicit
models, has gained renewed interest with the advent of novel neural network architectures. Among
these, deep equilibrium model (DEQ) [2] stands out as a commonly utilized model. In contrast to
explicit neural network that derives features through forward propagation, DEQ computes features
directly by solving an equilibrium equation induced by the implicit layer. Since the equilibrium state
is also the limit point of the infinitely recursive iterations of the implicit layer, DEQ can be regarded
as a new neural network that models the limit of a multi-layer weight-tied neural network with the
depth going to infinity.
†

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

