A Closer Look at AUROC and AUPRC
under Class Imbalance
Matthew B. McDermott
Harvard Medical School
matthew_mcdermott@hms.harvard.edu
Lasse Hyldig Hansen
Aarhus University
201908623@post.au.dk

Haoran Zhang
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
haoranz@mit.edu

Giovanni Angelotti
IRCCS Humanitas Research Hospital
giovanni.angelotti@humanitas.it

Jack Gallifant
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
jgally@mit.edu

Abstract
In machine learning (ML), a widespread claim is that the area under the precisionrecall curve (AUPRC) is a superior metric for model comparison to the area under
the receiver operating characteristic (AUROC) for tasks with class imbalance. This
paper refutes this notion on two fronts. First, we theoretically characterize the
behavior of AUROC and AUPRC in the presence of model mistakes, establishing
clearly that AUPRC is not generally superior in cases of class imbalance. We
further show that AUPRC can be a harmful metric as it can unduly favor model
improvements in subpopulations with more frequent positive labels, heightening
algorithmic disparities. Next, we empirically support our theory using experiments
on both semi-synthetic and real-world fairness datasets. Prompted by these insights,
we reviewed over 1.5 million scientific papers to understand the origin of this invalid
claim–finding it is often made without citation, misattributed to papers that do
not argue this point, and aggressively overgeneralized from source arguments.
Our findings represent a dual contribution: a significant technical advancement in
understanding the relationship between AUROC and AUPRC and a stark warning
about unchecked assumptions in the ML community.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML), especially in critical domains like healthcare, necessitates careful selection
and application of evaluation metrics to guide appropriate model choices and understand performance
nuances [150]. Model evaluation can happen in one of two settings: (1) a methodological/model
comparison setting, which occurs outside of a specific deployment setting and in which target model
usage workflows, optimal decision thresholds, or specific false-positive (FP) and false-negative (FN)
costs are typically not known, or (2) an application/deployment setting, where reasonably specific
estimates of model usage workflows and FP/FN costs can be made. In both settings, appropriate
metric choice is critical, as inappropriate selection can hinder innovation when used for model
comparison and lead to significant real-world costs (e.g., misdiagnosis in a medical setting) in
deployment settings.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

