Beating Adversarial Low-Rank MDPs with
Unknown Transition and Bandit Feedback
Haolin Liu∗
University of Virginia
srs8rh@virginia.edu

Zakaria Mhammedi∗
Google Research
mhammedi@google.com

Chen-Yu Wei∗
University of Virginia
chenyu.wei@virginia.edu

Julian Zimmert∗
Google Research
zimmert@google.com

Abstract
We consider regret minimization in low-rank MDPs with fixed transition and
adversarial losses. Previous work has investigated this problem under either fullinformation loss feedback with unknown transitions (Zhao et al., 2024), or bandit
loss feedback with known transition (Foster et al., 2022). First, we improve the
5
2
poly(d, A, H)T /6 regret bound of Zhao et al. (2024) to poly(d, A, H)T /3 for the
full-information unknown transition setting, where d is the rank of the transitions,
A is the number of actions, H is the horizon length, and T is the number of
episodes. Next, we initiate the study on the setting with bandit loss feedback and
unknown transitions. Assuming that the loss has a linear structure, we propose
2
both model-based and model-free algorithms achieving poly(d, A, H)T /3 regret,
though they are computationally inefficient. We also propose oracle-efficient model4
free algorithms with poly(d, A, H)T /5 regret. We show that the linear structure
is necessary for the bandit case—without structure on the reward function, the
regret has to scale polynomially with the number of states. This is contrary to the
full-information case (Zhao et al., 2024), where the regret can be independent of
the number of states even for unstructured reward function.

1

Introduction

We study online reinforcement learning (RL) in low-rank Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). Lowrank MDPs is a class of MDPs where the transition probability can be decomposed as an inner product
between two low-dimensional features, i.e., P (x′ ∣ x, a) = ϕ⋆ (x, a)⊺ µ⋆ (x′ ), where P (x′ ∣ x, a) is
the probability of transitioning to state x′ when the learner takes action a on state x, and ϕ⋆ , µ⋆ are
two feature mappings. The ground truth features ϕ⋆ and µ⋆ are unknown to the learner. This setting
has recently caught theoretical attention due to its simplicity and expressiveness (Agarwal et al.,
2020; Uehara et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022a; Cheng et al., 2023; Modi et al., 2024; Zhang et al.,
2022b; Mhammedi et al., 2024a; Huang et al., 2023). In particular, since the learner does not know
the features, it is necessary for the learner to perform feature learning (or representation learning)
to approximate them. This allows low-rank MDPs to model the additional difficulty not present in
traditional linear function approximation schemes where the features are given, such as in linear
MDPs (Jin et al., 2020b) and in linear mixture MDPs (Ayoub et al., 2020). Since feature learning
is an indispensable part of modern deep RL pipelines, low-rank MDP is a model that is closer to
practice than traditional linear function approximation.
∗

The authors are listed in alphabetical order.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

