Learning Formal Mathematics
From Intrinsic Motivation
Gabriel Poesia1
David Broman4
Nick Haber1,3
Noah D. Goodman1,2
{poesia,nhaber,ngoodman}@stanford.edu
dbro@kth.se
Departments of Computer Science1 , Psychology2 and Education3 , Stanford University, USA
EECS and Digital Futures4 , KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden

Abstract
How did humanity coax mathematics from the æther? We explore the Platonic
view that mathematics can be discovered from its axioms—a game of conjecture
and proof. We describe M INIMO (Mathematics from Intrinsic Motivation): an
agent that jointly learns to pose challenging problems for itself (conjecturing)
and solve them (theorem proving). Given a mathematical domain axiomatized in
dependent type theory, we first combine methods for constrained decoding and
type-directed synthesis to sample valid conjectures from a language model. Our
method guarantees well-formed conjectures by construction, even as we start with a
randomly initialized model. We use the same model to represent a policy and value
function for guiding proof search. Our agent targets generating hard but provable
conjectures—a moving target, since its own theorem proving ability also improves
as it trains. We propose novel methods for hindsight relabeling on proof search trees
to significantly improve the agent’s sample efficiency in both tasks. Experiments on
3 axiomatic domains (propositional logic, arithmetic and group theory) demonstrate
that our agent can bootstrap from only the axioms, self-improving in generating
true and challenging conjectures and in finding proofs.

1

Introduction

Mathematical reasoning stands as a grand challenge for Artificial Intelligence (AI) research since the
birth of the field [25]. Artificial agents capable of general mathematical reasoning have the potential
to drastically impact both mathematics itself and areas where mathematical proof plays a key role,
such as program and hardware verification [4]. While this goal has received significant attention
from the AI community [22, 46, 30, 42], it still remains far from the breakthroughs that areas such as
general game playing [36], image [32] generation or protein folding [35] have witnessed.
Prior work has reflected two main visions of how AI might achieve general mathematical reasoning abilities. One such strategy is to leverage all of the available human-produced mathematical
knowledge as a starting point [31]. This knowledge is encoded in source as varied as textbooks,
online forums, academic papers, as well as formal proofs written in computer languages such as
Lean, Isabelle, Coq or Metamath [2]. Large Language Models (LLMs) can ingest all such sources
of knowledge in a unified manner, and provide a foundation for tasks in both formal and informal
mathematics. Benchmarks of mathematical problem solving in natural language, such as GSM8k [10]
and MATH [15], have measured rapid progress over the years, but they remain limited to problems
where the final answer is a number, due to the challenge of assessing the correctness of mathematical
arguments written in natural language. This difficulty is not a challenge in formal theorem proving,
where we can automatically verify the correctness of proofs in arbitrarily high-level mathematics. But
benchmarks of formal theorem proving (such as minif2f [46] and LeanDojo [44]), even with rapid
advances in LLMs, have not yet witnessed the same breakthroughs. In fact, these benchmarks remain
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

