OpenDlign: Open-World Point Cloud Understanding
with Depth-Aligned Images

Junpeng Jing∗ Krystian Mikolajczyk
Imperial College London
https://yebulabula.github.io/OpenDlign/
{ye.mao21, j.jing23, k.mikolajczyk}@imperial.ac.uk
Ye Mao

Abstract
Recent open-world 3D representation learning methods using Vision-Language
Models (VLMs) to align 3D point clouds with image-text information have shown
superior 3D zero-shot performance. However, CAD-rendered images for this alignment often lack realism and texture variation, compromising alignment robustness.
Moreover, the volume discrepancy between 3D and 2D pretraining datasets highlights the need for effective strategies to transfer the representational abilities of
VLMs to 3D learning. In this paper, we present OpenDlign, a novel open-world
3D model using depth-aligned images generated from a diffusion model for robust
multimodal alignment. These images exhibit greater texture diversity than CAD
renderings due to the stochastic nature of the diffusion model. By refining the
depth map projection pipeline and designing depth-specific prompts, OpenDlign
leverages rich knowledge in pre-trained VLM for 3D representation learning with
streamlined fine-tuning. Our experiments show that OpenDlign achieves high
zero-shot and few-shot performance on diverse 3D tasks, despite only fine-tuning
6 million parameters on a limited ShapeNet dataset. In zero-shot classification,
OpenDlign surpasses previous models by 8.0% on ModelNet40 and 16.4% on OmniObject3D. Additionally, using depth-aligned images for multimodal alignment
consistently enhances the performance of other state-of-the-art models.

1

Introduction

3D understanding, including tasks like 3D object classification [1, 2], 3D scene segmentation
[3], and 3D reconstruction [4, 5], is becoming increasingly pivotal in real-world applications like
augmented/virtual reality [6, 7], autonomous vehicles [8]. Traditional 3D models [1, 2, 9, 10, 11]
are closed-world, recognizing only pre-defined categories and struggling with ‘unseen’ ones. Recent
studies aim to leverage Vision-Language Models (e.g., CLIP [12]) to develop open-world 3D models
that generalize beyond ‘seen’ 3D data, enabling zero-shot handling of various 3D tasks.
Existing open-world 3D learning methods can be classified into depth-based and point-based approaches. Depth-based methods [13, 14, 15] convert point clouds into multi-view depth maps and
use the pre-trained CLIP image encoder for 3D representations. A significant challenge is the domain
gap since CLIP is pre-trained on RGB images, not depth maps. To mitigate this gap, methods like
[15] introduce an additional depth encoder to align depth features with the image and text features
from the pre-trained CLIP encoders, as shown in Fig. 1(a). The images used for feature alignment are
produced by rendering synthetic CAD models from various camera viewpoints. Point-based methods
[16, 17, 18, 19, 20] directly extract 3D representations from point clouds, thereby bypassing the need
for depth map projection. However, they also require an extra point encoder for feature alignment to
address format disparities between images and point clouds, as shown in Fig. 1(b). Thus, employing
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

