Reverse Transition Kernel: A Flexible Framework to
Accelerate Diffusion Inference
Xunpeng Huang
HKUST
xhuangck@connect.ust.hk

Difan Zou
HKU
dzou@cs.hku.hk

Hanze Dong
Salesforce AI Research
hanze.dong@salesforce.com

Yi Zhang
HKU
yizhang101@connect.hku.hk

Yian Ma
UC San Diego
yianma@ucsd.edu

Tong Zhang
UIUC
tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org

Abstract
To generate data from trained diffusion models, most inference algorithms, such as
DDPM [17], DDIM [31], and other variants, rely on discretizing the reverse SDEs
or their equivalent ODEs. In this paper, we view such approaches as decomposing
the entire denoising diffusion process into several segments, each corresponding to
a reverse transition kernel (RTK) sampling subproblem. Specifically, DDPM uses a
Gaussian approximation for the RTK, resulting in low per-subproblem complexity
but requiring a large number of segments (i.e., subproblems), which is conjectured
to be inefficient. To address this, we develop a general RTK framework that enables
a more balanced subproblem decomposition, resulting in Õ(1) subproblems,
each with strongly log-concave targets. We then propose leveraging two fast
sampling algorithms, the Metropolis-Adjusted Langevin Algorithm (MALA) and
Underdamped Langevin Dynamics (ULD), for solving these strongly log-concave
subproblems. This gives rise to the RTK-MALA and RTK-ULD algorithms for
diffusion inference. In theory, we further develop the convergence guarantees
for RTK-MALA and RTK-ULD in total variation (TV) distance: RTK-ULD
can achieve ϵ target error within Õ(d1/2 ϵ−1 ) under mild conditions, and RTKMALA enjoys a O(d2 log(d/ϵ)) convergence rate under slightly stricter conditions.
These theoretical results surpass the state-of-the-art convergence rates for diffusion
inference and are well supported by numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Generative models have become a core task in modern machine learning, where the neural networks
are employed to learn the underlying distribution from training examples and generate new data points.
Among various generative models, denoising diffusions have produced state-of-the-art performance in
many domains, including image and text generation [14, 2, 28, 29], text-to-speech synthesis [27], and
scientific tasks [34, 37, 5]. The fundamental idea involves incrementally adding noise and gradually
transform the data distribution to a prior distribution that is easier to sample from, e.g., Gaussian
distribution. Then, diffusion models parameterize and learn the score of the noised distributions to
progressively denoise samples from priors and recover the data distribution [36, 32].
Under this paradigm, generating data in denoising diffusion models involves solving a series of
sampling subproblems, i.e., generating samples from the distribution after one-step denoising. To
this end, DDPM [17], one of the most popular sampling methods in diffusion models, has been
developed for this purpose. DDPM uses the Gaussian transition with carefully designed mean and
covariance to approximate the solutions to these sampling subproblems. By sequentially stacking
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

