Optimizing Automatic Differentiation
with Deep Reinforcement Learning

Jamie Lohoff
Peter Grünberg Institute
Forschungszentrum Jülich & RWTH Aachen
ja.lohoff@fz-juelich.de

Emre Neftci
Peter Grünberg Institute
Forschungszentrum Jülich & RWTH Aachen
e.neftci@fz-juelich.de

Abstract
Computing Jacobians with automatic differentiation is ubiquitous in many scientific
domains such as machine learning, computational fluid dynamics, robotics, and
finance. Even small savings in the number of computations or memory usage in
Jacobian computations can already incur massive savings in energy consumption
and runtime. While there exist many methods that allow for such savings, they
generally trade computational efficiency for approximations of the exact Jacobian.
In this paper, we present a novel method to optimize the number of necessary
multiplications for Jacobian computation by leveraging deep reinforcement learning
(RL) and a concept called cross-country elimination while still computing the exact
Jacobian. Cross-country elimination is a framework for automatic differentiation
that phrases Jacobian accumulation as ordered elimination of all vertices on the
computational graph where every elimination incurs a certain computational cost.
We formulate the search for the optimal elimination order that minimizes the
number of necessary multiplications as a single player game which is played by
an RL agent. We demonstrate that this method achieves up to 33% improvements
over state-of-the-art methods on several relevant tasks taken from diverse domains.
Furthermore, we show that these theoretical gains translate into actual runtime
improvements by providing a cross-country elimination interpreter in JAX that can
efficiently execute the obtained elimination orders.

1

Introduction

Automatic Differentiation (AD) is widely utilized for computing gradients and Jacobians across
diverse domains including machine learning (ML), computational fluid dynamics (CFD), robotics,
differential rendering, and finance [Baydin et al., 2018, Margossian, 2018, Forth et al., 2004a,
Tadjouddine et al., 2002b, Giftthaler et al., 2017, Kato et al., 2020, Schmidt et al., 2022, Capriotti and
Giles, 2011, Savine and Andreasen, 2021]. To many researchers in the machine learning community,
AD is synonymous with the backpropagation algorithm [Linnainmaa, 1976, Schmidhuber, 2014].
However, backpropagation is just one particular way of algorithmically computing the Jacobian that
is very efficient in terms of computations for “funnel-like” functions, i.e. with many inputs and a
single scalar output such as in neural networks. In many other domains, we may find functions that
do not have this particular property and thus backpropagation might not be optimal for computing the
respective Jacobian [Albrecht et al., 2003, Capriotti and Giles, 2011, Naumann, 2020]. In fact, there
exists a wide variety of AD algorithms, each of them coming with its own advantages and drawbacks
regarding computational cost and memory consumption depending on the function they are applied to.
Many of these AD algorithms can be viewed as special cases of cross-country elimination [Griewank
and Walther, 2008]. Cross-County Elimination frames AD as an ordered vertex elimination problem
on the computational graph with the goal of reducing the required number of multiplications and
additions. However, finding the optimal elimination procedure is a NP-complete problem [Naumann,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

