LoRA-GA: Low-Rank Adaptation with Gradient
Approximation

Shaowen Wang
wangsw23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Linxi Yu
yulx23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Jian Li ∗
lijian83@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Abstract
Fine-tuning large-scale pretrained models is prohibitively expensive in terms of
computational and memory costs. LoRA, as one of the most popular ParameterEfficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) methods, offers a cost-effective alternative by finetuning an auxiliary low-rank model that has significantly fewer parameters. Although LoRA reduces the computational and memory requirements significantly
at each iteration, extensive empirical evidence indicates that it converges at a considerably slower rate compared to full fine-tuning, ultimately leading to increased
overall compute and often worse test performance. In our paper, we perform an
in-depth investigation of the initialization method of LoRA and show that careful
initialization (without any change of the architecture and the training algorithm) can
significantly enhance both efficiency and performance. In particular, we introduce
a novel initialization method, LoRA-GA (Low Rank Adaptation with Gradient
Approximation), which aligns the gradients of low-rank matrix product with those
of full fine-tuning at the first step. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that
LoRA-GA achieves a convergence rate comparable to that of full fine-tuning (hence
being significantly faster than vanilla LoRA as well as various recent improvements) while simultaneously attaining comparable or even better performance. For
example, on the subset of the GLUE dataset with T5-Base, LoRA-GA outperforms
LoRA by 5.69% on average. On larger models such as Llama 2-7B, LoRA-GA
shows performance improvements of 0.34, 11.52%, and 5.05% on MT-bench,
GSM8K, and Human-eval, respectively. Additionally, we observe up to 2-4 times
convergence speed improvement compared to vanilla LoRA, validating its effectiveness in accelerating convergence and enhancing model performance. Code is
available at code.

1

Introduction

Fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) is essential for enabling advanced techniques such as
instruction fine-tuning [1], reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) [2], and adapting
models to specific downstream applications. However, the computational and storage costs associated
with full fine-tuning are prohibitively high, particularly as model sizes continue to grow. To address
these challenges, methods of Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) (see e.g., [3]), such as LowRank Adaptation (LoRA) [4], have emerged and gained significant attention.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

