Derivative-enhanced Deep Operator Network

Yuan Qiu, Nolan Bridges, Peng Chen
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332
{yuan.qiu, bridges, pchen402}@gatech.edu

Abstract
The deep operator networks (DeepONet), a class of neural operators that learn
mappings between function spaces, have recently been developed as surrogate models for parametric partial differential equations (PDEs). In this work we propose
a derivative-enhanced deep operator network (DE-DeepONet), which leverages
derivative information to enhance the solution prediction accuracy and provides a
more accurate approximation of solution-to-parameter derivatives, especially when
training data are limited. DE-DeepONet explicitly incorporates linear dimension
reduction of high dimensional parameter input into DeepONet to reduce training
cost and adds derivative loss in the loss function to reduce the number of required
parameter-solution pairs. We further demonstrate that the use of derivative loss can
be extended to enhance other neural operators, such as the Fourier neural operator
(FNO). Numerical experiments validate the effectiveness of our approach.

1

Introduction

Using neural networks to approximate the maps between functions spaces governed by parametric
PDEs can be very beneficial in solving many-query problems, typically arising from Bayesian
inference, optimization under uncertainty, and Bayesian optimal experimental design. Indeed, once
pre-trained on a dataset, neural networks are extremely fast to evaluate given unseen inputs, compared
to traditional numerical methods like the finite element method. Recently various neural operators
are proposed to enhance the learning capacity, with two prominent examples deep operator network
(DeepONet) [1] and Fourier neural operator (FNO) [2], which are shown to be inclusive of each
other in their more general settings [3, 4], see also their variants and other related neural operator
architectures in [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. Though these work demonstrate to be successful in approximating
the output function, they do not necessarily provide accurate approximation of the derivative of the
output with respect to the input, which are often needed for many downstream tasks such as PDEconstrained optimization problems for control, inference, and experimental design [11, 12, 13, 14].
In this paper, we propose to enhance the performance of DeepONet through derivative-based dimension reduction for the function input inspired by [15, 16, 17, 18] and the incorporation of derivative
information in the training to learn both the output and its derivative with respect to the input inspired
by [19, 20]. These two derivative-enhanced approaches can significantly improve DeepONet’s approximation accuracy for the output function and its directional derivative with respect to the input
function, especially when the training samples are limited. We provide details on the computation of
derivative labels of the solution of PDEs in a general form as well as the derivative-based dimension
reduction to largely reduce the computational cost. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
method (DE-DeepONet) compared to three other neural operators, including DeepONet, FNO, and
derivative-informed neural operator (DINO) [20], in terms of both test errors and computational cost.
In addition, we apply derivative learning to train the FNO and also compare its performance with
other methods. The code for data generation, model training and inference, as well as configurations
to reproduce the results in this paper can be found at https://github.com/qy849/DE-DeepONet.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

