Stabilizing Linear Passive-Aggressive Online Learning
with Weighted Reservoir Sampling

Skyler Wu
Booz Allen Hamilton
Harvard University
Stanford University
wu_skyler@bah.com

Fred Lu
Booz Allen Hamilton
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
lu_fred@bah.com

Edward Raff
Booz Allen Hamilton
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
raff_edward@bah.com

James Holt
Laboratory for Physical Sciences
holt@lps.umd.edu

Abstract
Online learning methods, like the seminal Passive-Aggressive (PA) classifier, are
still highly effective for high-dimensional streaming data, out-of-core processing,
and other throughput-sensitive applications. Many such algorithms rely on fast
adaptation to individual errors as a key to their convergence. While such algorithms
enjoy low theoretical regret, in real-world deployment they can be sensitive to
individual outliers that cause the algorithm to over-correct. When such outliers
occur at the end of the data stream, this can cause the final solution to have
unexpectedly low accuracy. We design a weighted reservoir sampling (WRS)
approach to obtain a stable ensemble model from the sequence of solutions without
requiring additional passes over the data, hold-out sets, or a growing amount of
memory. Our key insight is that good solutions tend to be error-free for more
iterations than bad solutions, and thus, the number of passive rounds provides an
estimate of a solution’s relative quality. Our reservoir thus contains K previous
intermediate weight vectors with high survival times. We demonstrate our WRS
approach on the Passive-Aggressive Classifier (PAC) and First-Order Sparse Online
Learning (FSOL), where our method consistently and significantly outperforms the
unmodified approach. We show that the risk of the ensemble classifier is bounded
with respect to the regret of the underlying online learning method.

1

Introduction

Online learning algorithms are especially attractive when working with high-volume and highdimensional streaming data, out-of-core processing, and other throughput-sensitive applications [1].
For example, the seminal Vowpal Wabbit uses importance-weighted online learning algorithms [2]
to reach high quality solutions quickly, with an optional second pass using LBFGS to refine the
solution. The MOA library still uses the Pegasos algorithm as its linear classifier [3]. Most relevantly,
online learning algorithms are particularly appealing for binary classification tasks, such as web spam
classification [1]. Such algorithms often enjoy fast theoretical convergence rates due to their fast
adaptation to errors on individual data points, as opposed to batch or offline learning.
However, in real-world deployment, online algorithms can be very sensitive to noisy observations
in the data stream and over-correct, resulting in out-of-sample performance dropping precipitously between timesteps. Indeed, in many cases (see Figure 1), an online learning algorithm might
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

