DropEdge not Foolproof: Effective Augmentation
Method for Signed Graph Neural Networks

Zeyu Zhang1,2 , Lu Li2 , Shuyan Wan4 , Sijie Wang3 ,
Zhiyi Wang2 , Zhiyuan Lu2 , Dong Hao4 , Wanli Li1,2∗
1
Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Technology for Agriculture, Ministry of Education
2
College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China
3
The University of Auckland, 4 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
zhangzeyu@mail.hzau.edu.cn, lu123@webmail.hzau.edu.cn,
wanshuyanzzz@163.com, swan387@aucklanduni.ac.nz,1492487431@qq.com,
1953764760@qq.com,haodong@uestc.edu.cn,liwanli@mail.hzau.edu.cn

Abstract
Signed graphs can model friendly or antagonistic relations where edges are annotated with a positive or negative sign. Signed Graph Neural Networks (SGNNs)
have been widely used for signed graph representation learning. While significant progress has been made in SGNNs research, two issues (i.e., graph sparsity
and unbalanced triangles) persist in the current SGNN models. We aim to alleviate these issues through data augmentation (DA) techniques which have demonstrated effectiveness in improving the performance of graph neural networks.
However, most graph augmentation methods are primarily aimed at graph-level
and node-level tasks (e.g., graph classification and node classification) and cannot be directly applied to signed graphs due to the lack of side information (e.g.,
node features and label information) in available real-world signed graph datasets.
Random DropEdge is one of the few DA methods that can be directly used for
signed graph data augmentation, but its effectiveness is still unknown. In this
paper, we are the first to provide the generalization error bound for the SGNN
model and demonstrate from both experimental and theoretical perspectives that
the random DropEdge cannot improve the performance of link sign prediction.
Therefore, we propose a novel Signed Graph Augmentation framework (SGA)
tailored for SGNNs. Specifically, SGA first integrates a structure augmentation
module to detect candidate edges solely based on network information. Furthermore, SGA incorporates a novel strategy to select beneficial candidates. Finally,
SGA introduces a novel data augmentation perspective to enhance the training
process of SGNNs. Experiment results on six real-world datasets demonstrate
that SGA effectively boosts the performance of diverse SGNN models, achieving
improvements of up to 26.2% in F1-micro for SGCN on the Slashdot dataset in the
link sign prediction task. Code and data are available at https://github.com/AlexZeyu/SGA.

1

Introduction

As social networks continue to gain widespread popularity, they foster a multitude of interactions
among individuals, which are later documented within social graphs [1, 2]. While many of these
social interactions denote positive connections, such as liking, trust, and friendship, there are also
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

