S EQUOIA: Scalable and Robust Speculative Decoding

Zhuoming Chen1∗ Avner May2∗ Ruslan Svirschevski3,4∗
Yuhsun Huang1 Max Ryabinin2 Zhihao Jia1 Beidi Chen1,5
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Together AI 3 Yandex
4
National Research University Higher School of Economics 5 FAIR, Meta
zhuominc@andrew.cmu.edu, avner@together.ai, ruslansv@gmail.com
yuhsunh@andrew.cmu.edu, mryab@together.ai, {zhihaoj2,beidic}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
As the usage of large language models (LLMs) grows, it becomes increasingly
important to serve them quickly and efficiently. While speculative decoding has
recently emerged as a promising direction for accelerating LLM serving, existing
methods are limited in their ability to scale to larger speculation budgets and adapt
to different hyperparameters. This paper introduces S EQUOIA, a scalable and robust
algorithm for speculative decoding. To improve scalability, S EQUOIA introduces a
dynamic programming algorithm to find an optimal tree structure for the speculated
tokens. To achieve robust speculative decoding, S EQUOIA uses a novel sampling
and verification method that outperforms prior work across different decoding temperatures. S EQUOIA improves the decoding speed of Llama2-7B, Llama2-13B, and
Vicuna-33B on an A100 GPU by up to 4.04×, 3.73×, and 2.27×. To serve Llama370B-Instruct on a single L40 GPU through offloading, S EQUOIA reduces the pertoken decoding latency to 0.60 s/token, 9.5× faster than DeepSpeed-Zero-Inference.
The code is available at https://github.com/Infini-AI-Lab/Sequoia.

1

Introduction

As large language models (LLMs) gain widespread adoption [3, 43, 7], efficiently serving these LLMs
becomes increasingly important. However, accelerating LLM inference is challenging since generating
a single new token requires accessing all parameters of the LLM [34]. As a result of this I/O bottleneck,
the hardware is poorly utilized during generation. This problem is exacerbated in both small-batch
and offloading-based inference settings, where generating one token takes as much time as processing
a prompt with hundreds or thousands of tokens on modern GPUs.
To address this challenge, recent work has introduced speculative decoding to accelerate LLM
inference while preserving the LLM’s output distribution [24, 5, 28, 40]. These approaches leverage
one or multiple draft models to predict the LLM’s output; the predictions are organized in a token
tree, whose nodes represent different sequences of speculated tokens. The correctness of these
speculated tokens is then verified in parallel through a single forward pass of the LLM. Using a token
tree—instead of a sequence—can increase the number of tokens accepted by the LLM by providing
several options for each token position.
While there are substantial studies on tree-based speculative decoding methods [28, 40], we see in our experiments that they have a couple of limitations. First, we observe that existing token tree construction algorithms perform well for small token trees but are sub-optimal for large tree sizes. For example, SpecInfer constructs a token tree using k independent sequences, a topology that is bounded by the expected
number of tokens it can accept, regardless of the tree size (Figure 1). Second, we observe that existing
token tree sampling and verification algorithms are unable to perform well across inference hyperparam∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

