Provably Efficient Reinforcement Learning with
Multinomial Logit Function Approximation

1

Long-Fei Li1,2 , Yu-Jie Zhang3 , Peng Zhao1,2 , Zhi-Hua Zhou1,2
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
3
The University of Tokyo, Chiba, Japan

Abstract
We study a new class of MDPs that employs multinomial logit (MNL) function
approximation to ensure valid probability distributions over the state space. Despite
its significant benefits, incorporating the non-linear function raises substantial
challenges in both statistical and computational efficiency.
√ The best-known result
of Hwang and Oh [2023] has achieved an e
O(κ−1 dH 2 K) regret upper bound,
where κ is a problem-dependent quantity, d is the feature dimension, H is the
episode length, and K is the number of episodes. However, we observe that
κ−1 exhibits polynomial dependence on the number of reachable states, which
can be as large as the state space size in the worst case and thus undermines
the motivation for function approximation. Additionally, their method requires
storing all historical data and the time complexity scales linearly with the episode
count, which is computationally expensive. In this work,
we propose a statistically
√
2
e
efficient algorithm that achieves a regret of O(dH
K + κ−1 d2 H 2 ), eliminating
the dependence on κ−1 in the dominant term for the first time. We then address the
computational challenges by introducing an enhanced algorithm that achieves the
same regret guarantee but with only constant cost. Finally, we establish the first
lower bound for this problem, justifying the optimality of our results in d and K.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) with function approximation has achieved remarkable success in
various applications involving large state and action spaces, such as games [Silver et al., 2016],
algorithm discovery [Fawzi et al., 2022] and large language models [Ouyang et al., 2022]. Therefore,
establishing the theoretical foundation for RL with function approximation is of great importance.
Recently, there have been many efforts devoted to understanding the linear function approximation,
yielding numerous valuable results [Yang and Wang, 2019, Jin et al., 2020, Ayoub et al., 2020].
While these studies make important steps toward understanding RL with function approximation,
there are still challenges to be solved. In linear function approximation, transitions are assumed
to be linear in feature mappings, such as P(s′ |s, a) = ϕ(s′ |s, a)⊤ θ∗ for linear mixture MDPs and
P(s′ |s, a) = ϕ(s, a)⊤ µ∗ (s′ ) for linear MDPs. Here P(s′ |s, a) is the probability from state s to s′
taking action a, ϕ(s′ |s, a) and ϕ(s, a) are feature mappings, θ∗ and µ∗ (s′ ) are unknown parameters.
However, the transition function is a probability distribution over states, meaning its values must lie
within [0, 1] and sum to 1. Thus, the linearity assumption is restrictive and hard to satisfy in practice.
An algorithm designed for linear MDPs could break down entirely if the underlying MDP is not
linear [Jin et al., 2020]. While some works explore generalized linear [Wang et al., 2021] and general
function approximation [Russo and Roy, 2013, Foster et al., 2021, Chen et al., 2023], they focus on
function approximation for value functions rather than transitions, hence do not tackle this challenge.
Correspondence: Peng Zhao <zhaop@lamda.nju.edu.cn>
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

