R AG C HECKER: A Fine-grained Framework for
Diagnosing Retrieval-Augmented Generation

Dongyu Ru1∗ Lin Qiu1∗ Xiangkun Hu1∗ Tianhang Zhang1∗ Peng Shi1∗
Shuaichen Chang1∗ Cheng Jiayang1† Cunxiang Wang1† Shichao Sun1
Huanyu Li2 Zizhao Zhang1† Binjie Wang1† Jiarong Jiang1 Tong He1
Zhiguo Wang1 Pengfei Liu2 Yue Zhang3 Zheng Zhang1
1

Amazon AWS AI

2

Shanghai Jiaotong University

3

Westlake University

Abstract
Despite Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) showing promising capability in
leveraging external knowledge, a comprehensive evaluation of RAG systems is still
challenging due to the modular nature of RAG, evaluation of long-form responses
and reliability of measurements. In this paper, we propose a fine-grained evaluation
framework, R AG C HECKER, that incorporates a suite of diagnostic metrics for both
the retrieval and generation modules. Meta evaluation verifies that R AG C HECKER
has significantly better correlations with human judgments than other evaluation
metrics. Using R AG C HECKER, we evaluate 8 RAG systems and conduct an indepth analysis of their performance, revealing insightful patterns and trade-offs in
the design choices of RAG architectures. The metrics of R AG C HECKER can guide
researchers and practitioners in developing more effective RAG systems3 .

1

Introduction

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) systems [18, 7] enhance Large Language Models (LLMs) by
incorporating external knowledge bases, enabling more precise and contextually relevant responses [7,
53, 13]. As these systems become integral to a variety of applications [54, 2, 8], it’s imperative to
develop robust and comprehensive evaluation frameworks to assess their performance and identify
areas for improvement. Evaluating RAG systems, however, presents several challenges:
(1) modular complexity: The modular nature of RAG systems, comprising both a retriever and a
generator, complicates the design of effective evaluation metrics. It is crucial to establish metrics
that can holistically assess the entire system as well as evaluate the individual modules and their
interplay [53], allowing for fully understanding the sources of the errors and misses and how they
are generated. (2) metric limitation: Existing metrics for evaluating RAG systems, which are often
rule-based or coarse-grained, fall short in providing accurate and interpretable results. Specifically,
traditional metrics like recall@k and MRR [44] for retrievers depend on annotated chunks and a rigid
chunking approach, missing out on the full semantic scope of the knowledge base. For generators,
typical measures such as n-gram-based (e.g., BLEU [30], ROUGE [19]), embedding-based (e.g.,
BERTScore [56]), and LLM-based methods [45] perform well with concise answers but fail to
detect finer distinctions in longer responses. To bridge these gaps, it is essential to develop detailed,
semantic-based evaluation metrics that effectively capture the intricacies and overall quality of both
the retrieval and generation components in RAG systems. (3) metric reliability: the reliability
∗

Shared first authorship.
Work done during internship at Amazon.
3
This work has been open sourced at https://github.com/amazon-science/RAGChecker

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

