WizardArena: Post-training Large Language Models
via Simulated Offline Chatbot Arena
Haipeng Luo1∗ Qingfeng Sun2∗ Can Xu2† Pu Zhao2
Qingwei Lin2

Jianguang Lou2

Shifeng Chen3 † Yansong Tang1 † Weizhu Chen2

1

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University 2 Microsoft Corporation
3
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{luohp24@mails., tang.yansong@sz.}tsinghua.edu.cn, {shifeng.chen}@siat.ac.cn
{qins,caxu,puzhao,qlin,jlou,wzchen}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recent work demonstrates that, post-training large language models with opendomain instruction following data have achieved colossal success. Simultaneously,
human Chatbot Arena has emerged as one of the most reasonable benchmarks
for model evaluation and developmental guidance. However, the processes of
manually curating high-quality training data and utilizing online human evaluation
platforms are both expensive and limited. To mitigate the manual and temporal
costs associated with post-training, this paper introduces a Simulated Chatbot
Arena named WizardArena, which is fully based on and powered by open-source
LLMs. For evaluation scenario, WizardArena can efficiently predict accurate
performance rankings among different models based on offline test set. For the
training scenario, we propose Arena Learning, an innovative offline strategy that
simulates iterative arena battles among various state-of-the-art models on a large
scale of instruction data using AI-driven annotations to evaluate and leverage
battle results, thus continuously enhancing the weaknesses of the target model
through both supervised fine-tuning and reinforcement learning. Experimental
results demonstrate that our WizardArena aligns closely with the online human
arena rankings, and our models, trained on extensive offline battle data through
Arena Learning, demonstrate marked improvements in performance across the SFT,
DPO, and PPO stages.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the field of natural language processing (NLP) has witnessed a remarkable transformation, driven by the rapid advancements in large language models (LLMs). These models, trained
on vast amounts of text data, have demonstrated an exceptional ability to understand, generate, and
interact with human language in a wide range of tasks [1–3]. One of the most exciting applications
of LLMs has been in the realm of conversational AI [4–9], where they have been utilized to create
powerful chatbots capable of engaging in naturalistic dialogues. One of the key factors contributing
to the success of LLM-powered chatbots is the ability to leverage large-scale high-quality instruction
following data for effective post-training [10–14]. By exposing these models to a diverse range of
conversational tasks and instructional scenarios, researchers have been able to imbue them with a
deep understanding of how to effectively communicate and assist humans.
∗
†

Equal contributions. Work done during the internship of Luo at Microsoft.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

