MindMerger: Efficiently Boosting LLM Reasoning in
non-English Languages
Zixian Huang1 , Wenhao Zhu1 , Gong Cheng1 , Lei Li2 , Fei Yuan3 ∗
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
Carnegie Mellon University
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{zixianhuang, zhuwh}@smail.nju.edu.cn, gcheng@nju.edu.cn
leili@cs.cmu.edu, yuanfei@pjlab.org.cn

1

Abstract
Reasoning capabilities are crucial for Large Language Models (LLMs), yet a
notable gap exists between English and non-English languages. To bridge this disparity, some works fine-tune LLMs to relearn reasoning capabilities in non-English
languages, while others replace non-English inputs with an external model’s outputs
such as English translation text to circumvent the challenge of LLM understanding
non-English. Unfortunately, these methods often underutilize the built-in skilled
reasoning and useful language understanding capabilities of LLMs. In order to
better utilize the minds of reasoning and language understanding in LLMs, we
propose a new method, namely MindMerger, which merges LLMs with the external
language understanding capabilities from multilingual models to boost the multilingual reasoning performance. Furthermore, a two-step training scheme is introduced
to first train to embeded the external capabilities into LLMs and then train the
collaborative utilization of the external capabilities and the built-in capabilities
in LLMs. Experiments on three multilingual reasoning datasets and a language
understanding dataset demonstrate that MindMerger consistently outperforms all
baselines, especially in low-resource languages. Without updating the parameters
of LLMs, the average accuracy improved by 6.7% and 8.0% across all languages
and low-resource languages on the MGSM dataset, respectively 2 .

1

Introduction

One of the primary focuses of Artificial Intelligence research currently revolves around improving
its reasoning capabilities [Ahn et al., 2024, Minaee et al., 2024], which is derived from the need
to enable Large Language Models (LLMs) [Ouyang et al., 2022, Touvron et al., 2023, Jiang et al.,
2023a] to think rationally and perform functions like humans [Imani et al., 2023, Jiang et al., 2023b].
Substantial progress has been made in English reasoning [Yu et al., 2023, Yuan et al., 2023a], but the
performance in non-English, especially low-resource languages, still lags behind [Shi et al., 2023]
due to the scarce of multilingual training data [Touvron et al., 2023].
Existing work tries to use external models to compensate for the deficiencies of LLM in multilingual
reasoning. Some works use the relearning-based strategy, which uses translation models to generate
multilingual training data for fine-tuning LLMs to relearn reasoning in each language [Chen et al.,
2023, Chai et al., 2024]. Some other works use the replacement-based strategy, which use translation
models to translate queries from non-English to English text for replacing the non-English input of
∗
2

Corresponding author.
Our code is available on https://github.com/CONE-MT/MindMerger.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

