Neural Combinatorial Optimization for Robust
Routing Problem with Uncertain Travel Times

Pei Xiao1 , Zizhen Zhang1∗ , Jinbiao Chen1 , Jiahai Wang1 , Zhenzhen Zhang2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, P.R. China 1
School of Economics and Management, Tongji University, P.R. China 2
xiaop39@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, zhangzzh7@mail.sysu.edu.cn
chenjb69@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wangjiah@mail.sysu.edu.cn
zhenzhenzhang@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
We consider the robust routing problem with uncertain travel times under the
min-max regret criterion, which represents an extended and robust version of the
classic traveling salesman problem (TSP) and vehicle routing problem (VRP).
The general budget uncertainty set is employed to capture the uncertainty, which
provides the capability to control the conservatism of obtained solutions and covers
the commonly used interval uncertainty set as a special case. The goal is to obtain
a robust solution that minimizes the maximum deviation from the optimal routing
time in the worst-case scenario. Given the significant advancements and broad
applications of neural combinatorial optimization methods in recent years, we
present our initial attempt to combine neural approaches for solving this problem.
We propose a dual multi-head cross attention mechanism to extract problem features
represented by the inputted uncertainty sets. To tackle the built-in maximization
problem, we derive the regret value by invoking a pre-trained model, subsequently
utilizing it as the reward during the model training. Our experimental results on
the robust TSP and VRP demonstrate the efficacy of our neural combinatorial
optimization method, showcasing its ability to efficiently handle the robust routing
problem of various sizes within a shorter time compared with alternative heuristic
approaches.

1

Introduction

The classic Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) and Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) represent
fundamental NP-hard combinatorial optimization challenges. In these routing problems, an agent
commences from a designated node and fulfills specific task requisites. The primary objective
is to minimize the total travel time or cost of access. However, the classic routing problem is
mathematically simplified and idealized, lacking the necessary robustness to handle the complexities
of the real world. In actual scenarios, the existence of various uncertain factors may significantly
impact the final outcome. For example, considering the travel time between two nodes, it is not
only affected by objective factors such as traffic conditions, road quality, and weather, but also
by subjective factors such as the traveler’s status and mood. When planning a trip and estimating
travel time, uncertainty about the actual travel conditions may arise. To ensure a satisfactory travel
experience, it is sensible to adopt a robust approach, which involves seeking a solution that is less
vulnerable to adverse conditions, even in the worst-case scenario.
While there are several robust routing formulations in the literature, this study primarily focuses on
classic robust routing problems featuring a budget uncertainty set. The underlying idea is that the
uncertainty support set is represented by a set of interval data, but usually not all arcs are affected to
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

