ID3: Identity-Preserving-yet-Diversified Diffusion
Models for Synthetic Face Recognition
Jianqing Xu∗1 ,
Shen Li∗2 ,
2
2
Jiaying Wu , Miao Xiong , Ailin Deng2 , Jiazhen Ji1 ,
Yuge Huang#1 , Guodong Mu1 , Wenjie Feng2 , Shouhong Ding1 , and Bryan Hooi2
2

1
Tencent Youtu Lab
National University of Singapore

Abstract
Synthetic face recognition (SFR) aims to generate synthetic face datasets that
mimic the distribution of real face data, which allows for training face recognition models in a privacy-preserving manner. Despite the remarkable potential of
diffusion models in image generation, current diffusion-based SFR models struggle with generalization to real-world faces. To address this limitation, we outline three key objectives for SFR: (1) promoting diversity across identities (interclass diversity), (2) ensuring diversity within each identity by injecting various
facial attributes (intra-class diversity), and (3) maintaining identity consistency
within each identity group (intra-class identity preservation). Inspired by these
goals, we introduce a diffusion-fueled SFR model termed ID3 . ID3 employs an
ID-preserving loss to generate diverse yet identity-consistent facial appearances.
Theoretically, we show that minimizing this loss is equivalent to maximizing the
lower bound of an adjusted conditional log-likelihood over ID-preserving data.
This equivalence motivates an ID-preserving sampling algorithm, which operates
over an adjusted gradient vector field, enabling the generation of fake face recognition datasets that approximate the distribution of real-world faces. Extensive
experiments across five challenging benchmarks validate the advantages of ID3 .
Code is released at: https://github.com/hitspring2015/ID3-SFR.

1

Introduction

With the introduction of various regulations restricting the use of large-scale facial data in recent
years, such as GDPR, synthetic-based face recognition (SFR) (Boutros et al., 2023) has received
widespread attention from the academic community (Qiu et al., 2021; Wood et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2023). The goal of SFR is to generate synthetic face datasets that mimic the distribution of
real face images, and use it to train a face recognition (FR) model such that the model can recognize
real face images as effectively as possible.
There exist numerous efforts to address SFR, which can be categorized into GAN-based models and
diffusion models. GAN-based models utilize adversarial training to learn to generate synthetic data
for FR training. Recently, with the empirical advantages of diffusion models over GANs, many
works have attempted to use diffusion models to generate synthetic face data in place of authentic
data. However, the reported results by these state-of-the-art (SoTA) SFR generative models (Bae
et al., 2023; Boutros et al., 2022; Kolf et al., 2023; Qiu et al., 2021; Boutros et al., 2023) show
*
#

Equal first authors. The order was determined by numpy.random.rand().
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

