Large Language Models’ Expert-level Global History
Knowledge Benchmark (HiST-LLM)

Jakob Hauser1,† , Daniel Kondor1 , Jenny Reddish1 , Majid Benam1 , Enrico Cioni2 , Federica Villa2 ,
James S. Bennett3 , Daniel Hoyer4 , Pieter Francois2,5 , Peter Turchin1 , R. Maria del Rio-Chanona1,6,†
1
Complexity Science Hub, Vienna, Austria 2 University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
3
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA 4 George Brown College, Toronto, Canada
5
The Alan Turing Institute, London, UK
6
Department of Computer Science, University College London, London, UK
†
hauser@csh.ac.at; m.delriochanona@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have the potential to transform humanities and social science research, yet their history knowledge and comprehension at a graduate
level remains untested. Benchmarking LLMs in history is particularly challenging, given that human knowledge of history is inherently unbalanced, with more
information available on Western history and recent periods. We introduce the
History Seshat Test for LLMs (HiST-LLM), based on a subset of the Seshat Global
History Databank, which provides a structured representation of human historical
knowledge, containing 36,000 data points across 600 historical societies and over
2,700 scholarly references. This dataset covers every major world region from the
Neolithic period to the Industrial Revolution and includes information reviewed
and assembled by history experts and graduate research assistants. Using this
dataset, we benchmark a total of seven models from the Gemini, OpenAI, and
Llama families. We find that, in a four-choice format, LLMs have a balanced accuracy ranging from 33.6% (Llama-3.1-8B) to 46% (GPT-4-Turbo), outperforming
random guessing (25%) but falling short of expert comprehension. LLMs perform
better on earlier historical periods. Regionally, performance is more even but still
better for the Americas and lowest in Oceania and Sub-Saharan Africa for the
more advanced models. Our benchmark shows that while LLMs possess some
expert-level historical knowledge, there is considerable room for improvement.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have the potential to simulate human behavior [1] [2], label data,
perform legal tasks [3], extract information on historical events [4], perform thematic analysis [5],
advance psychological measurement [6], among other applications [7]; thus many authors expect
LLMs to revolutionize social science and humanities research [8]. However, to fully reap the benefits
of LLMs we must also overcome biases and unbalanced distribution of knowledge that may originate
from inherent biases in training datasets [9]. In this work, we introduce a unique data set of graduate
and expert academic level global history knowledge, Seshat: Global History Databank [10–12]. We
make this dataset publicly available and use it to benchmark historical knowledge of large language
models. We name this benchmark History Seshat Test for LLMS (HiST-LLM)1 .
Our knowledge of history is inherently unbalanced and partial, complicating the fair measurement of
LLMs’ historical knowledge. We know more about the history of the Global North than the Global
1

Results and dataset can be found at https://github.com/seshat-db/HiST-LLM and https://doi.
org/10.5281/zenodo.14671247
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

