Algorithmic Capabilities of Random Transformers

Ziqian Zhong, Jacob Andreas
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{ziqianz, jda}@mit.edu

Abstract
Trained transformer models have been found to implement interpretable procedures
for tasks like arithmetic and associative recall, but little is understood about how
the circuits that implement these procedures originate during training. To what
extent do they depend on the supervisory signal provided to models, and to what
extent are they attributable to behavior already present in models at the beginning
of training? To investigate these questions, we investigate what functions can be
learned by randomly initialized transformers in which only the embedding layers
are optimized, so that the only input–output mappings learnable from data are
those already implemented (up to a choice of encoding scheme) by the randomly
initialized model. We find that these random transformers can perform a wide
range of meaningful algorithmic tasks, including modular arithmetic, in-weights
and in-context associative recall, decimal addition, parenthesis balancing, and even
some aspects of natural language text generation. Our results indicate that some
algorithmic capabilities are present in transformers (and accessible via appropriately
structured inputs) even before these models are trained.1

1

Introduction

A large body of recent work has demonstrated the effectiveness of transformer language models
(LMs) [46] on general sequence-modeling tasks. Transformers seem to be especially well-suited
(relative to other flexible neural models) at problems involving numerical reasoning [41, 24, 30],
string manipulation [28], and various forms of in-context learning [7, 17, 1, 25]. Why is this the case?
One possibility is that some aspect of the transformer architecture makes these behaviors easy to
learn. Under this hypothesis, transformer models do not implement any useful functionality when
initialized; however, their loss landscape is structured such that they can be (computation- and
sample-) efficiently optimized for behaviors of interest. But another possibility is that—because
of intrinsic properties of the transformer architecture and parameter initialization schemes—these
capabilities are already implemented in some fashion even in randomly initialized models.
To disentangle these possibilities, we investigate the behavior of randomly initialized transformer
models in which only the embedding layers are optimized, leaving all other model-internal parameters
fixed. If such embedding-only training is successful, it implies that the randomly initialized model’s
behavior on some subspace already corresponds to the input–output mapping of interest, up to a
choice of encoding scheme—in other words, that the randomly initialized model can already perform
the target task, and it suffices to find an encoding of inputs and outputs that induces the target behavior.
In experiments on seven tasks, we find that embedding-only training yields accurate models for a
diverse set of problems spanning arithmetic, associative recall, and sequence generation—in some
cases substantially outperforming similarly trained recurrent models. Remarkably, transformer
language models trained in this fashion can even produce grammatical (though largely nonsensical)
1

Code is available at https://github.com/fjzzq2002/random_transformers.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

