Loki: Low-rank Keys for Efficient Sparse Attention

Prajwal Singhania, Siddharth Singh, Shwai He, Soheil Feizi, Abhinav Bhatele
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
prajwal@umd.edu, bhatele@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Inference on large language models (LLMs) can be expensive in terms of the
compute and memory costs involved, especially when long sequence lengths are
used. In particular, the self-attention mechanism used in LLM inference contributes
significantly to these costs, which has sparked an interest in approximating the selfattention computation to reduce such costs. In this work, we propose to approximate
self-attention by focusing on the dimensionality of key vectors computed in the
attention block. Our analysis reveals that key vectors lie in a significantly lowerdimensional space, consistently across several datasets and models. Exploiting this
observation, we propose Loki, a novel sparse attention method that ranks and selects
tokens in the KV-cache based on attention scores computed in low-dimensional
space. Our evaluations show that Loki is able to speed up the attention computation
due to reduced data movement (load/store) and compute costs while maintaining
the efficacy of the models better than other popular approximation methods.

1

Introduction

As large language models (LLMs) grow in size, deploying them for efficient inference presents
substantial challenges, largely due to computation and memory access bottlenecks in the self-attention
block [32], especially when handling long sequences. These challenges stem from the autoregressive
nature of attention, which generates the output one token at a time. At each step, the entire preceding
state, stored in the key-value (KV) cache, must be fetched from memory, which can sometimes
exceed the size of the model parameters itself [18]. This frequent KV-cache access from GPU DRAM
to registers becomes costly, as it scales quadratically with the output sequence length. In addition,
matrix multiplications in the attention layers also have a quadratic scaling cost with sequence length,
compounding the overall computational burden.
Several strategies [39, 26, 20] have been proposed to address this challenge by reducing the computational complexity and/or memory demands associated with the self-attention mechanism. One
promising category of approaches focuses on approximating attention, employing techniques such as
quantization or using a subset of the tokens in the KV-cache [11] (sparse attention).
In contrast to other sparse attention approaches that either permanently prune tokens from the keyvalue cache [39] or impose a fixed sparsity pattern [35], our proposed method dynamically selects
key tokens at each generation step based on approximate attention scores and avoids deletions. This
approach is inspired by a critical observation: across a range of LLMs and datasets, key tensors
consistently occupy a significantly lower-dimensional space than the full attention head dimension.
For instance, in Figure 1 (left), we show that across various LLMs [8, 16], 90% of the variance
explained by PCA is captured at an effective key vector rank of around 80, despite the key tensor
dimension being much larger (128).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

