Recurrent Complex-Weighted Autoencoders
for Unsupervised Object Discovery

Anand Gopalakrishnan1∗ Aleksandar Stanić2†
Jürgen Schmidhuber1,3 Michael Curtis Mozer2
1
The Swiss AI Lab, IDSIA, USI & SUPSI, Lugano, Switzerland
2
Google DeepMind
3
AI Initiative, KAUST, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art synchrony-based models encode object bindings with
complex-valued activations and compute with real-valued weights in feedforward
architectures. We argue for the computational advantages of a recurrent architecture with complex-valued weights. We propose a fully convolutional autoencoder,
SynCx, that performs iterative constraint satisfaction: at each iteration, a hidden
layer bottleneck encodes statistically regular configurations of features in particular
phase relationships; over iterations, local constraints propagate and the model
converges to a globally consistent configuration of phase assignments. Binding is
achieved simply by the matrix-vector product operation between complex-valued
weights and activations, without the need for additional mechanisms that have
been incorporated into current synchrony-based models. SynCx outperforms or
is strongly competitive with current models for unsupervised object discovery.
SynCx also avoids certain systematic grouping errors of current models, such as
the inability to separate similarly colored objects without additional supervision. 3

1

Introduction

When shown arrays of simple visual elements, people have a natural tendency to perceive the arrays
in disjoint groups based on their color, shape, spatial configuration, etc. Grouping behavior was first
studied and systematized by Gestalt psychologists [1–3] who proposed a set of principles according
to which perception operates, e.g., grouping by proximity, similarity, closure, good continuation
and common fate. Although these Gestalt principles—also called laws—were assumed to be innate,
statistics of the environment may explain some forms of grouping [4], and people rapidly learn new
grouping principles when they are exposed to novel environments [5]. Grouping abilities are acquired
early in an infant’s developmental cycle [6] and serve as a building block in the human ability to form
concepts [7], build abstractions and categorize [8], and reason about the physical world [9].
Perceptual grouping has been modeled in deep learning under the guise of object-centric learning.
(See Greff et al. [10] for an overview.) Object-centric models discover modular and compositional
representations that can facilitate stronger generalization and relational reasoning capabilities on
downstream visual tasks such as question answering [11], game playing [12–14] and robotics [15–17].
Both human and AI object-centric learning aim to solve the binding problem [18, 19]—determining
how to integrate visual information in a flexible, dynamic manner to form unified wholes. The
predominant design strategy for implementing binding in deep learning systems to achieve perceptual
∗

Correspondence to anand@idsia.ch
Work done at IDSIA.
3
Official code repository: https://github.com/agopal42/syncx

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

