HumanVid: Demystifying Training Data for
Camera-controllable Human Image Animation

Zhenzhi Wang1 , Yixuan Li1 , Yanhong Zeng2 , Youqing Fang2 , Yuwei Guo1 ,
Wenran Liu2 , Jing Tan1 , Kai Chen2 , Tianfan Xue1,2 , Bo Dai3,2 , Dahua Lin1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,
3
The University of Hong Kong
{wz122, ly122, gy023, tj023, tfxue, dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
{zengyanhong, fangyouqing, liuwenran, chenkai}@pjlab.org.cn, bdai@hku.hk

Abstract
Human image animation involves generating videos from a character photo, allowing user control and unlocking the potential for video and movie production.
While recent approaches yield impressive results using high-quality training data,
the inaccessibility of these datasets hampers fair and transparent benchmarking.
Moreover, these approaches prioritize 2D human motion and overlook the significance of camera motions in videos, leading to limited control and unstable
video generation. To demystify the training data, we present HumanVid, the first
large-scale high-quality dataset tailored for human image animation, which combines crafted real-world and synthetic data. For the real-world data, we compile a
vast collection of real-world videos from the internet. We developed and applied
careful filtering rules to ensure video quality, resulting in a curated collection of
20K high-resolution (1080P) human-centric videos. Human and camera motion
annotation is accomplished using a 2D pose estimator and a SLAM-based method.
To expand our synthetic dataset, we collected 10K 3D avatar assets and leveraged
existing assets of body shapes, skin textures and clothings. Notably, we introduce
a rule-based camera trajectory generation method, enabling the synthetic pipeline
to incorporate diverse and precise camera motion annotation, which can rarely be
found in real-world data. To verify the effectiveness of HumanVid, we establish
a baseline model named CamAnimate, short for Camera-controllable Human
Animation, that considers both human and camera motions as conditions. Through
extensive experimentation, we demonstrate that such simple baseline training on
our HumanVid achieves state-of-the-art performance in controlling both human
pose and camera motions, setting a new benchmark. Demo, data and code could be
found in the project website: https://humanvid.github.io/.

1

Introduction

High-quality and highly controllable human image animation has significantly progressed as an
emerging popular task [15, 28, 31, 74]. Imagine the possibilities of recreating iconic movie performances using just a single photo of the characters, capturing them from any desired angle. This
technique has the potential to significantly impact video and movie production. In this study, we
focus on animating characters from a single image, considering both human and camera motions as
crucial factors for generating realistic human videos.
Despite recent advances [28, 88], human image animation presents two main challenges: the absence
of a high-quality public dataset and the neglect of camera motions in human videos. Specifically,
state-of-the-art approaches rely on private datasets for training similar models, underscoring the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

