Multi-Label Open Set Recognition

Yi-Bo Wang, Jun-Yi Hang, Min-Ling Zhang∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University),
Ministry of Education, China
{wang_yb, hangjy, zhangml}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
In multi-label learning, each training instance is associated with multiple labels
simultaneously. Traditional multi-label learning studies primarily focus on closed
set scenario, i.e. the class label set of test data is identical to those used in training
phase. Nevertheless, in numerous real-world scenarios, the environment is open
and dynamic where unknown labels may emerge gradually during testing. In this
paper, the problem of multi-label open set recognition (MLOSR) is investigated,
which poses significant challenges in classifying and recognizing instances with
unknown labels in multi-label setting. To enable open set multi-label prediction, a
novel approach named S LAN is proposed by leveraging sub-labeling information
enriched by structural information in the feature space. Accordingly, unknown
labels are recognized by differentiating the sub-labeling information from holistic
supervision. Experimental results on various datasets validate the effectiveness of
the proposed approach in dealing with the MLOSR problem.

1

Introduction

Multi-label Learning (MLL) deals with the problem where an instance can be associated with
multiple labels simultaneously [37, 19]. As a practical machine learning paradigm, multi-label
learning has been widely applied in various real-world applications, such as image annotation [30],
text categorization [26], information retrieval [12].
Traditional multi-label learning studies focus on closed set scenario. That is, they assume that the
class label set of test data is identical to that in the training set [37, 8, 21]. However, in many
real-world scenarios, this assumption rarely holds because the environment is open and dynamic [29].
In addition to the extant label knowledge at training phase, the unknown labels may emerge gradually
with the data streams during the testing phase. For example, in Figure 1, the test image is annotated
with several relevant labels, some of which are unseen in the training set. The classification task
becomes much more challenging because the label correlation between known and unknown labels
may degrade the performance of the predictive model. Furthermore, due to the presence of unknown
labels in the class label set of test data, these test data are hardly employed in subsequent learning
processes, such as incremental learning [15].
Motivated by the potential applications, we formalize a novel framework named multi-label open set
recognition (MLOSR), whose goal is to learn a multi-label model that can correctly classify known
labels for the unseen instance and recognize unknown labels within its relevant label set. This can
be regarded as a special weakly supervised learning. In MLOSR, the most challenging part is to
recognize the unknown labels associated with instances. Since we do not have any prior knowledge
of unknown labels and they almost always co-occur with some known labels, it is very difficult to
separate instances with unknown labels from those with the known labels only.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

