When is an Embedder More Promising
than Another?
†

Maxime DARRIN1,2,3,4 † Philippe F ORMONT1,2,4,5
Ismail B EN AYED1,5
2,3
Jackie Chi Kit C HEUNG
Pablo P IANTANIDA1,2,4,6
1
2
International Laboratory on Learning Systems, Mila - Quebec AI Institute, 3 McGill University
4
Université Paris-Saclay, 5 ÉTS Montréal, 6 CNRS, CentraleSupélec, † equal contribution
maxime.darrin@mila.quebec, philippe.formont@mila.quebec

Abstract
Embedders play a central role in machine learning, projecting any object into numerical representations that can, in turn, be leveraged to perform various downstream
tasks. The evaluation of embedding models typically depends on domain-specific
empirical approaches utilizing downstream tasks, primarily because of the lack of
a standardized framework for comparison. However, acquiring adequately large
and representative datasets for conducting these assessments is not always viable
and can prove to be prohibitively expensive and time-consuming. In this paper,
we present a unified approach to evaluate embedders. First, we establish theoretical foundations for comparing embedding models, drawing upon the concepts
of sufficiency and informativeness. We then leverage these concepts to devise a
tractable comparison criterion (information sufficiency), leading to a task-agnostic
and self-supervised ranking procedure. We demonstrate experimentally that our approach aligns closely with the capability of embedding models to facilitate various
downstream tasks in both natural language processing and molecular biology. This
effectively offers practitioners a valuable tool for prioritizing model trials.1

1

Introduction

Embeddings are a prominent tool in machine learning and are used in multiple fields, such as natural
language processing [64, 83], computer vision [93, 59, 12, 53] or bioinformatics [67, 3, 23, 112].
These models embed objects such as images, texts, or molecules into numerical representations that
can be used to perform numerous downstream tasks by preserving key features of the object [76, 111].
Depending on the data modalities, intended purpose, and available resources, embedders showcase
a wide variety of architectures, training settings (unsupervised, supervised, self-supervised, etc.),
objectives (masked language modeling, contrastive learning, etc.) [20, 100, 78, 112, 39], and datasets
[65, 86, 31, 38, 5, 117]. And more recently, foundation models have become a natural starting point
to create embedders [21, 106, 52, 73].
This diversity and variety of options makes selecting the most promising embedders for a data
distribution challenging [75]. Most work evaluates embedders focusing on the performance they
enable on a finite set of downstream tasks [85, 17, 90, 91, 81, 24]. Nevertheless, this evaluation
process encounters two primary limitations. Firstly, it is not scalable concerning the number of
embedders and tasks, as it requires fitting a downstream model for each task. Hence, prioritizing the
evaluation of the most promising models becomes essential to mitigate computational costs. Secondly,
acquiring high-quality labels can be a time-consuming and notably expensive endeavor in various
applications. To overcome these limitations, in this paper, we explore task-agnostic evaluation metrics
1

The code used to perform all experiments is available at https://github.com/ills-montreal/emir

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

