Data-Efficient Learning with Neural Programs

Alaia Solko-Breslin, Seewon Choi, Ziyang Li, Neelay Velingker,
Rajeev Alur, Mayur Naik, Eric Wong
University of Pennsylvania
{alaia,seewon,liby99,neelay,alur,mhnaik,exwong}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Many computational tasks can be naturally expressed as a composition of a DNN
followed by a program written in a traditional programming language or an API
call to an LLM. We call such composites “neural programs” and focus on the problem of learning the DNN parameters when the training data consist of end-to-end
input-output labels for the composite. When the program is written in a differentiable logic programming language, techniques from neurosymbolic learning are
applicable, but in general, the learning for neural programs requires estimating
the gradients of black-box components. We present an algorithm for learning neural programs, called ISED, that only relies on input-output samples of black-box
components. For evaluation, we introduce new benchmarks that involve calls to
modern LLMs such as GPT-4 and also consider benchmarks from the neurosymbolic learning literature. Our evaluation shows that for the latter benchmarks, ISED
has comparable performance to state-of-the-art neurosymbolic frameworks. For the
former, we use adaptations of prior work on gradient approximations of black-box
components as a baseline, and show that ISED achieves comparable accuracy but
in a more data- and sample-efficient manner. 1

1

Introduction

Many computational tasks cannot be solved by neural perception alone but can be naturally expressed
as a composition of a neural model Mθ followed by a program P written in a traditional programming
language or an API call to a large language model (LLM). We call such composites “neural programs”
and study the problem of learning neural programs in an end-to-end manner with a focus on data and
sample efficiency. One problem that is naturally expressed as a neural program is scene recognition
[29], where Mθ classifies objects in an image and P prompts GPT-4 to identify the room type given
these objects (Fig. 1).
Neurosymbolic learning [2] is one instance of neural program learning in which P takes the form of
a logic program. DeepProbLog (DPL) [14] and Scallop [13] are frameworks that extend ProbLog and
Datalog, respectively, to ensure that the symbolic component P is differentiable. This differentiability
requirement is what facilitates learning in many neurosymbolic learning frameworks. There are also
abductive learning frameworks that do not explicitly differentiate programs. Instead, they require that
the symbolic component expose a method for abducing the function’s inputs for a given output, often
using Prolog for the symbolic component as a result [6, 23]. While logic programming languages are
expressive enough for these frameworks to solve tasks such as sorting [14], visual question answering
[13], and path planning [23], they offer restricted features and a narrow range of libraries, making
them incompatible with calls to arbitrary APIs or to modern LLMs.
Learning neural programs when P is not expressed as a logic program is a difficult problem because
gradients across black-box programs cannot be computed explicitly. One possible solution is to use
REINFORCE [26] to sample symbols from distributions predicted by Mθ and compute the expected
1

Code is available at https://github.com/alaiasolkobreslin/ISED

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

