Repurposing Language Models into Embedding
Models: Finding the Compute-Optimal Recipe

Albert Q. Jiang *
University of Cambridge

Alicja Ziarko *
IDEAS NCBR
University of Warsaw
IMPAN

Bartosz Piotrowski
IDEAS NCBR

Wenda Li
University of Edinburgh

Mateja Jamnik †
University of Cambridge

Piotr Miłoś †
IDEAS NCBR
University of Warsaw
IMPAN, deepsense.ai

Abstract
Text embeddings are essential for many tasks, such as document retrieval, clustering, and semantic similarity assessment. In this paper, we study how to contrastively train text embedding models in a compute-optimal fashion, given a suite
of pre-trained decoder-only language models. Our innovation is an algorithm that
produces optimal configurations of model sizes, data quantities, and fine-tuning
methods for text-embedding models at different computational budget levels. The
resulting recipe, which we obtain through extensive experiments, can be used by
practitioners to make informed design choices for their embedding models. Specifically, our findings suggest that full fine-tuning and low-rank adaptation fine-tuning
produce optimal models at lower and higher computational budgets respectively.

Introduction

Text embeddings are vector representations of
text sequences [Devlin et al., 2019]. A desired
property of text embeddings is that their distribution in the embedding space reflects the
semantic relations of the embedded texts. This
property benefits multiple practical tasks [Muennighoff et al., 2023b], such as document retrieval
(where documents are ranked based on the distance between their representations and that of a
query), document clustering, sentiment analysis,
or textual similarity measurement.
In the era of large language models (LLMs) that
are pre-trained on vast textual data, it is a natural idea to capitalise on the language representations learned by these models to achieve
high-quality embedding models. A common
and effective approach has been to initialise an
embedding model from a pre-trained LLM and
fine-tune it with a contrastive loss [Neelakantan
et al., 2022, Izacard et al., 2022]. This phase is
* Equal contribution.
†

Equal advising contribution.

3 × 100

Optimal Loss vs Computational Budget

2 × 100

Loss

1

100

6 × 10 1

Optimal frontier
Full fine-tuning
Bias tuning
LoRA
Block freezing
1016

1017

1018

Budget (FLOP)
Figure 1: The optimal loss achieved using four different fine-tuning methods (full fine-tuning, only
tuning the bias, low-rank adaptation, and freezing
transformer blocks) at given budgets. The horizontal axis is the computational budget in floating
point operations (FLOP) and the vertical axis is
the contrastive loss. The X marks are datapoints
and dotted lines are fitted linear trends for different
methods. The solid black line is the “optimal frontier,” i.e., the optimal loss achievable with a fixed
budget and the best method.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

