Convergence of No-Swap-Regret Dynamics in Self-Play

Renato Paes Leme
Google Research

Georgios Piliouras
Google Deepmind

Jon Schneider
Google Research

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate the question of whether no-swap-regret dynamics have
stronger convergence properties in repeated games than regular no-external-regret
dynamics. We prove that in almost all symmetric zero-sum games under symmetric
initializations of the agents, no-swap-regret dynamics in self-play are guaranteed
to converge in a strong “frequent-iterate” sense to the Nash equilibrium: in all but a
vanishing fraction of the rounds, the players must play a strategy profile close to a
symmetric Nash equilibrium. Remarkably, relaxing any of these three constraints,
i.e. by allowing either i) asymmetric initial conditions, or ii) an asymmetric game
or iii) no-external regret dynamics suffices to destroy this result and lead to complex
non-equilibrating or even chaotic behavior.
In a dual type of result, we show that the power of no-swap-regret dynamics comes
at a cost of imposing a time-asymmetry on its inputs. While no-external-regret
dynamics can be completely determined by the cumulative reward vector received
by each player, we show there does not exist any general no-swap-regret dynamics
defined on the same state space. In fact, we prove that any no-swap-regret learning
algorithm must play a time-asymmetric function over the set of previously observed
rewards, ruling out any dynamics based on a symmetric function of the current set
of rewards.

1

Introduction

The analysis of learning dynamics in games is a well-established problem situated at the intersection
of game theory, online optimization and evolutionary game theory [16, 47, 54]. The significance
of this area has been amplified by the emergence of prominent machine learning architectures
and applications relying on multi-agent, typically zero-sum, games [42, 32, 46, 52, 14, 49, 10].
Symmetric zero-sum games and their dynamics are actually of particular interest both from a
traditional evolutionary perspective [54, 13] as well as from a modern Machine Learning perspective
as creating a population of agents that compete against each other in a heads-up fashion to outperform
each other (“self-play”) has been shown to be a reliable recipe for creating super-humanly capable
agents for a wide range of tasks [9, 38].
Despite growing interest in understanding and predicting the long-term behavior of such systems,
recent studies have revealed a wide array of negative results, demonstrating the elusiveness of
game dynamics. These range from non-convergence results to the establishment of chaotic or
even essentially arbitrary behavior [44, 28, 30, 40, 3, 4, 55, 26, 45]. Notably, these instability and
chaotic behaviors persist even in the analysis of well-known online optimization algorithms, such as
Multiplicative Weights Updates (MWU/Hedge), Online Gradient Descent, Follow-the-RegularizedLeader a.o., even within the narrow but seminal class of (symmetric) zero-sum games [7, 18, 19, 20].
Although it is possible to stabilize learning dynamics in zero-sum games using e.g., optimistic variants
of MWU [22, 43, 23], such results leave something to be desired as they presuppose that the agents
coordinate to use a specific instantiation of a learning algorithm. Ideally, we would like instead to be
able to prove such strong convergence results based on more abstract properties of the dynamics.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

