GenAI Arena: An Open Evaluation Platform for
Generative Models
Dongfu Jiang∗ Max Ku∗ Tianle Li∗
Yuansheng Ni Shizhuo Sun Rongqi Fan Wenhu Chen
University of Waterloo
{dongfu.jiang, m3ku, t29li, wenhuchen}@uwaterloo.ca
https://hf.co/spaces/TIGER-Lab/GenAI-Arena

Abstract
Generative AI has made remarkable strides to revolutionize fields such as image
and video generation. These advancements are driven by innovative algorithms,
architecture, and data. However, the rapid proliferation of generative models has
highlighted a critical gap: the absence of trustworthy evaluation metrics. Current
automatic assessments such as FID, CLIP, FVD, etc often fail to capture the
nuanced quality and user satisfaction associated with generative outputs. This
paper proposes an open platform G ENAI-A RENA to evaluate different image and
video generative models, where users can actively participate in evaluating these
models. By leveraging collective user feedback and votes, G ENAI-A RENA aims
to provide a more democratic and accurate measure of model performance. It
covers three arenas for text-to-image generation, text-to-video generation, and
image editing respectively. Currently, we cover a total of 35 open-source generative
models. G ENAI-A RENA has been operating for seven months, amassing over 9000
votes from the community. We describe our platform, analyze the data, and explain
the statistical methods for ranking the models. To further promote the research
in building model-based evaluation metrics, we release a cleaned version of our
preference data for the three tasks, namely GenAI-Bench. We prompt the existing
multi-modal models like Gemini, GPT-4o to mimic human voting. We compute the
accuracy by comparing the model voting with the human voting to understand their
juding abilities. Our results show existing multimodal models are still lagging in
assessing the generated visual content, even the best model GPT-4o only achieves
an average accuracy of 49.19% across the three generative tasks. Open-source
MLLMs perform even worse due to the lack of instruction-following and reasoning
ability in the complex vision scenarios.

vote
Users

Model A

Model B

Woman sitting on the sidewalk, rain, tight and wet
clothes, hands coming out of a puddle of water, anime

Leaderboard

GenAI-Bench

Preference Data

T2I/Editing/T2V Arena

>
=
X

Figure 1: GenAI Arena contains three components: (1) text-to-image, text-to-video and image editing
arena, which accept community voting to obtain the preference pairs. (2) The leaderboard utilizes
the preference pairs to calculate elo ranking for all the evaluated models. (3) We further release
GenAI-Bench to judge different multimodal LLM judges.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

