Boundary Matters: A Bi-Level
Active Finetuning Method

1

Han Lu1 , Yichen Xie2 , Xiaokang Yang1 , Junchi Yan1,‡
Dept. of CSE & School of AI & Moe Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
University of California, Berkeley
{sjtu_luhan, xkyang, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn, yichen_xie@berkeley.edu
https://github.com/Thinklab-SJTU/BiLAF

Abstract
The pretraining-finetuning paradigm has gained widespread adoption in vision
tasks and other fields. However, the finetuning phase still requires high-quality
annotated samples. To overcome this challenge, the concept of active finetuning
has emerged, aiming to select the most appropriate samples for model finetuning
within a limited budget. Existing active learning methods struggle in this scenario
due to their inherent bias in batch selection. Meanwhile, the recent active finetuning
approach focuses solely on global distribution alignment but neglects the contributions of samples to local boundaries. Therefore, we propose a Bi-Level Active
Finetuning framework (BiLAF) to select the samples for annotation in one shot,
encompassing two stages: core sample selection for global diversity and boundary
sample selection for local decision uncertainty. Without the need of ground-truth
labels, our method can successfully identify pseudo-class centers, apply a novel
denoising technique, and iteratively select boundary samples with designed evaluation metric. Extensive experiments provide qualitative and quantitative evidence of
our method’s superior efficacy, consistently outperforming the existing baselines.

1

Introduction

The advancement of deep learning significantly relies on extensive training data. However, annotating
large-scale datasets is challenging, requiring significant human labor and resources. To address this
challenge, the pretraining-finetuning paradigm has gained widespread adoption. In this paradigm,
models are first pretrained in an unsupervised manner on large datasets and then finetuned on a smaller,
labeled subset. While there is substantial research about both unsupervised pretraining [7, 11, 13, 17]
and supervised finetuning [15, 27], the optimization of sample set selection for annotation has received
less attention, especially in scenarios with limited labeling resources.
Active learning methods [33, 36, 31], though effective in identifying valuable samples for training
from scratch, face significant challenges when integrated into the pretraining-finetuning framework [3,
41]. The primary limitation stems from the batch-selection strategy commonly used by these methods.
Allocating a limited annotation budget across multiple iterations can introduce harmful biases,
which leads to overfitting. Consequently, this undermines the general representational quality of the
pretrained model and leads to the accumulation of errors in the iterative selection process.
To fill in the research gap, the Active Finetuning task has been formulated in [41], which focuses on the
selection of samples for supervised finetuning using pretrained models. This method optimizes sample
selection by minimizing the distributional gap between the selected subset and the entire data pool.
‡
Corresponding author. This work was supported by NSFC (92370201, 62222607) and Shanghai Municipal
Science and Technology Major Project under Grant 2021SHZDZX0102.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

