Multi-model Ensemble Conformal Prediction
in Dynamic Environments

Erfan Hajihashemi
Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
ehajihas@uci.edu
Yanning Shen∗
Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
yannings@uci.edu

Abstract
Conformal prediction is an uncertainty quantification method that constructs a
prediction set for a previously unseen datum, ensuring the true label is included
with a predetermined coverage probability. Adaptive conformal prediction has been
developed to address data distribution shifts in dynamic environments. However,
the efficiency of prediction sets varies depending on the learning model used.
Employing a single fixed model may not consistently offer the best performance
in dynamic environments with unknown data distribution shifts. To address this
issue, we introduce a novel adaptive conformal prediction framework, where the
model used for creating prediction sets is selected ‘on the fly’ from multiple
candidate models. The proposed algorithm is proven to achieve strongly adaptive
regret over all intervals while maintaining valid coverage. Experiments on real
and synthetic datasets corroborate that the proposed approach consistently yields
more efficient prediction sets while maintaining valid coverage, outperforming
alternative methods.

1

Introduction

Most machine learning algorithm designs aim to enhance label prediction accuracy. Nevertheless, a
significant challenge persists as many models demonstrate limitations in predicting labels with high
certainty, falling short of achieving the desired levels of accuracy and other critical evaluation metrics.
In applications such as medical diagnosis, it is sometimes more efficient to predict a subset of labels
rather than a single label [Levy et al., 2021, Straitouri et al., 2023]. This necessitates predicting a set
of candidate labels with a valid coverage probability, rather than limiting to a single label.
One of the most widely used frameworks for set prediction is conformal prediction [Vovk et al.,
2005]. Conventional conformal prediction algorithms can achieve the desired coverage assuming
the exchangeability of data [Balasubramanian et al., 2014]. However, in many real-world online
problems, the distribution of data shifts over time, making the exchangeability assumption no longer
applicable. Consequently, adaptive conformal prediction algorithms have been developed [Gibbs
and Candes, 2021], where prediction sets are constructed in a time-varying manner. Despite these
advancements, the efficiency (e.g., prediction set size or regret) of previous conformal prediction
methods in online settings with distribution shifts heavily depends on the model employed, and
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

