Precise asymptotics of reweighted least-squares
algorithms for linear diagonal networks

Chiraag Kaushik
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30308
ckaushik7@gatech.edu

Justin Romberg
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30308
jrom@ece.gatech.edu

Vidya Muthukumar
Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Industrial & Systems Engineering
Atlanta, GA 30308
vmuthukumar8@gatech.edu

Abstract
The classical iteratively reweighted least-squares (IRLS) algorithm aims to recover an unknown signal from linear measurements by performing a sequence of
weighted least squares problems, where the weights are recursively updated at each
step. Varieties of this algorithm have been shown to achieve favorable empirical
performance and theoretical guarantees for sparse recovery and ℓp -norm minimization. Recently, some preliminary connections have also been made between
IRLS and certain types of non-convex linear neural network architectures that are
observed to exploit low-dimensional structure in high-dimensional linear models.
In this work, we provide a unified asymptotic analysis for a family of algorithms
that encompasses IRLS, the recently proposed lin-RFM algorithm (which was
motivated by feature learning in neural networks), and the alternating minimization
algorithm on linear diagonal neural networks. Our analysis operates in a “batched”
setting with i.i.d. Gaussian covariates and shows that, with appropriately chosen
reweighting policy, the algorithm can achieve favorable performance in only a
handful of iterations. We also extend our results to the case of group-sparse recovery and show that leveraging this structure in the reweighting scheme provably
improves test error compared to coordinate-wise reweighting.

1

Introduction

Many high-dimensional machine learning and signal processing tasks rely on solving optimization
problems with regularizers that explicitly enforce certain structure on the learned parameters. The
traditional formulation for such tasks involves a regularized empirical risk minimization (ERM)
problem of the form
min L(θ) + λR(θ),
(1)
θ∈Rd

where L(·) is a loss function that encourages fidelity to the observed training data and R(·) encodes
desirable structural properties. In many important applications, it is desirable to obtain a sparsityseeking solution; in such cases, the regularizer is typically non-smooth, as in the LASSO, group
LASSO, and nuclear norm regularizers. As an alternative approach to this non-smooth optimization,
several recent works have proposed the “Hadamard over-parameterization” of θ into the entrywise product of two factors u ⊙ v. While the resulting minimization problem is non-convex, this
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

