Graph Neural Networks Need
Cluster-Normalize-Activate Modules
Arseny Skryagin1
Felix Divo1
Mohammad Amin Ali1
2
Devendra Singh Dhami
Kristian Kersting1,3,4,5
1

AI & ML Group, TU Darmstadt 2 TU Eindhoven 3 Hessian Center for AI (hessian.AI)
German Research Center for AI (DFKI) 5 Centre for Cognitive Science, TU Darmstadt
{arseny.skryagin,felix.divo,kersting}@cs.tu-darmstadt.de
amin.ali@stud.tu-darmstadt.de d.s.dhami@tue.nl

4

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are non-Euclidean deep learning models for graphstructured data. Despite their successful and diverse applications, oversmoothing
prohibits deep architectures due to node features converging to a single fixed point.
This severely limits their potential to solve complex tasks. To counteract this
tendency, we propose a plug-and-play module consisting of three steps: Cluster → Normalize → Activate (CNA). By applying CNA modules, GNNs search
and form super nodes in each layer, which are normalized and activated individually. We demonstrate in node classification and property prediction tasks that
CNA significantly improves the accuracy over the state-of-the-art. Particularly,
CNA reaches 94.18% and 95.75% accuracy on Cora and CiteSeer, respectively. It
further benefits GNNs in regression tasks as well, reducing the mean squared error
compared to all baselines. At the same time, GNNs with CNA require substantially
fewer learnable parameters than competing architectures.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are a promising approach to leveraging the full extent of the geometric
properties of various types of data in many different
key domains [Zhou et al., 2020a, Bronstein et al.,
2021, Waikhom and Patgiri, 2023]. For instance, they
are used to predict the stability of molecules [Wang
et al., 2023], aid in drug discovery [Askr et al., 2023],
recommend new contacts in social networks [Zhang
and Chen, 2018], identify weak points in electrical power grids [Nauck et al., 2022], predict traffic
volumes in cities [Jiang and Luo, 2022], and much
more [Waikhom and Patgiri, 2023]. To solve such
tasks, one typically uses message-passing GNNs,
where information from nodes is propagated along
outgoing edges to their neighbors, where it is aggregated and then projected by a learned non-linear function. Increasing the expressivity of GNNs is crucial to
learning more complex relationships and eventually
improving their utility in a plethora of applications.

Baseline

Epoch 1

Epoch 50

Epoch 100

Epoch 50

Epoch 100

CNA

Epoch 1

Figure 1: Evolution of node embeddings
for the Cora dataset. The colors indicate the
membership of one of the seven target classes.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

