The Representation Landscape of Few-Shot Learning
and Fine-Tuning in Large Language Models

Diego Doimo

Alessandro Serra

Alessio Ansuini

Alberto Cazzaniga

Area Science Park, Trieste, Italy
{diego.doimo,alessandro.serra,alessio.ansuini,alberto.cazzaniga}
@areasciencepark.it

Abstract
In-context learning (ICL) and supervised fine-tuning (SFT) are two common strategies for improving the performance of modern large language models (LLMs) on
specific tasks. Despite their different natures, these strategies often lead to comparable performance gains. However, little is known about whether they induce similar
representations inside LLMs. We approach this problem by analyzing the probability landscape of their hidden representations in the two cases. More specifically,
we compare how LLMs solve the same question-answering task, finding that ICL
and SFT create very different internal structures, in both cases undergoing a sharp
transition in the middle of the network. In the first half of the network, ICL shapes
interpretable representations hierarchically organized according to their semantic
content. In contrast, the probability landscape obtained with SFT is fuzzier and
semantically mixed. In the second half of the model, the fine-tuned representations develop probability modes that better encode the identity of answers, while
the landscape of ICL representations is characterized by less defined peaks. Our
approach reveals the diverse computational strategies developed inside LLMs to
solve the same task across different conditions, allowing us to make a step towards
designing optimal methods to extract information from language models.

1

Introduction

With the rise of pre-trained large language models (LLMs), supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and incontext learning (ICL) have become the central paradigms for solving domain-specific language tasks
[1]. Fine-tuning requires a set of labeled examples to adapt the pre-trained LLM to the target task
by modifying all or part of the model parameters. ICL, on the other hand, is preferred when little or
no supervised data is available. In ICL, the model receives an input request with a task description
followed by a few examples. It then generates a response based on this context without updating its
parameters.
While operationally, the differences between SFT and ICL are clear in how they handle model parameters, it is less clear how they affect the model’s representation space. Although both methods can
achieve similar performance, it is unknown whether they also structure their internal representations
in the same way. Differently from recent contributions which compared ICL and SFT in terms of
generalization performance [2–4] and efficiency [5], in this work we analyze how these two learning
paradigms affect the geometry of the representations.
Previous studies described the geometry of the hidden layers using distances and angles [6, 7],
often relying on low-dimensional projections of the data [8–10]. In contrast, we take a densitybased approach [11] that leverages the low-dimensionality of the hidden layers [12–14] and finds
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

