Pseudo-Siamese Blind-Spot Transformers for
Self-Supervised Real-World Denoising

Yuhui Quan∗ ,
Tianxiang Zheng∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering
South China University of Technology

Hui Ji∗
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore

Abstract
Real-world image denoising remains a challenge task. This paper studies selfsupervised image denoising, requiring only noisy images captured in a single shot.
We revamping the blind-spot technique by leveraging the transformer’s capability
for long-range pixel interactions, which is crucial for effectively removing noise
dependence in relating pixel–a requirement for achieving great performance for
the blind-spot technique. The proposed method integrates these elements with
two key innovations: a directional self-attention (DSA) module using a halfplane grid for self-attention, creating a sophisticated blind-spot structure, and a
Siamese architecture with mutual learning to mitigate the performance impacts
from the restricted attention grid in DSA. Experiments on benchmark datasets
demonstrate that our method outperforms existing self-supervised and clean-imagefree methods. This combination of blind-spot and transformer techniques provides
a natural synergy for tackling real-world image denoising challenges.

1

Introduction

Images taken with digital cameras inevitably acquire noise from various sources. Image denoising
aims to recover a clean (noise-free) image from its noisy counterpart, serving as an important technique in many low-level vision tasks. Recently, deep learning has prominently driven advancements
in image denoising; see e.g., [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. Early works typically take a supervised
learning approach to train a neural network (NN) on a dataset with paired noisy and clean images,
where noisy images are synthesized by corrupting clean images with Additive White Gaussian Noise
(AWGN). As observed in [6, 12], a denoising NN trained on AWGN fails to generalize well on
real-world noisy images due to the statistical distribution gap between AWGN and real-world noise.
To address this issue in supervised learning, several studies have concentrated on constructing datasets
with paired real-world noisy and clean images, such as the Smartphone Image Denoising Dataset
(SIDD) [13] and the Darmstadt Noise Dataset (DND) [14]. However, creating these datasets is
labor-intensive, involving multiple acquisitions of images of the same scene, requiring rigorous image
alignment, and is inapplicable to dynamic scenes. Additionally, the statistical properties of real noise
vary for different camera systems and settings. These limitations restrict the wider application of
supervised-learning-based solutions in real-world image denoising.
To address the difficulties of creating paired noisy-clean image datasets that capture the noise
characteristics of the targeted testing data, some approaches train denoising NNs using unpaired noisy
and clean images [15, 16, 17, 8]. Other studies [18, 19, 20] use multiple noisy images of the same
scene as training data. While these methods relax data collection requirements, limitations remain.
The former still requires clean images, which is challenging to collect, especially in scientific/medical
imaging. The latter involves rigorous image alignment, making it unsuitable for dynamic scenes.
∗

email: csyhquan@scut.edu.cn (Y. Quan); cszhengtx@mail.scut.edu.cn (T. Zheng); matjh@nus.edu.sg (H.

Ji).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

