Brain-JEPA: Brain Dynamics Foundation Model
with Gradient Positioning and Spatiotemporal Masking

Zijian Dong∗, Ruilin Li∗, Yilei Wu, Thuan Tinh Nguyen, Joanna Su Xian Chong, Fang Ji,
Nathanael Ren Jie Tong, Christopher Li Hsian Chen, Juan Helen Zhou†
zijian.dong@u.nus.edu, {li.rl, helen.zhou}@nus.edu.sg
National University of Singapore

Abstract
We introduce Brain-JEPA, a brain dynamics foundation model with the JointEmbedding Predictive Architecture (JEPA). This pioneering model achieves
state-of-the-art performance in demographic prediction, disease diagnosis/prognosis,
and trait prediction through fine-tuning. Furthermore, it excels in off-the-shelf
evaluations (e.g., linear probing) and demonstrates superior generalizability across
different ethnic groups, surpassing the previous large model for brain activity
significantly. Brain-JEPA incorporates two innovative techniques: Brain Gradient
Positioning and Spatiotemporal Masking. Brain Gradient Positioning introduces
a functional coordinate system for brain functional parcellation, enhancing the
positional encoding of different Regions of Interest (ROIs). Spatiotemporal Masking,
tailored to the unique characteristics of fMRI data, addresses the challenge of heterogeneous time-series patches. These methodologies enhance model performance
and advance our understanding of the neural circuits underlying cognition. Overall,
Brain-JEPA is paving the way to address pivotal questions of building brain functional coordinate system and masking brain activity at the AI-neuroscience interface,
and setting a potentially new paradigm in brain activity analysis through downstream
adaptation. Code is available at: https://github.com/Eric-LRL/Brain-JEPA.

1

Introduction

Understanding large-scale brain activity data is crucial for deciphering the complex mechanisms
underlying cognitive processes and human behavior. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
captures blood-oxygen-level dependent (BOLD) signals that reflect regional brain activity. It emerges
as an indispensable tool in neuroscience for identifying the neural bases of cognitive processes [1, 2, 3].
Deep learning approaches have been developed for fMRI analysis, improving brain disease diagnosis
and deepening insights into cognition and behavior [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. Despite notable
advances, these task-specific models suffer from limited generalizability and adaptability to other
tasks. In addition, they fail to leverage the vast amounts of unlabeled fMRI data available [14, 15].
Artificial intelligence (AI) is experiencing a paradigm shift from task-specific training to building
foundation models that are trained on extensive data using self-supervision at scale [16]. Unlike the
models with singular functions, foundation models can be adapted to a diverse array of downstream
tasks. Large language models such as GPT [17] and LLaMA [18] have shown significant potential in
natural language processing, with expansive applications in healthcare, biomedicine, and beyond [16].
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

