MIDGArD: Modular Interpretable Diffusion over
Graphs for Articulated Designs

Quentin Leboutet

Nina Wiedemann

Zhipeng Cai

Michael Paulitsch

Kai Yuan

Intel Labs – XRL – eXtended Reality Laboratory
{firstname.lastname}@intel.com

Abstract
Providing functionality through articulation and interaction with objects is a key
objective in 3D generation. We introduce MIDGArD (Modular Interpretable Diffusion over Graphs for Articulated Designs), a novel diffusion-based framework for
articulated 3D asset generation. MIDGArD improves over foundational work in
the field by enhancing quality, consistency, and controllability in the generation
process. This is achieved through MIDGArD’s modular approach that separates the
problem into two primary components: structure generation and shape generation.
The structure generation module of MIDGArD aims at producing coherent articulation features from noisy or incomplete inputs. It acts on the object’s structural and
kinematic attributes, represented as features of a graph that are being progressively
denoised to issue coherent and interpretable articulation solutions. This denoised
graph then serves as an advanced conditioning mechanism for the shape generation
module, a 3D generative model that populates each link of the articulated structure
with consistent 3D meshes. Experiments show the superiority of MIDGArD on
the quality, consistency, and interpretability of the generated assets. Importantly,
the generated models are fully simulatable, i.e., can be seamlessly integrated into
standard physics engines such as MuJoCo, broadening MIDGArD’s applicability
to fields such as digital content creation, meta realities, and robotics.

}
}
}
}
}
}
}
Figure 1: The MIDGArD generative pipeline.

1

Introduction

Despite their significance for applications in meta realities and embodied AI, the creation of 3D models
of articulated objects remains a manual endeavor, and existing datasets [92, 97, 65, 102, 47, 63, 15]
are often limited in both scope and scale. Human designers utilize strong prior knowledge of object
geometry and kinematic structures, a capability that automated systems have yet to fully replicate.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

