Adjust Pearson’s r to Measure Arbitrary Monotone
Dependence

Xinbo Ai
School of Intelligent Engineering and Automation
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
Beijing 100876, China
axb@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Pearson’s r, the most widely-used correlation coefficient, is traditionally regarded
as exclusively capturing linear dependence, leading to its discouragement in contexts involving nonlinear relationships. However, recent research challenges this
notion, suggesting that Pearson’s r should not be ruled out a priori for measuring
nonlinear monotone relationships. Pearson’s r is essentially a scaled covariance,
rooted in the renowned Cauchy-Schwarz Inequality. Our findings reveal that different scaling bounds yield coefficients with different capture ranges, and interestingly,
tighter bounds actually expand these ranges. We derive a tighter inequality than
Cauchy-Schwarz Inequality, leverage it to refine Pearson’s r, and propose a new
correlation coefficient, i.e., rearrangement correlation. This coefficient is able to
capture arbitrary monotone relationships, both linear and nonlinear ones. It reverts
to Pearson’s r in linear scenarios. Simulation experiments and real-life investigations show that the rearrangement correlation is more accurate in measuring
nonlinear monotone dependence than the three classical correlation coefficients,
and other recently proposed dependence measures.

1

Introduction

Proposed in the late 19th century, Pearson’s r (Pearson, 1896) has been one of the main tools for
scientists and engineers to study bivariate dependence during the 20th century. It is remarkably
unaffected by the passage of time (Lee Rodgers and Alan Nice Wander, 1988) and still goes strong
in the 21st century (Puccetti, 2022). It has been, and probably still is, the most used measure for
statistical associations, and generally accepted as the measure of dependence, not only in statistics,
but also in most applications of natural and social sciences (Tjøstheim, Otneim, and Støve, 2022).
Despite its popularity, Pearson’s r has a number of shortcomings, and the most serious issue might
be that it can only capture linear dependence, as stated in classical textbooks (Wasserman, 2004)
and contemporary literatures (Armstrong, 2019; Tjøstheim, Otneim, and Støve, 2022). The use of
Pearson’s r has been strongly discouraged for forms of associations other than linear ones (Speed,
2011).
Numerous nonlinear alternative coefficients have been proposed to address this deficiency, such
as Spearman’s ρ (Spearman, 1904), Kendall’s τ (Kendall, 1938), Hilbert-Schmidt Independence
Criterion(HSIC) (Gretton et al., 2005), distance correlation(dCor) (Székely, Rizzo, and Bakirov,
2007), Maximal Information Coefficient(MIC) (Reshef et al., 2011), and Chatterjee’s ξ (Chatterjee,
2021). Their capture ranges are extending from linear dependence to monotone dependence, and
then to non-monotone dependence. Without exception, all these coefficients adopt radically different
approaches for nonlinear dependence, rather than following the original way of Pearson’s r for a
breakthrough.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

