Predicting the Performance of Foundation Models via
Agreement-on-the-Line

Rahul Saxena∗1

Taeyoun Kim∗1 Aman Mehra∗1 Christina Baek1
Zico Kolter1,2 Aditi Raghunathan1

Carnegie Mellon University1 , Bosch Center for AI2
{rsaxena2, taeyoun3, amanmehr, kbaek, zkolter, raditi}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Estimating the out-of-distribution performance in regimes where labels are scarce is
critical to safely deploy foundation models. Recently, it was shown that ensembles
of neural networks observe the phenomena “agreement-on-the-line”, which can
be leveraged to reliably predict OOD performance without labels. However, in
contrast to classical neural networks that are trained on in-distribution data from
scratch for numerous epochs, foundation models undergo minimal finetuning from
heavily pretrained weights, which may reduce the ensemble diversity needed to
observe agreement-on-the-line. In our work, we demonstrate that when lightly
finetuning multiple runs from a single foundation model, the choice of randomness during training (linear head initialization, data ordering, and data subsetting)
can lead to drastically different levels of agreement-on-the-line in the resulting
ensemble. Surprisingly, only random head initialization is able to reliably induce
agreement-on-the-line in finetuned foundation models across vision and language
benchmarks. Second, we demonstrate that ensembles of multiple foundation models pretrained on different datasets but finetuned on the same task can also show
agreement-on-the-line. In total, by careful construction of a diverse ensemble, we
can utilize agreement-on-the-line-based methods to predict the OOD performance
of foundation models with high precision.

1

Introduction

Foundation models (FM), or large models first pretrained on open world data then finetuned or
prompted for a specific downstream task, have proven to be powerful solutions for many common
machine learning problems. A notable trait about FMs is that they are far more robust to distribution
shift than other deep learning approaches — across image and language benchmarks, they suffer
a smaller performance degradation on out-of-distribution (OOD) data, that may vary substantially
from the in-distribution (ID) finetuning data [43, 42, 7, 60, 58, 14]. From clinical decision-making
in different hospitals to navigating robots through unseen terrains, FMs are increasingly utilized
for tasks prone to distribution shift. However, evaluating these models in OOD settings remains
difficult: in many cases, acquiring labels for OOD data is costly and inefficient, while unlabled OOD
data is much easier to collect. Although the field has explored other means for estimating OOD
accuracy without labeled data, they are not ideal for FMs. A reliable FM performance estimator has
the following desirable properties. First, the method must be computationally efficient to account
for FMs’ large model size. Second, FMs are leveraged for many different tasks (e.g., classification,
question-answering, regression), so the method should also be versatile across tasks. Third, as we
will see, methods for finetuned FMs may require different model assumptions from neural networks
trained from scratch.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

