Adversarial Environment Design via Regret-Guided
Diffusion Models
Hojun Chung1 , Junseo Lee1 , Minsoo Kim1 , Dohyeong Kim2 , and Songhwai Oh1,2,∗
1
2

Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence and ASRI, Seoul National University
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and ASRI, Seoul National University
{hojun.chung, junseo.lee, minsoo.kim, dohyeong.kim}@rllab.snu.ac.kr,
songhwai@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Training agents that are robust to environmental changes remains a significant
challenge in deep reinforcement learning (RL). Unsupervised environment design
(UED) has recently emerged to address this issue by generating a set of training
environments tailored to the agent’s capabilities. While prior works demonstrate
that UED has the potential to learn a robust policy, their performance is constrained
by the capabilities of the environment generation. To this end, we propose a
novel UED algorithm, adversarial environment design via regret-guided diffusion
models (ADD). The proposed method guides the diffusion-based environment
generator with the regret of the agent to produce environments that the agent finds
challenging but conducive to further improvement. By exploiting the representation
power of diffusion models, ADD can directly generate adversarial environments
while maintaining the diversity of training environments, enabling the agent to
effectively learn a robust policy. Our experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed method successfully generates an instructive curriculum of environments,
outperforming UED baselines in zero-shot generalization across novel, out-ofdistribution environments. Project page: https://rllab-snu.github.io/projects/ADD

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved great success in various challenging domains, such
as Atari [1], GO [2], and real-world robotics tasks [3, 4]. Despite the progress, the deep RL agent
struggles with the generalization problem; it often fails in unseen environments even with a small
difference from the training environment distribution [5, 6]. To train well-generalizing policies,
various prior works have used domain randomization (DR) [7, 8, 9], which provides RL agents with
randomly generated environments. While DR enhances the diversity of the training environments,
it requires a large number of trials to generate meaningful structures in high-dimensional domains.
Curriculum reinforcement learning [10, 11] has been demonstrated to address these issues by providing instructive sequences of environments. Since manually designing an effective curriculum for
complicated tasks is challenging, prior works [12, 13] focus on generating curricula that consider the
current agent’s capabilities. Recently, unsupervised environment design (UED, [14]) has emerged
as a scalable approach, notable for its advantage of requiring no prior knowledge. UED algorithms
alternate between training the policy and designing training environments that maximize the regret
of the agent. This closed-loop framework ensures the agent learns a minimax regret policy [15],
assuming that the two-player game between the agent and the environment generator reaches the
Nash equilibrium.
∗

Corresponding author: Songhwai Oh

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

