KnowGPT: Knowledge Graph based PrompTing for
Large Language Models
∗

Qinggang Zhang*† , Junnan Dong*† , Hao Chen† , Daochen Zha‡ , Zailiang Yu§ , Xiao Huang†
†
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, ‡ Rice University, § Zhejiang Lab
{qinggangg.zhang,hanson.dong}@connect.polyu.hk, sundaychenhao@gmail.com
daochen.zha@rice.edu, yuzl@zhejianglab.com,xiaohuang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in
many real-world applications. Nonetheless, LLMs are often criticized for their
tendency to produce hallucinations, wherein the models fabricate incorrect statements on tasks beyond their knowledge and perception. To alleviate this issue,
graph retrieval-augmented generation (GraphRAG) has been extensively explored
which leverages the factual knowledge in knowledge graphs (KGs) to ground
the LLM’s responses in established facts and principles. However, most state-ofthe-art LLMs are closed-source, making it challenging to develop a prompting
framework that can efficiently and effectively integrate KGs into LLMs with hard
prompts only. Generally, it usually suffers from three critical issues, including
huge search space, high API costs, and laborious prompt engineering, that impede the widespread application in practice. To this end, we introduce a novel
Knowledge Graph-based PrompTing framework, namely KnowGPT, to enhance
LLMs with domain knowledge. KnowGPT contains a knowledge extraction module
to extract the most informative knowledge from KGs, and a context-aware prompt
construction module to automatically convert extracted knowledge into effective
prompts. Experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate that KnowGPT
significantly outperforms all competitors including the state-of-the-art GraphRAG
models. Notably, KnowGPT achieves a 92.6% accuracy on OpenbookQA leaderboard,
close to human-level performance.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs), such as GPT-4 [54] and Claude 3 [3], have surprised the world
with superior performance in a wide range of real-world applications [14, 38, 82, 83]. Despite their
impressive performance, LLMs are frequently criticized for their limited ability to handle factual
information accurately and their tendency to generate hallucinations [18], especially when faced
with questions requiring domain-specific or professional knowledge not covered in their training
corpus [2, 59]. For example, when queried about nutrient composition, an LLM might erroneously
associate it with “energy”, as depicted in Figure 1. This error stems from the model’s insufficient
biological knowledge. Therefore, integrating domain knowledge into LLMs is crucial for reducing
hallucinations and unlocking their full potential in diverse industry applications [24].
Recently, retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) has been explored, which can enhance LLMs with
external knowledge from text corpora or online sources [41, 89, 53]. It combines LLMs with external
knowledge retrieval systems to help reduce hallucinations. However, these models face challenges
in real-world applications due to the varying quality of available data. Domain knowledge is often
scattered across different sources, such as textbooks, research papers, technical manuals, and industry
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

