Alignment at Pre-training!
Towards Native Alignment for Arabic LLMs
Juhao Liang†1,2 , Zhenyang Cai†1,2 , Jianqing Zhu†3 , Huang Huang†4 , Kewei Zong4 , Bang An3 ,
Abdulmohsen Alharthi3 , Juncai He3 , Lian Zhang4 , Haizhou Li1,2 , Benyou Wang*,1,2 , and Jinchao Xu3
1

Shenzhen Research Institue of Big Data, Shenzhen, China
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
3
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
4
Shenzhen International Center for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Shenzhen Research Institute
of Big Data
*
wangbenyou@cuhk.edu.cn
2

Abstract
The alignment of large language models (LLMs) is critical for developing effective
and safe language models. Traditional approaches focus on aligning models
during the instruction tuning or reinforcement learning stages, referred to in this
paper as ‘post alignment’. We argue that alignment during the pre-training phase,
which we term ‘native alignment’, warrants investigation. Native alignment aims
to prevent unaligned content from the beginning, rather than relying on posthoc processing. This approach leverages extensively aligned pre-training data to
enhance the effectiveness and usability of pre-trained models. Our study specifically
explores the application of native alignment in the context of Arabic LLMs. We
conduct comprehensive experiments and ablation studies to evaluate the impact of
native alignment on model performance and alignment stability. Additionally, we
release open-source Arabic LLMs that demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on
various benchmarks, providing significant benefits to the Arabic LLM community. 1

1

Introduction

The alignment of large language models (LLMs) with human preferences is a crucial component in
the development of effective and safe language models for downstream tasks [1, 2, 3]. While most
existing studies focus on alignment during the instruction tuning phase [4, 5, 6] or the reinforcement
learning stage [2, 3, 7], they often overlook the pre-training stage. Unlike the common practice
of aligning LLMs during instruction tuning or reinforcement learning phase, referred to as ‘post
alignment’, in this paper, we delve into the relatively unexplored research area of model alignment
during the pre-training stage. We term this concept ‘native alignment’, with the goal of enhancing
the effectiveness and usability of LLMs during pre-training, a phase that utilizes a significant amount
of data for next-token prediction training [8, 9, 10].
Post alignment, the conventional approach to human preference alignment 2 typically conducted after
the model’s pre-training stage, is widely used in LLM development. Its effectiveness has been verified
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Benyou Wang is the corresponding author.
1
Our code is available at https://github.com/FreedomIntelligence/AceGPT-v2
2
Human preference alignment aims to ensure AI outputs reflect human values and preferences [2, 5, 11].
This is typically evaluated by crowd workers who compare model outputs and indicate their preferences based
on three key aspects: accuracy, fluency, and safety. Accuracy refers to the relevance and usefulness of the answer,
∗

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

