Local to Global: Learning Dynamics and Effect of
Initialization for Transformers
Ashok Vardhan Makkuva ∗
EPFL
Alliot Nagle
UT Austin

Marco Bondaschi ∗
EPFL

Chanakya Ekbote
EPFL

Hyeji Kim
UT Austin

Adway Girish
EPFL

Michael Gastpar
EPFL

Abstract
In recent years, transformer-based models have revolutionized deep learning, particularly in sequence modeling. To better understand this phenomenon, there is a
growing interest in using Markov input processes to study transformers. However,
our current understanding in this regard remains limited with many fundamental
questions about how transformers learn Markov chains still unanswered. In this
paper, we address this by focusing on first-order Markov chains and single-layer
transformers, providing a comprehensive characterization of the learning dynamics
in this context. Specifically, we prove that transformer parameters trained on nexttoken prediction loss can either converge to global or local minima, contingent on
the initialization and the Markovian data properties, and we characterize the precise
conditions under which this occurs. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
result of its kind highlighting the role of initialization. We further demonstrate that
our theoretical findings are corroborated by empirical evidence. Based on these
insights, we provide guidelines for the initialization of single-layer transformers
and demonstrate their effectiveness. Finally, we outline several open problems in
this arena. Code is available at: https://github.com/Bond1995/Markov.

1

Introduction

Transformers have been at the forefront of recent successes across various fields including natural
language processing [34]. To obtain insights into their impressive sequential modeling capabilities, a
notable emerging theme among several recent works is to model the input data as a Markov process.
Using this Markovian perspective, works such as [24, 14, 8], among others, study the in-context learning capabilities of transformer. [23] analyzes the loss-landscape for the next-token prediction task,
while [18] shows an equivalence between the attention mechanism and Markov models. Although
these works reveal interesting insights about transformers and their capabilities, many fundamental
questions about their learning dynamics remain unanswered. In particular, a comprehensive characterization of their training dynamics vis-á-vis the data distributional properties and the role of
initialization is still missing.
To address this gap, in this paper, we focus on the canonical setting of first-order Markov chains and
single-layer transformers and analyze the learning dynamics in this context. Specifically, we prove
(Thms. 2, 3, and 8) that the input data properties and the parameter initialization play a significant role
in the convergence of the transformer parameters to either local or global minima on the loss surface.
Further, we precisely characterize (Figs. 1 and Fig. 2) the specific data characteristics and the region
of initialization under which this convergence occurs. Based on these insights, we provide guidelines
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to ashok.makkuva@epfl.ch.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

