Federated Learning over Connected Modes

Dennis Grinwald1,2 , Philipp Wiesner2 , Shinichi Nakajima1,2,3
1
BIFOLD, 2 TU Berlin, 3 RIKEN Center for AIP
{dennis.grinwald, wiesner, nakajima}@tu-berlin.de

Abstract
Statistical heterogeneity in federated learning poses two major challenges: slow
global training due to conflicting gradient signals, and the need of personalization
for local distributions. In this work, we tackle both challenges by leveraging recent
advances in linear mode connectivity — identifying a linearly connected low-loss
region in the parameter space of neural networks, which we call solution simplex.
We propose federated learning over connected modes (F LOCO), where clients
are assigned local subregions in this simplex based on their gradient signals, and
together learn the shared global solution simplex. This allows personalization of
the client models to fit their local distributions within the degrees of freedom in
the solution simplex and homogenizes the update signals for the global simplex
training. Our experiments show that F LOCO accelerates the global training process,
and significantly improves the local accuracy with minimal computational overhead
in cross-silo federated learning settings.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) [1] is a decentralized machine learning paradigm that facilitates collaborative
model training across distributed devices while preserving data privacy. However, in typical real
applications, statistical heterogeneity—non-identically and independently distributed (non-IID) data
distributions at clients—makes it difficult to train well-performing models. To tackle this difficulty,
various methods have been proposed, e.g., personalized FL [2], clustered FL [3], advanced client
selection strategies [4], robust aggregation [5], regularization strategies [6], and federated meta- and
multi-task learning approaches [7, 8]. These methods aim either at training a global model that
performs well on the global distribution [9], or, as it is common in personalized FL, at training
multiple client-dependent models each of which performs well on its local distribution [10]. These
two aims often pose a trade-off—a model that shows better local performance tends to suffer from
worse global performance, and vice versa. In this work, we aim to develop a FL method that improves
local performance compared to state-of-the art methods without sacrificing global performance.
Our approach leverages recent findings on mode connectivity [11–13]—the existence of low-loss
paths in the parameter space between independently trained neural networks—and its applications
[14]. These works show that minima for the same task are typically connected by simple low-loss
curves, and that this connectivity benefits training for multi-task and continual learning. In particular,
the authors show that embracing mode connectivity between models improves accuracy on each task
and remedies the risk of catastrophic forgetting.
In this paper, we leverage such effects, and propose federated learning over connected modes (F LOCO),
where the clients share and together train a solution simplex—a linearly connected low-loss region in
the parameter space. Specifically, F LOCO represents clients as points within the standard simplex
based on the similarity between their gradients, and assigns each client a specific subregion of the
simplex. Clients then participate in FL by sampling different models within their assigned subregions
and sending back the gradient information to update the vertices of the global solution simplex (see
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

