Reshuffling Resampling Splits Can Improve
Generalization of Hyperparameter Optimization

Thomas Nagler∗
t.nagler@lmu.de

Lennart Schneider∗

Bernd Bischl

Matthias Feurer

Department of Statistics, LMU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)

Abstract
Hyperparameter optimization is crucial for obtaining peak performance of machine learning models. The standard protocol evaluates various hyperparameter
configurations using a resampling estimate of the generalization error to guide optimization and select a final hyperparameter configuration. Without much evidence,
paired resampling splits, i.e., either a fixed train-validation split or a fixed crossvalidation scheme, are often recommended. We show that, surprisingly, reshuffling
the splits for every configuration often improves the final model’s generalization
performance on unseen data. Our theoretical analysis explains how reshuffling
affects the asymptotic behavior of the validation loss surface and provides a bound
on the expected regret in the limiting regime. This bound connects the potential
benefits of reshuffling to the signal and noise characteristics of the underlying
optimization problem. We confirm our theoretical results in a controlled simulation study and demonstrate the practical usefulness of reshuffling in a large-scale,
realistic hyperparameter optimization experiment. While reshuffling leads to test
performances that are competitive with using fixed splits, it drastically improves
results for a single train-validation holdout protocol and can often make holdout
become competitive with standard CV while being computationally cheaper.

1

Introduction

Hyperparameters have been shown to strongly influence the performance of machine learning models
(van Rijn & Hutter, 2018; Probst et al., 2019). The primary goal of hyperparameter optimization
(HPO; also called tuning) is the identification and selection of a hyperparameter configuration
(HPC) that minimizes the estimated generalization error (Feurer & Hutter, 2019; Bischl et al., 2023).
Typically, this task is challenged by the absence of a closed-form mathematical description of the
objective function, the unavailability of an analytic gradient, and the large cost to evaluate HPCs,
categorizing HPO as a noisy, black-box optimization problem. An HPC is evaluated via resampling,
such as a holdout split or M -fold cross-validation (CV), during tuning.
These resampling splits are usually constructed in a fixed and instantiated manner, i.e., the same
training and validation splits are used for the internal evaluation of all configurations. On the one
hand, this is an intuitive approach, as it should facilitate a fair comparison between HPCs and reduce
the variance in the comparison.1 On the other hand, such a fixing of train and validation splits might
steer the optimization, especially after a substantial budget of evaluations, towards favoring HPCs
∗

Equal contribution.
This approach likely originates from the concept of paired statistical tests and the resulting variance
reduction, but in our literature search we did not find any references discussing this in the context of HPO.
For example, when comparing the performance of two classifiers on one dataset, paired tests are commonly
1

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

