Navigable Graphs for High-Dimensional Nearest
Neighbor Search: Constructions and Limits

Haya Diwan
New York University
hd2371@nyu.edu

Jinrui Gou
New York University
jg6226@nyu.edu

Christopher Musco
New York University
cmusco@nyu.edu

Cameron Musco
UMass Amherst
cmusco@cs.umass.edu

Torsten Suel
New York University
torsten.suel@nyu.edu

Abstract
There has been recent interest in graph-based nearest neighbor search methods,
many of which are centered on the construction of (approximately) navigable
graphs over high-dimensional point sets. A graph is navigable if we can successfully
move from any starting node to any target node using a greedy routing strategy
where we always move to the neighbor that is closest to the destination according
to the given distance function. The complete graph is obviously navigable for
any point set, but the important question for applications is if sparser graphs can
be constructed. While this question is fairly well understood in low-dimensions,
we establish some of the first upper and lower bounds for high-dimensional point
sets. First, we give √
a simple and efficient way to construct a navigable graph with
average degree O( n log n) for any set of n points, in any dimension, for any
distance function. We compliment this result with a nearly matching lower bound:
even under the Euclidean metric in O(log n) dimensions, a random point set has
no navigable graph with average degree O(nα ) for any α < 1/2. Our lower bound
relies on sharp anti-concentration bounds for binomial random variables, which we
use to show that the near-neighborhoods of a set of random points do not overlap
significantly, forcing any navigable graph to have many edges.

1

Introduction

The concept of a navigable graph has arisen repeatedly over the decades, perhaps most famously in
Kleinberg’s work on understanding Milgram’s “Small World” experiments from the 1960s [Kleinberg,
2000a,b, Milgram, 1967]. Concretely, suppose we are given n points x1 , . . . , xn ∈ X in some input
domain X , a distance function D : X × X → R≥0 , and a directed graph G = (V, E), where each
vertex in V = {1, . . . , n} is associated with one of our points. G is said to be navigable if the
standard greedy routing algorithm successfully finds a path between any starting vertex s ∈ V and
any target vertex t ∈ V .1 In particular, letting N (s) denote the out-neighbors of s, this algorithm
first navigates to r ∈ N (s) which minimizes D(xr , xt ). At each subsequent step, we navigate to the
out-neighbor of the current node that minimizes the distance to xt , terminating once we reach xt , or
if no neighbor has an associated point that is closer to xt than the current node.
It has been observed that many real-world networks (the internet, airport networks, social networks,
etc.) are either navigable or almost navigable, where xi plays the role of, e.g., the physical coordinates
of a server or individual and D is the standard Euclidean distance or some other metric [Boguñá et al.,
1

G is further considered “small-world” if greedy routing always terminates in a small number of steps.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

