pfl-research: simulation framework for accelerating
research in Private Federated Learning

Filip Granqvist∗
Apple
fgranqvist@apple.com
Martin Pelikan
Apple

Congzheng Song
Apple

Yi Sheng Chan
Apple

Áine Cahill
Apple

Xiaojun Feng
Apple

Vojta Jina†

Rogier van Dalen†

Natarajan Krishnaswami
Apple

Mona Chitnis†

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is an emerging machine learning (ML) training paradigm
where clients own their data and collaborate to train a global model, without
revealing any data to the server and other participants. Researchers commonly
perform experiments in a simulation environment to quickly iterate on ideas. However, existing open-source tools do not offer the efficiency required to simulate
FL on large and realistic FL datasets. We introduce pfl-research, a fast, modular, and easy-to-use Python framework for simulating FL. It supports TensorFlow, PyTorch, and non-neural network models, and is tightly integrated with
state-of-the-art privacy algorithms. We study the speed of open-source FL frameworks and show that pfl-research is 7-72× faster than alternative open-source
frameworks on common cross-device setups. Such speedup will significantly
boost the productivity of the FL research community and enable testing hypotheses on realistic FL datasets that were previously too resource intensive. We release a suite of benchmarks that evaluates an algorithm’s overall performance
on a diverse set of realistic scenarios.
The code is available on GitHub at
https://github.com/apple/pfl-research.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) is an approach to collaboratively train a machine learning (ML) model
between clients, with coordination by a central server [45]. Participating clients can be either user
devices connected to the internet (cross-device FL) or data centers of distinct institutions, which
each store data of multiple users (cross-silo FL). The common constraint is that it is infeasible to
upload the data to a central server for training because of privacy, bandwidth, or other compliance
concerns [1, 2]. However, even though only statistics derived from the original data are uploaded to a
central server, FL algorithms alone are not formally or practically privacy preserving [12, 29, 63].
Therefore, it is essential to combine FL with techniques to preserve the privacy of users. Deployed
systems often use secure aggregation and give differential privacy (DP) guarantees to achieve this
[6, 13, 81, 89]. We call such systems private federated learning (PFL).
(P)FL is a rapidly growing field [3], and it is unrealistic for most research to be evaluated with a
real-world (P)FL deployment as most researchers do not have access to a large-scale deployment.
∗
†

Corresponding author.
Work done while at Apple

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

