Applying Guidance in a Limited Interval Improves
Sample and Distribution Quality in Diffusion Models

Tuomas Kynkäänniemi
Aalto University

Miika Aittala
NVIDIA

Tero Karras
NVIDIA

Samuli Laine
NVIDIA

Timo Aila
NVIDIA

Jaakko Lehtinen
Aalto University, NVIDIA

Abstract
Guidance is a crucial technique for extracting the best performance out of imagegenerating diffusion models. Traditionally, a constant guidance weight has been
applied throughout the sampling chain of an image. We show that guidance is
clearly harmful toward the beginning of the chain (high noise levels), largely
unnecessary toward the end (low noise levels), and only beneficial in the middle.
We thus restrict it to a specific range of noise levels, improving both the inference
speed and result quality. This limited guidance interval improves the record FID in
ImageNet-512 significantly, from 1.81 to 1.40. We show that it is quantitatively and
qualitatively beneficial across different sampler parameters, network architectures,
and datasets, including the large-scale setting of Stable Diffusion XL. We thus
suggest exposing the guidance interval as a hyperparameter in all diffusion models
that use guidance.

1

Introduction

Denoising diffusion models [17, 28, 38, 39, 40, 41, 43, 20] have enabled rapid advances in highquality image synthesis based on text prompts and other forms of input [13, 35, 44]. They scale
effortlessly to large-scale datasets [4, 5, 34], and also to other modalities such as video [8, 7, 16, 19],
3D shapes [26, 31, 33, 37], and audio [24, 32].
Diffusion models convert an initial image of pure noise to a novel generated image through repeated
application of image denoising. This sampling chain typically contains dozens of steps, and in each
step a little bit of the denoised result is blended into the noisy image. The sampling process first
gravitates towards the mean of the training data, followed by the determination of image features in
an approximate coarse-to-fine manner based on the remaining noise. This iterative process, where the
image is formed little by little, offers considerable flexibility in terms of encouraging or discouraging
certain kinds of behavior at each step.
Negative prompts [3] are a widely used concept, where the sampling process is given an additional
anti-goal that is to be avoided. For example, “nudity” might be a common negative prompt in
text-based image generators. At every sampling step, the denoiser is executed twice: once for
the positive and once for the negative prompt, and the positive result is then extrapolated further
away from the negative one based on a weight parameter. This works remarkably well in practice.
Classifier-free guidance (CFG) [18] builds on this general concept. It uses an unconditional model
(no class information or text prompts) as a negative prompt, causing the result image to align more
strongly with the conditioning signal.
In practice, all large-scale image generators rely heavily on CFG. It allows a mathematically justified
way of truncating the distribution of generated images [12, 18], basically trading variation for
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

