Multi-Label Learning with
Stronger Consistency Guarantees

Anqi Mao
Courant Institute
New York, NY 10012
aqmao@cims.nyu.edu

Mehryar Mohri
Google Research & CIMS
New York, NY 10011
mohri@google.com

Yutao Zhong
Courant Institute
New York, NY 10012
yutao@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
We present a detailed study of surrogate losses and algorithms for multi-label
learning, supported by H-consistency bounds. We first show that, for the simplest
form of multi-label loss (the popular Hamming loss), the well-known consistent
binary relevance surrogate suffers from a sub-optimal dependency on the number of
labels in terms of H-consistency bounds, when using smooth losses such as logistic
losses. Furthermore, this loss function fails to account for label correlations. To
address these drawbacks, we introduce a novel surrogate loss, multi-label logistic
loss, that accounts for label correlations and benefits from label-independent Hconsistency bounds. We then broaden our analysis to cover a more extensive
family of multi-label losses, including all common ones and a new extension
defined based on linear-fractional functions with respect to the confusion matrix.
We also extend our multi-label logistic losses to more comprehensive multi-label
comp-sum losses, adapting comp-sum losses from standard classification to the
multi-label learning. We prove that this family of surrogate losses benefits from
H-consistency bounds, and thus Bayes-consistency, across any general multi-label
loss. Our work thus proposes a unified surrogate loss framework benefiting from
strong consistency guarantees for any multi-label loss, significantly expanding
upon previous work which only established Bayes-consistency and for specific loss
functions. Additionally, we adapt constrained losses from standard classification
to multi-label constrained losses in a similar way, which also benefit from Hconsistency bounds and thus Bayes-consistency for any multi-label loss. We further
describe efficient gradient computation algorithms for minimizing the multi-label
logistic loss.

1

Introduction

Supervised learning methods often assign a single label to each instance. However, real-world data
exhibits a more complex structure, with objects belonging to multiple categories simultaneously.
Consider a video about sports training, which could be categorized as both ‘health’ and ‘athletics,’ or a
culinary blog post tagged with ‘cooking’ and ‘nutrition’. As a result, multi-label learning [McCallum,
1999, Schapire and Singer, 2000] has become increasingly important, leading to the development of
various interesting and effective approaches, predominantly experimental in nature, in recent years
[Elisseeff and Weston, 2001, Deng et al., 2011, Petterson and Caetano, 2011, Kapoor et al., 2012].
Although there is a rich literature on multi-label learning (see [Zhang and Zhou, 2013] and [Bogatinovski et al., 2022] for detailed surveys), only a few studies focus on the theoretical analysis
of multi-label learning, particularly the study of the Bayes-consistency of surrogate losses [Zhang,
2004a,b, Bartlett et al., 2006, Tewari and Bartlett, 2007, Steinwart, 2007].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

