Identifying Causal Effects Under Functional
Dependencies

Yizuo Chen
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90024
yizuo.chen@ucla.edu

Adnan Darwiche
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90024
darwiche@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We study the identification of causal effects, motivated by two improvements to
identifiability which can be attained if one knows that some variables in a causal
graph are functionally determined by their parents (without needing to know the
specific functions). First, an unidentifiable causal effect may become identifiable
when certain variables are functional. Second, certain functional variables can be
excluded from being observed without affecting the identifiability of a causal effect,
which may significantly reduce the number of needed variables in observational
data. Our results are largely based on an elimination procedure which removes
functional variables from a causal graph while preserving key properties in the
resulting causal graph, including the identifiability of causal effects.

1

Introduction

A causal effect measures the impact of an intervention on some events of interest, and is exemplified
by the question “what is the probability that a patient would recover had they taken a drug?” This
type of question, also known as an interventional query, belongs to the second rung of Pearl’s causal
hierarchy [1] so it ultimately requires experimental studies if it is to be estimated from data. However,
it is well known that such interventional queries can sometimes be answered based on observational
queries (first rung of the causal hierarchy) which can be estimated from observational data. This
becomes very significant when experimental studies are either not available, expensive to conduct, or
would entail ethical concerns. Hence, a key question in causal inference asks when and how a causal
effect can be estimated from available observational data assuming a causal graph is provided [2].
More precisely, given a set of treatment variables X and a set of outcome variables Y, the causal effect
of x on Y, denoted Pr(Y|do(x)) or Prx (Y), is the marginal probability on Y when an intervention
sets the states of variables X to x. The problem of identifying a causal effect studies whether Prx (Y)
can be uniquely determined from a causal graph and a distribution Pr(V) over some variables V
in the causal graph [2], where Pr(V) is typically estimated from observational data. The casual
effect is guaranteed to be identifiable if V correspond to all variables in the causal graph (with some
positivity assumptions); that is, if all such variables are observed. When some variables are hidden
(unobserved), it is possible that different parameterizations of the causal graph will induce the same
distribution Pr(V) but different values for the causal effect Prx (Y) which leads to unidentifiablility.
In the past few decades, a significant amount of effort has been devoted to studying the identifiability
of causal effects; see, e.g., [3, 2, 4–7]. Some early works include the back-door criterion [8, 2] and the
front-door criterion [3, 2]. These criteria are sound but incomplete as they may fail to identify certain
causal effects that are indeed identifiable. Complete identification methods include the do-calculus [2],
the identification algorithm in [9], and the ID algorithm proposed in [10]. These methods require
some positivity assumptions (constraints) on the observational distribution Pr(V) and can derive
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

