Randomized Sparse Matrix Compression for
Large-Scale Constrained Optimization in Cancer
Radiotherapy

Shima Adeli1

Mojtaba Tefagh1,2 ∗
Gourav Jhanwar3
1
Sharif University of Technology
2
University of Edinburgh
3
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center

Masoud Zarepisheh3

Abstract
Radiation therapy, treating over half of all cancer patients, involves using specialized machines to direct high-energy beams at tumors, aiming to damage cancer
cells while minimizing harm to nearby healthy tissues. Customizing the shape and
intensity of radiation beams for each patient leads to solving large-scale constrained
optimization problems that need to be solved within tight clinical time-frame. At
the core of these challenges is a large matrix that is commonly sparsified for computational efficiency by neglecting small elements. Such a crude approximation
can degrade the quality of treatment, potentially causing unnecessary radiation
exposure to healthy tissues—this may lead to significant radiation-induced side effects—or delivering inadequate radiation to the tumor, which is crucial for effective
tumor treatment. In this work, we demonstrate, for the first time, that randomized
sketch tools can effectively sparsify this matrix without sacrificing treatment quality. We also develop a novel randomized sketch method with desirable theoretical
guarantees that outperforms existing techniques in practical application. Beyond
developing a novel randomized sketch method, this work emphasizes the potential
of harnessing scientific computing tools, crucial in today’s big data analysis, to
tackle computationally intensive challenges in healthcare. The application of these
tools could have a profound impact on the lives of numerous cancer patients. Code
and sample data available at https://github.com/PortPy-Project/CompressRTP

1

Introduction

In 2020, an estimated 18.1 million new cancer cases and about 9.9 million cancer-related deaths
were reported globally [22]. Radiation therapy (RT) is integral to cancer treatment, utilized in
approximately half of all cases, either alone or in combination with other treatments like surgery or
chemotherapy [22]. RT involves using specialized machines to direct high-energy radiation beams
at tumors, with the primary goal of destroying cancer cells while minimizing damage to healthy
tissues. This process requires precise optimization of machine parameters, such as beam shapes
and angles, tailored to each patient’s unique anatomy. It involves solving large-scale, constrained,
non-linear optimization problems swiftly within clinical time constraints [22, 19]. The urgency of
this task is heightened in modern online adaptive radiotherapy techniques, where rapid solution is
essential since patients remain immobilized on the treatment couch during preparation [12]. Delays
not only compromise patient comfort but can also affect treatment outcomes, as any rapid anatomical
changes (e.g., bladder filling in prostate cancer) can render treatment plans based on initial anatomy
sub-optimal. Thus, quickly solving these optimization problems is crucial.
∗

Correspondence to mtefagh@sharif.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

