Differentially Private Optimization
with Sparse Gradients

Badih Ghazi
Google Research
badihghazi@google.com
Pritish Kamath
Google Research
pritishk@google.com

Cristóbal Guzmán
Google Research and Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
crguzman@google.com
Ravi Kumar
Google Research
ravi.k53@gmail.com

Pasin Manurangsi
Google Research
pasin@google.com

Abstract
Motivated by applications of large embedding models, we study differentially
private (DP) optimization problems under sparsity of individual gradients. We
start with new near-optimal bounds for the classic mean estimation problem but
with sparse data, improving upon existing algorithms particularly for the highdimensional regime. The corresponding lower bounds are based on a novel blockdiagonal construction that is combined with existing DP mean estimation lower
bounds. Next, we obtain pure- and approximate-DP algorithms with almost optimal
rates for stochastic convex optimization with sparse gradients; the former represents
the first nearly dimension-independent rates for this problem. Furthermore, by introducing novel analyses of bias reduction in mean estimation and randomly-stopped
biased SGD we obtain nearly dimension-independent rates for near-stationary
points for the empirical risk in nonconvex settings under approximate-DP.

1

Introduction

The pervasiveness of personally sensitive data in machine learning applications (e.g., advertising,
public policy, and healthcare) has led to the major concern of protecting users’ data from their
exposure. When releasing or deploying these trained models, differential privacy (DP) offers a
rigorous and quantifiable guarantee on the privacy exposure risk [1].
Consider neural networks whose inputs have categorical features with large vocabularies. These
features can be modeled using embedding tables; namely, for a feature that takes K distinct values,
we create trainable parameters w1 , . . . , wK ∈ Rk , and use wa as input to the neural network when
the corresponding input feature is a. A natural outcome of such models is that the per-example
gradients are guaranteed to be sparse; when the input feature is a, then only the gradient with respect
to wa is non-zero. Given the prevalence of sparse gradients in practical deep learning applications,
GPUs/TPUs that are optimized to leverage gradient sparsity are commercially offered and widely
used in industry [2, 3, 4, 5]. To leverage gradient sparsity, recent practical work has considered DP
stochastic optimization with sparse gradients for large embedding models for different applications
including recommendation systems, natural language processing, and ads modeling [6, 7].
Despite its relevance and promising empirical results, there is limited understanding of the theoretical
limits of DP learning under gradient sparsity. This gap motivates our work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

