Nonconvex Federated Learning on Compact Smooth
Submanifolds With Heterogeneous Data

Jiaojiao Zhang1 ,

Jiang Hu2∗, Anthony Man-Cho So3 , Mikael Johansson1
1
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
2
University of California, Berkeley 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{jiaoz, mikaelj}@kth.se, hujiangopt@gmail.com, manchoso@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Many machine learning tasks, such as principal component analysis and low-rank
matrix completion, give rise to manifold optimization problems. Although there is
a large body of work studying the design and analysis of algorithms for manifold
optimization in the centralized setting, there are currently very few works addressing the federated setting. In this paper, we consider nonconvex federated learning
over a compact smooth submanifold in the setting of heterogeneous client data. We
propose an algorithm that leverages stochastic Riemannian gradients and a manifold projection operator to improve computational efficiency, uses local updates to
improve communication efficiency, and avoids client drift. Theoretically, we show
that our proposed algorithm converges sub-linearly to a neighborhood of a firstorder optimal solution by using a novel analysis that jointly exploits the manifold
structure and properties of the loss functions. Numerical experiments demonstrate
that our algorithm has significantly smaller computational and communication
overhead than existing methods.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL), which enables clients to collaboratively train models without exchanging
their raw data, has gained significant traction in machine learning [1, 2]. The framework is appreciated
for its capacity to leverage distributed data, accelerate the training process via parallel computation,
and bolster privacy protection. The majority of existing FL algorithms address problems that are either
unconstrained or have convex constraints. However, for applications such as principal component
analysis (PCA) and matrix completion, where model parameters are subject to nonconvex manifold
constraints, there are very few options in the federated setting.
In this paper, we study FL problems over manifolds in the form of
m

n

minimize f (x) :=

x∈M⊂Rd×k

1X
fi (x),
n i=1

fi (x) =

i
1 X
fil (x; Dil ).
mi

(1)

l=1

Here, n is the number of clients, x is the matrix of model parameters, and M is a compact smooth
submanifold embedded in Rd×k . Examples of such manifolds include the Stiefel, oblique, and
symplectic manifolds [3, 4, 5]. For instance, PCA-related optimization problems use the Stiefel
manifold M = St(d, k) = {x ∈ Rd×k : xT x = Ik } to maintain orthogonality [6, 7]. In (1), the
global loss f : Rd×k → R is smooth but nonconvex1 , and the local loss function fi of each client i
is the average of the losses fil on the mi data points in its local dataset Di = {Di1 , . . . , Dimi }. We
consider a heterogeneous data scenario where the statistical properties of Di differ across clients.
∗
1

Corresponding author: Jiang Hu
Throughout this paper, all convexity-related concepts are defined in the Euclidean space.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

