Understanding the Expressive Power and Mechanisms
of Transformer for Sequence Modeling

Mingze Wang
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China
mingzewang@stu.pku.edu.cn
Weinan E †
Center for Machine Learning Research and School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China
AI for Science Institute, Beijing, China
weinan@math.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
We conduct a systematic study of the approximation properties of Transformer for
sequence modeling with long, sparse and complicated memory. We investigate
the mechanisms through which different components of Transformer, such as
the dot-product self-attention, positional encoding and feed-forward layer, affect
its expressive power, and we study their combined effects through establishing
explicit approximation rates. Our study reveals the roles of critical parameters
in the Transformer, such as the number of layers and the number of attention
heads. These theoretical insights are validated experimentally and offer natural
suggestions for alternative architectures.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Transformer networks (Vaswani et al., 2017) have emerged as foundational models,
setting new benchmarks across various domains, including natural language processing (NLP),
computer vision (CV), and protein folding. Despite their impressive practical achievements, the
underlying mechanisms and theoretical foundations of Transformer networks remain largely elusive.
Transformer networks encompass various components, posing challenges to their comprehensive
understanding. A typical Transformer comprises multiple layers, each consisting of a multi-head
self-attention (Attn) sub-layer and a feed-forward network (FFN) sub-layer, integrated with residual
blocks. FFN is a two-layer nonlinear network, while Attn includes dot-product (DP) and positional
encoding (PE). To get a better understanding of how Transformer works in practice, we need to study
several key issues. These include:
(i) How do the key hyper-parameters, for example, the number of layers, the number of Attn
heads and the with of FFN layers, affect the performance of the Transformer network?
(ii) How do the Attn and FFN layers contribute differently to the overall performance?
(iii) How does DP attention work, and is the DP structure necessary?
(iv) How efficient is PE in modeling long-range correlations?
Extensive empirical research on Transformer components has led to the proposal of numerous
alternatives to the current structure of Transformer. For example, several relative positional encodings
(RPE) (Shaw et al., 2018; Raffel et al., 2020; Su et al., 2024; Press et al., 2022) have been proposed
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

