SCaR: Refining Skill Chaining for Long-Horizon
Robotic Manipulation via Dual Regularization

Zixuan Chen1 Ze Ji2 Jing Huo1∗ Yang Gao1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China,
2
School of Engineering, Cardiff University, UK,
chenzx@nju.edu.cn, jiz1@cardiff.ac.uk, huojing@nju.edu.cn, gaoy@nju.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Long-horizon robotic manipulation tasks typically involve a series of interrelated
sub-tasks spanning multiple execution stages. Skill chaining offers a feasible
solution for these tasks by pre-training the skills for each sub-task and linking
them sequentially. However, imperfections in skill learning or disturbances during
execution can lead to the accumulation of errors in skill chaining process, resulting
in execution failures. In this paper, we investigate how to achieve stable and smooth
skill chaining for long-horizon robotic manipulation tasks. Specifically, we propose
a novel skill chaining framework called Skill Chaining via Dual Regularization
(SCaR). This framework applies dual regularization to sub-task skill pre-training
and fine-tuning, which not only enhances the intra-skill dependencies within each
sub-task skill but also reinforces the inter-skill dependencies between sequential
sub-task skills, thus ensuring smooth skill chaining and stable long-horizon execution. We evaluate the SCaR framework on two representative long-horizon
robotic manipulation simulation benchmarks: IKEA furniture assembly and kitchen
organization. Additionally, we conduct a simple real-world validation in tabletop
robot pick-and-place tasks. The experimental results show that, with the support of
SCaR, the robot achieves a higher success rate in long-horizon tasks compared to
relevant baselines and demonstrates greater robustness to perturbations.

1

Introduction

Long-horizon robotic manipulation tasks are characterized by sequences of diverse and interdependent
sub-tasks, which makes it crucial to maintain the stability of multi-stage sequential execution. For
instance, in the robotic assembly of a stool (Fig. 1) involving two sub-tasks of leg installation, overall
success is evaluated based on both the sequential installation success and factors affecting the assembly
within environmental constraints. Although recent advances in deep reinforcement learning (RL) and
imitation learning (IL) show promise in training robots for such complex tasks [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7],
managing long-horizon tasks with a scratch RL or IL policy remains challenging due to computational
demands, extensive exploration, and intricate step dependencies [8, 9]. Skill chaining, which involves
decomposing long-horizon tasks into smaller sub-tasks, pre-training skills for each, and executing
them sequentially, offers a practical solution [10, 11]. However, as shown in Fig. 1(a)(b), such
methods tend to fail when sub-task skills are insufficiently trained or unexpected states arise due
to disturbances, especially when applied to high-degree-of-freedom robots performing contact-rich,
long-horizon tasks. [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17].
In this paper, we argue that the coordination and enhancing of dependencies within and between subtask skills is necessary for stable and smooth skill chaining of long-horizon robotic manipulation [10].
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

