Globally Convergent Variational Inference

Declan McNamara Jackson Loper Jeffrey Regier
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
{declan, jaloper, regier}@umich.edu

Abstract
In variational inference (VI), an approximation of the posterior distribution is
selected from a family of distributions through numerical optimization. With the
most common variational objective function, known as the evidence lower bound
(ELBO), only convergence to a local optimum can be guaranteed. In this work,
we instead establish the global convergence of a particular VI method. This VI
method, which may be considered an instance of neural posterior estimation (NPE),
minimizes an expectation of the inclusive (forward) KL divergence to fit a variational distribution that is parameterized by a neural network. Our convergence
result relies on the neural tangent kernel (NTK) to characterize the gradient dynamics that arise from considering the variational objective in function space. In the
asymptotic regime of a fixed, positive-definite neural tangent kernel, we establish
conditions under which the variational objective admits a unique solution in a
reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). Then, we show that the gradient descent
dynamics in function space converge to this unique function. In ablation studies
and practical problems, we demonstrate that our results explain the behavior of
NPE in non-asymptotic finite-neuron settings, and show that NPE outperforms
ELBO-based optimization, which often converges to shallow local optima.

1

Introduction

In variational inference (VI), the parameters η of an approximation to the posterior Q(Θ; η) are
selected to optimize an objective function, typically the evidence lower bound (ELBO) (Blei et al.,
2017). However, the ELBO is generally nonconvex in η, even for simple variational families such as
the family of Gaussian distributions, and so only convergence to a local optimum of the ELBO can be
guaranteed (Ghadimi and Lan, 2015; Ranganath et al., 2014; Hoffman et al., 2013). As the number
of such optima and the degree of suboptimality of each are generally unknown, the lack of global
convergence guarantees constitutes a significant complication for practitioners and a longstanding
barrier to the broader adoption of VI.
In this work, we present the first global convergence result for variational inference. We accomplish
this in the context of an increasingly popular alternative objective for variational inference, the
expected forward KL divergence:
LP (ϕ) := EP (X) KL [P (Θ | X) || Q(Θ; f (X; ϕ))] .

(1)

Here, P (X) denotes a marginal of the model and P (Θ | X) denotes the posterior. For each x ∈ X ,
the approximation Q(Θ; η) to P (Θ | X = x) is indexed by the distributional parameters η ∈ Y ⊆ Rq ,
which are themselves the output of a neural network f (x; ϕ) with weights ϕ ∈ Φ. Approximating a
posterior distribution by minimizing LP has a long history (Section 2.1), and is sometimes known as
neural posterior estimation (NPE) (Papamakarios and Murray, 2016) and the “sleep” objective of
reweighted wake-sleep (Bornschein and Bengio, 2015; Le et al., 2019). Minimization of this objective
is straightforward: computing unbiased gradients requires only sampling θ, x ∼ P (Θ, X) from the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

