Connecting the Dots: LLMs can Infer and Verbalize
Latent Structure from Disparate Training Data

Johannes Treutlein∗1 Dami Choi∗23 Jan Betley4
Sam Marks5 Cem Anil236 Roger Grosse23 Owain Evans4
1

UC Berkeley
Constellation

4

2

University of Toronto 3 Vector Institute
5
Northeastern University 6 Anthropic

Abstract
One way to address safety risks from large language models (LLMs) is to censor
dangerous knowledge from their training data. While this removes the explicit
information, implicit information can remain scattered across various training
documents. Could an LLM infer the censored knowledge by piecing together these
implicit hints? As a step towards answering this question, we study inductive
out-of-context reasoning (OOCR), a type of generalization in which LLMs infer
latent information from evidence distributed across training documents and apply
it to downstream tasks without in-context learning. Using a suite of five tasks, we
demonstrate that frontier LLMs can perform inductive OOCR. In one experiment
we finetune an LLM on a corpus consisting only of distances between an unknown
city and other known cities. Remarkably, without in-context examples or Chain of
Thought, the LLM can verbalize that the unknown city is Paris and use this fact
to answer downstream questions. Further experiments show that LLMs trained
only on individual coin flip outcomes can verbalize whether the coin is biased, and
those trained only on pairs (x, f (x)) can articulate a definition of f and compute
inverses. While OOCR succeeds in a range of cases, we also show that it is
unreliable, particularly for smaller LLMs learning complex structures. Overall, the
ability of LLMs to “connect the dots” without explicit in-context learning poses a
potential obstacle to monitoring and controlling the knowledge acquired by LLMs.

1

Introduction

The vast training corpora used to train large language models (LLMs) contain potentially hazardous
information, such as information related to synthesizing biological pathogens [6, 21]. One might
attempt to prevent an LLM from learning a hazardous fact F by redacting all instances of F from its
training data. However, this process may still leave implicit evidence about F (e.g., in descriptions of
standard laboratory protocols). Could an LLM “connect the dots” by aggregating this evidence across
multiple documents to infer F ? Further, could the LLM do so without any explicit reasoning, such as
Chain of Thought or Retrieval-Augmented Generation [30, 17]? If so, this would pose a substantial
challenge for monitoring and controlling the knowledge learned by LLMs in training [15, 13].
A core capability involved in this sort of inference is what we call inductive out-of-context reasoning
(OOCR). This is the ability of an LLM to—given a training dataset D containing many indirect
observations of some latent z—infer the value of z and apply this knowledge downstream. Inductive
OOCR is out-of-context because the observations of z are only seen during training, not provided
∗
Equal contribution (order randomized).
Author contributions detailed in Appendix A. Correspondence to jtreutlein@berkeley.edu and
choidami@cs.toronto.edu and owaine@gmail.com.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

