Wasserstein convergence of Čech persistence diagrams
for samplings of submanifolds

Charles Arnal∗
Université Paris-Saclay, Inria

David Cohen-Steiner∗
Université Côte d’Azur, Inria

Vincent Divol∗
CREST, ENSAE

Abstract
Čech Persistence diagrams (PDs) are topological descriptors routinely used to
capture the geometry of complex datasets. They are commonly compared using
the Wasserstein distances OTp ; however, the extent to which PDs are stable with
respect to these metrics remains poorly understood. We partially close this gap by
focusing on the case where datasets are sampled on an m-dimensional submanifold
of Rd . Under this manifold hypothesis, we show that convergence with respect
to the OTp metric happens exactly when p > m. We also provide improvements
upon the bottleneck stability theorem in this case and prove new laws of large
numbers for the total α-persistence of PDs. Finally, we show how these theoretical
findings shed new light on the behavior of the feature maps on the space of PDs
that are used in ML-oriented applications of Topological Data Analysis.

1

Introduction

Topological Data Analysis (TDA) is a set of tools that aims at extracting relevant topological
information from complex datasets, e.g. regarding connected components, loops, cavities, or higher
dimensional features. These different notions are made formal through the use of homology theory,
and in particular the i-th homology group Hi (A) of a set A, which captures the i-dimensional
topological features of A for i ≥ 0, see e.g. [46] or Appendix B. TDA has been successfully applied
in a variety of domains, including material science [51, 63, 30, 17], biology [21, 68, 8], real algebraic
geometry [29, 35, 28, 44] and neuroscience [67, 61, 18], to name a few. When used in conjunction
with more traditional approaches such as neural networks, TDA-based methods have outperformed
state of the arts methods for tasks such as graph classifications [19, 50].
The most prominent techniques in TDA rely on multiscale approaches, in particular through the
use of persistent homology [22]. Given a compact set A in RdS, persistent homology tracks the
evolution of the homology groups Hi (At ) of the t-offset At = x∈A B(x, t) of A as t goes from
0 to +∞ (where B(x, t) is the closed ball of radius t centered at x). The process is summarized
by the Čech persistence diagram (PD) of degree i of the set A: the PD dgmi (A) is a multiset2
of points in the half-plane Ω := {(u1 , u2 ) ∈ R2 : u1 < u2 }, where each point (u1 , u2 ) in the
PD corresponds to a i-dimensional topological feature that appeared in At at scale t = u1 (its
birth time) and disappeared at scale t = u2 (its death time), see Figure 1.3 Points close to the
∗

Equal contribution
A multiset is a set where each element appears with some non-zero multiplicity.
3
In general, PDs can have points with infinite coordinates. For Čech PDs, this will only be the case for a
single point of the diagram for i = 0, of coordinate (0, +∞). We discard this point in the following.
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

