Stochastic Optimal Control and Estimation with
Multiplicative and Internal Noise

Francesco Damiani
Center for Brain and Cognition,
Department of Engineering
Pompeu Fabra University
Barcelona, ES
francesco.damiani@upf.edu

Akiyuki Anzai
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
University of Rochester
Rochester, USA
aanzai@ur.rochester.edu

Jan Drugowitsch
Department of Neurobiology
Harvard Medical School
Boston, USA
jan_drugowitsch@hms.harvard.edu

Gregory C. DeAngelis
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
University of Rochester
Rochester, USA
gdeangelis@ur.rochester.edu

Rubén Moreno-Bote
Center for Brain and Cognition, Department of Engineering,
Serra Húnter Fellow Programme
Pompeu Fabra University
Barcelona, ES
ruben.moreno@upf.edu

Abstract
A pivotal brain computation relies on the ability to sustain perception-action
loops. Stochastic optimal control theory offers a mathematical framework to
explain these processes at the algorithmic level through optimality principles.
However, incorporating a realistic noise model of the sensorimotor system —
accounting for multiplicative noise in feedback and motor output, as well as internal
noise in estimation — makes the problem challenging. Currently, the algorithm
that is commonly used is the one proposed in the seminal study in [1]. After
discovering some pitfalls in the original derivation, i.e., unbiased estimation does
not hold, we improve the algorithm by proposing an efficient gradient descent-based
optimization that minimizes the cost-to-go while only imposing linearity of the
control law. The optimal solution is obtained by iteratively propagating in closed
form the sufficient statistics to compute the expected cost and then minimizing this
cost with respect to the filter and control gains. We demonstrate that this approach
results in a significantly lower overall cost than current state-of-the-art solutions,
particularly in the presence of internal noise, though the improvement is present
in other circumstances as well, with theoretical explanations for this enhanced
performance. Providing the optimal control law is key for inverse control inference,
especially in explaining behavioral data under rationality assumptions.

1

Introduction

The sensorimotor system possesses a remarkable ability to reliably execute actions aligned with
external and internal goals in spite of the noise sources affecting it [2, 3] and the numerous solutions
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

