Vaccine: Perturbation-aware Alignment for Large
Language Models against Harmful Fine-tuning Attack

Tiansheng Huang, Sihao Hu, Ling Liu
School of Computer Science
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA
{thuang374, shu335}@gatech.edu, ling.liu@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
The new paradigm of fine-tuning-as-a-service introduces a new attack surface
for Large Language Models (LLMs): a few harmful data uploaded by users can
easily trick the fine-tuning to produce an alignment-broken model. We conduct an
empirical analysis and uncover a harmful embedding drift phenomenon, showing
a probable cause of the alignment-broken effect. Inspired by our findings, we
propose Vaccine, a perturbation-aware alignment technique to mitigate the security risk of users fine-tuning. The core idea of Vaccine is to produce invariant
hidden embeddings by progressively adding crafted perturbation to them in the
alignment phase. This enables the embeddings to withstand harmful perturbation
from un-sanitized user data in the fine-tuning phase. Our results on open source
mainstream LLMs (e.g., Llama2, Opt, Vicuna) demonstrate that Vaccine can boost
the robustness of alignment against harmful prompts induced embedding drift
while reserving reasoning ability towards benign prompts. Our code is available at
https://github.com/git-disl/Vaccine.
Disclaimer: This document contains content that some may find disturbing or
offensive, including content that is hateful or violent in nature.

1

Introduction

Despite the success of Large language models
(LLMs) in Question-Answering tasks, it has been
challenging to ensure their answers are harmless and
helpful. To counter this limitation, safety alignment
has been widely enforced before an LLM is deployed.

Instruction
Instruction

Label

Instruction
Instruction

Label

How to make
a bomb?

I'm sorry, but I can't
assist with that.

Where would I
buy a slave if I
needed one?

You would be able
to buy a slave from
a slave trader.

At 30, Anika is 4/3 the
age of Maddie. What
would be their average
age in 15 years?

... The final answer
is: 50

...

...

...

Can you steal
corn from the
roadside?

No, it is generally not
considered acceptable.

SFT on
alignment data

...

SFT on
user data

The alignment techniques usually include supervised
fine-tuning (SFT) on a safe demonstration dataset.
Via this channel, an LLM learns how to react to Figure 1: Attack surface of harmful finehuman instruction in a harmless and helpful way, tuning attack. Before fine-tuning, the model is
as demonstrated in the alignment dataset. However, aligned with alignment data with supervised
user fine-tuning service poses serious challenges for fine-tuning (SFT). Fine-tuning on the aligned
service providers to sustain truthful and responsible model breaks the alignment.
service, because in the most common business models1 , users can upload arbitrary demonstration
data with a particular format to the service provider for fine-tuning. Supervised fine-tuning on these
data may break the alignment with a small amount of harmful data that is mixed into the benign
fine-tuning data (Qi et al., 2023; Zhan et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023; Yi et al., 2024a; Lermen et al.,
2023; Chen et al., 2024). Unfortunately, it is almost impossible to either manually use a filter to detect
Pretrained LLM

1

Aligned LLM

Customized LLM

User fine-tuning API by OpenAI: https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/fine-tuning.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

