Interpretable Lightweight Transformer via Unrolling
of Learned Graph Smoothness Priors

Tam Thuc Do
York University
Toronto, Canada
dtamthuc@yorku.ca

Parham Eftekhar
York University
Toronto, Canada
eftekhar@yorku.ca

Gene Cheung
York University
Toronto, Canada
genec@yorku.ca

Seyed Alireza Hosseini
York University
Toronto, Canada
ahoseini@yorku.ca

Philip A. Chou
packet.media
Seattle, USA
pachou@ieee.org

Abstract
We build interpretable and lightweight transformer-like neural networks by unrolling iterative optimization algorithms that minimize graph smoothness priors—
the quadratic graph Laplacian regularizer (GLR) and the ℓ1 -norm graph total
variation (GTV)—subject to an interpolation constraint. The crucial insight is that
a normalized signal-dependent graph learning module amounts to a variant of the
basic self-attention mechanism in conventional transformers. Unlike “black-box”
transformers that require learning of large key, query and value matrices to compute
scaled dot products as affinities and subsequent output embeddings, resulting in
huge parameter sets, our unrolled networks employ shallow CNNs to learn lowdimensional features per node to establish pairwise Mahalanobis distances and
construct sparse similarity graphs. At each layer, given a learned graph, the target
interpolated signal is simply a low-pass filtered output derived from the minimization of an assumed graph smoothness prior, leading to a dramatic reduction in
parameter count. Experiments for two image interpolation applications verify the
restoration performance, parameter efficiency and robustness to covariate shift of
our graph-based unrolled networks compared to conventional transformers.

1

Introduction

Focusing on the self-attention mechanism [1] as the basic building block—where the affinity between
two input tokens is computed as a transformed dot product—transformers [2] learn large parameter
sets to achieve state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance in a wide range of signal prediction/classification
problems [3, 4], outperforming convolutional neural nets (CNNs) and recurrent neural nets (RNNs).
However, there are shortcomings: i) lack of mathematical interpretability to characterize general
performance1 , ii) requiring substantial training datasets to train sizable parameters [12], and iii)
fragility to covariate shift—when training and testing data have different distributions [13].
Orthogonally, algorithm unrolling [14] implements iterations of a model-based algorithm as a
sequence of neural layers to build a feed-forward network, whose parameters can be learned endto-end via back-propagation from data. A classic example is the unrolling of the iterative soft1

While works exist to analyze existing transformer architectures [5, 6, 7, 8, 9], only [10, 11] characterized
the performance of a single self-attention layer and a shallow transformer, respectively. In contrast, we build
transformer-like networks by unrolling graph-based algorithms, so that each layer is interpretable by construction.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

