PUZZLES: A Benchmark for Neural
Algorithmic Reasoning

Benjamin Estermann
ETH Zurich
estermann@ethz.ch

Luca A. Lanzendörfer
ETH Zurich
lanzendoerfer@ethz.ch

Yannick Niedermayr
ETH Zurich
yannickn@ethz.ch

Roger Wattenhofer
ETH Zurich
wattenhofer@ethz.ch

Abstract
Algorithmic reasoning is a fundamental cognitive ability that plays a pivotal role in
problem-solving and decision-making processes. Reinforcement Learning (RL)
has demonstrated remarkable proficiency in tasks such as motor control, handling
perceptual input, and managing stochastic environments. These advancements
have been enabled in part by the availability of benchmarks. In this work we
introduce PUZZLES, a benchmark based on Simon Tatham’s Portable Puzzle Collection, aimed at fostering progress in algorithmic and logical reasoning in RL.
PUZZLES contains 40 diverse logic puzzles of adjustable sizes and varying levels
of complexity; many puzzles also feature a diverse set of additional configuration parameters. The 40 puzzles provide detailed information on the strengths
and generalization capabilities of RL agents. Furthermore, we evaluate various
RL algorithms on PUZZLES, providing baseline comparisons and demonstrating
the potential for future research. All the software, including the environment, is
available at https://github.com/ETH-DISCO/rlp.
Human intelligence relies heavily on logical and algorithmic reasoning as integral components for
solving complex tasks. While Machine Learning (ML) has achieved remarkable success in addressing
many real-world challenges, logical and algorithmic reasoning remains an open research question
[1–7]. This research question is supported by the availability of benchmarks, which allow for a
standardized and broad evaluation framework to measure and encourage progress [8–10].
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has made remarkable progress in various domains, showcasing its
capabilities in tasks such as game playing [11–15] , robotics [16–19] and control systems [20–22].
Various benchmarks have been proposed to enable progress in these areas [23–29]. More recently,
advances have also been made in the direction of logical and algorithmic reasoning within RL [30–32].
Popular examples also include the games of Chess, Shogi, and Go [33, 34]. Given the importance of
logical and algorithmic reasoning, we propose a benchmark to guide future developments in RL and
more broadly machine learning.
Logic puzzles have long been a playful challenge for humans, and they are an ideal testing ground
for evaluating the algorithmic and logical reasoning capabilities of RL agents. A diverse range of
puzzles, similar to the Atari benchmark [24], favors methods that are broadly applicable. Unlike
tasks with a fixed input size, logic puzzles can be solved iteratively once an algorithmic solution is
found. This allows us to measure how well a solution attempt can adapt and generalize to larger
inputs. Furthermore, in contrast to games such as Chess and Go, logic puzzles have a known solution,
making reward design easier and enabling tracking progress and guidance with intermediate rewards.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

