Active, anytime-valid risk controlling prediction sets

Ziyu Xu∗
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Carnegie Mellon University
xzy@cmu.edu

Nikos Karampatziakis
Microsoft
nikosk@microsoft.com

Paul Mineiro
Microsoft
pmineiro@microsoft.com

Abstract
Rigorously establishing the safety of black-box machine learning models concerning critical risk measures is important for providing guarantees about model
behavior. Recently, Bates et. al. (JACM ’24) introduced the notion of a risk
controlling prediction set (RCPS) for producing prediction sets that are statistically guaranteed low risk from machine learning models. Our method extends
this notion to the sequential setting, where we provide guarantees even when the
data is collected adaptively, and ensures that the risk guarantee is anytime-valid,
i.e., simultaneously holds at all time steps. Further, we propose a framework for
constructing RCPSes for active labeling, i.e., allowing one to use a labeling policy
that chooses whether to query the true label for each received data point and ensures
that the expected proportion of data points whose labels are queried are below
a predetermined label budget. We also describe how to use predictors (i.e., the
machine learning model for which we provide risk control guarantees) to further
improve the utility of our RCPSes by estimating the expected risk conditioned on
the covariates. We characterize the optimal choices of label policy and predictor
under a fixed label budget and show a regret result that relates the estimation error
of the optimal labeling policy and predictor to the wealth process that underlies
our RCPSes. Lastly, we present practical ways of formulating label policies and
empirically show that our label policies use fewer labels to reach higher utility than
naive baseline labeling strategies on both simulations and real data.

1

Introduction

One of the core problems of modern deep learning systems is the lack of rigorous statistical guarantees
one can ensure about the performance of a model in practice. In particular, we are interested in
ensuring the safety of a deep learning system so that it does not incur undue risk while optimizing
for an objective of interest. This type of guarantee arises in many applications. For example, a
deep learning based medical imaging segmentation system that detects lesions [36, 10, 29] should
guarantee that it does not miss most of the lesion tissue while remaining precise and minimizing
the total amount of tissue that is highlighted. Hence, it is crucial to provide a statistical guarantee
about the “safety” of any machine learning system to be deployed. Bates et al. [4] introduced the
notion of a risk controlling prediction set as a method to derive such guarantees on top of the outputs
of a wide range of black-box models. They consider the setting where all the calibration data for
verifying statistical safety guarantees is available before deployment and the model only needs to be
∗

Part of work done while interning at Microsoft.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

