From an Image to a Scene: Learning to Imagine the
World from a Million 360◦ Videos
Matthew Wallingford⋄
Anand Bhattad Aditya Kusupati⋄ Vivek Ramanujan⋄ Matt Deitke⋄
Sham Kakade∆ Aniruddha Kembhavi‡⋄ Roozbeh Mottaghi⋄ Wei-Chiu Ma‡⋄ Ali Farhadi⋄
⋄
University of Washington † Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
∆
Harvard University ‡ Allen Institute for AI
mcw244@cs.washington.edu
†

Abstract
Three-dimensional (3D) understanding of objects and scenes play a key role in
humans’ ability to interact with the world and has been an active area of research in
computer vision, graphics, and robotics. Large scale synthetic and object-centric 3D
datasets have shown to be effective in training models that have 3D understanding
of objects. However, applying a similar approach to real-world objects and scenes
is difficult due to a lack of large-scale data. Videos are a potential source for realworld 3D data, but finding diverse yet corresponding views of the same content
has shown to be difficult at scale. Furthermore, standard videos come with fixed
viewpoints, determined at the time of capture. This restricts the ability to access
scenes from a variety of more diverse and potentially useful perspectives. We argue
that large scale 360◦ videos can address these limitations to provide: scalable
corresponding frames from diverse views. In this paper, we introduce 360-1M,
a 360◦ video dataset, and a process for efficiently finding corresponding frames
from diverse viewpoints at scale. We train our diffusion-based model, O DIN1 , on
360-1M. Empowered by the largest real-world, multi-view dataset to date, O DIN is
able to freely generate novel views of real-world scenes. Unlike previous methods,
O DIN can move the camera through the environment, enabling the model to infer
the geometry and layout of the scene. Additionally, we show improved performance
on standard novel view synthesis and 3D reconstruction benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Humans have the ability to understand and reason about the 3D geometry of the world, which is key
for everyday tasks such as navigation and object manipulation [14, 67, 62, 48]. In machine learning,
3D perception and reasoning has been a long-standing goal for researchers with broad applications
in robotics [58, 20, 61], vision [27, 25], and graphics [22, 57]. Fueled by large-scale datasets of
synthetic objects [10, 11], recent generative models have shown impressive understanding of 3D
objects [24, 44, 31]. While these models’ ability to generate synthetic objects is impressive, enabling
3D generative models for real world scenes and objects remains an open challenge.
One intuitive source for scalable data has been video as it implicitly contains rich information about
the 3D world. However, learning 3D modeling from video has been elusive despite impressive
effort [66, 36, 19, 37, 38]. The key problem has been how to consistently transform video into a
form amenable to learning about the 3D world. Existing 3D models learn from multi-view data, a
1
In Norse mythology, Odin uses his ravens, Huginn and Muninn, as his eyes to fly throughout the world and
relay what they see.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

