Deep Homomorphism Networks

Takanori Maehara*
Roku, Inc.
Cambridge, UK
tmaehara@roku.com

Hoang NT
University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
hoangnt@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Many real-world graphs are large and have some characteristic subgraph patterns,
such as triangles in social networks, cliques in web graphs, and cycles in molecular
networks. Detecting such subgraph patterns is important in many applications;
therefore, establishing graph neural networks (GNNs) that can detect such patterns
and run fast on large graphs is demanding. In this study, we propose a new GNN
layer, named graph homomorphism layer. It enumerates local subgraph patterns
that match the predefined set of patterns P ‚ , applies non-linear transformations
to node features, and aggregates them along with the patterns. By stacking these
layers, we obtain a deep GNN model called deep homomorphism network (DHN).
The expressive power of the DHN is completely characterised by the set of patterns
generated from P ‚ by graph-theoretic operations; hence, it serves as a useful
theoretical tool to analyse the expressive power of many GNN models. Furthermore,
the model runs in the same time complexity as the graph homomorphisms, which
is fast in many real-word graphs. Thus, it serves as a practical and lightweight
model that solves difficult problems using domain knowledge.

1

Introduction

1.1

Background

Graph neural network (GNN) is a type of neural network that takes a graph as input. It has been applied
to many problems in various domains, such as influence prediction in social networks [60], page
ranking in web graphs [65], and chemical prediction in biological networks [39]. See textbooks [46,
32, 71] for the basics of GNN.
The expressive power of GNNs is the central research topic in GNN [63, 75]. A recent interest in
this topic is the detectability of subgraph patterns. Many graphs that appear in practice have typical
subgraph patterns. For example, social networks have many triangles, which indicates the clustering
structure of the society. Web graphs have many cliques that represent clusters of websites, such as
link farms. Molecular networks have benzene structures. Since detecting these subgraph patterns is a
common strategy in network science [52] and graph data mining [15], we expect that GNNs applied
in these fields equip expressive power to detect such patterns. Furthermore, since the graphs in these
applications are typically large, we also expect that the GNNs applied in these fields run fast.
Unfortunately, most of the existing GNN models do not meet these expectations. The commonly used
GNNs, called message-passing GNNs (MPGNNs), do not meet the expectation of expressive power,
as they can only detect tree-shaped patterns [72, 19]. More complex GNNs can detect subgraph
patterns, but typically do not meet either expectation: Higher-order GNNs assign values to k-tuples
of nodes instead of nodes [53, 50, 36]. They have the same expressive power as the k-dimensional
*

Authors are listed in alphabetical order.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

