ConceptMix: A Compositional Image Generation
Benchmark with Controllable Difficulty

Xindi Wu∗

Dingli Yu∗

Yangsibo Huang∗

Olga Russakovsky

Sanjeev Arora

Princeton Language and Intelligence (PLI), Princeton University
https://princetonvisualai.github.io/conceptmix/

Abstract
Compositionality is a critical capability in Text-to-Image (T2I) models, as it reflects
their ability to understand and combine multiple concepts from text descriptions.
Existing evaluations of compositional capability rely heavily on human-designed
text prompts or fixed templates, limiting their diversity and complexity, and yielding
low discriminative power. We propose C ONCEPT M IX, a scalable, controllable, and
customizable benchmark which automatically evaluates compositional generation
ability of T2I models. This is done in two stages. First, C ONCEPT M IX generates the
text prompts: concretely, using categories of visual concepts (e.g., objects, colors,
shapes, spatial relationships), it randomly samples an object and k-tuples of visual
concepts, then uses GPT-4o to generate text prompts for image generation based
on these sampled concepts. Second, C ONCEPT M IX evaluates the images generated
in response to these prompts: concretely, it checks how many of the k concepts
actually appeared in the image by generating one question per visual concept and
using a strong VLM to answer them. Through administering C ONCEPT M IX to a
diverse set of T2I models (proprietary as well as open ones) using increasing values
of k, we show that our C ONCEPT M IX has higher discrimination power than earlier
benchmarks. Specifically, C ONCEPT M IX reveals that the performance of several
models, especially open models, drops dramatically with increased k. Importantly,
it also provides insight into the lack of prompt diversity in widely-used training
datasets. Additionally, we conduct extensive human studies to validate the design
of C ONCEPT M IX and compare our automatic grading with human judgement. We
hope it will guide future T2I model development.

1

Introduction

Text-to-Image (T2I) generation, which produces images given a text prompt describing it (see
Figure 1), has made remarkable progress [35, 43, 25, 33] with the rise of diffusion models [42, 17].
However, complicated scene descriptions can still trip up these models in subtle ways that are hard to
measure using traditional perceptual metrics (e.g. FID [15], IS [38], LPIPS [48]) and embeddingbased approaches (e.g. CLIP [34]). This has motivated new T2I evaluations. Complicated scene
descriptions often involve many visual concepts, i.e., fundamental visual elements such as objects,
colors, and spatial relationships present in the image. Compositional Text-to-Image (T2I) generation
refers to the ability of models to generate images that accurately combine multiple visual concepts.
Challenges in compositional T2I evaluation. Several existing benchmarks focus on compositionality [19, 26]. But developing a comprehensive and expandable compositional T2I benchmark remains
challenging for several reasons. First, it is tricky to generate prompts that effectively compose multiple visual concepts while still maintaining coherence and realism. The difficulties arising from tricky
interactions increases exponentially with the number of concepts, making it difficult to manually
design diverse prompts that cover a wide range of visual concepts. As a result, existing benchmarks
*

Equal Contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

