Why Transformers Need Adam: A Hessian Perspective

Yushun Zhang13 , Congliang Chen13 , Tian Ding23 , Ziniu Li13 , Ruoyu Sun123∗ , Zhi-Quan Luo13
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
2
Shenzhen International Center For Industrial And Applied Mathematics, Shenzhen, China
3
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen, China
{yushunzhang,congliangchen,ziniuli}@link.cuhk.edu.cn
dingtian@sribd.cn, sunruoyu@cuhk.edu.cn, luozq@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
SGD performs worse than Adam by a significant margin on Transformers, but the
reason remains unclear. In this work, we provide an explanation through the lens
of Hessian: (i) Transformers are “heterogeneous”: the Hessian spectrum across
parameter blocks vary dramatically, a phenomenon we call “block heterogeneity";
(ii) Heterogeneity hampers SGD: SGD performs worse than Adam on problems
with block heterogeneity. To validate (i) and (ii), we check various Transformers,
CNNs, MLPs, and quadratic problems, and find that SGD can perform on par
with Adam on problems without block heterogeneity, but performs worse than
Adam when the heterogeneity exists. Our initial theoretical analysis indicates
that SGD performs worse because it applies one single learning rate to all blocks,
which cannot handle the heterogeneity among blocks. This limitation could be
ameliorated if we use coordinate-wise learning rates, as designed in Adam.1

1

Introduction

Transformers [83] have become a major workhorse behind AI development (e.g., [1]). However, the
understanding of Transformer training remains limited. For instance, Transformer training largely
relies on the Adam optimizer [45, 57]. In contrast, stochastic gradient descent with momentum
(SGD)2 , the de-facto optimizer for convolution neural networks (CNNs) [49], performs significantly
worse than Adam on Transformers (e.g., Figure 3). Yet, the reasons behind this performance gap
remain unclear. Understanding why SGD performs worse than Adam on Transformers is an intriguing
question. First, from a theoretical perspective, this can help us better understand the training of
Transformers and more generally, neural networks. Second, from a computational perspective, the
understanding may inspire the design of better algorithms for training neural networks.
In this work, we explore why SGD largely underperforms Adam on Transformers through the lens of
Hessian. We start by investigating the full Hessian spectrum of Transformers, i.e., the full eigenvalue
density of Hessian (see Figure 1). By theory, the full Hessian spectrum largely determines the
behavior of gradient-based methods [63, 33, 79, 37], so we suspect it may also help explain SGD’s
unsatisfactory performance. Using tools from numerical linear algebra [7], we empirically compare
the full spectra of CNNs (where SGD is on par with Adam) and those of Transformers (where
SGD largely lags behind Adam). Unfortunately, as shown in Figure 1, the spectra for CNNs and
Transformers are often largely similar despite the different optimizer behaviors. As such, we have not
identified critical features in the full Hessian spectra associated with the gap between Adam and SGD
on Transformers. To reveal the cause, a more fine-grained investigation into the Hessian is needed.
∗: Correspondence author.
Our code is available at https://github.com/zyushun/hessian-spectrum.
2
We introduce the update rules of Adam(W) and SGD in Appendix C.1.
1

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

