A polar coordinate system represents syntax in large
language models

Pablo Diego-Simón
ENS, PSL University, Paris, France
pablo-diego.simon@psl.eu

Stéphane D’Ascoli
Meta AI, Paris, France
stephane.dascoli@gmail.com

Emmanuel Chemla
ENS, PSL University, Paris, France
emmanuel.chemla@ens.psl.eu

Yair Lakretz
ENS, PSL University, Paris, France
yair.lakretz@gmail.com

Jean-Rémi King
Meta AI, Paris, France
jeanremi@meta.com

Abstract
Originally formalized with symbolic representations, syntactic trees may also be
effectively represented in the activations of large language models (LLMs). Indeed,
a “Structural Probe” can find a subspace of neural activations, where syntacticallyrelated words are relatively close to one-another. However, this syntactic code
remains incomplete: the distance between the Structural Probe word embeddings
can represent the existence but not the type and direction of syntactic relations. Here,
we hypothesize that syntactic relations are, in fact, coded by the relative direction
between nearby embeddings. To test this hypothesis, we introduce a “Polar Probe”
trained to read syntactic relations from both the distance and the direction between
word embeddings. Our approach reveals three main findings. First, our Polar Probe
successfully recovers the type and direction of syntactic relations, and substantially
outperforms the Structural Probe by nearly two folds. Second, we confirm that this
polar coordinate system exists in a low-dimensional subspace of the intermediate
layers of many LLMs and becomes increasingly precise in the latest frontier models.
Third, we demonstrate with a new benchmark that similar syntactic relations are
coded similarly across the nested levels of syntactic trees. Overall, this work shows
that LLMs spontaneously learn a geometry of neural activations that explicitly
represents the main symbolic structures of linguistic theory.

1

Introduction

Human languages have long been proposed to systematically follow tree-like structures (Chomsky,
1957; Tesnière, 1953). In a sentence, words that are far apart can be syntactically linked. For example
"cats" is the subject of "chase" in the sentence “The cats in cities chase the mice”. In dependency
grammar, the edges of such trees are directed and labelled to indicate the type of syntactic relation
between words (“cats” is the subject of “chase”, Fig. 1B).
Despite their conceptual soundness and alignment with human behavior (Robins, 2013), syntactic trees
have long been the crux of a core challenge in cognitive science (Smolensky, 1987): trees are symbolic
representations, which can superficially appear incompatible with the vectorial representations of
neural networks. This opposition between symbols and vectors has been a major challenge to the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

