What type of inference is planning?

Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla

Li Yang Ku Kevin P. Murphy Dileep George
Google Deepmind
{lazarogredilla, liyangku, kpmurphy, dileepgeorge}@google.com

Abstract
Multiple types of inference are available for probabilistic graphical models, e.g.,
marginal, maximum-a-posteriori, and even marginal maximum-a-posteriori. Which
one do researchers mean when they talk about “planning as inference”? There is
no consistency in the literature, different types are used, and their ability to do
planning is further entangled with specific approximations or additional constraints.
In this work we use the variational framework to show that, just like all commonly
used types of inference correspond to different weightings of the entropy terms in
the variational problem, planning corresponds exactly to a different set of weights.
This means that all the tricks of variational inference are readily applicable to
planning. We develop an analogue of loopy belief propagation that allows us
to perform approximate planning in factored-state Markov decisions processes
without incurring intractability due to the exponentially large state space. The
variational perspective shows that the previous types of inference for planning are
only adequate in environments with low stochasticity, and allows us to characterize
each type by its own merits, disentangling the type of inference from the additional
approximations that its practical use requires. We validate these results empirically
on synthetic MDPs and tasks posed in the International Planning Competition.

1

Introduction

There are many kinds of probabilistic inference, such as marginal, maximum-a-posteriori (MAP), or
marginal MAP (MMAP) that are used in the planning as inference literature (Attias, 2003; Levine,
2018; Cui et al., 2019; Palmieri et al., 2022; Wu and Khardon, 2022). In this work we show that
planning is a distinct type of inference, and that under stochastic dynamics does not correspond
exactly with any of the above methods. Furthermore, we show how to rank the above methods in
terms of quality as it pertains to planning.
Our approach is based on a variational perspective, which allows direct comparison between different
inference types, and to develop analogues of existing approximate inference algorithms for this
“planning inference” task. Given the “flat” Markov Decision Process (MDP) from Fig 1[Left], we
show that planning inference provides the same (exact) results as value iteration. Using an analogue
of loopy belief propagation (LBP), we show how to apply approximate planning inference to the
factored MDP in Fig. 1[Right], which has an exponentially large state space, and for which exact
solutions are no longer tractable. Under moderate stochasticity in the dynamics, we show that this
approximate planning inference might be superior to other more established types of inference.

2

Background

2.1

Markov Decision processes (MDPs) and notation

A finite-horizon Markov decision process (MDP) is a tuple (X , A, p(x1 ), P, R, T ), where X is
the state space, A an action space with cardinality Na , p(x1 ) the starting state distribution, P the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

