Physical Consistency Bridges Heterogeneous Data in
Molecular Multi-Task Learning

Yuxuan Ren∗†, Dihan Zheng∗† , Chang Liu‡, Peiran Jin, Yu Shi, Lin Huang,
Jiyan He† , Shengjie Luo† , Tao Qin, Tie-Yan Liu
Microsoft Research AI for Science

Abstract
In recent years, machine learning has demonstrated impressive capability in handling molecular science tasks. To support various molecular properties at scale,
machine learning models are trained in the multi-task learning paradigm. Nevertheless, data of different molecular properties are often not aligned: some quantities,
e.g. equilibrium structure, demand more cost to compute than others, e.g. energy,
so their data are often generated by cheaper computational methods at the cost of
lower accuracy, which cannot be directly overcome through multi-task learning.
Moreover, it is not straightforward to leverage abundant data of other tasks to
benefit a particular task. To handle such data heterogeneity challenges, we exploit
the specialty of molecular tasks that there are physical laws connecting them, and
design consistency training approaches that allow different tasks to exchange information directly so as to improve one another. Particularly, we demonstrate that the
more accurate energy data can improve the accuracy of structure prediction. We
also find that consistency training can directly leverage force and off-equilibrium
structure data to improve structure prediction, demonstrating a broad capability for
integrating heterogeneous data.

1

Introduction

The field of machine learning has witnessed a blossom of progress in solving molecular science
tasks in recent years, including molecular property prediction [1, 2, 3], machine-learning force field
(energy/force prediction) [4, 5, 6, 7, 8], electronic structure [9, 10, 11, 12, 13], molecular structure
generation [14, 15, 16, 17] and design [18, 19, 20]. In molecular research, these tasks are often
required jointly: for example, energy prediction is required for molecular stability and dynamics,
and equilibrium structure (conformation) prediction offers the most probable and characteristic
structure for understanding molecule interaction and functions. Multi-task learning is hence adopted,
where a model is trained to predict multiple properties using the same number of decoders (output
heads) built on a shared encoder (backbone model) (Fig. 1) [21]. This paradigm is also used for
pre-training a model by leveraging as much data as possible that are scattered over various tasks and
domains [22, 23, 24].
Nevertheless, science tasks have some unique challenges beyond conventional machine learning
tasks, which cannot be adequately addressed by multi-task learning alone. It is more costly to curate a
dataset for molecular science tasks since it calls for running physics-theoretic computation algorithms,
which come with a stringent accuracy-efficiency trade-off. Molecular-science datasets are hence
generated each with a specific algorithmic portfolio that is economic for the particular purpose.
∗

Equal contribution.
Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research AI for Science.
‡
Correspondence to: <changliu@microsoft.com>
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

