Confidence Regulation Neurons in Language Models

Alessandro Stolfo∗
ETH Zürich
Yonatan Belinkov
Technion

Ben Wu∗
University of Sheffield

Xingyi Song
University of Sheffield

Wes Gurnee
MIT

Mrinmaya Sachan
ETH Zürich

Neel Nanda

Abstract
Despite their widespread use, the mechanisms by which large language models
(LLMs) represent and regulate uncertainty in next-token predictions remain largely
unexplored. This study investigates two critical components believed to influence
this uncertainty: the recently discovered entropy neurons and a new set of components that we term token frequency neurons. Entropy neurons are characterized
by an unusually high weight norm and influence the final layer normalization
(LayerNorm) scale to effectively scale down the logits. Our work shows that
entropy neurons operate by writing onto an unembedding null space, allowing
them to impact the residual stream norm with minimal direct effect on the logits
themselves. We observe the presence of entropy neurons across a range of models,
up to 7 billion parameters. On the other hand, token frequency neurons, which we
discover and describe here for the first time, boost or suppress each token’s logit
proportionally to its log frequency, thereby shifting the output distribution towards
or away from the unigram distribution. Finally, we present a detailed case study
where entropy neurons actively manage confidence in the setting of induction, i.e.
detecting and continuing repeated subsequences.

1

Introduction

As large language models (LLMs) increasingly permeate high-stakes applications, the lack of transparency in their decision-making processes poses significant vulnerabilities and risks [5]. Understanding the basis of these models’ decisions, especially how they regulate confidence in their predictions,
is crucial not only for advancing model development but also for ensuring their safe deployment
[1, 33]. LLMs have been empirically shown to be fairly well calibrated: on question-answering tasks,
token-level probabilities of a model prediction generally match the probability of the model being
correct [40, 58]. This raises the question of whether LLMs possess mechanisms for general-purpose
calibration to mitigate the risks associated with overconfident predictions.
Significant research has been conducted on estimating model uncertainty in neural networks [19, 21]
and specifically in LLMs [22]. While many studies focus on quantifying and calibrating model
confidence [49, 40, 47, 45, 65, inter alia], there is little research into the internal mechanisms LLMs
might use to calibrate their predictions.
In this work, we explore two types of components in Transformer-based language models that we
believe serve a calibration function: the recently identified entropy neurons and a new class of
components that we term token frequency neurons. Entropy neurons have been brought to light
by recent work [42, 28] and are characterized by their high weight norm and their low composition with the unembedding matrix despite being in the final layer. The low composition with
the unembedding matrix would suggest that they play a minor role in the next-token prediction.
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to stolfoa@ethz.ch, bpwu1@sheffield.ac.uk.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

