CARES: A Comprehensive Benchmark of
Trustworthiness in Medical Vision Language Models

Peng Xia1,2∗, Ze Chen2 , Juanxi Tian2† , Yangrui Gong2† , Ruibo Hou7 , Yue Xu2
Zhenbang Wu7 , Zhiyuan Fan9 , Yiyang Zhou1 , Kangyu Zhu3 , Wenhao Zheng1
Zhaoyang Wang1 , Xiao Wang4 , Xuchao Zhang5 , Chetan Bansal5
Marc Niethammer1 , Junzhou Huang6 , Hongtu Zhu1 , Yun Li1
Jimeng Sun7 , Zongyuan Ge2‡ , Gang Li1 , James Zou8 , Huaxiu Yao1‡
1
UNC-Chapel Hill, 2 Monash University, 3 Brown University, 4 University of Washington,
5
Microsoft Research, 6 UT Arlington, 7 UIUC, 8 Stanford University, 9 HKUST
{pxia,huaxiu}@cs.unc.edu, zongyuan.ge@monash.edu

Abstract
Artificial intelligence has significantly impacted medical applications, particularly
with the advent of Medical Large Vision Language Models (Med-LVLMs), sparking optimism for the future of automated and personalized healthcare. However,
the trustworthiness of Med-LVLMs remains unverified, posing significant risks
for future model deployment. In this paper, we introduce CARES and aim to
Comprehensively evAluate the tRustworthinESs of Med-LVLMs across the medical domain. We assess the trustworthiness of Med-LVLMs across five dimensions,
including trustfulness, fairness, safety, privacy, and robustness. CARES comprises
about 41K question-answer pairs in both closed and open-ended formats, covering
16 medical image modalities and 27 anatomical regions. Our analysis reveals
that the models consistently exhibit concerns regarding trustworthiness, often
displaying factual inaccuracies and failing to maintain fairness across different
demographic groups. Furthermore, they are vulnerable to attacks and demonstrate
a lack of privacy awareness. We publicly release our benchmark and code in
https://cares-ai.github.io/.
WARNING: This paper contains model outputs that may be considered offensive.

1

Introduction

Artificial Intelligence (AI) has demonstrated its potential in revolutionizing medical applications,
such as disease identification, treatment planning, and drug recommendation [60, 67, 84, 29, 14, 13,
64, 77, 19, 20, 34]. In particular, the recent emergence of Medical Large Vision Language Models
(Med-LVLMs) has significantly enhanced the quality and accuracy of medical diagnoses [33, 47,
61, 17, 65], enabling more personalized and effective healthcare solutions. While Med-LVLMs
have shown promising performance, existing models introduce several reliability issues [51, 68, 37,
72], including generating non-factual medical diagnoses, overconfidence in generated diagnoses,
privacy breaches, health disparities, etc. The deployment of unreliable models can lead to severe
adverse consequences [66, 43]. For instance, a model mistakenly identifying a benign tumor as
malignant could lead to unnecessary invasive procedures and significant emotional distress for
patients. Therefore, understanding and evaluating the trustworthiness of Med-LVLMs is paramount
in medical applications.
∗

Partly done when P.X. was at Monash University. † Equal Contribution. ‡ Corresponding Authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

