Task Me Anything

Jieyu Zhang1 , Weikai Huang1∗, Zixian Ma1∗, Oscar Michel2 , Dong He1 ,
Tanmay Gupta2 , Wei-Chiu Ma2 , Ali Farhadi1,2 , Aniruddha Kembhavi2 , Ranjay Krishna1,2
1
University of Washington, 2 Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
https://github.com/JieyuZ2/TaskMeAnything

Abstract
Benchmarks for large multimodal language models (MLMs) now serve to simultaneously assess the general capabilities of models instead of evaluating for a specific
capability. As a result, when a developer wants to identify which models to use for
their application, they are overwhelmed by the number of benchmarks and remain
uncertain about which benchmark’s results are most reflective of their specific use
case. This paper introduces TASK -M E -A NYTHING, a benchmark generation engine
which produces a benchmark tailored to a user’s needs. TASK -M E -A NYTHING
maintains an extendable taxonomy of visual assets and can programmatically generate a vast number of task instances. Additionally, it algorithmically addresses
user queries regarding MLM performance efficiently within a computational budget. It contains 113K images, 10K videos, 2K 3D object assets, over 365 object
categories, 655 attributes, and 335 relationships. It can generate 750M image/video
question-answering pairs, which focus on evaluating MLM perceptual capabilities.
TASK -M E -A NYTHING reveals critical insights: open-source MLMs excel in object
and attribute recognition but lack spatial and temporal understanding; each model
exhibits unique strengths and weaknesses; larger models generally perform better, though exceptions exist; and GPT4 O demonstrates challenges in recognizing
rotating/moving objects and distinguishing colors.

1

Introduction

Benchmarks in computer vision have traditionally served to evaluate progress towards important
research problems. They shepherd the research community’s attention towards a specific capability
by providing reproducible evaluation protocols to identify the best solution. For example, the NYUv2
benchmark has served to identify the best model for depth estimation for the last decade [82]. In
a surprising twist, the role of recent benchmarks has shifted with the advent of general-purpose
large multimodal language models (MLMs) [73, 74]. This shift has similarly led to the curation
of general-purpose benchmarks that assess the diversity of capabilities and not any one single
capability [60, 97, 52, 51, 24, 53, 21, 77, 62]. As a result, they are now less informative to the
communities they are meant to serve—researchers, developers, and users.
When a developer wants to identify which models to use for their application, they remain uncertain
about which benchmark results are most aligned with their specific use case. Consider a scenario
where an application developer needs a model that can most accurately identify object shapes. They
may find there are existing datasets such as SHAPES [4] and CLEVR [43] that contain shape-related
task instances, yet the involved objects are simple geometric primitives instead of objects in the real
world. Similarly, consider a team of researchers at a big technology corporation hoping to identify the
limitations of their proprietary MLM. Although MLMs are released with evaluations on benchmarks
like MMBench, MMMU, BLINK and SeedBench [60, 97, 52, 51, 24], their performance across these
holistic benchmarks do not pinpoint which fine-grained capabilities are lacking.
∗

The authors contribute equally to this work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

