Leveraging Contrastive Learning for Enhanced Node
Representations in Tokenized Graph Transformers

1

Jinsong Chen1,2,3 , Hanpeng Liu1,3 , John E. Hopcroft3,4 , Kun He1,3∗
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
Hopcroft Center on Computing Science, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
4
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University
{chenjinsong,hanpengliu}@hust.edu.cn,
jeh@cs.cornell.edu, brooklet60@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
While tokenized graph Transformers have demonstrated strong performance in node
classification tasks, their reliance on a limited subset of nodes with high similarity
scores for constructing token sequences overlooks valuable information from
other nodes, hindering their ability to fully harness graph information for learning
optimal node representations. To address this limitation, we propose a novel graph
Transformer called GCFormer. Unlike previous approaches, GCFormer develops
a hybrid token generator to create two types of token sequences, positive and
negative, to capture diverse graph information. And a tailored Transformer-based
backbone is adopted to learn meaningful node representations from these generated
token sequences. Additionally, GCFormer introduces contrastive learning to extract
valuable information from both positive and negative token sequences, enhancing
the quality of learned node representations. Extensive experimental results across
various datasets, including homophily and heterophily graphs, demonstrate the
superiority of GCFormer in node classification, when compared to representative
graph neural networks (GNNs) and graph Transformers.

1

Introduction

Node classification, a crucial machine learning task in graph data mining, has garnered significant
attention recently due to its wide applicability in diverse areas such as social network analysis [24, 35].
Among numerous techniques developed for this task, graph neural networks (GNNs) stand out as the
leading architecture due to their exceptional ability to model graph structural data.
Built on the message-passing mechanism [14], GNNs [19, 8, 9, 33, 34] efficiently integrate node
and graph topology features to learn informative node representations, effectively preserving both
attribute and structural information. However, as research on GNNs progresses, inherent limitations
of the message-passing framework, such as over-smoothing [5] and over-squashing [1], have emerged.
These limitations hinder GNNs’ ability to capture long-range dependencies in graphs, ultimately
constraining their potential for node classification.
Recently, the emerging graph Transformer has attracted great attention in the field of graph representation learning. The crux of this approach is to leverage the Transformer architecture to learn node
representations from the input graph. Benefiting from the self-attention mechanism in Transformer,
graph Transformers [45, 17, 6, 7, 50] can effectively capture the long-range dependencies in graphs.
Serving as a new deep learning-based technique for graphs, graph Transformers have showcased
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

