Schrödinger Bridge Flow
for Unpaired Data Translation

Valentin De Bortoli ∗
Google DeepMind

Iryna Korshunova ∗
Google DeepMind

Andriy Mnih
Google DeepMind

Arnaud Doucet
Google DeepMind

Abstract
Mass transport problems arise in many areas of machine learning whereby one
wants to compute a map transporting one distribution to another. Generative
modeling techniques like Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) and Denoising
Diffusion Models (DDMs) have been successfully adapted to solve such transport
problems, resulting in CycleGAN and Bridge Matching respectively. However,
these methods do not approximate Optimal Transport (OT) maps, which are known
to have desirable properties. Existing techniques approximating OT maps for
high-dimensional data-rich problems, such as DDM-based Rectified Flow and
Schrödinger Bridge procedures, require fully training a DDM-type model at each
iteration, or use mini-batch techniques which can introduce significant errors. We
propose a novel algorithm to compute the Schrödinger Bridge, a dynamic entropyregularised version of OT, that eliminates the need to train multiple DDM-like
models. This algorithm corresponds to a discretisation of a flow of path measures,
which we call the Schrödinger Bridge Flow, whose only stationary point is the
Schrödinger Bridge. We demonstrate the performance of our algorithm on a variety
of unpaired data translation tasks.

1

Introduction

The problem of finding a map to transport one probability distribution to another one has numerous
applications in machine learning. In particular, it is at the core of generative modeling where the idea
is to transform a noise distribution into the data distribution, and is also central to transfer learning
tasks such as image-to-image translation. For discrete probability distributions, it is possible to
compute the Optimal Transport (OT) map but this is computationally expensive (Peyré et al., 2019).
By showing that an entropy-regularised version of OT, the Entropic OT (EOT), could be computed
much more efficiently using the Sinkhorn algorithm, Cuturi (2013) has enabled transport ideas to
be used in numerous applications (Ge et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2022). However, the computational
complexity of Sinkhorn algorithm is quadratic in the sample size, which makes its application to very
large datasets impractical. Mini-batch versions have been proposed, see e.g. (Genevay et al., 2018),
but tend to introduce significant errors in high dimensions (Sommerfeld et al., 2019).
In the context of generative modeling, Denoising Diffusion Models (DDMs) (Song et al., 2021a; Ho
et al., 2020) have shown impressive performance in a variety of domains. DDMs define a forward
process progressively noising the data, and sample generation is achieved by approximating the timereversal of this diffusion. In order to leverage the iterative refinement properties of DDMs in the OT
setting, methods exploiting the equivalence between the static versions of (E)OT and their dynamic
counterparts (Benamou and Brenier, 2000; Léonard, 2014) have been developed. A procedure to
approximate the dynamic OT is considered by Liu et al. (2023b), while techniques to approximate the
dynamic equivalent to EOT, the Schrödinger Bridge (SB), have been proposed in (De Bortoli et al.,
2021; Vargas et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022; Peluchetti, 2023; Shi et al., 2023). These techniques are
∗

Equal contribution.

Submitted to 38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

