Happy: A Debiased Learning Framework for
Continual Generalized Category Discovery

Shijie Ma1,2 , Fei Zhu3 , Zhun Zhong4,5 , Wenzhuo Liu1,2 , Xu-Yao Zhang1,2∗, Cheng-Lin Liu1,2
1
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI-CAS, China
4
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, China
5
School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, NG8 1BB Nottingham, UK
mashijie2021@ia.ac.cn

xyz@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Constantly discovering novel concepts is crucial in evolving environments. This paper explores the underexplored task of Continual Generalized Category Discovery
(C-GCD), which aims to incrementally discover new classes from unlabeled data
while maintaining the ability to recognize previously learned classes. Although
several settings are proposed to study the C-GCD task, they have limitations that
do not reflect real-world scenarios. We thus study a more practical C-GCD setting,
which includes more new classes to be discovered over a longer period, without
storing samples of past classes. In C-GCD, the model is initially trained on labeled
data of known classes, followed by multiple incremental stages where the model is
fed with unlabeled data containing both old and new classes. The core challenge
involves two conflicting objectives: discover new classes and prevent forgetting
old ones. We delve into the conflicts and identify that models are susceptible
to prediction bias and hardness bias. To address these issues, we introduce a
debiased learning framework, namely Happy, characterized by Hardness-aware
prototype sampling and soft entropy regularization. For the prediction bias, we first
introduce clustering-guided initialization to provide robust features. In addition,
we propose soft entropy regularization to assign appropriate probabilities to new
classes, which can significantly enhance the clustering performance of new classes.
For the harness bias, we present the hardness-aware prototype sampling, which
can effectively reduce the forgetting issue for previously seen classes, especially
for difficult classes. Experimental results demonstrate our method proficiently
manages the conflicts of C-GCD and achieves remarkable performance across
various datasets, e.g., 7.5% overall gains on ImageNet-100. Our code is publicly
available at https://github.com/mashijie1028/Happy-CGCD.

1

Introduction

In the open world [1, 2, 3], visual concepts are infinite and evolving and humans can cluster them
with previous knowledge. It is also important to endow AI with such abilities. In this regard, Novel
Category Discovery (NCD) [4, 5, 6] and Generalized Category Discovery (GCD) [7, 8, 1, 9, 10]
endeavor to transfer [4, 11] the knowledge from labeled classes to facilitate clustering new classes.
However, they are constrained to static settings where models only learn once, which contradicts the
ever-changing world. Thus, extending them to the temporal dimension is important. In the literature,
Continual Novel Category Discovery (C-NCD) [12, 13, 14] and Continual Generalized Category
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

