Fully Unconstrained Online Learning

Ashok Cutkosky
Boston University
ashok@cutkosky.com

Zakaria Mhammedi
Google Research
mhammedi@google.com

Abstract
We provide
a technique for online convex optimization that obtains regret
√
√
G∥w⋆ ∥ T log(∥w⋆ ∥G T ) + ∥w⋆ ∥2 + G2 on G-Lipschitz losses for any comparison point w⋆ without √
knowing either G or ∥w⋆ ∥. Importantly, this matches
the optimal bound G∥w⋆ ∥ T available with such knowledge
√ (up to logarithmic
factors), unless either ∥w⋆ ∥ or G is so large that even G∥w⋆ ∥ T is roughly linear
in T . Thus, at a high level it matches the optimal bound in all cases in which one
can achieve sublinear regret.

1

Unconstrained Online Learning

This paper provides new algorithms for online learning, which is a standard framework for the
design and analysis of iterative first-order optimization algorithms used throughout machine learning.
Specifically, we consider a variant of online learning often called “online convex optimization” [1, 2].
Formally, an online learning algorithm is designed to play a kind of “game” between the learning
algorithm and the environment, which we can describe using the following protocol:
Protocol 1. Online Learning/Online Convex Optimization.
Input: Convex domain W ⊆ Rd , number of rounds T .
For t = 1, . . . , T :
1. Learner outputs wt ∈ W.
2. Nature reveals loss vector gt ∈ ∂ℓt for some convex function ℓt ∶ W → R to the learner.
3. Learner suffers loss ⟨gt , wt ⟩.
The learner is evaluated with the regret ∑Tt=1 (ℓt (wt ) − ℓt (w⋆ )) against comparators w⋆ ∈ W. By
convexity, the regret is bounded by the linearized regret ∑Tt=1 ⟨gt , wt − w⋆ ⟩. Our goal is to ensure that
for all w⋆ ∈ W simultaneously:
¿
T
⎛
⎞
ÁT
À ∑ ∥g ∥2 ⎟ .
̃ ⎜∥w⋆ ∥Á
RegretT (w⋆ ) ∶= ∑ ⟨gt , wt − w⋆ ⟩ ≤ O
(1)
t
® ⎝
t=1
t=1
⎠
goal
Qualitatively, we consider a learner to be performing well if T1 ∑Tt=1 (ℓt (wt ) − ℓt (w⋆ )) is very small,
usually going to zero as T → ∞. This indicates that the average loss of the learner is close to the
average loss of any chosen comparison point w⋆ ∈ W. This property is called “sublinear regret”. The
bound (1) is unimprovable in general [3, 4, 5], and clearly implies sublinear regret.
Algorithms that achieve low regret are used in a variety of machine learning applications. Perhaps the
most famous such application is in the analysis of stochastic gradient descent, which achieves (1) for
appropriately tuned learning rate [6]. More generally, stochastic convex optimization can be reduced
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

