Disentangling Linear Quadratic Control with
Untrusted ML Predictions
Tongxin Li1∗

Hao Liu2∗

Yisong Yue2

1
School of Data Science
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
litongxin@cuhk.edu.cn
2
Computing + Mathematical Sciences
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, USA
{hliu3, yyue}@caltech.edu

Abstract
Uncertain perturbations in dynamical systems often arise from diverse resources,
represented by latent components. The predictions for these components, typically
generated by “black-box” machine learning tools, are prone to inaccuracies. To
tackle this challenge, we introduce D ISC, a novel policy that learns a confidence parameter online to harness the potential of accurate predictions while also mitigating
the impact of erroneous forecasts. When predictions are precise, D ISC leverages
this information to achieve near-optimal performance. Conversely, in the case of
significant prediction errors, it still has a worst-case competitive ratio guarantee.
We provide competitive ratio bounds for D ISC under both linear mixing of latent
variables as well as a broader class of mixing functions. Our results highlight a
first-of-its-kind “best-of-both-worlds” integration of machine-learned predictions,
thus lead to a near-optimal consistency and robustness tradeoff, which provably
improves what can be obtained without learning the confidence parameter. We
validate the applicability of D ISC across a spectrum of practical scenarios.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of online decision-making with predictions. Such settings are increasingly
popular with the use of machine learning for predictive modeling, with applications to power grids
and robotics [1, 2, 3, 4]. However, in many real-world settings, such black-box predictors can be
unreliable due to practical problems such as high model variability [5, 6], and out-of-distribution
generalization issues [7, 8]. In settings that require making reliable and high-quality decisions, recent
research has been working on designing the decision-making policy that can be adaptively in response
to receiving low-quality predictions [4].
In this paper, we consider the setting where there are different sources of disturbance, each representing distinct (and often independent) resources or factors. For instance, in electricity grids, machine
learning (ML) forecasts of variables like power consumption/generation fluctuations, electricity
prices, and battery states can facilitate near-optimal operational decisions on the one hand, but on the
other hand, latent variables such as power injections on certain loads can be highly unpredictable
due to their volatility [9]. Another example is the drone navigation task [10], where the challenge
∗

Correspondence to: Tongxin Li <litongxin@cuhk.edu.cn>. Tongxin Li contributed to the design of the
algorithms and experiments, and the writing of the paper. Hao Liu focused on conducting the experiments and
data analysis. The contributions are equal.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

