In-Context Learning with Representations:
Contextual Generalization of Trained Transformers
Tong Yang∗
CMU

Yu Huang†
UPenn

Yingbin Liang‡
OSU

Yuejie Chi§
CMU

Abstract
In-context learning (ICL) refers to a remarkable capability of pretrained large
language models, which can learn a new task given a few examples during inference.
However, theoretical understanding of ICL is largely under-explored, particularly
whether transformers can be trained to generalize to unseen examples in a prompt,
which will require the model to acquire contextual knowledge of the prompt for
generalization. This paper investigates the training dynamics of transformers by
gradient descent through the lens of non-linear regression tasks. The contextual
generalization here can be attained via learning the template function for each
task in-context, where all template functions lie in a linear space with m basis
functions. We analyze the training dynamics of one-layer multi-head transformers
to in-contextly predict unlabeled inputs given partially labeled prompts, where
the labels contain Gaussian noise and the number of examples in each prompt
are not sufficient to determine the template. Under mild assumptions, we show
that the training loss for a one-layer multi-head transformer converges linearly
to a global minimum. Moreover, the transformer effectively learns to perform
ridge regression over the basis functions. To our knowledge, this study is the
first provable demonstration that transformers can learn contextual (i.e., template)
information to generalize to both unseen examples and tasks when prompts contain
only a small number of query-answer pairs.

1

Introduction

Transformers [Vaswani et al., 2017] have achieved tremendous successes in machine learning,
particularly in natural language processing, by introducing self-attention mechanisms that enable
models to capture long-range dependencies and contextualized representations. In particular, these
self-attention mechanisms endow transformers with remarkable in-context learning (ICL) capabilities,
allowing them to adapt to new tasks or domains by simply being prompted with a few examples
that demonstrate the desired behavior, without any explicit fine-tuning or updating of the model’s
parameters [Brown et al., 2020].
A series of papers have empirically studied the underlying mechanisms behind in-context learning in
transformer models [Garg et al., 2022, Von Oswald et al., 2023, Wei et al., 2023, Olsson et al., 2022,
Xie et al., 2021, Chen and Zou, 2024, Agarwal et al., 2024], which have shown that transformers
can predict unseen examples after being prompted on a few examples. The pioneering work of
∗

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University; email:
tongyang@andrew.cmu.edu.
†
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania; email:
yuh42@wharton.upenn.edu.
‡
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The Ohio State University; email:
liang.889@osu.edu.
§
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University; email:
yuejiechi@cmu.edu.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

