Vocal Call Locator Benchmark (VCL) for localizing
rodent vocalizations from multi-channel audio
Ralph E Peterson1,2,⇤,† , Aramis Tanelus2,⇤ , Christopher Ick3 , Bartul Mimica4 , Niegil Francis1,5 ,
Violet J Ivan1 , Aman Choudhri6 , Annegret L Falkner4 , Mala Murthy4 ,
David M Schneider1 , Dan H Sanes1 , Alex H Williams1,2,†
NYU, Center for Neural Science
Flatiron Institute, Center for Computational Neuroscience
3
NYU, Center for Data Science
4
Princeton Neuroscience Institute
5
NYU, Tandon School of Engineering
6
Columbia Univsersity
1

2

†

⇤
Equal contribution
Correspondence to rep359@nyu.edu and alex.h.williams@nyu.edu

Abstract
Understanding the behavioral and neural dynamics of social interactions is a goal
of contemporary neuroscience. Many machine learning methods have emerged
in recent years to make sense of complex video and neurophysiological data that
result from these experiments. Less focus has been placed on understanding how
animals process acoustic information, including social vocalizations. A critical
step to bridge this gap is determining the senders and receivers of acoustic information in social interactions. While sound source localization (SSL) is a classic
problem in signal processing, existing approaches are limited in their ability to
localize animal-generated sounds in standard laboratory environments. Advances
in deep learning methods for SSL are likely to help address these limitations,
however there are currently no publicly available models, datasets, or benchmarks
to systematically evaluate SSL algorithms in the domain of bioacoustics. Here,
we present the VCL Benchmark: the first large-scale dataset for benchmarking
SSL algorithms in rodents. We acquired synchronized video and multi-channel
audio recordings of 767,295 sounds with annotated ground truth sources across 9
conditions. The dataset provides benchmarks which evaluate SSL performance on
real data, simulated acoustic data, and a mixture of real and simulated data. We
intend for this benchmark to facilitate knowledge transfer between the neuroscience
and acoustic machine learning communities, which have had limited overlap.
Data is available at: vclbenchmark.flatironinstitute.org

1

Introduction

An ongoing renaissance of ethology in the field of neuroscience has shown the importance of conducting experiments in naturalistic contexts, particularly social interactions [40, 1]. Most experiments
in social neuroscience have focused on relatively constrained contexts over short timescales, however
an emerging paradigm shift is leading laboratories to adopt longitudinal experiments in semi-natural
or natural environments [52]. With this shift comes significant data analytic challenges—such as how
to track individuals in groups of socially interacting animals—necessitating collaboration between
the fields of machine learning and neuroscience [10, 46].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

