DeTeCtive: Detecting AI-generated Text via
Multi-Level Contrastive Learning

Xun Guo1∗ Shan Zhang2∗ Yongxin He2∗ Ting Zhang2
Wanquan Feng1 Haibin Huang1† Chongyang Ma1
1
2
ByteDance
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Current techniques for detecting AI-generated text are largely confined to manual
feature crafting and supervised binary classification paradigms. These methodologies typically lead to performance bottlenecks and unsatisfactory generalizability.
Consequently, these methods are often inapplicable for out-of-distribution (OOD)
data and newly emerged large language models (LLMs). In this paper, we revisit
the task of AI-generated text detection. We argue that the key to accomplishing
this task lies in distinguishing writing styles of different authors, rather than simply
classifying the text into human-written or AI-generated text. To this end, we propose DeTeCtive, a multi-task auxiliary, multi-level contrastive learning framework.
DeTeCtive is designed to facilitate the learning of distinct writing styles, combined
with a dense information retrieval pipeline for AI-generated text detection. Our
method is compatible with a range of text encoders. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method enhances the ability of various text encoders in detecting
AI-generated text across multiple benchmarks and achieves state-of-the-art results.
Notably, in OOD zero-shot evaluation, our method outperforms existing approaches
by a large margin. Moreover, we find our method boasts a Training-Free Incremental Adaptation (TFIA) capability towards OOD data, further enhancing its efficacy
in OOD detection scenarios. We will open-source our code and models in hopes
that our work will spark new thoughts in the field of AI-generated text detection,
ensuring safe application of LLMs and enhancing compliance.3

1

Introduction

Recently, the field of large language models (LLMs) [6, 12, 60, 69] has witnessed swift advancements,
bringing great convenience to both professional settings and daily life. However, the widespread use
of AI-generated text also poses threats to global information security, manifesting in the propagation
of disinformation, misinformation, and content that can incite harmful or destructive behaviors [16].
Hence, the detection of AI-generated text has ascended as a task of vital importance.
On the other hand, with the advancement of LLMs, the task of AI-generated text detection has elevated
into an escalating challenge. Early methods, such as watermarking methods [23, 32] and statisticalbased methods [63, 47] encountered performance bottlenecks due to their reliance on manually
hand-crafted forms. Moreover, the inherent inability to swiftly adapt to newly emerged LLMs
further restricts their effectiveness. In stark contrast, recent training-based methods [11, 27, 24] have
showcased notable improvements in performance. However, they remain constrained by the necessity
of precisely paired training data and exhibit unsatisfactory generalization in out-of-distribution (OOD)
detection scenarios due to the fixed binary classification formulation.
∗

main contributor
Corresponding author: jackiehuanghaibin@gmail.com
3
Our code is available at https://github.com/heyongxin233/DeTeCtive

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

