Can neural operators always be continuously
discretized?
Takashi Furuya1,∗
2

Michael Puthawala2,∗

Maarten V. de Hoop3

Matti Lassas4

1
Shimane University, takashi.furuya0101@gmail.com
South Dakota State University, Michael.Puthawala@sdstate.edu
3
Rice University, mdehoop@rice.edu
4
University of Helsinki, matti.lassas@helsinki.fi

* These authors contributed equally to this work

Abstract
We consider the problem of discretization of neural operators between Hilbert
spaces in a general framework including skip connections. We focus on bijective neural operators through the lens of diffeomorphisms in infinite dimensions.
Framed using category theory, we give a no-go theorem that shows that diffeomorphisms between Hilbert spaces or Hilbert manifolds may not admit any continuous
approximations by diffeomorphisms on finite-dimensional spaces, even if the approximations are nonlinear. The natural way out is the introduction of strongly
monotone diffeomorphisms and layerwise strongly monotone neural operators
which have continuous approximations by strongly monotone diffeomorphisms
on finite-dimensional spaces. For these, one can guarantee discretization invariance, while ensuring that finite-dimensional approximations converge not only as
sequences of functions, but that their representations converge in a suitable sense
as well. Finally, we show that bilipschitz neural operators may always be written
in the form of an alternating composition of strongly monotone neural operators,
plus a simple isometry. Thus we realize a rigorous platform for discretization of
a generalization of a neural operator. We also show that neural operators of this
type may be approximated through the composition of finite-rank residual neural
operators, where each block is strongly monotone, and may be inverted locally via
iteration. We conclude by providing a quantitative approximation result for the
discretization of general bilipschitz neural operators.

1

Introduction

Neural operators, first introduced in [30], have become more and more prominent in deep learning on
function spaces. As opposed to traditional neural networks that learn maps between finite-dimensional
Euclidean spaces, neural operators learn maps between infinite-dimensional function spaces yet may
be trained and evaluated on finite-dimensional data through a rigorous notion of discretization. Neural
operators are widely used in the field of scientific machine learning [6, 21, 38, 55, 56], among others,
principally because of their discretization invariance. In this work, we consider the fundamental limits
of this discretization. Throughout, we emphasize the importance of continuity under discretization.
A key ingredient in our analysis is the identification of properties of diffeomorphisms that may be
induced by (bijective) neural operators, which are diffeomorphisms themselves. Diffeomorphisms
exist in many contexts, for example, in generative models. These involve mapping one probability
distribution or measure, µ, over some measurable space to another, X, via a push forward, that is,
F# µ(U ) = µ(F −1 (U )) for U ⊂ X. If µ admits a density dµ then, in finite dimensions, we may
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

