PrivAuditor: Benchmarking Privacy Vulnerabilities in
LLM Adaptation Techniques

Derui Zhu1∗ Dingfan Chen2∗ Xiongfei Wu3 Jiahui Geng4
Zhuo Li3 Jens Grossklags1 Lei Ma5,6
1
Technical University of Munich 2 Saarland University
3
Kyushu University 4 MBZUAI
5
The University of Tokyo 6 University of Alberta

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) are recognized for their potential to be an important building block toward achieving artificial general intelligence due to their
unprecedented capability for solving diverse tasks. Despite these achievements,
LLMs often underperform in domain-specific tasks without training on relevant
domain data. This phenomenon, which is often attributed to distribution shifts,
makes adapting pre-trained LLMs with domain-specific data crucial. However, this
adaptation raises significant privacy concerns, especially when the data involved
come from sensitive domains. In this work, we extensively investigate the privacy
vulnerabilities of adapted (fine-tuned) LLMs and benchmark privacy leakage across
a wide range of data modalities, state-of-the-art privacy attack methods, adaptation
techniques, and model architectures. We systematically evaluate and pinpoint critical factors related to privacy leakage. With our organized codebase and actionable
insights, we aim to provide a standardized auditing tool for practitioners seeking to
deploy customized LLM applications with faithful privacy assessments.

1

Introduction

The rapid evolution of large language models (LLMs) has made them fundamental to many modern
natural language processing tasks [1, 2]. These capabilities are typically powered by vast amounts of
model parameters, scaling to trillions, and intensive pre-training on massive text corpora (e.g., nearly
a terabyte of English text [3]). However, the large-scale pre-training required for these models incurs
significant computational costs, making it financially prohibitive for most practitioners. Additionally,
pre-trained models often need additional fine-tuning to achieve satisfactory performance in specific
domains [4, 5, 6]. Consequently, the current best practice involves acquiring an open-source LLM as
a pre-trained foundation model and then adapting it for domain-specific data.
However, the common “pre-training, adaptation tuning” pipeline inadvertently raises privacy concerns regarding the leakage of sensitive domain data used for adapting pre-trained LLMs [7, 8, 9,
10, 11]. Indeed, recent research has demonstrated that LLMs can memorize substantial volumes of
sensitive data, leading to a high risk of unintentional privacy leakage to third parties [12, 13, 14].
These issues contribute to the ongoing debate about the privacy implications of LLMs and may trigger
violations of modern privacy regulations, e.g., the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),
underscoring the urgent need to address the privacy challenges associated with LLMs.
To analyze the privacy issues related to the usage of LLMs, existing research primarily focuses on the
leakage of pre-training data when querying a deployed general-purpose LLM [12, 14, 13]. Building
on this foundation, in-depth investigations regarding such leakage, with respect to various factors
*

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

