Why are Visually-Grounded Language Models
Bad at Image Classification?

Yuhui Zhang1†

Alyssa Unell1 Xiaohan Wang1 Dhruba Ghosh2 Yuchang Su3
Ludwig Schmidt1,2† Serena Yeung-Levy1†
1
Stanford University 2 University of Washington 3 Tsinghua University
†
{yuhuiz,ludwigsc,syyeung}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Image classification is one of the most fundamental capabilities of machine vision
intelligence. In this work, we revisit the image classification task using visuallygrounded language models (VLMs) such as GPT-4V and LLaVA. We find that
existing proprietary and public VLMs, despite often using CLIP as a vision encoder
and having many more parameters, significantly underperform CLIP on standard
image classification benchmarks like ImageNet. To understand the reason, we
explore several hypotheses concerning the inference algorithms, training objectives,
and data processing in VLMs. Our analysis reveals that the primary cause is datarelated: critical information for image classification is encoded in the VLM’s latent
space but can only be effectively decoded with enough training data. Specifically,
there is a strong correlation between the frequency of class exposure during VLM
training and instruction-tuning and the VLM’s performance in those classes; when
trained with sufficient data, VLMs can match the accuracy of state-of-the-art
classification models. Based on these findings, we enhance a VLM by integrating
classification-focused datasets into its training, and demonstrate that the enhanced
classification performance of the VLM transfers to its general capabilities, resulting
in an improvement of 11.8% on the newly collected ImageWikiQA dataset.1

1

Introduction

The ability to recognize objects within images is a fundamental capability of machine vision. Over the
past 15 years, the field has experienced significant breakthroughs due to deep learning and large-scale
datasets [11, 48]. For instance, on the renowned ImageNet dataset, designed to classify images into
1,000 categories, the error rate has dramatically decreased from 47.1% in 2009 to 9.1% in 2024,
representing a 5-fold reduction [30, 12]. Consequently, these classification models have superseded
most human labelers.
Nowadays, the community has focused on more sophisticated and nuanced capabilities in the
quest for visual intelligence. Visually-grounded language models (VLMs), which integrate visual
signals from vision encoders with large language models, have recently emerged as a promising
paradigm [2, 36, 32]. VLMs like GPT-4V [36], Gemini-1.5 [44], or Claude-3 [3] have demonstrated
advanced visual understanding abilities, such as answering math questions from table images or
generating HTML code from design sketches.
In this work, we revisit the fundamental task of image classification using VLMs. Surprisingly, we
find that various public and proprietary VLMs struggle with image classification in both open-world
settings, where the class list is unknown, and closed-world settings, where class names are provided
in the context (§2). Despite having many more parameters, there is a significant gap between the
1

Project page: https://yuhui-zh15.github.io/VLMClassifier-Website/.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

