Neural Model Checking

Mirco Giacobbe∗
University of Birmingham, UK
Abhinandan Pal∗
University of Birmingham, UK

Daniel Kroening∗
Amazon Web Services, USA
Michael Tautschnig∗
Amazon Web Services, USA and
Queen Mary University of London, UK

Abstract
We introduce a machine learning approach to model checking temporal logic,
with application to formal hardware verification. Model checking answers the
question of whether every execution of a given system satisfies a desired temporal
logic specification. Unlike testing, model checking provides formal guarantees. Its
application is expected standard in silicon design and the EDA industry has invested
decades into the development of performant symbolic model checking algorithms.
Our new approach combines machine learning and symbolic reasoning by using
neural networks as formal proof certificates for linear temporal logic. We train
our neural certificates from randomly generated executions of the system and we
then symbolically check their validity using satisfiability solving which, upon the
affirmative answer, establishes that the system provably satisfies the specification.
We leverage the expressive power of neural networks to represent proof certificates
as well as the fact that checking a certificate is much simpler than finding one. As a
result, our machine learning procedure for model checking is entirely unsupervised,
formally sound, and practically effective. We experimentally demonstrate that our
method outperforms the state-of-the-art academic and commercial model checkers
on a set of standard hardware designs written in SystemVerilog.

1

Introduction

Electronic design is complex and prone to error. Hardware bugs are permanent after production
and as such can irremediably affect the correctness of software—which runs on hardware—and can
compromise the safety of cyber-physical systems—which embed hardware. Correctness assurance is
core to the engineering of digital circuitry, with the median FPGA and IC/ASIC projects spending
respectively 40 % and 60 % of time in verification [48]. Verification approaches based on directed
or constrained random testing are easy to set up but are inherently non-exhaustive [89, 91]. Testing
cannot show the absence of bugs which, for systems the safety of which is critical, can have
serious consequences; notably, over 40 % of hardware development projects must satisfy at least
one functional safety standard [48]. In contrast to testing, model checking a design against a formal
specification of correctness answers the question of whether the design satisfies the specification with
mathematical certainty, for every possible execution of the system [9, 13, 35].
The EDA industry has heavily invested in software tools for symbolic model checking. Early symbolic
model checking algorithms utilise fixed-point computations with binary decision diagrams (BDDs) [7],
where each node specifies the Boolean assignment for a circuit’s flip-flop or input bit [26, 45]. BDDs
struggle to scale when applied to complex arithmetic data paths, prompting a shift towards iterative
approximation of fixed points using propositional satisfiability (SAT) solving [16, 17, 33], which
∗

The authors are listed alphabetically.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

