Recurrent Reinforcement Learning with Memoroids

Steven Morad1,2 , Chris Lu3 , Ryan Kortvelesy2 , Stephan Liwicki4 , Jakob Foerster3 ,
Amanda Prorok2
1
Faculty of Science and Technology, University of Macau, China
2
Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge, UK
3
Engineering Science, University of Oxford, UK
4
Toshiba Europe, UK
smorad@um.edu.mo, christopher.lu@exeter.ox.ac.uk, rk627@cst.cam.ac.uk,
Stephan.Liwicki@toshiba.eu, jakob.foerster@eng.ox.ac.uk, asp45@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Memory models such as Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and Transformers
address Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs) by mapping
trajectories to latent Markov states. Neither model scales particularly well to long
sequences, especially compared to an emerging class of memory models called
Linear Recurrent Models. We discover that the recurrent update of these models resembles a monoid, leading us to reformulate existing models using a novel
monoid-based framework that we call memoroids. We revisit the traditional approach to batching in recurrent reinforcement learning, highlighting theoretical and
empirical deficiencies. We leverage memoroids to propose a batching method that
improves sample efficiency, increases the return, and simplifies the implementation
of recurrent loss functions in reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) traditionally focuses on solving Markov Decision Processes (MDPs),
although for many interesting problems the Markov state is hidden. Instead, we receive noisy or
ambiguous observations, resulting in Partially Observable MDPs. The standard approach to RL under
partial observability involves summarizing a sequence of observations into a latent Markov state
using a memory model or sequence model. Commonly used models include RNNs and Transformers.
Training Transformers or RNNs over long sequences is computationally expensive. Instead, prior
work often splits these sequences into shorter fixed-length subsequences called segments (Figure 1).
Using segments adds implementation complexity, reduces efficiency, and introduces theoretical
issues. Despite these drawbacks, most prior work and virtually all existing RL libraries follow this
segment-based approach. A new class of sequence models, sometimes called Linear Recurrent
Models, offers much greater efficiency over long sequences than Transformers or RNNs. We posit
that we can utilize these efficient models to do away with segments and their associated drawbacks.
Contributions We aim to remove the need for segments in RL. First, we discover that many
efficient memory models share an underlying structure reminiscent of monoids, a concept from
category theory. We propose to extend the monoid into a memoroid, a mathematical framework which
can represent a large class of efficient memory models. Armed with the memoroid, we propose a new
batching method that eliminates the need for segments.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

