FasMe: Fast and Sample-efficient Meta Estimator
for Precision Matrix Learning in Small Sample
Settings
Xiao Tan1,3 Yiqin Wang1 Yangyang Shen1 Dian Shen1
Meng Wang2 Peibo Duan3 Beilun Wang1,*
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
2
College of Design and Innovation, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
3
Department of Data Science & AI, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
{xtan, 213200449, seu_syy, dshen, beilun}@seu.edu.cn
mengwangtj@tongji.edu.cn peibo.duan@monash.edu

Abstract
Precision matrix estimation is a ubiquitous task featuring numerous applications
such as rare disease diagnosis and neural connectivity exploration. However, this
task becomes challenging in small sample settings, where the number of samples
is significantly less than the number of dimensions, leading to unreliable estimates.
Previous approaches either fail to perform well in small sample settings or suffer
from inefficient estimation processes, even when incorporating meta-learning
techniques. To this end, we propose a novel approach FasMe for Fast and Sampleefficient Meta Precision Matrix Learning, which first extracts meta-knowledge
through a multi-task learning diagram. Then, meta-knowledge constraints are
applied using a maximum determinant matrix completion algorithm for the novel
task. As a result, we reduce the sample size requirements to O(log p/K) per
meta-training task and O(log |G|) for the meta-testing task. Moreover, the hereby
proposed model only needs O(p log ϵ−1 ) time and O(p) memory for converging to
an ϵ-accurate solution. On multiple synthetic and biomedical datasets, FasMe is at
least ten times faster than the four baselines while promoting prediction accuracy
in small sample settings.

1

Introduction

Precision matrix estimation aims to exploit conditional dependency relationships between random
variables, which plays a vital role in high-dimensional statistical learning with a wide range of
applications in areas such as genetics [1], neuroscience [2], and social networks. For instance,
researchers are examining the gene network derived from the gene expression data of patients to
investigate a rare disease. However, in cases involving rare diseases, the analysis is hindered by
the high dimensionality of genetic datasets, where the number of features significantly exceeds the
number of samples. For example, the Cholangiocarcinoma dataset in TCGA contains only 51 samples
but thousands of genes. In this context, we define a "small sample setting" as a scenario in which
the number of samples is less than one-tenth of the number of dimensions. Although inferring such
relationship graphs in small sample settings is challenging, it can provide valuable insights into the
genetic characteristics underlying this disease and its etiology.
Precision matrix estimator inherently has the capability to handle datasets where the number of
dimensions p is equal to or greater than the number of samples n [3]. However, this capability has its
* Corresponding Author.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

