SARAD: Spatial Association-Aware Anomaly
Detection and Diagnosis for Multivariate Time Series

Ligang He∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Warwick
Coventry, UK
ligang.he@warwick.ac.uk

Zhihao Dai
Department of Computer Science
University of Warwick
Coventry, UK
zhihao.dai@warwick.ac.uk
Shuang-Hua Yang
Department of Computer Science
University of Reading
Reading, UK
shuang-hua.yang@reading.ac.uk

Matthew Leeke
School of Computer Science
University of Birmingham
Birmingham, UK
m.leeke@bham.ac.uk

Abstract
Anomaly detection in time series data is fundamental to the design, deployment,
and evaluation of industrial control systems. Temporal modeling has been the
natural focus of anomaly detection approaches for time series data. However, the
focus on temporal modeling can obscure or dilute the spatial information that can
be used to capture complex interactions in multivariate time series. In this paper,
we propose SARAD, an approach that leverages spatial information beyond data
autoencoding errors to improve the detection and diagnosis of anomalies. SARAD
trains a Transformer to learn the spatial associations, the pairwise inter-feature
relationships which ubiquitously characterize such feedback-controlled systems. As
new associations form and old ones dissolve, SARAD applies subseries division to
capture their changes over time. Anomalies exhibit association descending patterns,
a key phenomenon we exclusively observe and attribute to the disruptive nature of
anomalies detaching anomalous features from others. To exploit the phenomenon
and yet dismiss non-anomalous descent, SARAD performs anomaly detection
via autoencoding in the association space. We present experimental results to
demonstrate that SARAD achieves state-of-the-art performance, providing robust
anomaly detection and a nuanced understanding of anomalous events.

1

Introduction

Time series anomaly detection is critical for industrial automation (Rieth et al., 2018), intrusion
detection (Mathur and Tippenhauer, 2016), and healthcare sensing (Goldberger et al., 2000). Anomaly
detection in these contexts is typically treated as an unsupervised learning problem, owing to the
novelty of anomalies and the scarcity of labeled anomalies.
Temporal modeling is the mainstream basis of current time series anomaly detectors. By learning
the dependencies between discrete time steps, temporal modeling can pinpoint the time spans
of anomalies. During anomalies, unseen and peculiar temporal dependence patterns degrade data
autoencoding (Wang et al., 2023b) or autoregression (Zhao et al., 2020) performance, thereby enabling
detection. Alternatively, irregular temporal representations can be driven to breach learned enclosing
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

