Semi-Open 3D Object Retrieval via Hierarchical
Equilibrium on Hypergraph

1

Yang Xu1 , Yifan Feng1 , Jun Zhang2 , Jun-Hai Yong1 , and Yue Gao1∗
BNRist, THUIBCS, KLISS, BLBCI, School of Software, Tsinghua University, China
2
Tencent AI Lab
{xuyang9610,evanfeng97}@gmail.com, junejzhang@tencent.com,
{yongjh,gaoyue}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing open-set learning methods consider only the single-layer labels of objects
and strictly assume no overlap between the training and testing sets, leading to
contradictory optimization for superposed categories. In this paper, we introduce a
more practical Semi-Open Environment setting for open-set 3D object retrieval
with hierarchical labels, in which the training and testing set share a partial label
space for coarse categories but are completely disjoint from fine categories. We
propose the Hypergraph-Based Hierarchical Equilibrium Representation (HERT)
framework for this task. Specifically, we propose the Hierarchical Retrace Embedding (HRE) module to overcome the global disequilibrium of unseen categories
by fully leveraging the multi-level category information. Besides, tackling the feature overlap and class confusion problem, we perform the Structured Equilibrium
Tuning (SET) module to utilize more equilibrial correlations among objects and
generalize to unseen categories, by constructing a superposed hypergraph based
on the local coherent and global entangled correlations. Furthermore, we generate
four semi-open 3DOR datasets with multi-level labels for benchmarking. Results
demonstrate that the proposed method can effectively generate the hierarchical
embeddings of 3D objects and generalize them towards semi-open environments.

1

Introduction

3D objects are of paramount significance, finding extensive applications from computer graphics [1]
to security [31] and autonomous robotics [2]. As the fundamental task of data acquisition, 3D object
retrieval (3DOR) [22, 10] plays a pivotal role in the computer vision community [3]. 3DOR methods
learn to represent 3D objects from the training set and then extract features from query objects to
effectively align similar samples. According to the category overlap between training and testing sets,
existing 3DOR algorithms can be divided into closed-set and open-set types. The former conducts
retrieval for objects whose categories have been seen in the training set [32, 36], while the latter
handles objects of unseen categories [7].
Existing open-set 3D learning methods are based on the assumption that the labels of object categories
are at a single level [46, 23]. In practical scenarios, objects are typically described by multiple
hierarchical labels. This leads to categories in training and testing sets showing varying degrees of
overlap at different levels. As illustrated in Figure 1(a), we term this scenario, where the training
and testing set share a partial label space of coarse categories but are completely disjoint from fine
categories, as Semi-Open Environment. Besides, existing methods typically extract basic features
using pre-trained models, followed by further open-set learning and optimization. However, for
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

