Harmonizing Visual Text Comprehension and
Generation
Zhen Zhao1,2,* , Jingqun Tang2, , Binghong Wu2 , Chunhui Lin2 , Shu Wei2 , Hao Liu2 ,
Xin Tan1 , Zhizhong Zhang1,3 , Can Huang2 , Yuan Xie1,
3

1
East China Normal University 2 ByteDance
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Computer Software Evaluating and Testing, Shanghai, China
51255901056@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, tangjingqun@bytedance.com, yxie@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this work, we present TextHarmony, a unified and versatile multimodal generative model proficient in comprehending and generating visual text. Simultaneously
generating images and texts typically results in performance degradation due to
the inherent inconsistency between vision and language modalities. To overcome
this challenge, existing approaches resort to modality-specific data for supervised
fine-tuning, necessitating distinct model instances. We propose Slide-LoRA, which
dynamically aggregates modality-specific and modality-agnostic LoRA experts,
partially decoupling the multimodal generation space. Slide-LoRA harmonizes the
generation of vision and language within a singular model instance, thereby facilitating a more unified generative process. Additionally, we develop a high-quality
image caption dataset, DetailedTextCaps-100K, synthesized with a sophisticated
closed-source MLLM to enhance visual text generation capabilities further. Comprehensive experiments across various benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed approach. Empowered by Slide-LoRA, TextHarmony achieves
comparable performance to modality-specific fine-tuning results with only a 2%
increase in parameters and shows an average improvement of 2.5% in visual text
comprehension tasks and 4.0% in visual text generation tasks. Our work delineates
the viability of an integrated approach to multimodal generation within the visual
text domain, setting a foundation for subsequent inquiries. Code is available at
https://github.com/bytedance/TextHarmony.

1

Introduction

Visual text comprehension and generation tasks such as scene text detection and recognition [79,
63, 40, 75, 62, 61, 24, 58], document understanding [64, 23], visual question answering (VQA)
[26, 15, 27, 39, 59], key information extraction (KIE) [64, 23], multi-modal retrieval[33, 34, 30, 31,
36, 29, 32, 35, 28], visual text generation, editing, and erasure [66, 6, 5] are consistently of significant
value for both academic research and practical applications. Recently, remarkable advancements have
been achieved in visual text comprehension and generation, driven by the evolution of Multimodal
Large Language Models (MLLMs) and diffusion models. Foremost text-centric MLLMs [73, 20,
27, 39] utilize a cohesive framework to comprehend text-rich images comprehensively, whereas
diffusion-based approaches [66, 6, 5] introduce innovative modifications to enhance visual text
generation capabilities. As depicted in Figure 1, text-centric MLLMs and diffusion models are
capable of handling language and vision modalities adeptly, with MLLMs generating texts and
diffusion models producing images. However, integrating language and vision generation capabilities
within a large multimodal model for visual text scenarios remains unexplored. This paper focuses on
∗

Work done when Zhen Zhao was an intern at ByteDance.

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

