Transferability Bound Theory: Exploring Relationship
between Adversarial Transferability and Flatness

Mingyuan Fan1 , Xiaodan Li1,3 , Cen Chen1,2∗, Wenmeng Zhou3 , Yaliang Li4
1
School of Data Science & Engineering, East China Normal University, China
2
The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University, China
3
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
4
Alibaba Group, Bellevue, WA, USA
fmy2660966@gmail.com, cenchen@dase.ecnu.edu.cn,
{fiona.lxd, wenmeng.zwm, yaliang.li}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
A prevailing belief in attack and defense community is that the higher flatness of
adversarial examples enables their better cross-model transferability, leading to a
growing interest in employing sharpness-aware minimization and its variants. However, the theoretical relationship between the transferability of adversarial examples
and their flatness has not been well established, making the belief questionable.
To bridge this gap, we embark on a theoretical investigation and, for the first time,
derive a theoretical bound for the transferability of adversarial examples with few
practical assumptions. Our analysis challenges this belief by demonstrating that the
increased flatness of adversarial examples does not necessarily guarantee improved
transferability. Moreover, building upon the theoretical analysis, we propose TPA,
a Theoretically Provable Attack that optimizes a surrogate of the derived bound to
craft adversarial examples. Extensive experiments across widely used benchmark
datasets and various real-world applications show that TPA can craft more transferable adversarial examples compared to state-of-the-art baselines. We hope that
these results can recalibrate preconceived impressions within the community and
facilitate the development of stronger adversarial attack and defense mechanisms.
The source codes are available in https://github.com/fmy266/TPA.

1

Introduction

The transferability of adversarial examples [5, 9] suggests a phenomenon where adversarial examples
designed to fool one local proxy model can also be generalized to mislead other unknown target
models, even with different model parameters and architectures. This intriguing property has
significant implications for various applications, ranging from the robustness assessment of largescale models [10, 27] to data privacy protection [17, 23, 32]. However, it is observed that the
generated adversarial examples often tend to be overly specialized to the proxy model, showing
limited transferability [27, 30, 36]. Driven by this, researchers have dedicated substantial efforts to
developing transferability-enhancing techniques [24, 30, 35].
Most transferability-enhancing techniques have drawn inspiration from an analogy between the
transferability of adversarial examples and the generalization capability of models [25, 36, 44]. For
example, borrowing the idea of Mixup [46], Admix [37] attempts to blend adversarial examples with
other samples to generate more transferable adversarial examples. Recently, Foret et al. [14] observed
a strong correlation between the flatness of the model’s loss landscape and its generalization capability,
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

