Unifying Homophily and Heterophily for Spectral
Graph Neural Networks via Triple Filter Ensembles

Rui Duan1 , Mingjian Guang2 , Junli Wang3 , Chungang Yan3 , Hongda Qi4 ,
Wenkang Su1∗, Can Tian1∗, Haoran Yang3
School of Computer Science and Cyber Engineering, Guangzhou University, China,
2
Donghua University, China, 3 Tongji University, China 4 Shanghai Normal University, China
1
{duan, swk1004, tiancan}@gzhu.edu.cn; 2 guangmingjian@dhu.edu.cn;
3
{junliwang, yanchungang, 2010498}@tongji.edu.cn; 4 hongda_qi@shnu.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Polynomial-based learnable spectral graph neural networks (GNNs) utilize polynomial to approximate graph convolutions and have achieved impressive performance
on graphs. Nevertheless, there are three progressive problems to be solved. Some
models use polynomials with better approximation for approximating filters, yet
perform worse on real-world graphs. Carefully crafted graph learning methods,
sophisticated polynomial approximations, and refined coefficient constraints leaded
to overfitting, which diminishes the generalization of the models. How to design a
model that retains the ability of polynomial-based spectral GNNs to approximate
filters while it possesses higher generalization and performance? In this paper, we
propose a spectral GNN with triple filter ensemble (TFE-GNN), which extracts homophily and heterophily from graphs with different levels of homophily adaptively
while utilizing the initial features. Specifically, the first and second ensembles are
combinations of a set of base low-pass and high-pass filters, respectively, after
which the third ensemble combines them with two learnable coefficients and yield a
graph convolution (TFE-Conv). Theoretical analysis shows that the approximation
ability of TFE-GNN is consistent with that of ChebNet under certain conditions,
namely it can learn arbitrary filters. TFE-GNN can be viewed as a reasonable combination of two unfolded and integrated excellent spectral GNNs, which motivates
it to perform well. Experiments show that TFE-GNN achieves high generalization
and new state-of-the-art performance on various real-world datasets. The source
code of GEN is publicly available at https://github.com/graphNN/TFEGNN

1

Introduction

Graph neural networks (GNNs) are competitive in graph-related tasks (Scarselli et al., 2008; Yang
et al., 2023; Shirzad et al., 2023; Duan et al., 2024) and can be divided into two main categories:
spatial-based (Xu et al., 2019) and spectral-based (Shirzad et al., 2023; Tao et al., 2023; He et al.,
2022; Bo et al., 2023b; Guo et al., 2023) GNNs. Spectral graph convolutions in the spectral domain
of the graph Laplace matrix, i.e., the spectral graph filters, are the core component of spectral-based
GNNs. We further classify spectral-based GNNs into two categories based on whether their graph
convolutions can be learned or not.
The first class of spectral-based GNNs’ graph convolutions are predetermined, i.e., they filter the
graph signals (features) in a fixed way. Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2016)
∗

Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

