Once Read is Enough: Domain-specific
Pretraining-free Language Models with Cluster-guided
Sparse Experts for Long-tail Domain Knowledge

Fang Dong1
Mengyi Chen1,∗ Jixian Zhou1,∗
Yubin Shi1
Yixuan Chen2
3,1
2,†
4
Mingzhi Dong
Yujiang Wang
Dongsheng Li
Xiaochen Yang5
Rui Zhu6
7
8
9
1
1
Robert Dick
Qin Lv
Fan Yang
Tun Lu
Ning Gu
Li Shang1,†
1

China and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Oxford Suzhou Centre for Advanced Research, Suzhou, China 3 University of Bath
4
Microsoft Research Asia, Shanghai, China
5
School of Mathematics & Statistics, University of Glasgow
6
Bayes Business School, City St George’s, University of London
7
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Michigan
8
Department of Computer Science, University of Colorado Boulder
9
School of Microelectronics, Fudan University

Abstract
Language models (LMs) only pretrained on a general and massive corpus usually
cannot attain satisfying performance on domain-specific downstream tasks, and
hence, applying domain-specific pretraining to LMs is a common and indispensable
practice. However, domain-specific pretraining can be costly and time-consuming,
hindering LMs’ deployment in real-world applications. In this work, we consider
the incapability to memorize domain-specific knowledge embedded in the general
corpus with rare occurrences and “long-tail” distributions as the leading cause for
pretrained LMs’ inferior downstream performance. Analysis of Neural Tangent
Kernels (NTKs) reveals that those long-tail data are commonly overlooked in the
model’s gradient updates and, consequently, are not effectively memorized, leading
to poor domain-specific downstream performance. Based on the intuition that
data with similar semantic meaning are closer in the embedding space, we devise
a Cluster-guided Sparse Expert (CSE) layer to actively learn long-tail domain
knowledge typically neglected in previous pretrained LMs. During pretraining, a
CSE layer efficiently clusters domain knowledge together and assigns long-tail
knowledge to designate extra experts. CSE is also a lightweight structure that only
needs to be incorporated in several deep layers. With our training strategy, we found
that during pretraining, data of long-tail knowledge gradually formulate isolated,
“outlier” clusters in an LM’s representation spaces, especially in deeper layers.
Our experimental results show that only pretraining CSE-based LMs is enough to
achieve superior performance than regularly pretrained-finetuned LMs on various
downstream tasks, implying the prospects of domain-specific-pretraining-free
language models.

∗
†

Co-first authors.
Corresponding authors: <yujiang.wang@oscar.ox.ac.uk>, <lishang@fudan.edu.cn>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

