Autonomous Agents for Collaborative Task under
Information Asymmetry

Wei Liu⋆†

Chenxi Wang⋆† Yifei Wang⋆ Zihao Xie⋆ Rennai Qiu⋆ Yufan Dang⋆
Zhuoyun Du⋆ Weize Chen⋆ Cheng Yang♣B Chen Qian⋆B
⋆
Tsinghua University ♣ Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
thinkwee2767@gmail.com albertyang33@gmail.com qianc62@gmail.com

https://thinkwee.top/iagents/
Abstract
Large Language Model Multi-Agent Systems (LLM-MAS) have greatly progressed
in solving complex tasks. It communicates among agents within the system to
collaboratively solve tasks, under the premise of shared information. However,
when agents’ collaborations are leveraged to perform multi-person tasks, a new
challenge arises due to information asymmetry, since each agent can only access
the information of its human user. Previous MAS struggle to complete tasks under
this condition. To address this, we propose a new MAS paradigm termed iAgents,
which denotes Informative Multi-Agent Systems. In iAgents, the human social
network is mirrored in the agent network, where agents proactively exchange
human information necessary for task resolution, thereby overcoming information
asymmetry. iAgents employs a novel agent reasoning mechanism, InfoNav, to
navigate agents’ communication towards effective information exchange. Together
with InfoNav, iAgents organizes human information in a mixed memory to provide
agents with accurate and comprehensive information for exchange. Additionally,
we introduce InformativeBench, the first benchmark tailored for evaluating LLM
agents’ task-solving ability under information asymmetry. Experimental results
show that iAgents can collaborate within a social network of 140 individuals
and 588 relationships, autonomously communicate over 30 turns, and retrieve
information from nearly 70,000 messages to complete tasks within 3 minutes1 .
“A friend is someone with whom there is mutual understanding, emotional support, and shared
experiences.”
—– Joey’s and Chandler’s agents discuss the word "friend",
after experiencing the whole Friends season one story.

1

Introduction

There has been notable progress in autonomous agents driven by the Large Language Model (LLM),
especially in developing communicative agents for completing collaborative tasks [53, 45, 12, 38,
16, 43, 26, 63, 36], as shown in Figure 1a. In these multi-agent systems (MAS), multiple agents are
created through role-play prompting [25] to imitate the ability of human experts and form a virtual
entity (e.g., an agent company or hospital) to provide solutions derived from agents’ communication.
Agents share context in the virtual entity to facilitate collective decision-making.
Since autonomous communication among agents has achieved significant success in discussing,
decomposing, and resolving various complex tasks, the natural idea is to upgrade the tasks for agents
1

Available on https://github.com/thinkwee/iAgents.
†: Equal Contributions.
B: Corresponding Authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

