Learning Structured Representations
with Hyperbolic Embeddings

Aditya Sinha∗ †
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
as146@illinois.edu

Siqi Zeng∗
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
siqi6@illinois.edu

Makoto Yamada
Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology
makoto.yamada@oist.jp

Han Zhao
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
hanzhao@illinois.edu

Abstract
Most real-world datasets consist of a natural hierarchy between classes or an inherent label structure that is either already available or can be constructed cheaply.
However, most existing representation learning methods ignore this hierarchy,
treating labels as permutation invariant. Recent work [104] proposes using this
structured information explicitly, but the use of Euclidean distance may distort the
underlying semantic context [8]. In this work, motivated by the advantage of hyperbolic spaces in modeling hierarchical relationships, we propose a novel approach
HypStructure: a Hyperbolic Structured regularization approach to accurately
embed the label hierarchy into the learned representations. HypStructure is a
simple-yet-effective regularizer that consists of a hyperbolic tree-based representation loss along with a centering loss. It can be combined with any standard task loss
to learn hierarchy-informed features. Extensive experiments on several large-scale
vision benchmarks demonstrate the efficacy of HypStructure in reducing distortion and boosting generalization performance, especially under low-dimensional
scenarios. For a better understanding of structured representation, we perform
an eigenvalue analysis that links the representation geometry to improved Out-ofDistribution (OOD) detection performance seen empirically. The code is available
at https://github.com/uiuctml/HypStructure.

1

Introduction

Real-world datasets, such as ImageNet [72] and CIFAR [45], often exhibit a natural hierarchy or
an inherent label structure that describes a structured relationship between different classes in the
data. In the absence of an existing hierarchy, it is often possible to cheaply construct or infer
this hierarchy from the label space directly [64]. However, the majority of existing representation
learning methods [43, 7, 95, 29, 87, 33, 27, 39] treat the labels as permutation invariant, ignoring
this semantically-rich hierarchical label information. Recently, Zeng et al. [104] offer a promising
approach to embed the tree-hierarchy explicitly in representation learning using a tree-metric-based
regularizer, leading to improvements in generalization performance. The approach uses a computation
of shortest paths between two classes in the tree hierarchy to enforce the same structure in the feature
space, by means of a Cophenetic Correlation Coefficient (CPCC) [79] based regularizer. However,
their approach uses the ℓ2 distance in the Euclidean space, distorting the parent-child representations
in the hierarchy [70, 50] owing to the bounded dimensionality of the Euclidean space [8].
∗
†

Authors contributed equally.
Now at Netflix Inc.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

