In-and-Out: Algorithmic Diffusion for
Sampling Convex Bodies

Yunbum Kook
School of Computer Science
Georgia Institute of Technology
yb.kook@gatech.edu

Santosh S. Vempala
School of Computer Science
Georgia Institute of Technology
vempala@gatech.edu

Matthew S. Zhang
Department of Computer Science,
University of Toronto,
matthew.zhang@mail.utoronto.ca

Abstract
We present a new random walk for uniformly sampling high-dimensional convex
bodies. It achieves state-of-the-art runtime complexity with stronger guarantees on
the output than previously known, namely in Rényi divergence (which implies TV,
W2 , KL, χ2 ). The proof departs from known approaches for polytime algorithms
for the problem — we utilize a stochastic diffusion perspective to show contraction
to the target distribution with the rate of convergence determined by functional
isoperimetric constants of the stationary density.

1

Introduction

Generating random samples from a high-dimensional convex body is a basic algorithmic problem with
myriad connections and applications. The core of the celebrated result of [1], giving a randomized
polynomial-time algorithm for computing the volume of a convex body, was the first polynomial-time
algorithm for uniformly sampling convex bodies. In the decades since, the study of sampling has led to
a long series of improvements in its algorithmic complexity [2, 3, 4, 5, 6], often based on uncovering
new mathematical/geometric structure, establishing connections to other fields (e.g., functional
analysis, matrix concentration) and developing new tools for proving isoperimetric inequalities and
analyzing Markov chains. With the proliferation of data and the increasing importance of machine
learning, sampling has also become an essential algorithmic tool, with applications needing samplers
in very high dimension, e.g., scientific computing [7, 8, 9], systems biology [10, 11], differential
privacy [12, 13] and machine learning [14, 15].
Samplers for convex bodies are based on Markov chains (see §5 for a summary). Their analysis is
based on bounding the conductance of the associated Markov chain, which in turn bounds the mixing
rate. Analyzing the conductance requires combining delicate geometric arguments with (Cheeger)
isoperimetric inequalities for convex bodies. An archetypal example of the latter is the following: for
any measurable partition S1 , S2 , S3 of a convex body K ⊂ Rd , we have
vol(S3 ) ≥ d(SC1K,S2 ) min{vol(S1 ), vol(S2 )} ,
where d(·, ·) is the (minimum) Euclidean distance, and CK is an isoperimetric constant of the uniform
distribution over K. (The KLS conjecture posits that CK = O(1) for any convex body K in isotropic
position, i.e., under the normalization that a random point from K has identity covariance). The
2
coefficient CK
is bounded by the Poincaré constant of the uniform distribution over K (and they are
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

