EMR-M ERGING: Tuning-Free High-Performance
Model Merging

Chenyu Huang1† , Peng Ye1,3†‡ , Tao Chen1∗, Tong He2 , Xiangyu Yue3 , Wanli Ouyang3
1
Fudan University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
cyhuang24@m.fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
The success of pretrain-finetune paradigm brings about the release of numerous
model weights. In this case, merging models finetuned on different tasks to enable
a single model with multi-task capabilities is gaining increasing attention for its
practicability. Existing model merging methods usually suffer from (1) significant
performance degradation or (2) requiring tuning by additional data or training.
In this paper, we rethink and analyze the existing model merging paradigm. We
discover that using a single model’s weights can hardly simulate all the models’
performance. To tackle this issue, we propose E LECT, M ASK & R ESCALE M ERGING (EMR-M ERGING). We first (a) elect a unified model from all the model
weights and then (b) generate extremely light-weight task-specific modulators,
including masks and rescalers, to align the direction and magnitude between
the unified model and each specific model, respectively. EMR-M ERGING is
tuning-free, thus requiring no data availability or any additional training while
showing impressive performance. We find that EMR-M ERGING shows outstanding
performance compared to existing merging methods under different classical and
newly-established settings, including merging different numbers of vision models
(up to 30), NLP models, PEFT models, and multi-modal models. 1

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of deep learning, different model architectures [36, 22, 71, 88] are
proposed, along with multiple training strategies [89, 86]. Pre-trained models’ capabilities are
enhanced, thus showing increasing significance [54, 22, 7, 19]. Finetuning models on downstream
tasks from a pre-trained model has become a standard paradigm in both NLP and vision fields [20,
51, 19, 22, 5, 87], which usually leads to improved performance with less labeled data. With the
development of open-source repositories such as Huggingface [79], timm [77], and torchvision [44],
the number of pre-trained and finetuned checkpoints exponentially rise. However, applying individual
models to different tasks results in high storage and deployment costs. Multi-task learning (MTL)
partially solves this problem by jointly training a model using multiple datasets [70, 93, 95], but it
suffers from (i) high computational costs and (ii) data unavailability due to privacy [33]. Recently,
model merging attempts to solve these drawbacks by combining weights instead of additional training,
thus showing vital significance and broad application prospects.
A simple strategy of model merging is averaging the model weights [80], but it usually causes obvious
performance degradation, as shown in Fig. 1. To this end, there are multiple model merging methods
proposed to improve the performance of the merged model, which can be roughly divided into three
∗
1

Corresponding Author(eetchen@fudan.edu.cn). † Equal Contribution. ‡ Project Lead.
Our code is available at https://github.com/harveyhuang18/EMR_Merging.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

