Error Analysis of Spherically Constrained Least
Squares Reformulation in Solving the Stackelberg
Prediction Game
Xiyuan Li Weiwei Liu∗
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Wuhan University
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan University
Lee_xiyuan@outlook.com, liuweiwei863@gmail.com

Abstract
The Stackelberg prediction game (SPG) is a popular model for characterizing
strategic interactions between a learner and an adversarial data provider. Although
optimization problems in SPGs are often NP-hard, a notable special case involving
the least squares loss (SPG-LS) has gained significant research attention recently
[1, 2, 3]. The latest state-of-the-art method for solving the SPG-LS problem is the
spherically constrained least squares reformulation (SCLS) method proposed in the
work of [3]. However, the paper [3] lacks theoretical analysis on the error of the
SCLS method, which limits its large-scale applications. In this paper, we investigate
the estimation error between the learner obtained by the SCLS method and the
actual learner. Specifically, we reframe the estimation error of the SCLS method as
a Primary Optimization (PO) problem and utilize the Convex Gaussian min-max
theorem (CGMT) to transform the PO problem into an Auxiliary Optimization
(AO) problem. Subsequently, we provide a theoretical error analysis for the SCLS
method based on this simplified AO problem. This analysis not only strengthens the
theoretical framework of the SCLS method but also confirms the reliability of the
learner produced by it. We further conduct experiments to validate our theorems,
and the results are in excellent agreement with our theoretical predictions.

1

Introduction

The Stackelberg prediction games (SPGs) play prominent roles in various applications of the machine
learning field, such as intrusion detection [4], spam filtering [5], and malware detection [6, 7]. SPG
characterizes the interactions between two players, a learner and a data provider (attacker), during
the training process of various machine learning algorithms [8, 9, 10, 11]. Specifically, the learner
first selects a learning model to fit the given data. The data provider, with full knowledge of the
learner’s model, then attacks the learner by modifying the data. The learner’s goal is to minimize
its loss function under the assumption that the training data has been optimally modified from the
data provider’s perspective. Therefore, the SPG model is often formulated as a bi-level optimization
problem, which is generally NP-hard even in the simplest case with linear constraints and objectives
[1, 12].
To overcome the NP-hard nature of SPGs, [1, 2, 3] focus on a commonly used subclass of SPGs,
termed as the SPG-LS, whose loss functions for the learner and the data provider are least squares.
Specifically, SPG-LS has access to a set of n sample tuples denoted by S = {(x i , yi , zi )}ni=1 , where
∗

Corresponding author: Weiwei Liu (liuweiwei863@gmail.com).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

