A Concept-Based Explainability Framework for Large
Multimodal Models
Jayneel Parekh1

Pegah Khayatan1

Alasdair Newson1
1

Mustafa Shukor1

Matthieu Cord1,2

ISIR, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France

2

Valeo.ai, Paris, France

{jayneel.parekh, pegah.khayatan}@sorbonne-universite.fr

Abstract
Large multimodal models (LMMs) combine unimodal encoders and large language
models (LLMs) to perform multimodal tasks. Despite recent advancements towards
the interpretability of these models, understanding internal representations of
LMMs remains largely a mystery. In this paper, we present a novel framework
for the interpretation of LMMs. We propose a dictionary learning based approach,
applied to the representation of tokens. The elements of the learned dictionary
correspond to our proposed concepts. We show that these concepts are well
semantically grounded in both vision and text. Thus we refer to these as “multimodal concepts”. We qualitatively and quantitatively evaluate the results of the
learnt concepts. We show that the extracted multimodal concepts are useful to
interpret representations of test samples. Finally, we evaluate the disentanglement
between different concepts and the quality of grounding concepts visually and
textually. Our implementation is publicly available.1

1

Introduction

Despite the exceptional capacity of deep neural networks (DNNs) to address complex learning problems, one aspect that hinders their deployment is the lack of human-comprehensible understanding
of their internal computations. This directly calls into question their reliability and trustworthiness
[5, 30]. Consequently, this has boosted research efforts in interpretability/explainability of these
models i.e. devising methods to gain human-understandable insights about their decision processes.
The growth in ability of DNNs has been accompanied by a similar increase in their design complexity
and computational intensiveness. This is epitomized by the rise of vision transformers [11] and
large-language models (LLMs) [8, 44] which can deploy up to tens of billions of parameters. The
effectiveness of these models for unimodal processing tasks has spurred their use in addressing
multimodal tasks. In particular, visual encoders and LLMs are frequently combined to address tasks
such as image captioning and VQA [2, 25, 29, 43, 45]. This recent class of models are referred to as
large multimodal models (LMMs).
For interpretability research, LMMs have largely remained unexplored. Most prior works on interpreting models that process visual data, focus on convolutional neural network (CNN) based systems and
classification as the underlying task. Multimodal tasks and transformer-based architectures have both
been relatively less studied. LMMs operate at the intersection of both domains. Thus, despite their
rapidly growing popularity, there have been very few prior attempts at understanding representations
inside an LMM [34, 35, 41, 42].
1

Project page and code: https://jayneelparekh.github.io/LMM_Concept_Explainability/

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

