Aligning Target-Aware Molecule Diffusion Models
with Exact Energy Optimization

Siyi Gu∗1 , Minkai Xu∗1† , Alexander Powers1 , Weili Nie2 , Tomas Geffner2
Karsten Kreis2 , Jure Leskovec1 , Arash Vahdat2 , Stefano Ermon1
1
Stanford Univeristy 2 NVIDIA
{sgu33,minkai,jure,ermon}@cs.stanford.edu lxpowers@stanford.edu
{wnie,tgeffner,kkreis,avahdat}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Generating ligand molecules for specific protein targets, known as structure-based
drug design, is a fundamental problem in therapeutics development and biological
discovery. Recently, target-aware generative models, especially diffusion models,
have shown great promise in modeling protein-ligand interactions and generating
candidate drugs. However, existing models primarily focus on learning the
chemical distribution of all drug candidates, which lacks effective steerability
on the chemical quality of model generations. In this paper, we propose a novel
and general alignment framework to align pretrained target diffusion models
with preferred functional properties, named A LI D IFF. A LI D IFF shifts the
target-conditioned chemical distribution towards regions with higher binding
affinity and structural rationality, specified by user-defined reward functions, via
the preference optimization approach. To avoid the overfitting problem in common
preference optimization objectives, we further develop an improved Exact Energy
Preference Optimization method to yield an exact and efficient alignment of
the diffusion models, and provide the closed-form expression for the converged
distribution. Empirical studies on the CrossDocked2020 benchmark show that
A LI D IFF can generate molecules with state-of-the-art binding energies with up
to -7.07 Avg. Vina Score, while maintaining strong molecular properties. Code
is available at https://github.com/MinkaiXu/AliDiff.

1

Introduction

Generating ligand molecules with desirable properties and high affinity to specific protein targets,
known as structure-based drug design (SBDD), is a fundamental problem in therapeutic design
and biological discovery. It necessitates methods that can produce realistic and diverse drug-like
molecules with stable 3D structures and high binding affinities. In the past few years, numerous deep
generative models have been proposed to generate molecules in SMILES string representation [Kusner
et al., 2017, Segler et al., 2018] or graph representations [Jin et al., 2018, Shi et al., 2020, Guan et al.,
2023]. Although these models have shown promise in generating plausible drug-like molecules, they
lack sufficient modeling of the 3D protein-ligand interaction with proteins and therefore can hardly be
adopted in target-aware molecule generation. As a result, generating ligands conditioned on protein
targets remains an open research problem.
Recently, with rapid progress in structural biology and the increasing scale of structural data [Francoeur et al., 2020, Jumper et al., 2021], numerous target-aware generative models have been proposed
to directly generate molecules within the protein targets in 3D. Initial work proposed to sequentially
* Equal contribution; junior author listed earlier. † Correspondence to: Minkai Xu <minkai@cs.stanford.edu>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

