Active preference learning for ordering items
in- and out-of-sample

Herman Bergström∗
Chalmers University of Technology
and University of Gothenburg
hermanb@chalmers.se

Emil Carlsson∗†
Sleep Cycle AB
Chalmers University of Technology
and University of Gothenburg

Devdatt Dubhashi
Chalmers University of Technology
and University of Gothenburg

Fredrik D. Johansson
Chalmers University of Technology
and University of Gothenburg

Abstract
Learning an ordering of items based on pairwise comparisons is useful when items
are difficult to rate consistently on an absolute scale, for example, when annotators
have to make subjective assessments. When exhaustive comparison is infeasible,
actively sampling item pairs can reduce the number of annotations necessary for
learning an accurate ordering. However, many algorithms ignore shared structure
between items, limiting their sample efficiency and precluding generalization to
new items. It is also common to disregard how noise in comparisons varies between item pairs, despite it being informative of item similarity. In this work, we
study active preference learning for ordering items with contextual attributes, both
in- and out-of-sample. We give an upper bound on the expected ordering error of a
logistic preference model as a function of which items have been compared. Next,
we propose an active learning strategy that samples items to minimize this bound
by accounting for aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty in comparisons. We evaluate
the resulting algorithm, and a variant aimed at reducing model misspecification,
in multiple realistic ordering tasks with comparisons made by human annotators.
Our results demonstrate superior sample efficiency and generalization compared
to non-contextual ranking approaches and active preference learning baselines.

1

Introduction

The success of supervised learning is built on annotating items at great volumes with small error.
For subjective assessments, however, assigning a value from an arbitrary rating scale can be difficult
and prone to inconsistencies, causing many to favor preference feedback from pairwise comparisons
(Yannakakis and Martínez, 2015; Christiano et al., 2017; Ouyang et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2023).
Preference feedback is sufficient to learn an ordering of items (Fürnkranz and Hüllermeier, 2003),
but for n items, there are O(n2 ) possible pairs of items to compare. A common solution is to use
crowd-sourcing (Chen et al., 2013; Yang et al., 2021; Larkin et al., 2022), but many tasks require
domain expertise, making annotations expensive to collect. This is the case in the field of medical
imaging, where annotations require trained radiologists (Phelps et al., 2015; Jang et al., 2022; Lidén
et al., 2024; Tärnåsen and Bergström, 2023). So, how can we learn the best ordering possible from
a limited number of comparisons?
∗
Equal contribution. † Work was mainly performed while the author was a PhD student at Chalmers University of Technology.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

