On the Use of Anchoring for Training Vision Models

Vivek Narayanaswamy
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
narayanaswam1@llnl.gov
Rushil Anirudh
Amazon
rushil15anirudh@gmail.com

Kowshik Thopalli
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
thopalli1@llnl.gov
Yamen Mubarka
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
mubarka1@llnl.gov

Wesam Sakla
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
sakla1@llnl.gov

Jayaraman J. Thiagarajan
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
jjthiagarajan@gmail.com

Abstract
Anchoring is a recent, architecture-agnostic principle for training deep neural
networks that has been shown to significantly improve uncertainty estimation,
calibration, and extrapolation capabilities. In this paper, we systematically explore
anchoring as a general protocol for training vision models, providing fundamental
insights into its training and inference processes and their implications for generalization and safety. Despite its promise, we identify a critical problem in anchored
training that can lead to an increased risk of learning undesirable shortcuts, thereby
limiting its generalization capabilities. To address this, we introduce a new anchored training protocol that employs a simple regularizer to mitigate this issue
and significantly enhances generalization. We empirically evaluate our proposed
approach across datasets and architectures of varying scales and complexities,
demonstrating substantial performance gains in generalization and safety metrics
compared to the standard training protocol. The open-source code is available at https://software.llnl.gov/anchoring

1

Introduction

Anchoring [1] is a recent architecture-agnostic principle for training deep neural networks. It
reparameterizes each input x into a tuple comprising a reference sample r̄ and the residual d = x − r̄,
i.e., [r̄, d], r̄ ∼ Pr and d ∼ P∆ . Here, Pr and P∆ denote the distributions of references and residuals
respectively. The resulting tuple is then fed as input to a deep network instead of the original input
x, by concatenating the tuple elements along the feature axis for vector-valued data or the channel
axis for image data. Although the first layer of the network needs to be modified to accommodate
twice the number of input dimensions (due to concatenation), the rest of the model architecture and
optimization strategies remain the same as in standard training. This simple re-parameterization of
the input forces the neural network to model the joint distribution P(r,∆) for predicting the target
label y. Formally, the training objective can be written as:



1 X
∗
θ = arg min
E L y, Fθ concat([r̄, x − r̄]) ,
(1)
r̄∼Pr
θ
|D|
(x,y)∈D

where L(.) is a loss function such as cross-entropy, D is the training dataset and F is the underlying
network parameterized by θ. In effect, for a given x and reference samples r̄1 , . . . , r̄k , anchoring
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

