When Is Inductive Inference Possible?
Zhou Lu
Princeton University
zhoul@princeton.edu

Abstract
Can a physicist make only a finite number of errors in the eternal quest to uncover the law of nature? This millennium-old philosophical problem, known as
inductive inference, lies at the heart of epistemology. Despite its significance to
understanding human reasoning, a rigorous justification of inductive inference has
remained elusive. At a high level, inductive inference asks whether one can make
at most finite errors amidst an infinite sequence of observations, when deducing the
correct hypothesis from a given hypothesis class. Historically, the only theoretical
guarantee has been that if the hypothesis class is countable, inductive inference is
possible, as exemplified by Solomonoff induction for learning Turing machines. In
this paper, we provide a tight characterization of inductive inference by establishing
a novel link to online learning theory. As our main result, we prove that inductive
inference is possible if and only if the hypothesis class is a countable union of
online learnable classes, potentially with an uncountable size, no matter the observations are adaptively chosen or iid sampled. Moreover, the same condition is
also sufficient and necessary in the √
agnostic setting, where any hypothesis class
meeting this criterion enjoys an Õ( T ) regret bound for any time step T , while
others require an arbitrarily slow rate of regret. Our main technical tool is a novel
non-uniform online learning framework, which may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

How does one move from observations to scientific laws? The question of induction, one of the
oldest and most basic problems in philosophy, dates back to the 4th century BCE when Aristotle
recognized deduction and induction as the cornerstones of human reasoning. Unlike deduction,
where conclusions are drawn logically from premises, induction extrapolates general principles from
empirical observations without such certainty.
The justification of induction has historically been contentious. David Hume, in his ‘Problem
of Induction’, argued that extrapolations based on past experiences cannot reliably predict the
unexperienced. Despite such skepticism, induction remains essential for advancing from specific
instances to general theories, deriving first principles upon which rigorous deductive reasoning is
built, as Aristotle put it in ‘Nicomachean Ethics’:
“Induction is the starting-point which knowledge even of the universal presupposes,
while syllogism proceeds from the universals."
This highlights induction’s crucial role in human reasoning and scientific discovery. Yet, the enduring
question remains: how do we model induction, and what guarantees can it offer?
Inductive inference Gold [1967], as the most representative mathematical abstraction of induction,
provides a rigorous framework for modeling induction. In inductive inference, a learner aims to
deduce the ground-truth hypothesis h∗ from a hypothesis class H based on an infinite observation
sequence {xt }. At each round t, the learner makes a binary prediction yt based on all previous
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

