Noether’s Razor: Learning Conserved Quantities

Tycho F. A. van der Ouderaa
Imperial College London
London, UK

Mark van der Wilk
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK

Pim de Haan
CuspAI
Amsterdam, NL

Abstract
Symmetries have proven useful in machine learning models, improving generalisation and overall performance. At the same time, recent advancements in learning
dynamical systems rely on modelling the underlying Hamiltonian to guarantee the
conservation of energy. These approaches can be connected via a seminal result
in mathematical physics: Noether’s theorem, which states that symmetries in a
dynamical system correspond to conserved quantities. This work uses Noether’s
theorem to parameterise symmetries as learnable conserved quantities. We then
allow conserved quantities and associated symmetries to be learned directly from
train data through approximate Bayesian model selection, jointly with the regular
training procedure. As training objective, we derive a variational lower bound to
the marginal likelihood. The objective automatically embodies an Occam’s Razor
effect that avoids collapse of conservation laws to the trivial constant, without the
need to manually add and tune additional regularisers. We demonstrate a proof-ofprinciple on n-harmonic oscillators and n-body systems. We find that our method
correctly identifies the correct conserved quantities and U(n) and SE(n) symmetry
groups, improving overall performance and predictive accuracy on test data.

1

Introduction

Symmetries provide strong inductive biases, effectively reducing the volume of the hypothesis space.
A celebrated example of this is the convolutional layer embedding translation equivariance in neural
networks, which can be generalised to other symmetry groups [Cohen and Welling, 2016].
Meanwhile, physics-informed machine learning models [Greydanus et al., 2019, Cranmer et al., 2020],
typically relying on neural differential equations [Chen et al., 2018], embed constraints known from
classical mechanics into model architectures to improve accuracy on physical dynamical systems.
Rather than strictly constraining a model to certain symmetries, recent works have explored whether
invariance and equivariance symmetries in machine learning models can also be automatically learned
from data. This often relies on separate validation data [Maile et al., 2022], explicit regularisers [Finzi
et al., 2021] or additional outer loops [Cubuk et al., 2018]. Alternatively, we can take a Bayesian
approach where we embed symmetries into the prior and empirically learn them through Bayesian
model selection [van der Wilk et al., 2018, Immer et al., 2022, van der Ouderaa et al., 2022].
We propose to use Noether’s theorem [Noether, 1918] to parameterise symmetries in Hamiltonian
machine learning models in terms of their conserved quantities. To do so, we propose to symmetrise
a learnable Hamiltonian using a set of learnable quadratic conserved quantitites. By choosing the
conserved quantities to be quadratic, we can find closed-form transformations that can be used to
obtain an unbiased estimate of the symmetrised Hamiltonian.
Secondly, we phase symmetries implied by conserved quantities in the prior over Hamiltonians an
leverage the Occam’s razor effect of Bayesian model selection [Rasmussen and Ghahramani, 2000,
van der Wilk et al., 2018] to learn conserved quantities and their implied symmetries directly from
train data. We derive a practical lower bound using variational inference [Hoffman et al., 2013]
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

