Cross-Scale Self-Supervised Blind Image Deblurring
via Implicit Neural Representation

Tianjing Zhang1 , Yuhui Quan2 , Hui Ji1
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
tianjingzhang@u.nus.edu, csyhquan@scut.edu.cn, matjh@nus.edu.sg
1

Abstract
Blind image deblurring (BID) is an important yet challenging image recovery
problem. Most existing deep learning methods require supervised training with
ground truth (GT) images. This paper introduces a self-supervised method for
BID that does not require GT images. The key challenge is to regularize the
training to prevent over-fitting due to the absence of GT images. By leveraging
an exact relationship among the blurred image, latent image, and blur kernel
across consecutive scales, we propose an effective cross-scale consistency loss.
This is implemented by representing the image and kernel with implicit neural
representations (INRs), whose resolution-free property enables consistent yet
efficient computation for network training across multiple scales. Combined with
a progressively coarse-to-fine training scheme, the proposed method significantly
outperforms existing self-supervised methods in extensive experiments.

1

Introduction

Uniform blurring, a degradation commonly encountered in optics, leads to the loss of important
details within a captured image. Uniform blurring usually can be described as the convolution:
y = k ⊗ x + n,

(1)

where ⊗ denotes the 2D discrete convolution operation, (y, x) is the pair of blurred and sharp
(latent) images. k represents the blur kernel responsible for degradation, and n denotes measurement
noise. For example, in digital photography, motion blur is caused by camera shake during exposure.
When scene depth variation is small and camera movement is mainly translational within the image
plane, motion blur can be approximated by the convolution model (1), with k representing camera
motion. In fluorescence microscopy, specimens stained with fluorescent dyes and exposed to specific
wavelength light often exhibit blurring due to light diffraction and optical path imperfections, such
as optical component misalignment or lens aberrations. These factors obscure critical details, like
micro-tubule arrangements in cells. Such blurring can also be modeled by (1). In either case, both
the latent image x and blur kernel k are unknown and must be estimated from the blurred image y.
BID aims at estimating (k, x), the pair of latent image and blur kernel, from the degraded image y.
BID is a challenging non-linear inverse problem with many plausible solutions due to its inherent
solution ambiguity. This ambiguity stems from the fact that the kernel can be decomposed into
k = k1 ⊗k2 , suggesting that the pair (k1 , k2 ⊗x) are also viable solutions since y = (k1 ⊗k2 )⊗x =
k1 ⊗ (k2 ⊗ x). One such example is the pair (δ, y = k, x), where δ denotes the delta kernel, which
gives a trivial solution saying a blurred image is the convolution of a blurred image and a delta kernel.
This ambiguity indicates the ill-posed-ness of the BID problem.
1.1

Discussion on existing approaches for BID

The existing deep learning methods for BID can be roughly classified into the following categories:
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

