CARE: a Benchmark Suite for the Classification and
Retrieval of Enzymes

Jason Yang
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering
California Institute of Technology

Ariane Mora
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering
California Institute of Technology

Shengchao Liu
Computing and Mathematical Sciences
California Institute of Technology

Bruce J. Wittmann
Office of the Chief Scientific Officer
Microsoft Corporation

Anima Anandkumar
Computing and Mathematical Sciences
California Institute of Technology

Frances H. Arnold
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering
Biology and Biological Engineering
California Institute of Technology

Yisong Yue ∗
Computing and Mathematical Sciences
California Institute of Technology

Abstract
Enzymes are important proteins that catalyze chemical reactions. In recent years,
machine learning methods have emerged to predict enzyme function from sequence;
however, there are no standardized benchmarks to evaluate these methods. We
introduce CARE, a benchmark and dataset suite for the Classification And Retrieval
of Enzymes (CARE). CARE centers on two tasks: (1) classification of a protein
sequence by its enzyme commission (EC) number and (2) retrieval of an EC
number given a chemical reaction. For each task, we design train-test splits to
evaluate different kinds of out-of-distribution generalization that are relevant to
real use cases. For the classification task, we provide baselines for state-of-the-art
methods. Because the retrieval task has not been previously formalized, we propose
a method called Contrastive Reaction-EnzymE Pretraining (CREEP) as one of the
first baselines for this task and compare it to the recent method, CLIPZyme. CARE
is available at https://github.com/jsunn-y/CARE/.

1

Introduction

Proteins, which are sequences of amino acid building blocks, are not only integral components of
all living organisms, but also important for a myriad of commercial applications spanning from the
health domain to the bio-economy. Enzymes are a subclass of proteins that can catalyze chemical
reactions, and they have many applications in areas such as bioremediation, plastic degradation, gene
editing, and drug synthesis [1, 2, 3, 4].
Identifying the specific chemical reactions that an enzyme is capable of performing (i.e. the enzyme’s
function) is a key first step for many applications [5]. While hundreds of millions of proteins
∗

Corespondance: yyue@caltech.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

