CoLoR-Filter: Conditional Loss Reduction Filtering
for Targeted Language Model Pre-training

David Brandfonbrener
Kempner Institute at Harvard University
Jonathan Richard Schwarz
Harvard University

Hanlin Zhang
Harvard University

Andreas Kirsch
University of Oxford

Sham Kakade
Kempner Institute at Harvard University

Abstract
Selecting high-quality data for pre-training is crucial in shaping the downstream
task performance of language models. A major challenge lies in identifying this
optimal subset, a problem generally considered intractable, thus necessitating
scalable and effective heuristics. In this work, we propose a data selection method,
CoLoR-Filter (Conditional Loss Reduction Filtering), which leverages an empirical
Bayes-inspired approach to derive a simple and computationally efficient selection
criterion based on the relative loss values of two auxiliary models.
In addition to the modeling rationale, we evaluate CoLoR-Filter empirically on
two language modeling tasks: (1) selecting data from C4 for domain adaptation
to evaluation on Books and (2) selecting data from C4 for a suite of downstream
multiple-choice question answering tasks. We demonstrate favorable scaling both
as we subselect more aggressively and using small auxiliary models to select data
for large target models. As one headline result, CoLoR-Filter data selected using a
pair of 150m parameter auxiliary models can train a 1.2b parameter target model to
match a 1.2b parameter model trained on 25b randomly selected tokens with 25x
less data for Books and 11x less data for the downstream tasks.
Code: https://github.com/davidbrandfonbrener/color-filter-olmo
Filtered data: https://huggingface.co/datasets/davidbrandfonbrener/color-filtered-c4

1

Introduction

The content of the data that a language model is trained on can have profound effects on its performance and the efficiency of the training process [Rae et al., 2021, Longpre et al., 2023, Penedo
et al., 2023, Soboleva et al., 2023, Li et al., 2024]. But it remains an open research question how
to decide which data to include in the training set. In this paper, we analyze a family of loss-based
approaches for targeted selection of pre-training data, propose a simple approach that outperforms
existing methods, and provide some preliminary evidence of favorable scaling properties.
To formulate the data selection problem, we first need to specify an objective that quantifies whether
the selected data is good. Defining this objective requires evaluating a pre-trained language model,
which is an area of active research [Gao et al., 2023, Magnusson et al., 2023, Engstrom et al., 2024,
Chang et al., 2024]. For this paper, we will take the goal to be to maximize performance on a set
of downstream tasks. Since the preferred metrics on a given set of tasks are not necessarily the
same nor amenable to direct optimization, we consider the likelihood of sequences sampled from
the downstream tasks as a proxy objective. With this objective, we now have a straightforward
goal: given a very large corpus of sequences and a small amount of high-quality data from a set of
downstream tasks, we want to select a subset from the corpus so that training on the selected data
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

