Scalable DBSCAN with Random Projections

Ninh Pham
School of Computer Science
University of Auckland
ninh.pham@auckland.ac.nz

HaoChuan Xu
School of Computer Science
University of Auckland
hxu612@aucklanduni.ac.nz

Abstract
We present sDBSCAN, a scalable density-based clustering algorithm in high dimensions with cosine distance. sDBSCAN leverages recent advancements in random
projections given a significantly large number of random vectors to quickly identify
core points and their neighborhoods, the primary hurdle of density-based clustering.
Theoretically, sDBSCAN preserves the DBSCAN’s clustering structure under mild
conditions with high probability. To facilitate sDBSCAN, we present sOPTICS, a
scalable visual tool to guide the parameter setting of sDBSCAN. We also extend
sDBSCAN and sOPTICS to L2, L1, χ2 , and Jensen-Shannon distances via random
kernel features. Empirically, sDBSCAN is significantly faster and provides higher
accuracy than competitive DBSCAN variants on real-world million-point data
sets. On these data sets, sDBSCAN and sOPTICS run in a few minutes, while the
scikit-learn counterparts and other clustering competitors demand several hours or
cannot run on our hardware due to memory constraints. Our code is available at
https://github.com/NinhPham/sDbscan.

1

Introduction

DBSCAN [1] is one of the most fundamental clustering algorithms with many applications in data
mining and machine learning [2]. It has been featured in several data analysis tool kits, including
scikit-learn in Python, ELKI in Java, and CRAN in R. In principle, DBSCAN connects neighboring
points from nearby high-density areas to form a cluster where the high density is decided by a
sufficiently large number of points in the neighborhood. DBSCAN is parameterized by (ε, minP ts)
where ε is the distance threshold to govern the point’s neighborhood and to connect nearby areas; and
minP ts is the density threshold to identify high-density areas.
Apart from other popular clustering algorithms, including k-means variants [3, 4] and spectral
clustering [5], DBSCAN is non-parametric. It can find the number of clusters, detect arbitrary
clustering shapes and sizes, and work on any arbitrary distance measure.
Given a distance measure, DBSCAN has two primary steps, including (1) finding the ε-neighborhood
(i.e. points within a radius ε) for every point to discover the density areas surrounding the point and
(2) forming the cluster by connecting neighboring points. The first step is the main bottleneck as
finding ε-neighborhoods for all points requires a worst-case O(n2 ) time for a data set of n points in
high-dimensions [6, 7]. This limits the applications of DBSCAN on modern million-point data sets.
Another hurdle of (ε, minP ts)-DBSCAN is the choice of ε, which highly depends on the data
distribution and distance measure. While minP ts is easier to set for smoothing the density estimate,
DBSCAN’s outputs are susceptible to ε, especially in high dimensions where the range of ε is very
sensitive. For instance, when applying DBSCAN with cosine distance on the Pamap2 data set,
changing ε by just 0.005 can diminish the clustering accuracy by 10%. In practice, ones often need to
compute an ε-neighborhood for each point given a large value of ε, and use them to explore the quality
of clustering structures over smaller values of ε. Using large ε causes O(n2 ) memory bottleneck
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

