An Analysis of Tokenization: Transformers under
Markov Data
Nived Rajaraman
UC Berkeley
nived.rajaraman@berkeley.edu

Jiantao Jiao
UC Berkeley
jiantao@berkeley.edu

Kannan Ramchandran
UC Berkeley
jiantao@berkeley.edu

Abstract
While there has been a large body of research attempting to circumvent tokenization
for language modeling (Clark et al., 2022; Xue et al., 2022), the current consensus is that it is a necessary initial step for designing state-of-the-art performant
language models. In this paper, we investigate tokenization from a theoretical
point of view by studying the behavior of transformers on simple data generating
processes. When trained on data drawn from certain simple k th -order Markov
processes for k > 1, transformers exhibit a surprising phenomenon - in the absence of tokenization, they empirically are incredibly slow or fail to learn the right
distribution and predict characters according to a unigram model (Makkuva et al.,
2024). With the addition of tokenization, however, we empirically observe that
transformers break through this barrier and are able to model the probabilities of
sequences drawn from the source near-optimally, achieving small cross-entropy
loss. With this observation as starting point, we study the end-to-end cross-entropy
loss achieved by transformers with and without tokenization. With the appropriate
tokenization, we show that even the simplest unigram models (over tokens) learnt
by transformers are able to model the probability of sequences drawn from k th order Markov sources near optimally. Our analysis provides a justification for the
use of tokenization in practice through studying the behavior of transformers on
Markovian data.

1

Introduction

The training of language models is typically not an end-to-end process. Language models are often
composed of a “tokenizer”, which encodes a sequence of characters into a sequence of token ids,
which map to substrings. The subsequent language modeling task is carried out by a neural network
or transformer, which is pre-trained and fine-tuned on large datasets. The ideal goal is to jointly
train the tokenizer and transformer with end-to-end accuracy as the objective. This is a challenging
problem to solve efficiently, and thus, the tokenizer is generally adapted on a portion of the training
dataset and frozen before the transformer is trained. In practice, byte-level/character level models
such as ByT5 (Xue et al., 2022) and C ANINE (Clark et al., 2022) which avoid tokenization often
perform worse for the reason that semantic relationships can be harder to capture at the character
level (Libovickỳ et al., 2021; Itzhak and Levy, 2021).
Though used most commonly, tokenization at the subword level often has sharp edges. Test sequences
may contain rare tokens which were never seen in the training dataset. The presence of such tokens
may induce undesirable behavior in the outputs of models (Rumbelow and Watkins, 2023; Kharitonov
et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2021) and present an attack surface for bad actors. Moreover, tokenized
models struggle on tasks that involve manipulation at the character level, such as spelling out words
or reversing sentences. For similar reasons, LLMs with standard tokenizers also struggle to carry
out basic arithmetic (Golkar et al., 2023). Despite this brittleness, tokenization is used in nearly all
state-of-the-art LLM architectures.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

