Fast yet Safe: Early-Exiting with Risk Control

Metod Jazbec1,∗ Alexander Timans1,∗ Tin Hadži Veljković1
Kaspar Sakmann2 Dan Zhang2 Christian A. Naesseth1 Eric Nalisnick1,3
1
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab, University of Amsterdam
2
Bosch Center for AI, Robert Bosch GmbH 3 Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
Scaling machine learning models significantly improves their performance. However, such gains come at the cost of inference being slow and resource-intensive.
Early-exit neural networks (EENNs) offer a promising solution: they accelerate
inference by allowing intermediate layers to ‘exit’ and produce a prediction early.
Yet a fundamental issue with EENNs is how to determine when to exit without
severely degrading performance. In other words, when is it ‘safe’ for an EENN to
go ‘fast’? To address this issue, we investigate how to adapt frameworks of risk
control to EENNs. Risk control offers a distribution-free, post-hoc solution that
tunes the EENN’s exiting mechanism so that exits only occur when the output is of
sufficient quality. We empirically validate our insights on a range of vision and language tasks, demonstrating that risk control can produce substantial computational
savings, all the while preserving user-specified performance goals.

1

Introduction

As predictive models continue to grow in size, so do the costs of running them at inference time
[12, 80]. This presents a challenge to domains ranging from mobile computing to smart appliances to
autonomous vehicles – all of which require models that operate on resource-constrained hardware
[62, 50, 47]. Even if computation is not limited by hardware, concerns over the energy usage and
carbon footprint of large models motivates their efficient implementation [55, 44]. Additionally, since
computational constraints can be dynamic, e.g., due to variable loads in web traffic or energy demand,
it is desirable for models to be able to adjust their computational needs to changing conditions [63].
Early-exit neural networks (EENNs) present a simple yet effective approach to such dynamic computation [70, 36]. Leveraging the neural network’s compositional nature, EENNs can generate
predictions at intermediate layers, thereby ‘exiting’ the computation ‘early’ when a stop condition
is met. This early-exit ability has proven useful in settings ranging from vision and language to
recommendations ([29], see § 4). Yet the flexibility of EENNs does not come for free: predictions
generated at early exits are usually inferior to those produced by the full model. In turn, a dilemma
arises in which the exit condition must balance computational savings with predictive performance.
In this work, we address the EENN’s efficiency vs. performance trade-off via statistical frameworks
of risk control (RC) [4, 8]. By tuning the EENN’s exiting mechanism based on a user-specified notion
of risk, RC aims to enhance the safety of early-exit outputs. We consider several risks that quantify
the difference between the early-exit and full model’s outputs, both in terms of prediction quality and
uncertainty estimation. Moreover, we study RC frameworks that control the risk with varying degrees
of stringency (i.e., in expectation vs. with high probability). We demonstrate the effectiveness of
this light-weight, post-hoc solution across a range of tasks, including image classification, semantic
segmentation, language modeling, image generation with diffusion, and speculative decoding in large
language models. In particular, we make the following contributions:
∗

Equal contributions. Corresponding authors: <m.jazbec@uva.nl, a.r.timans@uva.nl>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

