A Theoretical design of Concept Sets: improving the
predictability of concept bottleneck models

Max Ruiz Luyten
University of Cambridge
Cambridge CB3 0WA
mr971@cam.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
Cambridge CB3 0WA
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Concept-based learning, a promising approach in machine learning, emphasizes
the value of high-level representations called concepts. However, despite growing
interest in concept-bottleneck models (CBMs), there is a lack of clear understanding regarding the properties of concept sets and their impact on model performance.
In this work, we define concepts within the machine learning context, highlighting their core properties: expressiveness and model-aware inductive bias, and
we make explicit the underlying assumption of CBMs. We establish theoretical
results for concept-bottleneck models (CBMs), revealing how these properties
guide the design of concept sets that optimize model performance. Specifically,
we demonstrate that well-chosen concept sets can improve sample efficiency and
out-of-distribution robustness in the appropriate regimes. Based on these insights,
we propose a method to effectively identify informative and non-redundant concepts. We validate our approach with experiments on CIFAR-10 and MetaShift,
showing that concept-bottleneck models outperform the foundational embedding
counterpart, particularly in low-data regimes and under distribution shifts. We also
examine failure modes and discuss how they can be tackled.

1

Introduction

Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) [23] offer a compelling trifecta of interpretability [19], intervenability, and predictability [28]. They are inspired by the power of concepts: the fundamental building
blocks of human thought that guide our learning, decision-making, inference, and communication
[13]. In a nutshell, CBMs force these high-level representations to inform model predictions. For
example, rather than directly predicting a car’s action from raw images, a CBM first identifies key
concepts such as the presence of a semaphore or a pedestrian crossing the road (C : X → C), and
learns ĝ : C → Y to act based on them (ĝ ◦ C)(x). Indeed, despite never having seen a Tesla Model
X, one could reasonably classify them provided they can identify an SUV, a T logo, gull-wing doors,
and the absence of exhaust pipes. This paradigm has found applications across various domains,
including automated driving [12], fine segmentation [31], and clinical imaging [39, 22].
Despite their promise, the predictability of CBMs, particularly in relation to the properties of the
concept set C, remains poorly understood. A deeper understanding of how the composition and
characteristics of concept sets affect CBM performance is essential to enhance their practical utility
and robustness in real-world applications.
In this paper, we address this gap by systematically investigating the properties of concept sets
C = {c1 , . . . , cm } and their influence on model performance. We answer the following key questions:

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

