MoTE: Reconciling Generalization with Specialization
for Visual-Language to Video Knowledge Transfer

Minghao Zhu
Xiao Lin

Zhengpu Wang
Mengxian Hu
Ronghao Dang
Xun Zhou
Chengju Liu∗
Qijun Chen
Tongji University, Shanghai, China
{zmhh_h, wangzhengpu, humengxian, dangronghao, linx_xx,
zhouxun, liuchengju, qjchen}@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
Transferring visual-language knowledge from large-scale foundation models for
video recognition has proved to be effective. To bridge the domain gap, additional
parametric modules are added to capture the temporal information. However,
zero-shot generalization diminishes with the increase in the number of specialized
parameters, making existing works a trade-off between zero-shot and close-set
performance. In this paper, we present MoTE, a novel framework that enables
generalization and specialization to be balanced in one unified model. Our approach
tunes a mixture of temporal experts to learn multiple task views with various
degrees of data fitting. To maximally preserve the knowledge of each expert, we
propose Weight Merging Regularization, which regularizes the merging process
of experts in weight space. Additionally with temporal feature modulation to
regularize the contribution of temporal feature during test. We achieve a sound
balance between zero-shot and close-set video recognition tasks and obtain stateof-the-art or competitive results on various datasets, including Kinetics-400 & 600,
UCF, and HMDB. Code is available at https://github.com/ZMHH-H/MoTE.

1

Introduction

With the advent of large-scale Vision-Language Models (VLMs), adapting such foundation models
(e.g., CLIP [33], ALIGN [13], Florence [54]) for downstream tasks has become an emerging paradigm
of intense scrutiny. Their semantic visual concepts empowered by aligning large-scale image-text pairs
can be transferred to a wide range of downstream tasks, such as open-vocabulary classification [55,
56], detection [11, 51], and segmentation [21, 52].
The crux of an adaptation procedure for foundation models lies in injecting specialized knowledge
of the domain of interest. For video recognition tasks, this necessity is reflected in the fact that the
dynamic nature of video data requires effective comprehension of context and temporal correlation by
the model. Therefore, to condition the adapted model on the video-specialized knowledge, one general
and effective way is to incorporate additional parameters in the form of well-designed prompts [43,
45], adapters [30, 53], and temporal modules [28, 49, 50]. However, we observe that while the
increased model capacity brought by more additional parameters enables the better fitting of videospecific inductive bias, it comes at the cost of catastrophically forgetting the generalization knowledge
of the original VLM. To better illustrate this phenomenon, we present an overview of existing methods
in Figure 1. A clear trade-off problem between zero-shot and close-set performance emerges in
existing works, which correlates to the scale of additional parameters. The former relies more on
the generalization capability inherent in VLMs while the latter requires intensive video-specialized
knowledge, but no method achieves the best of both worlds. On one hand, introducing new knowledge
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

