A Novel Unified Architecture for Low-Shot Counting
by Detection and Segmentation

Jer Pelhan, Alan Lukežič, Vitjan Zavrtanik, Matej Kristan
Faculty of Computer and Information Science, University of Ljubljana
jer.pelhan@fri.uni-lj.si

Abstract
Low-shot object counters estimate the number of objects in an image using few
or no annotated exemplars. Objects are localized by matching them to prototypes,
which are constructed by unsupervised image-wide object appearance aggregation.
Due to potentially diverse object appearances, the existing approaches often lead to
overgeneralization and false positive detections. Furthermore, the best-performing
methods train object localization by a surrogate loss, that predicts a unit Gaussian
at each object center. This loss is sensitive to annotation error, hyperparameters
and does not directly optimize the detection task, leading to suboptimal counts. We
introduce GeCo, a novel low-shot counter that achieves accurate object detection,
segmentation, and count estimation in a unified architecture. GeCo robustly generalizes the prototypes across objects appearances through a novel dense object query
formulation. In addition, a novel counting loss is proposed, that directly optimizes
the detection task and avoids the issues of the standard surrogate loss. GeCo
surpasses the leading few-shot detection-based counters by ∼25% in the total count
MAE, achieves superior detection accuracy and sets a new solid state-of-the-art
result across all low-shot counting setups. The code is available on GitHub.

1

Introduction

Low-shot object counting considers estimating the number of objects of previously unobserved
category in the image, given only a few annotated exemplars (few-shot) or without any supervision
(zero-shot) [22]. The current state-of-the-art methods are predominantly based on density estimation [4; 14; 32; 26; 22; 31; 7; 31]. These methods predict a density map over the image and estimate
the total count by summing the density.
While being remarkably robust for global count estimation, density outputs lack explainability such
as object location and size, which is crucial for many practical applications [33; 30]. This recently
gave rise to detection-based low-shot counters [20; 19; 35], which predict the object bounding boxes
and estimate the total count as the number of detections. Nevertheless, detection-based counting falls
behind the density-based methods in total count estimation, leaving a performance gap.
In detection-based counters, a dominant approach to identify locations of the objects in the image
involves construction of object prototypes from few (e.g., three) annotated exemplar bounding
boxes and correlating them with image features [20; 35; 19]. The exemplar construction process is
trained to account for potentially large diversity of object appearances in the image, often leading
to overgeneralization, which achieves a high recall, but is also prone to false positive detection.
Post-hoc detection verification methods have been considered [20; 35] to address the issue, but their
multi-stage formulation prevents exploiting the benefits of end-to-end training.
Currently, the best detection counters [20; 35] predict object locations based on the local maxima in
the correlation map. During training, the map prediction is supervised by a unit Gaussian placed on
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

