Diffusion-DICE: In-Sample Diffusion Guidance for
Offline Reinforcement Learning

Liyuan Mao∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Xianyuan Zhan
Tsinghua University

Haoran Xu∗
UT Austin

Weinan Zhang†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Amy Zhang†
UT Austin

Abstract
One important property of DIstribution Correction Estimation (DICE) methods is
that the solution is the optimal stationary distribution ratio between the optimized
and data collection policy. In this work, we show that DICE-based methods can
be viewed as a transformation from the behavior distribution to the optimal policy
distribution. Based on this, we propose a novel approach, Diffusion-DICE, that
directly performs this transformation using diffusion models. We find that the
optimal policy’s score function can be decomposed into two terms: the behavior
policy’s score function and the gradient of a guidance term which depends on
the optimal distribution ratio. The first term can be obtained from a diffusion
model trained on the dataset and we propose an in-sample learning objective to
learn the second term. Due to the multi-modality contained in the optimal policy
distribution, the transformation in Diffusion-DICE may guide towards those localoptimal modes. We thus generate a few candidate actions and carefully select
from them to approach global-optimum. Different from all other diffusion-based
offline RL methods, the guide-then-select paradigm in Diffusion-DICE only uses
in-sample actions for training and brings minimal error exploitation in the value
function. We use a didatic toycase example to show how previous diffusion-based
methods fail to generate optimal actions due to leveraging these errors and how
Diffusion-DICE successfully avoids that. We then conduct extensive experiments
on benchmark datasets to show the strong performance of Diffusion-DICE.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of offline reinforcement learning (RL), where the goal is to learn effective
policies solely from offline data, without any additional online interactions. Offline RL is quite
useful for scenarios where arbitrary exploration with untrained policies is costly or dangerous, but
sufficient prior data is available, such as robotics [18] or industrial control [56]. Most previous
model-free offline RL methods add a pessimism term to off-policy RL algorithms [50, 9, 2], this
pessimism term acts as behavior regularization to avoid extrapolation errors caused by querying the
Q-function about values of potential out-of-distribution (OOD) actions produced by the policy [25].
However, explicitly adding the regularization requires careful tuning of the regularization weight
because otherwise, the policy will still output actions that are not seen in the dataset. DIstribution
Correction Estimation (DICE) methods [35, 41, 34] provide an implicit way of doing so. By applying
convex duality, DICE-based methods solve for the optimal stationary distribution ratio between the
optimized and data collection policy in an in-sample manner without querying unseen actions [55].
* Equal contribution; more junior authors listed earlier.
†

Corresponding authors. Project page at https://ryanxhr.github.io/Diffusion-DICE/.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

