Toward Semantic Gaze Target Detection

Samy Tafasca
Idiap Research Institute
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
stafasca@idiap.ch

Anshul Gupta
Idiap Research Institute
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
agupta@idiap.ch

Victor Bros
Idiap Research Institute
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
vbros@idiap.ch

Jean-Marc Odobez
Idiap Research Institute
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
odobez@idiap.ch

Abstract
From the onset of infanthood, humans naturally develop the ability to closely
observe and interpret the visual gaze of others. This skill, known as gaze following,
holds significance in developmental theory as it enables us to grasp another person’s
mental state, emotions, intentions, and more [6]. In computer vision, gaze following
is defined as the prediction of the pixel coordinates where a person in the image is
focusing their attention. Existing methods in this research area have predominantly
centered on pinpointing the gaze target by predicting a gaze heatmap or gaze point.
However, a notable drawback of this approach is its limited practical value in gaze
applications, as mere localization may not fully capture our primary interest —
understanding the underlying semantics, such as the nature of the gaze target, rather
than just its 2D pixel location. To address this gap, we extend the gaze following
task, and introduce a novel architecture that simultaneously predicts the localization
and semantic label of the gaze target. We devise a pseudo-annotation pipeline
for the GazeFollow dataset, propose a new benchmark, develop an experimental
protocol and design a suitable baseline for comparison. Our method sets a new
state-of-the-art on the main GazeFollow benchmark for localization and achieves
competitive results in the recognition task on both datasets compared to the baseline,
with 40% fewer parameters.

1

Introduction

Gaze is an important marker in non-verbal communication that is indicative of a person’s visual
attention. It is also a proxy measure of cognition and can be used to evaluate a subject’s intentions,
preferences, emotions, among others. Consequently, it received a lot of attention over the years from
different research communities such as neuroscience [13], psychology [17], cognitive science [44],
robotics [43], and education [37].
In computer vision, the analysis and understanding of attention was formulated through different
tasks. One research direction focuses on predicting a gaze direction representing the 3D line of sight
from a frontal image of a face [34]. Another one tries to estimate the visual focus of attention (VFOA),
i.e. the gaze target of a person, given 3D information about the subject (e.g. body, head, eyes) and the
scene (e.g. layout, object positions) [45, 4]. Beyond predicting gaze as a standalone signal, several
research efforts focused on understanding gaze dynamics in the context of social communication
such as inferring mutual gaze [35, 15, 20], joint attention [14, 15, 20], or gaze aversion [15].
This paper focuses on the task of gaze following [42], which extends the idea of Visual Focus of
Attention (VFOA). Gaze following aims to predict the 2D pixel coordinates where a person in an
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

