Geometry-aware training of factorized layers in tensor
Tucker format
Emanuele Zangrando∗
School of Mathematics,
Gran Sasso Science Institute,
L’Aquila, Italy
emanuele.zangrando@gssi.it
Gianluca Ceruti
Department of Mathematics,
University of Innsbruck,
Innsbruck, Austria
gianluca.ceruti@uibk.ac.at

Steffen Schotthöfer∗
Computer Science and Mathematics Division,
Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
Oak Ridge, TN, USA
schotthoefers@ornl.gov
Jonas Kusch
Department of Data Science,
Norwegian University of Life Sciences,
Ås, Norway
jonas.kusch@nmbu.no

Francesco Tudisco
School of Mathematics and Maxwell Institute,
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK;
School of Mathematics,
Gran Sasso Science Institute, L’Aquila, Italy
f.tudisco@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Reducing parameter redundancies in neural network architectures is crucial for
achieving feasible computational and memory requirements during training and
inference phases. Given its easy implementation and flexibility, one promising
approach is layer factorization, which reshapes weight tensors into a matrix format
and parameterizes them as the product of two small rank matrices. However, this
approach typically requires an initial full-model warm-up phase, prior knowledge
of a feasible rank, and it is sensitive to parameter initialization. In this work, we
introduce a novel approach to train the factors of a Tucker decomposition of the
weight tensors. Our training proposal proves to be optimal in locally approximating
the original unfactorized dynamics independently of the initialization. Furthermore,
the rank of each mode is dynamically updated during training. We provide a
theoretical analysis of the algorithm, showing convergence, approximation and
local descent guarantees. The method’s performance is further illustrated through
a variety of experiments, showing remarkable training compression rates and
comparable or even better performance than the full baseline and alternative layer
factorization strategies.

1

Introduction

The memory footprint and computational cost for inference and training are major limitations of
modern deep learning architectures. A variety of techniques have been developed to address this
issue, aiming to reduce model size and computational complexity. Popular approaches include
∗

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

