Sample-Efficient Constrained Reinforcement Learning
with General Parameterization
Washim Uddin Mondal
Department of Electrical Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur
Kanpur, UP, India 208016
wmondal@iitk.ac.in

Vaneet Aggarwal
School of IE and ECE
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA 47906
vaneet@purdue.edu

Abstract
We consider a constrained Markov Decision Problem (CMDP) where the goal of
an agent is to maximize the expected discounted sum of rewards over an infinite
horizon while ensuring that the expected discounted sum of costs exceeds a certain
threshold. Building on the idea of momentum-based acceleration, we develop
the Primal-Dual Accelerated Natural Policy Gradient (PD-ANPG) algorithm that
ensures an ϵ global optimality gap and ϵ constraint violation with Õ((1 − γ)−7 ϵ−2 )
sample complexity for general parameterized policies where γ denotes the discount
factor. This improves the state-of-the-art sample complexity in general parameterized CMDPs by a factor of O((1 − γ)−1 ϵ−2 ) and achieves the theoretical lower
bound in ϵ−1 .

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a framework where an agent repeatedly interacts with an unknown
Markovian environment to find a policy that maximizes the expected discounted sum of its observed
rewards. Such problems, often modeled via Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), find applications
in many areas, including transportation [1], communication networks [2], robotics [3], etc. In many
applications, however, the agents must also obey certain constraints. For example, in a food delivery
network, the orders must be delivered within a stipulated time window; the marketing decisions of a
firm must satisfy its budget constraints, etc. Such constraints are incorporated into RL by introducing
a cost function. In constrained MDPs (CMDPs), the agents not only maximize the expected sum
of discounted rewards but also ensure that the expected sum of discounted costs does not cross a
predefined boundary.
Finding an optimal policy for a CMDP is a challenging problem, especially when the environment,
i.e., the state transition function, is unknown. The efficiency of a solution to a CMDP is measured by
its sample complexity, which essentially states how many state-transition samples it takes to yield a
policy that is ϵ close to the optimal one while also ensuring that the expected sum of discounted costs
does not violate the imposed boundary by more than ϵ amount. Many articles in the literature solve the
CMDP with an unknown environment. Most of these works, however, focus on the tabular case where
the number of states is finite. These solutions cannot be applied to many real-life scenarios where
the state space is either large or infinite. To tackle this issue, the concept of policy parameterization
must be invoked. Unfortunately, as exhibited in Table 1, only a few works are available on CMDPs
with parameterized policies. While, for softmax parameterization, the state-of-the-art (SOTA) sample
complexity is O(ϵ−2 ), the same for the general parameterization is Õ(ϵ−4 ) which is far from the lower
bound Ω(ϵ−2 ). It should be noted that the number of parameters needed in softmax parameterization
is O(SA) where S, A are the sizes of the state and action spaces of the underlying CMDP. On the
other hand, general parameterization uses d ≪ SA number of parameters, which makes it appropriate
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

