Constrained Diffusion Models via Dual Training

Shervin Khalafi
Dongsheng Ding∗
Alejandro Ribeiro
{shervink,dongshed,aribeiro}@seas.upenn.edu
University of Pennsylvania

Abstract
Diffusion models have attained prominence for their ability to synthesize a probability distribution for a given dataset via a diffusion process, enabling the generation
of new data points with high fidelity. However, diffusion processes are prone to
generating samples that reflect biases in a training dataset. To address this issue,
we develop constrained diffusion models by imposing diffusion constraints based
on desired distributions that are informed by requirements. Specifically, we cast
the training of diffusion models under requirements as a constrained distribution
optimization problem that aims to reduce the distribution difference between original and generated data while obeying constraints on the distribution of generated
data. We show that our constrained diffusion models generate new data from
a mixture data distribution that achieves the optimal trade-off among objective
and constraints. To train constrained diffusion models, we develop a dual training algorithm and characterize the optimality of the trained constrained diffusion
model. We empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of our constrained models
in two constrained generation tasks: (i) we consider a dataset with one or more
underrepresented classes where we train the model with constraints to ensure fairly
sampling from all classes during inference; (ii) we fine-tune a pre-trained diffusion
model to sample from a new dataset while avoiding overfitting.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have become a driving force of modern generative modeling, achieving groundbreaking performance in tasks ranging from image/video/audio generation [64, 6, 43] to molecular
design for drug discovery [75, 74]. Diffusion models learn diffusion processes that produce a
probability distribution for a given dataset (e.g., images) from which we can generate new data (e.g.,
classic models [66, 34, 68, 78]). As diffusion models are used to generate data with societal impacts,
e.g., art generation and content creation for media, they must comply with requirements from specific
domains, e.g., social fairness in image generation [54, 57], aesthetic properties of images [12, 13],
bioactivity in molecule generation [39], and more [40, 81, 8, 19, 79, 14].
Classic diffusion models [66, 34, 68] have been extended to generate data under different requirements
through either first-principle methods or fine-tuning. In image generation with fairness, for instance,
first principle methods directly mitigate biases towards social/ethical identities by revising the training
loss functions per biased/unbiased data [49, 41]; while fine-tuning methods align biased diffusion
models with desired data distributions by optimizing the associated metrics [24, 72, 71, 70]. Although
these methods allow us to equip diffusion models with specific requirements, they are often designed
for particular generation tasks and do not provide transparency on how these requirements are satisfied.
Since diffusion models are trained by minimizing the loss functions of diffusion processes, it is natural
to incorporate requirements into diffusion models by imposing constraints on these optimization
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

