MMLU-Pro: A More Robust and Challenging
Multi-Task Language Understanding Benchmark

Yubo Wang∗, 1 Xueguang Ma∗, 1 Ge Zhang, 1 Yuansheng Ni, 1 Abhranil Chandra,
Shiguang Guo, 1 Weiming Ren, 1 Aaran Arulraj, 1 Xuan He, 1 Ziyan Jiang, 1 Tianle Li,
1
Max Ku, 2 Kai Wang, 1 Alex Zhuang, 1 Rongqi Fan, 3 Xiang Yue, 1 Wenhu Chen∗
1

1

1

University of Waterloo, 2 University of Toronto, 3 Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
In the age of large-scale language models, benchmarks like the Massive Multitask
Language Understanding (MMLU) have been pivotal in pushing the boundaries
of what AI can achieve in language comprehension and reasoning across diverse
domains. However, as models continue to improve, their performance on these
benchmarks has begun to plateau, making it increasingly difficult to discern differences in model capabilities. This paper introduces MMLU-Pro, an enhanced
dataset designed to extend the mostly knowledge-driven MMLU benchmark by integrating more challenging, reasoning-focused questions and expanding the choice
set from four to ten options. Additionally, MMLU-Pro eliminates the trivial and
noisy questions in MMLU. Our experimental results show that MMLU-Pro not
only raises the challenge, causing a significant drop in accuracy by 16% to 33%
compared to MMLU but also demonstrates greater stability under varying prompts.
With 24 different prompt styles tested, the sensitivity of model scores to prompt
variations decreased from 4-5% in MMLU to just 2% in MMLU-Pro. Additionally,
we found that models utilizing Chain of Thought (CoT) reasoning achieved better
performance on MMLU-Pro compared to direct answering, which is in stark contrast to the findings on the original MMLU, indicating that MMLU-Pro includes
more complex reasoning questions. Our assessments confirm that MMLU-Pro is a
more discriminative benchmark to better track progress in the field.

Figure 1: Comparing between MMLU and MMLU-Pro: (Left) Performance gap; (Center) Accuracy
distributions affected by 24 prompts, with taller and thinner profiles indicating more stability and
shorter and wider profiles indicating greater fluctuations; (Right) Performance using CoT vs. Direct.

∗

Core Contributors. B: {y726wang, x93ma, wenhuchen}@uwaterloo.ca

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

