Overcoming Brittleness in Pareto-Optimal
Learning-Augmented Algorithms

Alex Elenter
Sorbonne University, CNRS, LIP6
4 place Jussieu
Paris, France 75005
alexelenter@gmail.com

Spyros Angelopoulos
International Laboratory on Learning Systems
Montreal, Canada, and
Sorbonne University, CNRS, LIP6
Paris, France 75005
spyros.angelopoulos@lip6.fr

Christoph Dürr
Sorbonne University, CNRS, LIP6
4 place Jussieu
Paris, France 75005
christoph.durr@lip6.fr

Yanni Lefki∗
Institut Polytechnique de Paris
Rte de Saclay
Palaiseau, 91120, France
yanni.lefki@gmail.com

Abstract
The study of online algorithms with machine-learned predictions has gained considerable prominence in recent years. One of the common objectives in the design and
analysis of such algorithms is to attain (Pareto) optimal tradeoffs between the consistency of the algorithm, i.e., its performance assuming perfect predictions, and its
robustness, i.e., the performance of the algorithm under adversarial predictions. In
this work, we demonstrate that this optimization criterion can be extremely brittle,
in that the performance of Pareto-optimal algorithms may degrade dramatically
even in the presence of imperceptive prediction error. To remedy this drawback,
we propose a new framework in which the smoothness in the performance of
the algorithm is enforced by means of a user-specified profile. This allows us to
regulate the performance of the algorithm as a function of the prediction error,
while simultaneously maintaining the analytical notion of consistency/robustness
tradeoffs, adapted to the profile setting. We apply this new approach to a wellstudied online problem, namely the one-way trading problem. For this problem, we
further address another limitation of the state-of-the-art Pareto-optimal algorithms,
namely the fact that they are tailored to worst-case, and extremely pessimistic
inputs. We propose a new Pareto-optimal algorithm that leverages any deviation
from the worst-case input to its benefit, and introduce a new metric that allows us
to compare any two Pareto-optimal algorithms via a dominance relation.

1

Introduction

The field of learning-augmented online algorithms has witnessed remarkable growth in recent years,
starting with the seminal works of Lykouris and Vassilvitskii [31] and Purohit et al. [36]. The
focus, in this field, is on improving the algorithmic performance by leveraging some inherently
imperfect prediction on the online input. This is in contrast to the standard framework of competitive
analysis [15], in which the algorithm has no access to any information about the future, and the
analysis is based on adversarial inputs tailored to the myopic nature of the algorithm.
∗

Research done while at LIP6, Sorboonne University.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

