In-Context Learning State Vector with Inner and
Momentum Optimization

Dongfang Li, Zhenyu Liu, Xinshuo Hu, Zetian Sun, Baotian HuB , Min Zhang
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China
{crazyofapple, liuzhenyuhit}@gmail.com
{hubaotian, zhangmin2021}@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have exhibited an impressive ability to perform
In-Context Learning (ICL) from only a few examples. Recent works have indicated
that the functions learned by ICL can be represented through compressed vectors
derived from the transformer. However, the working mechanisms and optimization
of these vectors are yet to be thoroughly explored. In this paper, we address
this gap by presenting a comprehensive analysis of these compressed vectors,
drawing parallels to the parameters trained with gradient descent, and introducing
the concept of state vector. Inspired by the works on model soup and momentumbased gradient descent, we propose inner and momentum optimization methods
that are applied to refine the state vector progressively as test-time adaptation.
Moreover, we simulate state vector aggregation in the multiple example setting,
where demonstrations comprising numerous examples are usually too lengthy
for regular ICL, and further propose a divide-and-conquer aggregation method
to address this challenge. We conduct extensive experiments using Llama-2 and
GPT-J in both zero-shot setting and few-shot setting. The experimental results show
that our optimization method effectively enhances the state vector and achieves
the state-of-the-art performance on diverse tasks. Code is available at https:
//github.com/HITsz-TMG/ICL-State-Vector

1

Introduction

In-Context Learning (ICL) has emerged as a powerful capability in tandem with the scaling of large
language models (LLMs) [Brown et al., 2020]. By simply conditioning on a few input-label pairs
as demonstrations, LLMs yield a significant improvement and deliver remarkable results in various
downstream Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks [Wei et al., 2022, Liu et al., 2023a]. For
example, a model prompted with the input “gaot → goat, sakne → snake, brid →” can produce the
output “bird”. Given these successes, it is worthwhile to inquire about the exact internal working
mechanisms of ICL. Considering the opaque operation of ICL within the auto-regressive transformer,
it is plausible that ICL might function as a general mechanism that leverages both demonstrations
and the query to yield the prediction [Dong et al., 2023].
Recently, some studies have found that the ICL mapping function exists in the outputs of the attention
layers or attention heads [Liu et al., 2023b, Dai et al., 2023] when applying causal effects analysis
on a different set of models and tasks, such as the task vector [Hendel et al., 2023] and the function
vector [Todd et al., 2023]. These works show that the functionalities learned through ICL can be
encapsulated in compressed vectors derived from transformers, which then can be used to intervene
in the transformer to handle queries without demonstrations. This revelation suggests the potential
mechanism of ICL that first utilises demonstrations to learn the mapping function from inputs to
B

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

