IaC-Eval: A Code Generation Benchmark for
Cloud Infrastructure-as-Code Programs

Patrick Tser Jern Kon, Jiachen Liu, Yiming Qiu, Weijun Fan, Ting He
Lei Lin, Haoran Zhang, Owen M. Park, George S. Elengikal, Yuxin Kang
Ang Chen, Mosharaf Chowdhury, Myungjin Lee‡ , Xinyu Wang
University of Michigan ‡ Cisco Research

Abstract
Infrastructure-as-Code (IaC), an important component of cloud computing, allows
the definition of cloud infrastructure in high-level programs. However, developing
IaC programs is challenging, complicated by factors that include the burgeoning
complexity of the cloud ecosystem (e.g., diversity of cloud services and workloads),
and the relative scarcity of IaC-specific code examples and public repositories.
While large language models (LLMs) have shown promise in general code generation and could potentially aid in IaC development, no benchmarks currently exist
for evaluating their ability to generate IaC code. We present IaC-Eval, a first step
in this research direction. IaC-Eval’s dataset includes 458 human-curated scenarios
covering a wide range of popular AWS services, at varying difficulty levels. Each
scenario mainly comprises a natural language IaC problem description and an
infrastructure intent specification. The former is fed as user input to the LLM,
while the latter is a general notion used to verify if the generated IaC program conforms to the user’s intent; by making explicit the problem’s requirements that can
encompass various cloud services, resources and internal infrastructure details. Our
in-depth evaluation shows that contemporary LLMs perform poorly on IaC-Eval,
with the top-performing model, GPT-4, obtaining a pass@1 accuracy of 19.36%. In
contrast, it scores 86.6% on EvalPlus, a popular Python code generation benchmark,
highlighting a need for advancements in this domain. We open-source the IaC-Eval
dataset and evaluation framework at https://github.com/autoiac-project/iac-eval to
enable future research on LLM-based IaC code generation.

1

Introduction

Cloud computing has become a cornerstone of our digital infrastructure. According to recent
reports [55, 31], 94% of all enterprises use cloud services of some form. Building on this trend,
“Infrastructure as Code” (IaC) has emerged as the standard for developing cloud infrastructure. IaC
allows users to codify their desired infrastructures within high-level IaC programs, which can be
deployed repeatably and consistently. The IaC frameworks in turn are responsible for provisioning
the underlying resources (e.g., compute instances) specified in the program, by interacting with
cloud-specific APIs. The most widely adopted tool leading this paradigm is Terraform [34], and
is the focus of our paper. Terraform programs (otherwise known as configuration files) are written
in the HCL language [68]; Fig. 1a illustrates a simplified example of such a program, where we
construct an infrastructure consisting of a compute instance (VM) connected to a network. First, we
have resource blocks which define instances of specific infrastructure components. Cloud services
typically encompass multiple resources, each representing a distinct part of the service, and the
selection of these resources depends on the specific use case; here, we need a SUBNET and NIC,
both essential parts of the virtual private cloud service, a key networking component. Second, these
resource blocks contain various attributes that dictate their instantiation. Attributes can have different
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

