WildGaussians: 3D Gaussian Splatting in the Wild

Jonas Kulhanek1,2,3∗, Songyou Peng3†, Zuzana Kukelova4 , Marc Pollefeys3 , Torsten Sattler1
1
Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics, Czech Technical University in Prague
2
Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
3
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
4
Visual Recognition Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
https://wild-gaussians.github.io

Ground truth
Prediction
Uncertainty

Photo Tourism [35]

NeRF On-the-go [31]

Figure 1: WildGaussians extends 3DGS [14] to scenes with appearance and illumination changes (left). It
jointly optimizes a DINO-based [27] uncertainty predictor to handle occlusions (right).

Abstract
While the field of 3D scene reconstruction is dominated by NeRFs due to their photorealistic quality, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has recently emerged, offering
similar quality with real-time rendering speeds. However, both methods primarily
excel with well-controlled 3D scenes, while in-the-wild data – characterized by occlusions, dynamic objects, and varying illumination – remains challenging. NeRFs
can adapt to such conditions easily through per-image embedding vectors, but
3DGS struggles due to its explicit representation and lack of shared parameters. To
address this, we introduce WildGaussians, a novel approach to handle occlusions
and appearance changes with 3DGS. By leveraging robust DINO features and
integrating an appearance modeling module within 3DGS, our method achieves
state-of-the-art results. We demonstrate that WildGaussians matches the real-time
rendering speed of 3DGS while surpassing both 3DGS and NeRF baselines in
handling in-the-wild data, all within a simple architectural framework.

1

Introduction

Reconstruction of photorealistic 3D representations from a set of images has significant applications
across various domains, including the generation of immersive VR experiences, 3D content creation
∗
†

The work was done during an academic visit to ETH Zurich.
Corresponding author, now at Google DeepMind.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

