When is Multicalibration Post-Processing Necessary?

Dutch Hansen∗
University of Southern California
jmhansen@usc.edu
Preetum Nakkiran
Apple
preetum@nakkiran.org

Siddartha Devic∗
University of Southern California
devic@usc.edu
Vatsal Sharan
University of Southern California
vsharan@usc.edu

Abstract
Calibration is a well-studied property of predictors which guarantees meaningful uncertainty estimates. Multicalibration is a related notion — originating in
algorithmic fairness — which requires predictors to be simultaneously calibrated
over a potentially complex and overlapping collection of protected subpopulations (such as groups defined by ethnicity, race, or income). We conduct the first
comprehensive study evaluating the usefulness of multicalibration post-processing
across a broad set of tabular, image, and language datasets for models spanning
from simple decision trees to 90 million parameter fine-tuned LLMs. Our findings
can be summarized as follows: (1) models which are calibrated out of the box
tend to be relatively multicalibrated without any additional post-processing; (2)
multicalibration post-processing can help inherently uncalibrated models and also
large vision and language models; and (3) traditional calibration measures may
sometimes provide multicalibration implicitly. More generally, we distill many
independent observations which may be useful for practical and effective applications of multicalibration post-processing in real-world contexts. We also release
a python package implementing multicalibration algorithms, available via ‘pip
install multicalibration’.

1

Introduction

A popular approach to ensuring that probabilistic predictions from machine learning algorithms are
meaningful is model calibration. Intuitively, calibration requires that amongst all samples given score
p ∈ [0, 1] by an ML algorithm, exactly a p-fraction of those samples have positive label. Calibration
ensures that a predictor has an accurate estimate of its own predictive uncertainty, and is a fundamental
requirement in applications where probabilities may be taken into account for high-stake decisions
such as disease diagnosis (Dahabreh et al., 2017) or credit/lending decisions (Bequé et al., 2017).
Miscalibration can result in undesirable downstream consequences when probabilistic predictions are
thresholded into decisions: if a predictor has high calibration error in disease diagnosis, for example,
the individuals assigned lower predicted probabilities may be unfairly denied treatment. Calibration
has a long history in the machine learning community (Guo et al., 2017; Minderer et al., 2021;
Niculescu-Mizil and Caruana, 2005; Platt et al., 1999), but was arguably first introduced in fairness
contexts by Cleary (1968). More recently, it has appeared in the algorithmic fairness community via
the seminal works of Chouldechova (2017); Kleinberg et al. (2017).
Although calibration ensures meaningful uncertainty estimates aggregated over the entire population,
it does not preclude potential discrimination at the level of groups of individuals: a model may
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).
* Equal contribution.

