Text-Infused Attention and Foreground-Aware
Modeling for Zero-Shot Temporal Action Detection

Yearang Lee Ho-Joong Kim Seong-Whan Lee∗
Dept. of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul, Korea
{yr_lee, hojoong_kim, sw.lee}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Zero-Shot Temporal Action Detection (ZSTAD) aims to classify and localize
action segments in untrimmed videos for unseen action categories. Most existing
ZSTAD methods utilize a foreground-based approach, limiting the integration of
text and visual features due to their reliance on pre-extracted proposals. In this
paper, we introduce a cross-modal ZSTAD baseline with mutual cross-attention,
integrating both text and visual information throughout the detection process. Our
simple approach results in superior performance compared to previous methods.
Despite this improvement, we further identify a common-action bias issue that
the cross-modal baseline over-focus on common sub-actions due to a lack of
ability to discriminate text-related visual parts. To address this issue, we propose
Text-infused attention and Foreground-aware Action Detection (Ti-FAD), which
enhances the ability to focus on text-related sub-actions and distinguish relevant
action segments from the background. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that
Ti-FAD outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on ZSTAD benchmarks by a large
margin: 41.2% (+ 11.0%) on THUMOS14 and 32.0% (+ 5.4%) on ActivityNet v1.3.
Code is available at: https://github.com/YearangLee/Ti-FAD.

1

Introduction

Temporal action detection (TAD) is a fundamental task in video understanding, aiming to localize and
classify action instances within untrimmed videos. Conventional TAD methods are time-consuming
and expensive for annotating long untrimmed videos, making them impractical for real-world
scenarios. Zero-shot temporal action detection (ZSTAD) [8, 18, 20, 26, 29] has been introduced to
recognize unseen action categories that are not included in the training dataset by utilizing arbitrary
categories defined by textual descriptions. As large-scale pre-trained visual-language (ViL) models
(e.g. CLIP [21] and ALIGN [6]) have shown impressive performance on zero-shot downstream tasks,
recent works [18, 20, 26] have extended their application to ZSTAD.
Most existing ZSTAD methods [8, 18, 20] employ a foreground-based approach that initially generates
the foreground candidate proposals from the visual features and subsequently fuses them with the text
features, as shown in Fig. 1 (a). This foreground-based approach fuses only text features with visual
features in the foreground, following a previous ViL model trained on an environment containing the
foreground. However, addressing only foreground features limits the use of the entire information of
text-visual modalities due to the following two reasons: (1) the text features are only incorporated
with the foreground candidate proposals that contain the partial information of the video, and (2) the
visual features are utilized for localization without incorporating the text features.
To demonstrate the importance of incorporating both text and video information throughout the entire
detection process, we construct a simple cross-modal baseline employing the attention mechanism
[25], as illustrated in Fig. 1 (b). Even with this simple approach, we confirm that our cross-modal
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

