TAPVid-3D:
A Benchmark for Tracking Any Point in 3D

Skanda Koppula*1,2 , Ignacio Rocco*1 , Yi Yang1 , Joe Heyward1 ,
João Carreira1 , Andrew Zisserman1,3 , Gabriel Brostow2 , Carl Doersch1
1
Google DeepMind 2 University College London 3 University of Oxford

Abstract
We introduce a new benchmark, TAPVid-3D, for evaluating the task of long-range
Tracking Any Point in 3D (TAP-3D). While point tracking in two dimensions
(TAP-2D) has many benchmarks measuring performance on real-world videos,
such as TAPVid-DAVIS, three-dimensional point tracking has none. To this end,
leveraging existing footage, we build a new benchmark for 3D point tracking featuring 4,000+ real-world videos, composed of three different data sources spanning
a variety of object types, motion patterns, and indoor and outdoor environments.
To measure performance on the TAP-3D task, we formulate a collection of metrics
that extend the Jaccard-based metric used in TAP-2D to handle the complexities of
ambiguous depth scales across models, occlusions, and multi-track spatio-temporal
smoothness. We manually verify a large sample of trajectories to ensure correct
video annotations, and assess the current state of the TAP-3D task by constructing
competitive baselines using existing tracking models. We anticipate this benchmark
will serve as a guidepost to improve our ability to understand precise 3D motion
and surface deformation from monocular video.

1

Introduction

For robots, humans, and other agents to effectively interact with the physical 3D world, it is necessary
to understand a scene’s structure and dynamics. This is a key ingredient to any general embodied
intelligence: the ability to learn a world model to understand and predict the structure and motion of
arbitrary scenes. It is attractive to leverage the vast amounts of monocular video data that is available
cheaply, and use such signals to understand the geometry and 3D motion in real-world footage. But
how well can current perception algorithms actually do this?
The field has seen many efforts to measure 3D and motion understanding from videos, each contributing a part of the overall goal. For example, monocular depth estimation is a widely recognized
task [8, 36, 61]. However, success in depth estimation alone doesn’t reveal whether the model
understands how surfaces move from one frame to the next, and may not respect temporal continuity.
For instance, a basketball spinning on its axis is often not visible in a sequence of depth maps.
On the other end of the generality spectrum, 3D pose tracking, e.g. for rigid objects [15, 34] and
people [13, 48], evaluates precise motion, but requires a known 3D model of each object, with
articulations. Building parametric models and pose estimation methods for all animal classes is
infeasible, much less for all the objects that a robot might encounter in, for example, an unseen, busy
construction site.
An alternative and more general approach for 3D understanding observes that the world consists of
particles, each of which individually follows a 3D trajectory through space. Measuring the motion of
these points provides a way to measure 3D motion without requiring any 3D shapes to be known
*Equal contribution. Corresponding author: skandak@google.com
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

