Unlock the Intermittent Control Ability of Model Free
Reinforcement Learning

Jiashun Liu, Jianye Hao∗& Xiaotian Hao
College of Intelligence and Computing
Tianjin University
China

Yi Ma
School of Computer and Information Technology
Shanxi University
China

YAN ZHENG
Tianjin University
China
yanzheng@tju.edu.cn

Yujing Hu & Tangji Lv
FUXI AI Laboratory
NetEase
China

Abstract
Intermittent control problems are common in real world. The interactions between
the decision maker and the executor can be discontinuous (intermittent) due to
various types of interruptions, e.g. unstable communication channel. Due to intermittent interaction, agents are unable to acquire the state sent by the executor and
cannot transmit actions to the executor within a period of time step, i.e. bidirectional blockage, which may lead to inefficiencies of reinforcement learning policies
and prevent the executors from completing the task. Such problem is not well
studied in the RL community. In this paper, we model Intermittent Control Problem
as an Intermittent Control Markov Decision Process, i.e., agents are expected to
generate action sequences corresponding to the unavailable states and transmit
them before disabling interactions to ensure the smooth and effective motion of
executors. However, directly generating multiple future actions in the original
action space has unnatural motion issue and exploration difficulty. We propose
Multi-step Action RepreSentation (MARS), which encodes a sequence of actions
from the original action space to a compact and decodable latent space. Then based
on the latent action sequence representation, the mainstream RL methods can be
easily optimized to learn a smooth and efficient motion policy. Extensive experiments on simulation tasks and real-world robotic grasping tasks show that MARS
significantly improves the learning efficiency and final performances compared
with existing baselines.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the field of deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has witnessed striking empirical
achievements in a variety of Markov Decision Process (MDP) problems [Mnih et al., 2013, Kaufmann
et al., 2023] and has been successfully applied to many real-time control tasks [Mahmood et al., 2018,
Lee et al., 2020]. In real-time control, “interaction" plays a crucial role. At each time step, the decision
maker obtains observations from the environment and feeds actions back to the action executor through
real-time interactions. Thus, in an ideal MDP setting, the interaction should be continuous. However,
in many scenarios, interactions become intermittent due to limitations of realistic conditions [Jiang
et al., 2021] or communication interruption (e.g., unstable network) [Dong et al., 2009]. Due to
∗

Correspondence to: Jianye Hao <jianye.hao@tju.edu.cn>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

