Active Learning for Derivative-Based Global
Sensitivity Analysis with Gaussian Processes

Syrine Belakaria
Stanford University
Janardhan Rao Doppa
Washington State University

Benjamin Letham
Meta

Barbara Engelhardt
Stanford University

Stefano Ermon
Stanford University

Eytan Bakshy
Meta

Abstract
We consider the problem of active learning for global sensitivity analysis of expensive black-box functions. Our aim is to efﬁciently learn the importance of different
input variables, e.g., in vehicle safety experimentation, we study the impact of the
thickness of various components on safety objectives. Since function evaluations
are expensive, we use active learning to prioritize experimental resources where
they yield the most value. We propose novel active learning acquisition functions
that directly target key quantities of derivative-based global sensitivity measures
(DGSMs) under Gaussian process surrogate models. We showcase the ﬁrst application of active learning directly to DGSMs, and develop tractable uncertainty
reduction and information gain acquisition functions for these measures. Through
comprehensive evaluation on synthetic and real-world problems, our study demonstrates how these active learning acquisition strategies substantially enhance the
sample efﬁciency of DGSM estimation, particularly with limited evaluation budgets. Our work paves the way for more efﬁcient and accurate sensitivity analysis
in various scientiﬁc and engineering applications.

1

Introduction

Sensitivity analysis is the study of how variation and changes in the output of a function can be
attributed to distinct sources of variability in the function inputs [13]. More precisely, we seek to
determine how changes in each input variable impact the output. Sensitivity analysis can be used for
several purposes, including identifying the input variables that are most inﬂuential for the function
output and those that are least inﬂuential [13], and quantifying variable importance in order to explore and interpret a model’s behavior [40]. Sensitivity analysis is an important tool in many ﬁelds of
science and engineering to understand complex, often black-box systems. It has proven particularly
important for environmental modeling [31, 41], geosciences [42, 4], chemical engineering [35], biology [15], engineering safety experimentation [29], and other simulation-heavy domains. In these
settings, function evaluations often involve time-consuming simulations or costly lab experiments,
so it is important to perform the sensitivity analysis with as few function evaluations as possible. For
example, sensitivity analysis in environmental modeling can help understand how parameters such
as CO2 emissions, temperature increases, and deforestation rates inﬂuence the output of climate
models. Identifying the variables that most directly impact model outcomes allows researchers to
better prioritize efforts in data collection, model reﬁnement, and policy development [31].
Sensitivity analysis can be either local or global. Local sensitivity analysis (LSA) [11] studies the effect of perturbations of single input variables at a ﬁxed, nominal point. Input sensitivity is measured
only locally to that nominal point and does not take into account any interactions. Global sensitivity
analysis (GSA) [33], on the other hand, evaluates sensitivity over an entire compact input space
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

