Rad-NeRF: Ray-decoupled Training of Neural
Radiance Field
Lidong Guo1∗

Xuefei Ning1∗†

Yonggan Fu2

Zhuoliang Kang3

Jincheng Yu1

Yingyan (Celine) Lin2

1

Tsinghua University

2

Tianchen Zhao1

Georgia Institute of Technology

Yu Wang1†
3

Meituan

Abstract
Although the neural radiance field (NeRF) exhibits high-fidelity visualization on
the rendering task, it still suffers from rendering defects, especially in complex
scenes. In this paper, we delve into the reason for the unsatisfactory performance
and conjecture that it comes from interference in the training process. Due to
occlusions in complex scenes, a 3D point may be invisible to some rays. On such a
point, training with those rays that do not contain valid information about the point
might interfere with the NeRF training. Based on the above intuition, we decouple
the training process of NeRF in the ray dimension softly and propose a Raydecoupled Training Framework for neural rendering (Rad-NeRF). Specifically,
we construct an ensemble of sub-NeRFs and train a soft gate module to assign
the gating scores to these sub-NeRFs based on specific rays. The gate module
is jointly optimized with the sub-NeRF ensemble to learn the preference of subNeRFs for different rays automatically. Furthermore, we introduce depth-based
mutual learning to enhance the rendering consistency among multiple sub-NeRFs
and mitigate the depth ambiguity. Experiments on five datasets demonstrate that
Rad-NeRF can enhance the rendering performance across a wide range of scene
types compared with existing single-NeRF and multi-NeRF methods. With only
0.2% extra parameters, Rad-NeRF improves rendering performance by up to 1.5dB.
Code is available at https://github.com/thu-nics/Rad-NeRF.

1

Introduction

Novel view synthesis is an important task within the domains of computer vision and computer
graphics, playing an essential role in a variety of applications, such as autonomous driving, augmented
reality, and so on. Recently, Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [17] has emerged as a promising solution,
achieving high-fidelity visualizations on the novel view synthesis task. It implicitly encodes 3D
scenes through neural networks and trains the networks using volume rendering.
Despite NeRF’s excellent scene representation ability, it still suffers from rendering defects when
dealing with complex scenes, such as 360-degree unbounded scenes [37, 2] and large scenes with free
shooting trajectories [30, 27, 26]. One of the main reasons is the limited model capacity. However,
directly increasing the network’s size yields marginal performance improvement [18].
Our fundamental intuition is that the training interference from invisible rays affects NeRF’s
performance. Let us consider a simple case of a 360-degree unbounded scene with a central object
∗
†

Both authors contribute equally to this work.
Corresponding authors: Xuefei Ning (foxdoraame@gmail.com), Yu Wang (yu-wang@tsinghua.edu.cn).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

