ENAT: Rethinking Spatial-temporal Interactions in
Token-based Image Synthesis

Zanlin Ni1∗ Yulin Wang1∗ Renping Zhou1 Yizeng Han1
Jiayi Guo1 Zhiyuan Liu1 Yuan Yao2† Gao Huang1†
1
Tsinghua University 2 National University of Singapore

Abstract
Recently, token-based generation approaches have demonstrated their effectiveness
in synthesizing visual content. As a representative example, non-autoregressive
Transformers (NATs) can generate decent-quality images in just a few steps. NATs
perform generation in a progressive manner, where the latent tokens of a resulting image are incrementally revealed step-by-step. At each step, the unrevealed
image regions are padded with [MASK] tokens and inferred by NAT, with the
most reliable predictions preserved as newly revealed, visible tokens. In this
paper, we delve into understanding the mechanisms behind the effectiveness of
NATs and uncover two important interaction patterns that naturally emerge from
NAT’s paradigm: Spatially (within a step), although [MASK] and visible tokens
are processed uniformly by NATs, the interactions between them are highly asymmetric. In specific, [MASK] tokens mainly gather information for decoding. On
the contrary, visible tokens tend to primarily provide information, and their deep
representations can be built only upon themselves. Temporally (across steps), the
interactions between adjacent generation steps mostly concentrate on updating the
representations of a few critical tokens, while the computation for the majority of
tokens is generally repetitive. Driven by these findings, we propose EfficientNAT
(ENAT), a NAT model that explicitly encourages these critical interactions inherent
in NATs. At the spatial level, we disentangle the computations of visible and
[MASK] tokens by encoding visible tokens independently, while decoding [MASK]
tokens conditioned on the fully encoded visible tokens. At the temporal level,
we prioritize the computation of the critical tokens at each step, while maximally
reusing previously computed token representations to supplement necessary information. ENAT improves the performance of NATs notably with significantly
reduced computational cost. Experiments on ImageNet-2562 & 5122 and MSCOCO validate the effectiveness of ENAT. Code and pre-trained models will be
released at https://github.com/LeapLabTHU/ENAT.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed an unprecedented growth in the field of AI-generated content (AIGC). In
computer vision, diffusion models [10, 59, 61] have emerged as an effective approach. On the contrary,
within the context of natural language processing, content is typically synthesized via the generation
of discrete tokens using Transformers [72, 19, 5, 55]. Such discrepancy has excited a growing interest
in exploring token-based generation paradigms for visual synthesis [7, 85, 33, 87, 6, 35]. Different
from diffusion models, these approaches utilize a discrete data format akin to language models. This
makes them straightforward to harness well-established language model optimizations such as the
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

