In Pursuit of Causal Label Correlations for Multi-label
Image Recognition

1

Zhao-Min Chen1 ,
Xin Jin2 ,
Yisu Ge1,∗,
Sixian Chan3
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Informatics for Safety & Emergency of Zhejiang Province,
Wenzhou University
2
Samsung Electronic (China) R&D Centre, Samsung Electronic
3
The College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology
chenzhaomin123@gmail.com, ysg@wzu.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-label image recognition aims to predict all objects present in an input image.
A common belief is that modeling the correlations between objects is beneficial for
multi-label recognition. However, this belief has been recently challenged as label
correlations may mislead the classifier in testing, due to the possible contextual
bias in training. Accordingly, a few of recent works not only discarded label
correlation modeling, but also advocated to remove contextual information for
multi-label image recognition. This work explicitly explores label correlations for
multi-label image recognition based on a principled causal intervention approach.
With causal intervention, we pursue causal label correlations and suppress spurious
label correlations, as the former tend to convey useful contextual cues while the
later may mislead the classifier. Specifically, we decouple label-specific features
with a Transformer decoder attached to the backbone network, and model the
confounders which may give rise to spurious correlations by clustering spatial
features of all training images. Based on label-specific features and confounders,
we employ a cross-attention module to implement causal intervention, quantifying
the causal correlations from all object categories to each predicted object category.
Finally, we obtain image labels by combining the predictions from decoupled
features and causal label correlations. Extensive experiments clearly validate the
effectiveness of our approach for multi-label image recognition in both common
and cross-dataset settings.

1

Introduction

Multi-label image recognition is a fundamental task in computer vision, aiming to predict all objects
present in an image. It has widespread applications including object detection [6], medical imaging [39], and person re-identification [31]. However, this task is challenging as the combinations of
labels can be tremendous. Modelling label correlations to reduce the search space is believed to be
essential for multi-label image recognition [4].
In the research of multi-label image recognition, an implicit yet common assumption is: the training
and test sets follow independent and identically distributions (i.i.d.), and the label correlations
are consistent. Under this setting, a deep backbone network can implicitly extract context-aware
features that are beneficial for object recognition, and furthermore, explicit label correlation modeling
can explore contextual cues more deeply to improve the recognition accuracy. Technically, graph
structures [4, 12] or attention mechanisms [10, 25] have been successfully employed to model label
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

