SS1: Accelerating Inference with Fast and Expressive
Sketch Structured Transform
Kimia Saedi1 ∗ Aditya Desai1 ∗ Apoorv Walia1 Jihyeong Lee2 †
Keren Zhou2 Anshumali Shrivastava1,3
1
Rice University 2 George Mason University
3
Ken Kennedy Institute, ThirdAI Corp., Xmad.ai
{ks152,apd10,aw82,as143}@rice.edu
{jlee436,kzhou6}@gmu.edu

Abstract
Tensor multiplication with learned weight matrices is the fundamental building
block in deep learning models. These matrices can often be sparsified, decomposed,
quantized, or subjected to random parameter sharing without losing accuracy, suggesting the possibility of more efficient transforms. Although many variants of
weight matrices exist, unstructured ones are incompatible with modern hardware,
slowing inference and training. On the other hand, structured variants often limit
expressivity or fail to deliver the promised latency benefits. We present Sketch
Structured Transform(SS1), an expressive and GPU-friendly operator that accelerates inference. SS1 leverages parameter sharing in a random yet structured manner
to reduce computation while retraining the rich expressive nature of parameter
sharing. We confirm empirically that SS1 offers better quality-efficiency tradeoffs
than competing variants. Interestingly SS1 can be combined with Quantization to
achieve gains unattainable by either method alone, a finding we justify via theoretical analysis. The analysis may be of independent interest. Moreover, existing
pre-trained models can be projected onto SS1 and finetuned for efficient deployment. Surprisingly, these projected models can perform reasonably well even
without finetuning. Our experiments highlight various applications of the SS1: (a)
Training GPT2 and DLRM models from scratch for faster inference. (b) Finetuning
projected BERT models for 1.31× faster inference while maintaining GLUE scores.
(c) Proof of concept with Llama-3-8b, showing 1.11× faster wall clock inference
using projected SS1 layers without finetuning. Our code is open-source.3

1

Introduction

Tensor-matrix multiplication is one of the fundamental operations in deep learning models across
various domains. Linear transformation are especially crucial in transformer architectures, which form
the backbone of foundational models responsible for the advanced capabilities of Large Language
Models (LLMs). A significant portion of the computational load in LLMs comes from linear layers.
For example, with a batch size of 4 at full sequence length, the MLP workload of even the smallest
Llama-3-8B model [1] involves (32768 × 4096 × 4096) operations in attention and (32768 × 4096
× 14336) in the MLP. Larger models have even larger workloads. Given these demands, finding
efficient and expressive alternatives to standard linear layers is a crucial research direction.
Deep learning models often have significant redundancies that can be removed using various techniques. Popular approaches include Sparsification [2, 3, 4, 5, 6], Quantization [2, 7], Randomized
∗

Equal contribution; order chosen by a flip of a coin
Work done in sole affiliation with George Mason University
3
https://github.com/apd10/Sketch-Structured-Linear/

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

