A Kernel Perspective on
Distillation-based Collaborative Learning

Sejun Park Kihun Hong Ganguk Hwang∗
Department of Mathematical Sciences
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
{sejunpark, nuri9911, guhwang}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Over the past decade, there is a growing interest in collaborative learning that can
enhance AI models of multiple parties. However, it is still challenging to enhance
performance them without sharing private data and models from individual parties.
One recent promising approach is to develop distillation-based algorithms that exploit unlabeled public data but the results are still unsatisfactory in both theory and
practice. To tackle this problem, we rigorously analyze a representative distillationbased algorithm in the view of kernel regression. This work provides the first
theoretical results to prove the (nearly) minimax optimality of the nonparametric
collaborative learning algorithm that does not directly share local data or models
in massively distributed statistically heterogeneous environments. Inspired by our
theoretical results, we also propose a practical distillation-based collaborative learning algorithm based on neural network architecture. Our algorithm successfully
bridges the gap between our theoretical assumptions and practical settings with
neural networks through feature kernel matching. We simulate various regression
tasks to verify our theory and demonstrate the practical feasibility of our proposed
algorithm.

1

Introduction

Collaborative learning of AI models in decentralized settings is an important problem covered in
various fields of machine learning such as distributed learning [10, 70], Federated Learning (FL) [23],
peer-to-peer learning [3], and miscellaneous collaborative learning [47]. In particular, this theme
has been most actively discussed in the context of FL [24, 31, 45, 61]. In this context, each local
party is typically viewed as a subordinate entity within the collective learning system. For example,
most FL algorithms mandate the exchange of local AI model information among participating local
parties. Under this scheme, local AI models are usually subjected to restrictions in their architecture.
However, from the perspective of collaboration, each local party may have to be regarded as an
independent learning agent, meaning they are not obligated to fully share their model information.
In short, the model (or parameter) exchange in FL algorithms can emerge as a critical issue in
collaborative learning.
Fundamentally, addressing this issue necessitates an alternative medium for sharing learning
information distinct from model exchange. Indeed, Distillation-based Collaborative Learning
(DCL) [14, 30, 44] provides a good answer. In these algorithms, local training information is
shared via the outcomes of AI models on additional unlabeled public data. The collected information
is then utilized for knowledge distillation [21] to each local AI model. As mentioned in [14, 48],
this procedure is agnostic to model heterogeneity and avoids the direct sharing of local AI model
information. This is a key advantage that distinguishes DCL from traditional FL.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

