SwitchHead: Accelerating Transformers with
Mixture-of-Experts Attention

Róbert Csordás1†

Piotr Pi˛ekos2 Kazuki Irie3† Jürgen Schmidhuber2,4
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
2
AI Initiative, KAUST, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
3
Center for Brain Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
4
The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA, USI & SUPSI, Lugano, Switzerland
rcsordas@stanford.edu, piotr.piekos@kaust.edu.sa,
kirie@fas.harvard.edu, juergen@idsia.ch
1

Abstract
Despite many recent works on Mixture of Experts (MoEs) for resource-efficient
Transformer language models, existing methods mostly focus on MoEs for feedforward layers. Previous attempts at extending MoE to the self-attention layer fail to
match the performance of the parameter-matched baseline. Our novel SwitchHead
is an effective MoE method for the attention layer that successfully reduces both the
compute and memory requirements, achieving wall-clock speedup, while matching
the language modeling performance of the baseline Transformer. Our novel MoE
mechanism allows SwitchHead to compute up to 8 times fewer attention matrices
than the standard Transformer. SwitchHead can also be combined with MoE feedforward layers, resulting in fully-MoE “SwitchAll” Transformers. For our 262M
parameter model trained on C4, SwitchHead matches the perplexity of standard
models with only 44% compute and 27% memory usage. Zero-shot experiments
on downstream tasks confirm the performance of SwitchHead, e.g., achieving more
than 3.5% absolute improvements on BliMP compared to the baseline with an
equal compute resource.1

1

Introduction

Figure 1: A schematic representation of SwitchHead. It consists of a few independent heads, each
with multiple experts for value and output projections. Each head has a single attention matrix.
Large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable capabilities [1, 2, 3, 4] and great versatility
[5]. However, training large Transformers [6, 7] requires a considerable amount of computing power
and memory, which is not accessible to most researchers, academic institutions, and even companies.
†
1

Work done at IDSIA.
Our code is public: https://github.com/robertcsordas/switchhead

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

