ReMI: A Dataset for Reasoning with Multiple Images

Mehran Kazemi1 , Nishanth Dikkala2 , Ankit Anand1 , Petar Devic3 ,
Ishita Dasgupta1 , Fangyu Liu1 , Bahare Fatemi2 , Pranjal Awasthi2 ,
Dee Guo2 , Sreenivas Gollapudi2 , Ahmed Qureshi3
1
Google DeepMind, 2 Google Research, 3 Google

Abstract
With the continuous advancement of large language models (LLMs), it is essential
to create new benchmarks to effectively evaluate their expanding capabilities and
identify areas for improvement. This work focuses on multi-image reasoning,
an emerging capability in state-of-the-art LLMs. We introduce ReMI, a dataset
designed to assess LLMs’ ability to Reason with Multiple Images. This dataset
encompasses a diverse range of tasks, spanning various reasoning domains such
as math, physics, logic, code, table/chart understanding, and spatial and temporal
reasoning. It also covers a broad spectrum of characteristics found in multi-image
reasoning scenarios. We have benchmarked several cutting-edge LLMs using ReMI
and found a substantial gap between their performance and human-level proficiency.
This highlights the challenges in multi-image reasoning and the need for further
research. Our analysis also reveals the strengths and weaknesses of different
models, shedding light on the types of reasoning that are currently attainable and
areas where future models require improvement. To foster further research in
this area, we are open-sourcing ReMI: https://huggingface.co/datasets/
mehrankazemi/ReMI.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated an extraordinary evolution, not only in their
output quality but also in their burgeoning capabilities. A significant direction of development has
been models’ ability to perform increasingly general forms of reasoning that were previously not
possible. The emergence of these novel capabilities necessitates the development of robust evaluation
benchmarks and metrics to measure and enhance model performance in these specific areas.
The ability of LLMs to reason over text has improved in leaps and bounds, and has been studied
extensively [25, 49, 37]. More recent developments in multi-modal models has opened up a new
space of reasoning problems, moving toward the capability to reason across multiple, potentially
disparate, sources of information presented in various formats [38, 46, 1, 5, 24, 19, 28]. This
multi-modal reasoning capability has numerous applications, from complex problem-solving to
information synthesis. In this paper, we focus on a specific aspect of this capability: multi-image
reasoning. A large portion of the current benchmarks for multi-modal evaluation are based on a
single image [33, 34, 32, 20]. We address the lack of dedicated evaluation frameworks in this domain
by introducing a comprehensive benchmark designed to specifically assess and improve this skill in
LLMs. We focus specifically on reasoning problems where besides visual understanding, one needs
to find a step-by-step solution to a problem. This process often involves combining information across
text and multiple images – a skill that is currently not extensively evaluated in existing benchmarks.
This contribution aims to catalyze progress in multi-image reasoning, ultimately enabling LLMs
to better navigate and extract insights from the increasingly complex information landscape of our
digital world.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

