HuRef: HUman-REadable Fingerprint
for Large Language Models

Boyi Zeng1 , Lizheng Wang2 , Yuncong Hu2 , Yi Xu2
Chenghu Zhou3 , Xinbing Wang2 , Yu Yu2 , Zhouhan Lin1∗
1
LUMIA Lab, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 3 Chinese Academy of Sciences
boyizeng@sjtu.edu.cn ∗ lin.zhouhan@gmail.com

Abstract
Protecting the copyright of large language models (LLMs) has become crucial due
to their resource-intensive training and accompanying carefully designed licenses.
However, identifying the original base model of an LLM is challenging due to
potential parameter alterations. In this study, we introduce HuRef, a humanreadable fingerprint for LLMs that uniquely identifies the base model without
interfering with training or exposing model parameters to the public. We first
observe that the vector direction of LLM parameters remains stable after the model
has converged during pretraining, with negligible perturbations through subsequent
training steps, including continued pretraining, supervised fine-tuning, and RLHF,
which makes it a sufficient condition to identify the base model. The necessity
is validated by continuing to train an LLM with an extra term to drive away the
model parameters’ direction and the model becomes damaged. However, this
direction is vulnerable to simple attacks like dimension permutation or matrix
rotation, which significantly change it without affecting performance. To address
this, leveraging the Transformer structure, we systematically analyze potential
attacks and define three invariant terms that identify an LLM’s base model. Due to
the potential risk of information leakage, we cannot publish invariant terms directly.
Instead, we map them to a Gaussian vector using an encoder, then convert it into
a natural image using StyleGAN2, and finally publish the image. In our blackbox setting, all fingerprinting steps are internally conducted by the LLMs owners.
To ensure the published fingerprints are honestly generated, we introduced ZeroKnowledge Proof (ZKP). Experimental results across various LLMs demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method.1

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have become the foundation models in many scenarios of artificial
intelligence. As training an LLM from scratch consumes a huge amount of computation and data
resources and the trained LLM needs to be carefully protected from malicious use, the parameters
of the LLMs become a crucial property to protect, for both commercial and ethical reasons. As a
result, many of the LLMs are open-sourced with carefully designed licenses to reject commercial
use (Touvron et al., 2023a; Taylor et al., 2022) or requiring an apply-and-approval process (Touvron
et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2022; Penedo et al., 2023; BaiChuan-Inc, 2023; Team, 2023; Zheng et al.,
2023b), let alone some LLMs are not open-sourced entirely (OpenAI, 2022; GPT-4, 2023; Brown
et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2023b; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Hoffmann et al., 2022).
∗
1

Zhouhan Lin is the corresponding author.
The code is available at https://github.com/LUMIA-Group/HuRef.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

