Stopping Bayesian Optimization with
Probabilistic Regret Bounds

James T. Wilson
Morgan Stanley, New York, USA
james.t.wilson@morganstanley.com

Abstract
Bayesian optimization is a popular framework for efficiently tackling black-box
search problems. As a rule, these algorithms operate by iteratively choosing what
to evaluate next until some predefined budget has been exhausted. We investigate
replacing this de facto stopping rule with criteria based on the probability that a
point satisfies a given set of conditions. We focus on the prototypical example
of an (ϵ, δ)-criterion: stop when a solution has been found whose value is within
ϵ > 0 of the optimum with probability at least 1 − δ under the model. For Gaussian
process priors, we show that Bayesian optimization satisfies this criterion under
mild technical assumptions. Further, we give a practical algorithm for evaluating
Monte Carlo stopping rules in a manner that is both sample efficient and robust
to estimation error. These findings are accompanied by empirical results which
demonstrate the strengths and weaknesses of the proposed approach.

1

Introduction

In the real world, we are often interested in finding high-quality solutions to black-box problems.
Many of these problems are not only expensive to solve but difficult to reason about without extensive
background knowledge—such as discovering new chemicals [17], designing better experiments [48],
or configuring machine learning algorithms [42].
A common approach is therefore to construct models for these problems and use them to predict
real-world outcomes. In recent years, Bayesian optimization (BO) has emerged as a leading approach
for accomplishing these tasks. Precise definitions vary, but BO methods are frequently characterized
by their use of probabilistic models to guide the search for good solutions. The idea is for these
models to provide distributions over the performance of competing alternatives, which can then be
used to simulate the usefulness of evaluating different things. For a recent review, see Garnett [16].
Despite the success of these algorithms, an ongoing issue for practitioners has been the continued
lack of interpretable stopping rules. The vast majority of BO runs proceed until a predetermined
budget (e.g., a number of evaluations or amount of resources) is exhausted. We highlight two likely
reasons for this trend and then give a brief prospective for model-based alternatives. The first reason
is that stopping rules often revolve around quantities like optimums that are difficult to work with,
even when defined under a model. The second is that even the best models sometimes go astray; and,
if the model is bad, then model-based stopping is liable to stop much too soon or far too late. To
avoid potential disappointment, let us say upfront that this work addresses the former challenge and
only provides mild commentary on the latter. We will revisit this topic in the closing sections.
At the same time, we argue there is much to be gained by using models to help us decide whether a
given solution is “good-enough” for its intended purpose [40]. One benefit of model-based stopping
is its ability to adapt to the data. Sometimes, we will get lucky and stumble upon good solutions early
on. Other times, our progress will be slow. If the model captures these events, then stopping can
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

