Knowledge Circuits in Pretrained Transformers

Yunzhi Yao1 Ningyu Zhang1∗ Zekun Xi1 Mengru Wang1
Ziwen Xu1 Shumin Deng2 Huajun Chen1,3∗
1
Zhejiang University 2 National University of Singapore, NUS-NCS Joint Lab, Singapore
3
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Big Data Intelligent Computing
{yyztodd,zhangningyu}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
The remarkable capabilities of modern large language models are rooted in their
vast repositories of knowledge encoded within their parameters, enabling them
to perceive the world and engage in reasoning. The inner workings of how these
models store knowledge have long been a subject of intense interest and investigation among researchers. To date, most studies have concentrated on isolated
components within these models, such as the Multilayer Perceptrons and attention
head. In this paper, we delve into the computation graph of the language model
to uncover the knowledge circuits that are instrumental in articulating specific
knowledge. The experiments, conducted with GPT2 and TinyLLAMA, have allowed us to observe how certain information heads, relation heads, and Multilayer
Perceptrons collaboratively encode knowledge within the model. Moreover, we
evaluate the impact of current knowledge editing techniques on these knowledge
circuits, providing deeper insights into the functioning and constraints of these
editing methodologies. Finally, we utilize knowledge circuits to analyze and interpret language model behaviors such as hallucinations and in-context learning. We
believe the knowledge circuits hold potential for advancing our understanding of
Transformers and guiding the improved design of knowledge editing1 .

1

Introduction

“Knowledge is power, and when embodied in the form of new technical inventions and mechanical
discoveries it is the force that drives history.” [1, 2], Bacon’s words are vividly re-enacted in the
era of Large Language Models (LLMs) [3, 4], as we witness their immense power in reshaping
human society and redefining our understanding of machine intelligence. One thing that cannot be
denied is that knowledge encapsulated within these models empowers their capabilities in reasoning,
perceiving the world, and engaging in human-like communication. Nevertheless, these powerful
models are not without their flaws. They still struggle with issues such as hallucinations [5–7], unsafe
norms [8, 9], and offensive behaviors [10, 11] and these problems are exacerbated by the enigmatic
internal mechanisms of knowledge storage within language models.
Recently, the research community has devoted significant efforts to unraveling the knowledge storage
mechanisms of these models. Various studies [12–19] have been conducted to shed light on this
intricate process, aiming to enhance our understanding and improve the safety and reliability of
language models. The main finding in previous work is that knowledge may primarily stored in the
Multilayer Perceptrons (MLPs) of Transformer-based language models. These MLPs function as
a key-value neural memory, with knowledge being stored in what are termed “knowledge neurons”
(KN). Based on these findings, researchers conduct Knowledge Editing [18, 20] to update the
language models’ inaccurate facts, bias and unsafe content in their parametric space. Despite the
∗
1

Corresponding Author.
Code and data are available in https://github.com/zjunlp/KnowledgeCircuits.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

