WaterMax: breaking the LLM watermark
detectability-robustness-quality trade-off

Eva Giboulot
Inria, CNRS, IRISA
University of Rennes
Rennes, France
eva.giboulot@inria.fr

Teddy Furon
Inria, CNRS, IRISA
University of Rennes
Rennes, France
teddy.furon@inria.fr

Abstract
Watermarking is a technical means to dissuade malfeasant usage of Large Language
Models. This paper proposes a novel watermarking scheme, so-called WaterMax,
that enjoys high detectability while sustaining the quality of the generated text
of the original LLM. Its new design leaves the LLM untouched (no modification
of the weights, logits, temperature, or sampling technique). WaterMax balances
robustness and complexity contrary to the watermarking techniques of the literature
inherently provoking a trade-off between quality and robustness. Its performance
is both theoretically proven and experimentally validated. It outperforms all the
SotA techniques under the most complete benchmark suite.

1

Introduction

The availability of powerful large-language models (LLMs) allows users to produce texts that look
like human writings. The risk for misuse of these models is critical, ranging from the impersonation
of individuals to the large-scale generation of fake news. Identifying the provenance of a given
piece of text is paramount to limit the impact of such ‘weaponization’ of LLMs. New initiatives or
regulations impose technical means for AI traceability [28, 9, 5].
Forensics passive methods generally leverage a priori knowledge about the statistics of texts generated
by a given class of LLMs [34, 27]. Despite their versatility, these methods offer low performance.
The reported probabilities of errors are only validated empirically on some datasets, and because of
this, they are never lower than 10−3 [14].
In contrast, active methods like watermarking are only limited by the fact the LLM owner must integrate the watermarking within the generation processes. This is done by embedding an imperceptible
signal in the generated text, which can be retrieved by a detector sharing the secret key of the model
owner. Current watermarking methods for generative texts [22, 1, 23, 8] provide low and guaranteed
false positives rates. Yet, the trade-off between the detectability and the text quality crucially depends
on the entropy of the text to be generated, which in turn depends on the prompt and the LLM, as
illustrated in Fig. 1. This implies that the distortion-free property [1, 23, 8] ensures that watermarking
does not degrade text quality but inherently limits the detectability.
This paper presents WaterMax, a watermarking technique that trades off robustness not for quality,
but for complexity. It obeys the regular constraints found in the literature: it can be integrated into
any standard LLM without fine-tuning the weights, the detection does not need the original LLM,
and it can spot the watermark on a slice of generated text with some guarantee on the false positive
rate. Our contributions are the following:
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

