Fearless Stochasticity in Expectation Propagation

Jonathan So
University of Cambridge
js2488@cam.ac.uk

Richard E. Turner
University of Cambridge
The Alan Turing Institute

Abstract
Expectation propagation (EP) is a family of algorithms for performing approximate inference in probabilistic models. The updates of EP involve the evaluation
of moments—expectations of certain functions—which can be estimated from
Monte Carlo (MC) samples. However, the updates are not robust to MC noise
when performed naively, and various prior works have attempted to address this
issue in different ways. In this work, we provide a novel perspective on the
moment-matching updates of EP; namely, that they perform natural-gradient-based
optimisation of a variational objective. We use this insight to motivate two new
EP variants, with updates that are particularly well-suited to MC estimation. They
remain stable and are most sample-efficient when estimated with just a single sample. These new variants combine the benefits of their predecessors and address key
weaknesses. In particular, they are easier to tune, offer an improved speed-accuracy
trade-off, and do not rely on the use of debiasing estimators. We demonstrate their
efficacy on a variety of probabilistic inference tasks.

1

Introduction

Expectation propagation (EP) [37, 40] is a family of algorithms that is primarily used for performing
approximate inference in probabilistic models [9, 10, 12, 13, 16, 18, 20, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 28,
29, 30, 32, 35, 36, 38, 39, 41, 44, 47, 48, 50, 52, 53], although it can be used more generally for
approximating certain kinds of functions and their integrals [14].
EP involves the evaluation of moments—expectations of certain functions—under distributions that
are derived from the model of interest. EP is usually applied to models for which these moments
have convenient closed-form expressions or can be accurately estimated using deterministic methods.
Moments can also be estimated using Monte Carlo (MC) samples, significantly expanding the set of
models EP can be applied to. However, the updates of EP are not robust to MC noise when performed
naively, and various prior works have attempted to address this issue in different ways [17, 48, 52].
In this work we provide a novel perspective on the moment-matching updates of EP; namely, that
they perform natural-gradient-based optimization of a variational objective (Section 3). We use this
insight to motivate two new EP variants, EP-η (Section 3.2) and EP-µ (Section 3.3), with updates that
are particularly well-suited to MC estimation, remaining stable and being most sample-efficient when
estimated with just a single sample. These new variants combine the benefits of their predecessors
and address key weaknesses. In particular, they are easier to tune, offer an improved speed-accuracy
trade-off, and do not rely on the use of debiasing estimators. We demonstrate their efficacy on a
variety of probabilistic inference tasks (Section 4).

2

Background

In this section, we first introduce the problem setting. We then give an overview of EP, followed by a
discussion of issues related to sampled estimation of EP updates.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

