Exploring Adversarial Robustness of Deep State
Space Models
Biqing Qi1,2 , Yiang Luo3 , Junqi Gao4,∗, Pengfei Li4 , Kai Tian1 , Zhiyuan Ma1 , Bowen Zhou1,2,∗
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University,
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,
3
Department of Control Science and Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology,
4
School of Mathematics, Harbin Institute of Technology
{qibiqing7,normanluo668,gjunqi97,lipengfei0208}@gmail.com,
tiankaidyx@163.com, {mzyth,zhoubowen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep State Space Models (SSMs) have proven effective in numerous task scenarios but face significant security challenges due to Adversarial Perturbations (APs)
in real-world deployments. Adversarial Training (AT) is a mainstream approach
to enhancing Adversarial Robustness (AR) and has been validated on various traditional DNN architectures. However, its effectiveness in improving the AR of
SSMs remains unclear. While many enhancements in SSM components, such
as integrating Attention mechanisms and expanding to data-dependent SSM parameterizations, have brought significant gains in Standard Training (ST) settings,
their potential benefits in AT remain unexplored. To investigate this, we evaluate existing structural variants of SSMs with AT to assess their AR performance.
We observe that pure SSM structures struggle to benefit from AT, whereas incorporating Attention yields a markedly better trade-off between robustness and
generalization for SSMs in AT compared to other components. Nonetheless, the
integration of Attention also leads to Robust Overfitting (RO) issues. To understand these phenomena, we empirically and theoretically analyze the output error of SSMs under AP. We find that fixed-parameterized SSMs have output error
bounds strictly related to their parameters, limiting their AT benefits, while inputdependent SSMs may face the problem of error explosion. Furthermore, we show
that the Attention component effectively scales the output error of SSMs during
training, enabling them to benefit more from AT, but at the cost of introducing
RO due to its high model complexity. Inspired by this, we propose a simple and
effective Adaptive Scaling (AdS) mechanism that brings AT performance close
to Attention-integrated SSMs without introducing the issue of RO. Our code is
available at Robustness-of-SSM.

1

Introduction

Deep State Space Models (SSMs) represent a promising emerging model architecture inspired by
traditional linear state space models [1]. These models capture temporal dependencies in sequences
via structured state space transitions [2, 3, 4]. By leveraging their inherent recurrent nature and
linear discretized transmission form, SSMs excel in long-sequence modeling with linear computational complexity [3, 5]. This makes SSMs highly competitive in various downstream tasks, with the
potential to surpass classical architectures like convolutional networks and Transformers [6, 7, 8].
While the superior performance of SSMs on clean data has been well established across various
tasks, these models may face significant security risks from meticulously crafted Adversarial Perturbations (APs) [9, 10, 11, 12, 13]in real-world scenarios. Therefore, it is essential to thoroughly
explore and discuss the Adversarial Robustness (AR) of SSMs. Previous work [14] has conducted
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

