EM Distillation for One-step Diffusion Models

Sirui Xie1,2,3 Zhisheng Xiao2 Diederik P. Kingma1 Tingbo Hou2
Ying Nian Wu3 Kevin Murphy1 Tim Salimans1 Ben Poole1 Ruiqi Gao1
1
2
3
Google DeepMind
Google Research
UCLA

Abstract
While diffusion models can learn complex distributions, sampling requires a computationally expensive iterative process. Existing distillation methods enable efficient
sampling, but have notable limitations, such as performance degradation with very
few sampling steps, reliance on training data access, or mode-seeking optimization
that may fail to capture the full distribution. We propose EM Distillation (EMD), a
maximum likelihood-based approach that distills a diffusion model to a one-step
generator model with minimal loss of perceptual quality. Our approach is derived
through the lens of Expectation-Maximization (EM), where the generator parameters are updated using samples from the joint distribution of the diffusion teacher
prior and inferred generator latents. We develop a reparametrized sampling scheme
and a noise cancellation technique that together stabilize the distillation process.
We further reveal an interesting connection of our method with existing methods
that minimize mode-seeking KL. EMD outperforms existing one-step generative
methods in terms of FID scores on ImageNet-64 and ImageNet-128, and compares
favorably with prior work on distilling text-to-image diffusion models.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [1–3] have enabled high-quality generation of images [4–6], videos [7, 8], and
other modalities [9–11]. Diffusion models use a forward process to create a sequence of distributions
that transform the complex data distribution into a Gaussian distribution, and learn the score function
for each of these intermediate distributions. Sampling from a diffusion model reverses this forward
process to create data from random noise by solving an SDE, or an equivalent probability flow
ODE [12]. Typically, solving this differential equation requires a significant number of evaluations
of the score function, resulting in a high computational cost. Reducing this cost to single function
evaluation would enable applications in real-time generation.
To enable efficient sampling from diffusion models, two distinct approaches have emerged: (1)
trajectory distillation methods [13–18] that accelerate solving the differential equation, and (2)
distribution matching approaches [19–23] that learn implicit generators to match the marginals
learned by the diffusion model. Trajectory distillation-based approaches have greatly reduced the
number of steps required to produce samples, but continue to face challenges in the 1-step generation
regime. Distribution matching approaches can enable the use of arbitrary generators and produce
more compelling results in the 1-step regime, but often fail to capture the full distribution due to the
mode-seeking nature of the divergences they minimize.
In this paper, we propose EM Distillation (EMD), a diffusion distillation method that minimizes an
approximation of the mode-covering divergence between a pre-trained diffusion teacher model and a
latent-variable student model. The student enables efficient generation by mapping from noise to
data in just one step. To achieve Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) of the marginal teacher
distribution for the student, we propose a method similar to the Expectation-Maximization (EM)
framework [24], which alternates between an Expectation-step (E-step) that estimates the learning
gradients with Monte Carlo samples, and a Maximization-step (M-step) that updates the student
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

