QBB: Quantization with Binary Bases for LLMs

1

Adrian Bulat1,2 Yassine Ouali1 Georgios Tzimiropoulos1,3
Samsung AI Cambridge 2 Technical University of Iasi 3 Queen Mary University of London

Abstract
Current post-training quantization methods for LLMs compress the weights down
to 4-bits, with moderate to low degradation in accuracy. However, further reducing
the number of bits or accelerating the network while avoiding large accuracy drops,
especially for smaller, sub 7B models, remains an actively researched and open
problem. To address this, in this work, we introduce Quantization with Binary
Bases (QBB), a new approach for low-bit quantization that effectively removes
(nearly) all multiplications, reducing the implementation to summations. Our novel
approach works by decomposing the original weights into a set of binary (1-bit)
matrices using an iterative process. For a given layer, starting from a weight matrix,
we first construct an initial approximation using an analytical solution, where each
new binary matrix, paired with a scaling vector, approximates the residual error
of the previous estimation. Secondly, using gradient descent and a progressive
learning curriculum, we find the optimal set of binary matrices and scaling vectors
that minimize the ℓ2 distance between the produced approximation and original
weights. Thirdly, as previous steps are input agnostic, we holistically optimize the
scaling vectors alone, calibrating them in student-teacher fashion, with the teacher
providing both the data, by autoregressive generation starting from a random token,
and the target logits. When evaluated across multiple LLM families, our approach
matches and outperforms all prior works, setting a new state-of-the-art result using
a summation-only based approach.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) demonstrated proficiency in natural language understanding and
generation across multiple domains, exhibiting strong in-context learning abilities [3; 52; 53]. This
remarkable performance can be in part attributed to the ever-increasing model and dataset sizes [25;
9], with the current generation of models being trained on Trillion-sized (tokens) datasets [53],
using Billions of parameters [53; 24; 29]. This, in turn, made deploying such models, even on
consumer-grade GPUs, problematic. A promising and flexible direction that disentangles the training
and the deployment process, while being hardware friendly, is given by post-training and/or datafree quantization [16; 32; 48]. Within this area, current methods have successfully achieved 4×
compression (i.e. 4-bit quantization) with small drops in accuracy [16; 7; 32], especially for larger
(7B+) models. However, compressing the model further and/or applying said methods to smaller
models yields unsatisfactory results [16; 32]. Importantly, on the inference side, this class of PTQ
approaches replaces 16b multiplications with mixed-precision (i.e., 16b-4b) ones, which have limited
hardware support and rely on software-based solutions. Our aim is to alleviate these limitations,
enabling higher compression rates while removing (nearly) all multiplications.
To this end, departing from prior work, we focus on the most extreme case of quantization, that of
binarization (which, as we will show, enables us to remove costly multiplications). As binarizing the
weights directly, without retraining, results in unsatisfactory performance, we propose to approximate
the weights W using a set of binary matrices Bi , i ∈ {1, ..., N } with corresponding fp16 scaling
vectors αi . The main case of interest studied is that of N = 4. We note that binarising the weights
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

