Symmetries in Overparametrized Neural Networks:
A Mean-Field View
Javier Maass Martínez
Center for Mathematical Modeling
University of Chile
javier.maass@gmail.com

Joaquín Fontbona
Center for Mathematical Modeling
University of Chile
fontbona@dim.uchile.cl

Abstract
We develop a Mean-Field (MF) view of the learning dynamics of overparametrized
Artificial Neural Networks (NN) under distributional symmetries of the data w.r.t.
the action of a general compact group G. We consider for this a class of generalized
shallow NNs given by an ensemble of N multi-layer units, jointly trained using
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and possibly symmetry-leveraging (SL) techniques, such as Data Augmentation (DA), Feature Averaging (FA) or Equivariant
Architectures (EA). We introduce the notions of weakly and strongly invariant laws
(WI and SI) on the parameter space of each single unit, corresponding, respectively,
to G-invariant distributions, and to distributions supported on parameters fixed by
the group action (which encode EA). This allows us to define symmetric models
compatible with taking N → ∞ and give an interpretation of the asymptotic dynamics of DA, FA and EA in terms of Wasserstein Gradient Flows describing their
MF limits. When activations respect the group action, we show that, for symmetric
data, DA, FA and freely-trained models obey the exact same MF dynamic, which
stays in the space of WI parameter laws and attains therein the population risk’s
minimizer. We also provide a counterexample to the general attainability of such an
optimum over SI laws. Despite this, and quite remarkably, we show that the space
of SI laws is also preserved by these MF distributional dynamics even when freely
trained. This sharply contrasts the finite-N setting, in which EAs are generally
not preserved by unconstrained SGD. We illustrate the validity of our findings as
N gets larger, in a teacher-student experimental setting, training a student NN to
learn from a WI, SI or arbitrary teacher model through various SL schemes. We
lastly deduce a data-driven heuristic to discover the largest subspace of parameters
supporting SI distributions for a problem, that could be used for designing EA with
minimal generalization error.

1

Introduction

Learning in complex tasks, employing ever larger datasets, has strongly benefited from the implementation and training of Artificial Neural Networks (NN) with a huge number of parameters; as well as
from training schemes or architectures that can leverage underlying symmetries of the data in order
to reduce the problem’s complexity (see [33, 34] for general reference). This raises questions, on one
hand, of understanding the puzzling generalizability in overparametrized NN; and on the other, of
when and how symmetry-leveraging (SL) techniques (such as Data Augmentation, Feature Averaging
or Equivariant Architectures), can induce useful biases towards learning with symmetries, without
hindering approximation and generalization properties. The recent Mean-Field (MF) theory of NN
(see [16] and further references below) provides a partial, yet promissory, viewpoint to address the
first question for shallow NN: in the Mean-Field Limit (MFL) of an infinitely wide hidden layer,
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) training dynamics approximates the Wasserstein Gradient Flow
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

