Limits of Transformer Language Models
on Learning to Compose Algorithms

Jonathan Thomm1,2∗
Giacomo Camposampiero1,2
jthomm@ethz.ch
giacomo.camposampiero1@ibm.com

Aleksandar Terzic1,2
aleksandar.terzic1@ibm.com

Michael Hersche1

Bernhard Schölkopf2,3

Abbas Rahimi1

michael.hersche@ibm.com

bs@tuebingen.mpg.de

abr@zurich.ibm.com

1

IBM Research – Zurich, 2 ETH Zurich, 3 MPI Tübingen

Abstract
We analyze the capabilities of Transformer language models in learning compositional discrete tasks. To this end, we evaluate training LLaMA models and
prompting GPT-4 and Gemini on four tasks demanding to learn a composition
of several discrete sub-tasks. In particular, we measure how well these models can reuse primitives observable in the sub-tasks to learn the composition
task. Our results indicate that compositional learning in state-of-the-art Transformer language models is highly sample inefficient: LLaMA requires more data
samples than relearning all sub-tasks from scratch to learn the compositional
task; in-context prompting with few samples is unreliable and fails at executing
the sub-tasks or correcting the errors in multi-round code generation. Further,
by leveraging complexity theory, we support these findings with a theoretical
analysis focused on the sample inefficiency of gradient descent in memorizing
feedforward models. We open source our code at https://github.com/IBM/
limitations-lm-algorithmic-compositional-learning.

1

Introduction

While Large Language Models (LLMs) are known to perform well on natural language generation
tasks [1, 2], they exhibit failures on reasoning [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10], mathematics [11, 12], causal
inference [13, 14, 15], and algorithmic tasks [16, 17, 18]. Many interesting algorithmic tasks rely
on function composition, which is an act of combining simple functions (e.g., primitive sub-tasks)
to build more complicated ones. In this paper, we dive into the question of how sample-efficient
Transformer-based [19] language models are when learning to compose as well as to decompose
algorithmic procedures. We empirically approach the aforementioned question by analyzing the
performance of Transformer language models on a set of compositional algorithmic tasks. Given that
a Transformer language model has enough samples to learn all primitive sub-tasks, we define four
hypotheses on how well it learns the composition task within the same training routine:
H1 . A Transformer language model learns the task composition with a constant number of samples
(only used in the in-context learning setting).
H2 . A Transformer language model learns a compositional task with fewer samples than those
required to learn its most difficult sub-task.
∗

Research conducted at IBM Research – Zurich.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

