The Benefits of Balance:
From Information Projections to Variance Reduction

Lang Liu∗

Ronak Mehta∗

Soumik Pal

Zaid Harchaoui

University of Washington

Abstract
Data balancing across multiple modalities and sources appears in various forms in
foundation models in machine learning and AI, e.g. in CLIP and DINO. We show
that data balancing across modalities and sources actually offers an unsuspected
benefit: variance reduction. We present a non-asymptotic statistical bound that
quantifies this variance reduction effect and relates it to the eigenvalue decay of
Markov operators. Furthermore, we describe how various forms of data balancing
in contrastive multimodal learning and self-supervised clustering can be better
understood, and even improved upon, owing to our variance reduction viewpoint.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have shown remarkable success at learning task-specific representations of
data when provided supervision from massive amounts of labeled training examples. Recent trends,
however, have shifted toward task-agnostic, universal representations that may be easily fine-tuned or
even have zero-shot capabilities out of the box. Supervised learning, stricto sensu, is too limited a
framework for these billion-parameter, data-hungry models, and a question at the heart of modern
machine learning is learning from unlabeled, partially labeled, or weakly labeled data.
This need has paved the way for the current generation of self-supervised learning (SSL) approaches
that circumvent the need for large amounts of “strong” labels. In SSL, a model is trained on a generic
pseudo-task suited for unlabeled data, such as relating image-caption pairs or augmentations of
the same image. Despite modern foundation models such as DINO [Caron et al., 2021] and CLIP
[Radford et al., 2021] being trained in this fashion, many aspects of SSL remain mysterious.
In particular, the training process of self-supervised models often transcends the rules of the standard
empirical risk minimization (ERM) toolkit. ERM combines two well-understood techniques: minibatch sampling and gradient-based optimization using backpropagation. On the other hand, SSL adds
clever, yet less-understood techniques to the training pipeline. To illustrate this, consider a minibatch
of independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) training examples (X1 , Y1 ), . . . , (Xn , Yn ) ∼ P ,
where P is a joint probability
Pn measure on sample spaces X × Y (e.g. feature-label or image-caption
pairs) and let Pn = n1 i=1 δ(Xi ,Yi ) be the empirical distribution. For a model parameterized by
θ ∈ Rd with loss function hθ , a stochastic learning algorithm involves computing the minibatch loss
n

EPn [hθ (X, Y )] =

1X
hθ (Xi , Yi )
n i=1

(1)

and backpropagating through it to produce a minibatch stochastic gradient estimate. The algorithm
then proceeds with the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) or a variant thereof (e.g., Adam, SGD with
momentum, etc). Self-supervised methods often modify this recipe by intervening on the optimization
algorithm in a minibatch-specific way.
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

