Chimera: Effectively Modeling Multivariate Time
Series with 2-Dimensional State Space Models

Ali Behrouz
Cornell University
ab2947@cornell.edu

Michele Santacatterina
New York University
santam13@nyu.edu

Ramin Zabih
Cornell University
rdz@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Modeling multivariate time series is a well-established problem with a wide range
of applications from healthcare to financial markets. It, however, is challenging as
it requires methods to (1) have high expressive power of representing complicated
dependencies along the time axis to capture both long-term progression and seasonal patterns, (2) capture the inter-variate dependencies when it is informative, (3)
dynamically model the dependencies of variate and time dimensions, and (4) have
efficient training and inference for very long sequences. Traditional State Space
Models (SSMs) are classical approaches for univariate time series modeling due
to their simplicity and expressive power to represent linear dependencies. They,
however, have fundamentally limited expressive power to capture non-linear dependencies, are slow in practice, and fail to model the inter-variate information flow.
Despite recent attempts to improve the expressive power of SSMs by using deep
structured SSMs, the existing methods are either limited to univariate time series,
fail to model complex patterns (e.g., seasonal patterns), fail to dynamically model
the dependencies of variate and time dimensions, and/or are input-independent. We
present Chimera, an expressive variation of the 2-dimensional SSMs with careful
design of parameters to maintain high expressive power while keeping the training
complexity linear. Using two SSM heads with different discretization processes
and input-dependent parameters, Chimera is provably able to learn long-term progression, seasonal patterns, and desirable dynamic autoregressive processes. To
improve the efficiency of complex 2D recurrence, we present a fast training using a
new 2-dimensional parallel selective scan. Our experimental evaluation shows the
superior performance of Chimera on extensive and diverse benchmarks, including
ECG and speech time series classification, long-term and short-term time series
forecasting, and time series anomaly detection.

1

Introduction

Modeling time series is a well-established problem with a wide range of applications from healthcare [1–3] to financial markets [4, 5] and energy management [6]. The complex nature of time series
data, its diverse domains of applicability, and its broad range of tasks (e.g., classification [2, 7],
imputation [8, 9], anomaly detection [2, 10], and forecasting [6]), however, raise fundamental challenges to design effective and generalizable models: (1) The higher-order, seasonal, and long-term
patterns in time series require an effective model to be able to expressively capture complex and
autoregressive dependencies; (2) In the presence of multiple variates of time series, an effective
model need to capture the complex dynamics of the dependencies between time and variate axes.
More specifically, most existing multivariate models seem to suffer from overfitting especially when
the target time series is not correlated with other covariates [11]. Accordingly, an effective model
needs to adaptively learn to select (resp. filter) informative (resp. irrelevant) variates; (3) The diverse
set of domains and tasks requires effective models to be free of manual pre-processing and domain
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

