End-to-End Video Semantic Segmentation in Adverse
Weather using Fusion Blocks and Temporal-Spatial
Teacher-Student Learning

Xin Yang1

Yan Wending2 Michael Bi Mi2 Yuan Yuan2 Robby T. Tan1
1
National University of Singapore
2
Huawei International Pte Ltd
e0674612@u.nus.edu , yan.wending@huawei.com , michaelbimi@yahoo.com ,
yuanyuan10@huawei.com , robby.tan@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Adverse weather conditions can significantly degrade video frames, leading to erroneous predictions by current video semantic segmentation methods. Furthermore,
these methods rely on accurate optical flows, which become unreliable under adverse weather. To address this issue, we introduce the novelty of our approach: the
first end-to-end, optical-flow-free, domain-adaptive video semantic segmentation
method. This is accomplished by enforcing the model to actively exploit the temporal information from adjacent frames through a fusion block and temporal-spatial
teachers. The key idea of our fusion block is to offer the model a way to merge
information from consecutive frames by matching and merging relevant pixels
from those frames. The basic idea of our temporal-spatial teachers involves two
teachers: one dedicated to exploring temporal information from adjacent frames,
the other harnesses spatial information from the current frame and assists the
temporal teacher. Finally, we apply temporal weather degradation augmentation
to consecutive frames to more accurately represent adverse weather degradations.
Our method achieves a performance of 25.4% and 33.0% mIoU on the adaptation
from VIPER [28] and Synthia [29] to MVSS [18], respectively, representing an
improvement of 4.3% and 5.8% mIoU over the existing state-of-the-art method.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is gaining attention in video semantic segmentation, offering
a solution to the challenge of annotations by adapting models from labeled synthetic datasets to
unlabeled real-world scenarios. However, existing video-based UDA methods often falter under
the assumption of ideal conditions, neglecting the drastic impact of adverse weather conditions like
nighttime and fog. These weather conditions can lead to significant degradation in video quality and
result in inaccurate predictions.
The existing UDA methods often rely on two components: pretrained optical flow and pseudolabels, where the optical flow is used to warp adjacent frames, and the pseudo-labels are used for
unsupervised training on the target domain [10, 30, 36, 24, 9]. However, when it comes to adverse
weather conditions, the reliability of these components diminishes for two main reasons. Firstly,
adverse weather conditions introduce significant degradation in low-level features, including issues
such as noise and glare effects during nighttime, as well as occlusions in rainy and foggy conditions.
Since existing methods are not inherently designed to handle such low-level degradations, they can
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

