Semantic Density: Uncertainty Quantification for
Large Language Models through
Confidence Measurement in Semantic Space

Xin Qiu
Cognizant AI Labs
San Francisco, USA
qiuxin.nju@gmail.com

Risto Miikkulainen
Cognizant AI Labs, San Francisco, USA
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, USA
risto@cognizant.com

Abstract
With the widespread application of Large Language Models (LLMs) to various domains, concerns regarding the trustworthiness of LLMs in safety-critical scenarios have been raised, due
to their unpredictable tendency to hallucinate and generate misinformation. Existing LLMs do
not have an inherent functionality to provide the users with an uncertainty/confidence metric
for each response it generates, making it difficult to evaluate trustworthiness. Although several
studies aim to develop uncertainty quantification methods for LLMs, they have fundamental
limitations, such as being restricted to classification tasks, requiring additional training and
data, considering only lexical instead of semantic information, and being prompt-wise but not
response-wise. A new framework is proposed in this paper to address these issues. Semantic
density extracts uncertainty/confidence information for each response from a probability distribution perspective in semantic space. It has no restriction on task types and is "off-the-shelf" for
new models and tasks. Experiments on seven state-of-the-art LLMs, including the latest Llama
3 and Mixtral-8x22B models, on four free-form question-answering benchmarks demonstrate
the superior performance and robustness of semantic density compared to prior approaches.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have revolutionalized many domains, such as conversational agents
[34], code generation [41], and mathematical discovery [39]. Given their ability for general reasoning
and adaptability to new tasks, LLMs are utilized increasingly in safety-critical applications, including
healthcare [42] and finance [50]. However, existing LLMs have an unpredictable tendency to
hallucinate [30], leading to misleading information and risky behaviors. Responses are generated
without quantitative indicators for their uncertainty/confidence, making it difficult to evaluate how
trustworthy they are. As a result, concerns have been raised about their safety [54], hindering a deeper
utilization of LLMs in risk-sensitive domains [5].
Although significant resources have been invested in LLM development, leading to a rapid pace
in new model releases, only little progress has been made in building an uncertainty quantification
framework for LLMs. An ideal outcome of such a system would be a quantitative metric associated
with each response that can be used as an uncertainty/confidence indicator. Users can then build on
this metric to evaluate the trustworthiness of LLM responses, e.g., establish an automatic system that
triggers a warning if the response confidence is below a pre-defined threshold.
Following this line of thought, several techniques have been proposed in the literature to extract the
uncertainty/confidence score from LLMs. In addition to the baselines that directly ask the LLM
itself to evaluate its own answers [44, 21], one further step was to integrate traditional uncertainty
estimation/calibration methods into LLMs [6, 51, 53]. However, due to the nature of these traditional
methods, they only work on classification problems, not free-form natural language generation (NLG)
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

