SGD vs GD: Rank Deficiency in Linear Networks

Aditya Varre
EPFL
aditya.varre@epfl.ch

Margarita Sagitova
EPFL
margarita.sagitova@epfl.ch

Nicolas Flammarion
EPFL
nicolas.flammarion@epfl.ch

Abstract
In this article, we study the behaviour of continuous-time gradient methods on a
two-layer linear network with square loss. A dichotomy between SGD and GD is
revealed: GD preserves the rank at initialization while (label noise) SGD diminishes
the rank regardless of the initialization. We demonstrate this rank deficiency by
studying the time evolution of the determinant of a matrix of parameters. To further
understand this phenomenon, we derive the stochastic differential equation (SDE)
governing the eigenvalues of the parameter matrix. This SDE unveils a replusive
force between the eigenvalues: a key regularization mechanism which induces
rank deficiency. Our results are well supported by experiments illustrating the
phenomenon beyond linear networks and regression tasks.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have significantly advanced machine learning in recent decades. A key attribute
of these models is their ability, despite being heavily overparameterized, to learn effective representations which generalizes well across different tasks. This capability has sparked substantial interest in
understanding how neural networks learn internal representations for specific tasks [Bengio et al.,
2013]. Gaining deeper insights into these mechanisms is crucial for enhancing model interpretability
and refining training and application methodologies in real-world scenarios.
The success in learning these representations is often attributed to the gradient methods used in
training. These methods navigate complex non-convex landscapes, finding solutions that not only
minimize the training objective but also yield effective representations. They achieve this generalization while avoiding the spurious features that could potentially arise from the models’ large number
of parameters. Empirical studies have shown that the stochastic noise in gradient algorithms enhances generalization [Keskar et al., 2017] by favoring solutions with simpler structures that mitigate
spurious features [Andriushchenko et al., 2022]. This paper address the overarching question:
How does stochasticity facilitate the discovery of solutions with simplified structures?
We explore this question using a simplified model: a single hidden-layer linear network. Despite
lacking non-linearity, such networks capture some intricate phenomena of real-world deep networks
and have been extensively studied to understand convergence [Arora et al., 2019a, Min et al., 2021],
learning dynamics [Saxe et al., 2014], and the implicit bias of optimization algorithms [Gunasekar
et al., 2017, Soudry et al., 2018]. Our work builds on this foundation by comparing stochastic
algorithms with their deterministic counterparts, focusing on how these differences influence the
learning of simpler structures.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

