Bayesian Strategic Classification

Lee Cohen1

Saeed Sharifi-Malvajerdi2

Kevin Stangl2

Ali Vakilian2

Juba Ziani3

Abstract
In strategic classification, agents modify their features, at a cost, to obtain a positive
classification outcome from the learner’s classifier, typically assuming agents
have full knowledge of the deployed classifier. In contrast, we consider a Bayesian
setting where agents have a common distributional prior on the classifier being used
and agents manipulate their features to maximize their expected utility according to
this prior. The learner can reveal truthful, yet not necessarily complete, information
about the classifier to the agents, aiming to release just enough information to
shape the agents’ behavior and thus maximize accuracy. We show that partial
information release can counter-intuitively benefit the learner’s accuracy, allowing
qualified agents to pass the classifier while preventing unqualified agents from
doing so. Despite the intractability of computing the best response of an agent in
the general case, we provide oracle-efficient algorithms for scenarios where the
learner’s hypothesis class consists of low-dimensional linear classifiers or when the
agents’ cost function satisfies a sub-modularity condition. Additionally, we address
the learner’s optimization problem, offering both positive and negative results
on determining the optimal information release to maximize expected accuracy,
particularly in settings where an agent’s qualification can be represented by a
real-valued number.

1

Introduction

Machine Learning critically relies on the assumption that the training data is representative of the
unseen instances a learner faces at test time. Yet, in many real-life situations, this assumption
fails when individuals (agents) manipulate decision-making algorithms for personal advantage, by
modifying their features at a cost. A typical example of such manipulations or strategic behavior
is seen in loan applications or credit scoring: for example, an individual may open new credit card
accounts to lower their credit utilization and increase their credit score artificially. In the context of
job interviews, a candidate can spend time and effort to memorize solutions to common interview
questions and potentially look more qualified than they are at the time of an interview. A student
might cram to pass an exam this way without actually understanding or improving their knowledge
of the subject.
The prevalence of such behaviors has led to the rise of an area of research known as strategic
classification. Strategic classification, introduced by Hardt et al. [2016], aims to understand how a
learner can optimally modify decision making algorithms to be robust to such strategic manipulations
of agents, if and when possible.
Most of the strategic classification literature makes the assumption that the model deployed by the
learner is fully observable by the agents, granting them the ability to optimally best respond to the
learner using resources such as effort, time, and money. Yet, this full information assumption can
be unrealistic in practice. There are several reasons for this: some machine learning models are
1

Stanford University. Email: leeco@stanford.edu
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago (TTIC). Email: saeed@ttic.edu, kevin@ttic.edu, vakilian@ttic.edu
3
Georgia Institute of Technology. Email: jziani3@gatech.edu
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

