SDformer: Similarity-driven Discrete Transformer For
Time Series Generation
Zhicheng Chen1,2,† , Shibo Feng3 , Zhong Zhang2 , Xi Xiao1,4,∗ , Xingyu Gao5 , Peilin Zhao2,∗
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Tencent AI Lab
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
4

Key Laboratory of Data Protection and Intelligent Management (Sichuan University), Ministry of Education
5

Institute of Microelectronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{czc22@mails,xiaox@sz}.tsinghua.edu.cn, shibo001@ntu.edu.sg,
gaoxingyu@ime.ac.cn, {todzhang, masonzhao}@tencent.com

Abstract
The superior generation capabilities of Denoised Diffusion Probabilistic Models
(DDPMs) have been effectively showcased across a multitude of domains. Recently, the application of DDPMs has extended to time series generation tasks,
where they have significantly outperformed other deep generative models, often
by a substantial margin. However, we have discovered two main challenges with
these methods: 1) the inference time is excessively long; 2) there is potential for
improvement in the quality of the generated time series. In this paper, we propose
a method based on discrete token modeling technique called Similarity-driven Discrete Transformer (SDformer). Specifically, SDformer utilizes a similarity-driven
vector quantization method for learning high-quality discrete token representations
of time series, followed by a discrete Transformer for data distribution modeling at
the token level. Comprehensive experiments show that our method significantly
outperforms competing approaches in terms of the generated time series quality
while also ensuring a short inference time. Furthermore, without requiring retraining, SDformer can be directly applied to predictive tasks and still achieve
commendable results.

1

Introduction

Time series data is prevalent across a wide array of real-world applications, spanning fields such as
finance [22, 9, 38, 36], healthcare [27], energy [28, 21, 12, 13], retail [20, 45], and climate science
[35] . Despite its significance, the limited availability of dynamic data can pose a significant barrier
to the development of machine learning solutions, particularly in scenarios where data sharing could
lead to privacy violations [2]. The generation of synthetic yet realistic time series data has emerged
as a promising alternative, garnering increased interest due to recent advancements in deep learning
techniques.
Existing works on time series generation (TSG) is mainly based on common deep generative models,
such as methods based on generative adversarial networks (GAN) [24, 11, 39, 37, 26, 16, 17] and
methods based on Variational Autoencoders (VAE) [7, 25]. Currently holding state-of-the-art results
are DDPMs-based methods [19, 6, 42], which have the capability to generate high-quality, realistic
time series. However, they are not without their challenges. Firstly, these methods often require
lengthy inference times due to the substantial number of denoising steps involved. Secondly, despite
†
∗

This work is done when Zhicheng Chen works as an intern in Tencent AI Lab.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

