Exactly Minimax-Optimal Locally Differentially
Private Sampling

Hyun-Young Park
School of Electrical Engineering
KAIST
phy811@kaist.ac.kr

Shahab Asoodeh
Department of Computing and Software
McMaster University
asoodeh@mcmaster.ca

Si-Hyeon Lee
School of Electrical Engineering
KAIST
sihyeon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
The sampling problem under local differential privacy has recently been studied
with potential applications to generative models, but a fundamental analysis of
its privacy-utility trade-off (PUT) remains incomplete. In this work, we define
the fundamental PUT of private sampling in the minimax sense, using the f divergence between original and sampling distributions as the utility measure. We
characterize the exact PUT for both finite and continuous data spaces under some
mild conditions on the data distributions, and propose sampling mechanisms that are
universally optimal for all f -divergences. Our numerical experiments demonstrate
the superiority of our mechanisms over baselines, in terms of theoretical utilities
for finite data space and of empirical utilities for continuous data space.

1

Introduction

Privacy leakage is a pressing concern in the realm of machine learning (ML), spurring extensive
research into privacy protection techniques [1–4]. Among these, local differential privacy (LDP) [5]
stands out as a standard model and has been deployed in industry, e.g., by Google [6, 7], Apple [8],
Microsoft [9]. In the LDP framework, individual clients randomize their data on their own devices
and send it to a potentially untrusted aggregator for analysis, thus preventing the user data from being
inferred. However, this perturbation inherently diminishes data utility. Consequently, the central
challenge in privacy mechanism design lies in optimizing utility while preserving the desired level of
privacy protection. This goal involves characterizing the optimal balance between privacy parameter
and utility, referred to as the privacy-utility trade-off (PUT). The analysis of the PUT and the proposal
of privacy mechanisms have been actively conducted for various settings of statistical inference and
machine learning [10–27].
Most research in this field focuses on scenarios where each client has only a single data point.
However, there are increasingly more applications where each client has a large local dataset with
multiple data records. One can formulate the privacy requirement in these cases by assuming that
clients have datasets of the same size, generated independently from an underlying distribution [28–
34]. This probabilistic assumption, however, restricts practical flexibility. The work [35] explored a
scenario where clients have large datasets that may vary in size and seek to privately release another
dataset that closely resembles their original dataset. In this scenario, local datasets can be represented
by an empirical distribution, allowing each client to be seen as holding a probability distribution and
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

