Data curation via joint example selection
further accelerates multimodal learning

Talfan Evans1,∗

Nikhil Parthasarathy1,∗ Hamza Merzić1,2 Olivier J. Hénaff1,∗
1
Google DeepMind 2 University College London
London, UK

Abstract
Data curation is an essential component of large-scale pretraining. In this work, we
demonstrate that jointly prioritizing batches of data is more effective for learning
than selecting examples independently. Multimodal contrastive objectives expose
the dependencies between data and thus naturally yield criteria for measuring
the joint learnability of a batch. We derive a simple and tractable algorithm for
selecting such batches, which significantly accelerate training beyond individuallyprioritized data points. As performance improves by selecting from large superbatches, we also leverage recent advances in model approximation to reduce
the computational overhead of scoring. As a result, our approach—multimodal
contrastive learning with joint example selection (JEST)—surpasses state-of-the-art
pretraining methods with up to 13× fewer iterations and 10× less computation.
Essential to the performance of JEST is the ability to steer the data selection process
towards the distribution of smaller, well-curated datasets via pretrained reference
models, exposing data curation as a new dimension for neural scaling laws.

1

Introduction

Data quality is an essential driver of performance for large-scale pretraining. Whether in language [17],
vision [13], or multimodal modeling [1, 20, 30], training on well-curated datasets has consistently
demonstrated that strong performance can be achieved with significantly less data. However, current
data pipelines rely heavily on manual curation, which is difficult and expensive to scale. In contrast,
model-based data curation [29, 31], which uses features of the model being trained to select high
quality data, holds promise for improving the slow, power-law scaling of large-scale pretraining
across modalities, both in theory [45] and in practice [13].
Existing methods apply curation at the level of individual data points [10, 40]. Yet the quality of
a batch is also a function of its composition, in addition to the summed quality of the data points
considered independently. In computer vision, hard negatives (i.e. clusters of points which lie close
to one another but contain different labels) have been found to provide a more effective learning
signal than trivially solvable ones [5, 19, 32, 39, 43, 48, 51]. In this work we seek to generalize this
notion by asking whether model-based data-selection criteria applied to batches of data can accelerate
learning beyond what is possible by selecting examples independently.
In multimodal learning, contrastive objectives directly expose the interactions between examples in
a batch. We therefore derive a simple and tractable algorithm for joint example selection (JEST),
which efficiently selects relevant ‘sub-batches’ of data from much larger ‘super-batches’ given their
model-based scores. When scoring batches with a pretrained reference model (i.e. easy-reference),
JEST accelerates learning relative to uniform batch selection, significantly improving independent
example selection with the same model (as in CLIPScore [20]). When scoring batches according
to their learnability, which also takes into account the learner’s loss [31], JEST improves further,
matching the performance of state-of-the-art models [52] with up to 13× fewer training iterations.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

