Multi-view Masked Contrastive Representation
Learning for Endoscopic Video Analysis

Kai Hu
Xiangtan University
kaihu@xtu.edu.cn

Ye Xiao
Xiangtan University
yxiao@smail.xtu.edu.cn

Yuan Zhang∗
Xiangtan University
yuanz@xtu.edu.cn

Xieping Gao∗
Hunan Normal University
xpgao@hunnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Endoscopic video analysis can effectively assist clinicians in disease diagnosis
and treatment, and has played an indispensable role in clinical medicine. Unlike
regular videos, endoscopic video analysis presents unique challenges, including
complex camera movements, uneven distribution of lesions, and concealment, and
it typically relies on contrastive learning in self-supervised pretraining as its mainstream technique. However, representations obtained from contrastive learning
enhance the discriminability of the model but often lack fine-grained information,
which is suboptimal in the pixel-level prediction tasks. In this paper, we develop a
Multi-view Masked Contrastive Representation Learning (M2 CRL) framework
for endoscopic video pre-training. Specifically, we propose a multi-view masking strategy for addressing the challenges of endoscopic videos. We utilize the
frame-aggregated attention guided tube mask to capture global-level spatiotemporal
sensitive representation from the global views, while the random tube mask is employed to focus on local variations from the local views. Subsequently, we combine
multi-view mask modeling with contrastive learning to obtain endoscopic video
representations that possess fine-grained perception and holistic discriminative
capabilities simultaneously. The proposed M2 CRL is pre-trained on 7 publicly
available endoscopic video datasets and fine-tuned on 3 endoscopic video datasets
for 3 downstream tasks. Notably, our M2 CRL significantly outperforms the current
state-of-the-art self-supervised endoscopic pre-training methods, e.g., Endo-FM
(3.5% F1 for classification, 7.5% Dice for segmentation, and 2.2% F1 for detection)
and other self-supervised methods, e.g., VideoMAE V2 (4.6% F1 for classification,
0.4% Dice for segmentation, and 2.1% F1 for detection). 2

1

Introduction

Video endoscopy is a crucial medical examination and diagnostic tool widely used for inspecting
various tissues and structures (the digestive tract, respiratory tract, and abdominal cavity, etc.) [1].
In clinical practice, endoscopic video analysis usually relies on the experience and expertise of
physicians, which is not only time-consuming and labor-intensive but also prone to subjective errors.
Computer-aided medical analysis [2, 3, 4] can automatically and efficiently identify and classify
∗
2

Corresponding authors.
Code is publicly available at: https://github.com/MLMIP/MMCRL.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

