Contextual Linear Optimization with Bandit Feedback

Yichun Hu1∗
1

Nathan Kallus1∗ Xiaojie Mao2∗ Yanchen Wu2∗
Cornell University 2 Tsinghua University
{yh767, kallus}@cornell.edu
maoxj@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn
wu-yc23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Contextual linear optimization (CLO) uses predictive contextual features to reduce
uncertainty in random cost coefficients and thereby improve average-cost performance. An example is the stochastic shortest path problem with random edge
costs (e.g., traffic) and contextual features (e.g., lagged traffic, weather). Existing
work on CLO assumes the data has fully observed cost coefficient vectors, but in
many applications, we can only see the realized cost of a historical decision, that
is, just one projection of the random cost coefficient vector, to which we refer as
bandit feedback. We study a class of offline learning algorithms for CLO with
bandit feedback, which we term induced empirical risk minimization (IERM),
where we fit a predictive model to directly optimize the downstream performance
of the policy it induces. We show a fast-rate regret bound for IERM that allows
for misspecified model classes and flexible choices of the optimization estimate,
and we develop computationally tractable surrogate losses. A byproduct of our
theory of independent interest is fast-rate regret bound for IERM with full feedback
and misspecified policy class. We compare the performance of different modeling
choices numerically using a stochastic shortest path example and provide practical
insights from the empirical results.

1

Introduction

Contextual linear optimization (CLO) models the use of predictive features (context variables) to
improve decision making in linear optimization with random coefficients. In CLO, we consider a
decision z ∈ Z that incurs an uncertain cost Y ⊤ z determined by a random cost vector Y ∈ Rd that is
not observed at decision time. We do, however, observe predictive features X ∈ Rp prior to decision,
which help reduce uncertainty. CLO can be expressed either as a contextual stochastic optimization
problem or a linear optimization problem where the cost vector is a conditional expectation:


v ∗ (x) = minz∈Z E Y ⊤ z | X = x = minz∈Z f0 (x)⊤ z, where f0 (x) = E[Y | X = x]. (1)
We assume throughout that Z is a polytope (Z = Conv(Z ∠ ) for some vertex set Z ∠ < ∞ with
supz∈Z ∠ ∥z∥ ≤ B) and Y is bounded (without loss of generality, Y ∈ Y = {y : ∥y∥ ≤ 1}).
CLO has been the focus of much recent work [e.g., 9, 11, 14, 27, 30], due to its relevance to datadriven operational decision making in many applications such as network optimization, portfolio
optimization, product recommendation, etc. The key question in these is how to use data to learn a
good policy, π : Rp → Z, mapping feature observations to effective decisions. All of this literature
studies an offline setting, where a batch of existing data (Xi , Yi ) for i = 1, . . . , n is observed. These
data are viewed as random draws from the joint distribution of (X, Y ), and the goal is to learn an
effective decision policy from them. Crucially, this assumes that we fully observe the random cost
∗

Authors are listed in alphabetical order. Correspondence to Xiaojie Mao: maoxj@sem.tsingua.edu.cn.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

