Putting Gale & Shapley to Work:
Guaranteeing Stability Through Learning

Hadi Hosseini
Penn State University, USA
hadi@psu.edu

Sanjukta Roy
University of Leeds, UK
s.roy@leeds.ac.uk

Duohan Zhang*
Penn State University, USA
dqz5235@psu.edu

Abstract
Two-sided matching markets describe a large class of problems wherein participants
from one side of the market must be matched to those from the other side according
to their preferences. In many real-world applications (e.g. content matching
or online labor markets), the knowledge about preferences may not be readily
available and must be learned, i.e., one side of the market (aka agents) may not
know their preferences over the other side (aka arms). Recent research on online
settings has focused primarily on welfare optimization aspects (i.e. minimizing
the overall regret) while paying little attention to the game-theoretic properties
such as the stability of the final matching. In this paper, we exploit the structure
of stable solutions to devise algorithms that improve the likelihood of finding
stable solutions. We initiate the study of the sample complexity of finding a stable
matching, and provide theoretical bounds on the number of samples needed to reach
a stable matching with high probability. Finally, our empirical results demonstrate
intriguing tradeoffs between stability and optimality of the proposed algorithms,
further complementing our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Two-sided markets provide a framework for a large class of problems that deal with matching two
disjoint sets (colloquially agents and arms) according to their preferences. These markets have been
extensively studied in the past decades and formed the foundation of matching theory—a prominent
subfield of economics that deals with designing markets without money. They have had profound
impact on numerous practical applications such as school choice [Abdulkadiroğlu et al., 2005a,b],
entry-level labor markets [Roth and Peranson, 1999], and medical residency [Roth, 1984]. The
primary objective is to find a stable matching between the two sets such that no pair prefers each
other to their matched partners.
The advent of digital marketplaces and online systems has given rise to novel applications of twosided markets such as matching riders and drivers [Banerjee and Johari, 2019], electric vehicle to
charging stations [Gerding et al., 2013], and matching freelancers (or flexworkers) to job requester in
a gig economy. In contrast to traditional markets that consider preferences to be readily available
(e.g. by direct reporting or elicitation), in these new applications preferences may be uncertain or
unavailable due to limited access or simply eliciting may not be feasible. Thus, a recent line of work
has utilized bandit learning to learn preferences by modeling matching problems as multi-arm bandit
problems where the preferences of agents are unknown while the preferences of arms are known. The
goal is to devise learning algorithms such that a matching based on the learned preferences minimize
the regret for each agent (see, for example, Liu et al. [2020, 2021], Sankararaman et al. [2021], Basu
et al. [2021], Maheshwari et al. [2022], Kong et al. [2022], Zhang et al. [2022], Kong and Li [2023],
Wang et al. [2022]).
*

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

