Learning via Surrogate PAC-Bayes

Antoine Picard-Weibel
Inria & SUEZ,∗ France
antoine.picard.ext@suez.com

Roman Moscoviz
SUEZ,∗ France
roman.moscoviz@suez.com

Benjamin Guedj
Inria and University College London†, France and United Kingdom
benjamin.guedj@inria.fr

Abstract
PAC-Bayes learning is a comprehensive setting for (i) studying the generalisation
ability of learning algorithms and (ii) deriving new learning algorithms by optimising a generalisation bound. However, optimising generalisation bounds might
not always be viable for tractable or computational reasons, or both. For example,
iteratively querying the empirical risk might prove computationally expensive. In
response, we introduce a novel principled strategy for building an iterative learning
algorithm via the optimisation of a sequence of surrogate training objectives, inherited from PAC-Bayes generalisation bounds. The key argument is to replace the
empirical risk (seen as a function of hypotheses) in the generalisation bound by its
projection onto a constructible low dimensional functional space: these projections
can be queried much more efficiently than the initial risk. On top of providing
that generic recipe for learning via surrogate PAC-Bayes bounds, we (i) contribute
theoretical results establishing that iteratively optimising our surrogates implies
the optimisation of the original generalisation bounds, (ii) instantiate this strategy
to the framework of meta-learning, introducing a meta-objective offering a closed
form expression for meta-gradient, (iii) illustrate our approach with numerical
experiments inspired by an industrial biochemical problem.

1

Introduction

Generalisation is arguably one of the central problems in machine learning. Among the different
techniques to study generalisation, PAC-Bayes has gained considerable traction over the past decade,
as evidenced by the surge in publications. We refer to the seminal works of Shawe-Taylor and
Williamson [1997], McAllester [1999], Catoni [2004, 2007] and to the recent surveys and monographs
from Guedj [2019], Hellström et al. [2023], Alquier [2024] for a thorough overview of the field.
One appealing feature is that PAC-Bayes learning is a comprehensive setting for (i) studying the
generalisation ability of learning algorithms and (ii) deriving new learning algorithms by optimising
a PAC-Bayes generalisation bound. This is the strategy pursued in a number of recent works, among
which Germain et al. [2009], Biggs and Guedj [2021], Germain et al. [2015], Viallard et al. [2023],
Zantedeschi et al. [2021], Rivasplata et al. [2019], Pérez-Ortiz et al. [2021], Zhou et al. [2019].
We now regard this strategy of substituting a generalisation bound to more classical training objectives
as established, and we focus here on the computational aspect of this strategy. Indeed, optimising
generalisation bounds might not always be viable for tractable or computational reasons, or both.
∗
†

Centre International de Recherche Sur l’Eau et l’Environnement.
Department of Computer Science and Centre for Artificial Intelligence.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

