Semi-Supervised Sparse Gaussian Classification:
Provable Benefits of Unlabeled Data
Eyar Azar
Weizmann Institute of Science
eyar.azar@weizmann.ac.il

Boaz Nadler
Weizmann Institute of Science
boaz.nadler@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
The premise of semi-supervised learning (SSL) is that combining labeled and unlabeled data yields significantly more accurate models. Despite empirical successes,
the theoretical understanding of SSL is still far from complete. In this work, we
study SSL for high dimensional sparse Gaussian classification. To construct an
accurate classifier a key task is feature selection, detecting the few variables that
separate the two classes. For this SSL setting, we analyze information theoretic
lower bounds for accurate feature selection as well as computational lower bounds,
assuming the low-degree likelihood hardness conjecture. Our key contribution is
the identification of a regime in the problem parameters (dimension, sparsity, number of labeled and unlabeled samples) where SSL is guaranteed to be advantageous
for classification. Specifically, there is a regime where it is possible to construct
in polynomial time an accurate SSL classifier. However, any computationally
efficient supervised or unsupervised learning schemes, that separately use only the
labeled or unlabeled data would fail. Our work highlights the provable benefits of
combining labeled and unlabeled data for classification and feature selection in
high dimensions. We present simulations that complement our theoretical analysis.

1

Introduction

The presumption underlying Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) is that more accurate predictors may
be learned by leveraging both labeled and unlabeled data. Over the past 20 years, many SSL methods
have been proposed and studied (Chapelle et al., 2006; Zhu & Goldberg, 2009). Indeed, on many
datasets SSL yields significant improvements over supervised learning (SL) and over unsupervised
learning (UL). However, there are also cases where unlabeled data does not seem to help. A
fundamental theoretical issue in SSL is thus to understand under which settings can unlabeled data
help to construct more accurate predictors and under which its benefit, if any, is negligible.
To address this issue, SSL was studied theoretically under various models. Several works proved
that under a cluster or a manifold assumption, with sufficient unlabeled data, SSL significantly
outperforms SL (Rigollet, 2007; Singh et al., 2008). In some cases, however, SSL performs similarly
to UL (i.e., clustering, up to a label permutation ambiguity). In addition, Ben-David et al. (2008)
described a family of distributions where SSL achieves the same error rate as SL.
In the context of the cluster assumption, a popular model for theoretical analysis is Gaussian
classification, in particular binary classification for a mixture of two spherical Gaussians. In this case,
the label Y ∈ {±1} has probabilities P(Y = y) = πy and conditional on a label value y, the vector
x ∈ Rp follows a Gaussian distribution,
x|y ∼ N (µy , Ip )

(1)

where µ1 , µ−1 ∈ Rp are both unknown. This model and related ones were studied theoretically in
supervised, unsupervised and semi-supervised settings, see for example Li et al. (2017); Tifrea et al.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

