Scene Graph Disentanglement and Composition for
Generalizable Complex Image Generation

Yunnan Wang1,2 Ziqiang Li1,2 Wenyao Zhang1,2
Zequn Zhang2,3 Baao Xie2 Xihui Liu4 Wenjun Zeng2 Xin Jin2∗
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
Ningbo Institute of Digital Twin, Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo, China
3
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
4
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
{wangyunnan, ziqiangli}@sjtu.edu.cn jinxin@eitech.edu.cn

Abstract
There has been exciting progress in generating images from natural language or layout conditions. However, these methods struggle to faithfully reproduce complex
scenes due to the insufficient modeling of multiple objects and their relationships.
To address this issue, we leverage the scene graph, a powerful structured representation, for complex image generation. Different from the previous works that directly
use scene graphs for generation, we employ the generative capabilities of variational autoencoders and diffusion models in a generalizable manner, compositing
diverse disentangled visual clues from scene graphs. Specifically, we first propose
a Semantics-Layout Variational AutoEncoder (SL-VAE) to jointly derive (layouts,
semantics) from the input scene graph, which allows a more diverse and reasonable
generation in a one-to-many mapping. We then develop a Compositional Masked
Attention (CMA) integrated with a diffusion model, incorporating (layouts, semantics) with fine-grained attributes as generation guidance. To further achieve
graph manipulation while keeping the visual content consistent, we introduce a
Multi-Layered Sampler (MLS) for an “isolated” image editing effect. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms recent competitors based on
text, layout, or scene graph, in terms of generation rationality and controllability.
Code is available at https://github.com/wangyunnan/DisCo.

1

Introduction

Text-to-image (T2I) generation with diffusion models (DMs) [1, 2] has yielded remarkable advancements [3, 4, 5] in recent years, benefiting from the developments of vision-language foundation
models [6, 7, 8, 9]. However, textual conditions with linear structure struggle to delineate the intricacies of complex scenes precisely. For example, as shown in the failure cases of DALL·E 3 [3] in
Figure 1 (a), given the intricate text prompt “A sheep by another sheep ... a boat on the grass.”, the
T2I model may have difficulty accurately generating object relationships or quantities. Consequently,
some studies [10, 11, 12, 13] strive to improve spatial relationship (e.g., “by” and “on”) control
by incorporating additional layout conditions. Nevertheless, as illustrated in the failure cases of
LayoutDiffusion [10] in Figure 1 (b), layout-to-image (L2I) methods inevitably encounter challenges
in representing certain non-spatial interactions, such as depicting “playing” within spatial topology.
To efficiently depict complex scenes for guiding generative models, recent methods [14, 15, 16]
utilize structured scene graphs as conditions instead of text or layout prompts. Scene graphs [17]
* Xin Jin is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

