The Prevalence of Neural Collapse
in Neural Multivariate Regression

George Andriopoulos1∗ Zixuan Dong2,4∗
1

Li Guo3∗

Zifan Zhao3∗

Keith Ross1∗†

New York University Abu Dhabi 2 SFSC of AI and DL, NYU Shanghai
3
New York University Shanghai 4 New York University

Abstract
Recently it has been observed that neural networks exhibit Neural Collapse (NC)
during the final stage of training for the classification problem. We empirically
show that multivariate regression, as employed in imitation learning and other
applications, exhibits Neural Regression Collapse (NRC), a new form of neural
collapse: (NRC1) The last-layer feature vectors collapse to the subspace spanned
by the n principal components of the feature vectors, where n is the dimension of
the targets (for univariate regression, n = 1); (NRC2) The last-layer feature vectors
also collapse to the subspace spanned by the last-layer weight vectors; (NRC3) The
Gram matrix for the weight vectors converges to a specific functional form that
depends on the covariance matrix of the targets. After empirically establishing the
prevalence of (NRC1)-(NRC3) for a variety of datasets and network architectures,
we provide an explanation of these phenomena by modeling the regression task
in the context of the Unconstrained Feature Model (UFM), in which the last layer
feature vectors are treated as free variables when minimizing the loss function.
We show that when the regularization parameters in the UFM model are strictly
positive, then (NRC1)-(NRC3) also emerge as solutions in the UFM optimization
problem. We also show that if the regularization parameters are equal to zero, then
there is no collapse. To our knowledge, this is the first empirical and theoretical
study of neural collapse in the context of regression. This extension is significant
not only because it broadens the applicability of neural collapse to a new category
of problems but also because it suggests that the phenomena of neural collapse
could be a universal behavior in deep learning.

1

Introduction

Recently, an insightful phenomenon known as neural collapse (NC) [Papyan et al., 2020] has been
empirically observed during the terminal phases of training in classification tasks with balanced
data. NC has three principal components: (NC1) The features of samples within each class converge
closely around their class mean. (NC2) The averages of the features within each class converge to
form the vertices of a simplex equiangular tight frame. This geometric arrangement implies that class
means are equidistant and symmetrically distributed. (NC3) The weight vectors of the classifiers in
the final layer align with the class means of their respective features. These phenomena not only
enhance our understanding of neural network behaviors but also suggest potential simplifications in
the architecture and the training of neural networks.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author: keithwross@nyu.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

