SILENCE: Lightweight Protection for Privacy in
Offloaded Speech Understanding
Dongqi Cai
Beiyou Shenzhen Institude
Shenzhen, Guangdong
cdq@bupt.edu.cn

Shangguang Wang
Beiyou Shenzhen Institude
Shenzhen, Guangdong
sgwang@bupt.edu.cn

Felix Xiaozhu Lin
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA, 22904
felixlin@virginia.edu

Zeling Zhang
Beiyou Shenzhen Institude
Shenzhen, Guangdong
marovlo@bupt.edu.cn

Mengwei Xu
Beiyou Shenzhen Institude
Shenzhen, Guangdong
mwx@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Speech serves as a ubiquitous input interface for embedded mobile devices. Cloud-based solutions, while offering powerful speech understanding
services, raise significant concerns regarding user privacy. To address this,
disentanglement-based encoders have been proposed to remove sensitive information from speech signals without compromising the speech understanding functionality. However, these encoders demand high memory usage and computation
complexity, making them impractical for resource-constrained wimpy devices.
Our solution is based on a key observation that speech understanding hinges on
long-term dependency knowledge of the entire utterance, in contrast to privacysensitive elements that are short-term dependent. Exploiting this observation, we
propose SILENCE, a lightweight system that selectively obscuring short-term details, without damaging the long-term dependent speech understanding performance. The crucial part of SILENCE is a differential mask generator derived from
interpretable learning to automatically configure the masking process. We have
implemented SILENCE on the STM32H7 microcontroller and evaluate its efficacy
under different attacking scenarios. Our results demonstrate that SILENCE offers
speech understanding performance and privacy protection capacity comparable to
existing encoders, while achieving up to 53.3× speedup and 134.1× reduction in
memory footprint.

1

Introduction

Privacy concern for cloud speech service The volume of speech data uploaded to the cloud for
spoken language understanding (SLU) is steadily increasing [1, 2, 3], particularly in ubiquitous
wimpy devices where textual input is inconvenient [4, 5, 6], e.g., home automation devices [7],
smartwatches [8], telehealth sensors [9] and smart factory sensors [10] . However, exposing raw
speech signal to the cloud raises privacy concerns [11]. It was revealed that contractors regularly
listened to confidential details in Siri recordings to improve its accuracy [12]. This included private
discussions, medical information, and even intimate moments.
There are many aspects of potential privacy leakage in cloud-based SLU. Among them: biometric
or contextual privacy leakage have been well studied and somewhat solved by removing information
relevant to such tasks without compromising the SLU accuracy [13, 14]; transcript protection (especially sensitive entities) is more challenging since it is deeply entangled with the SLU task itself. As
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

