Nuclear Norm Regularization for Deep Learning

Christopher Scarvelis
MIT CSAIL
scarv@mit.edu

Justin Solomon
MIT CSAIL
jsolomon@mit.edu

Abstract
Penalizing the nuclear norm of a function’s Jacobian encourages it to locally behave
like a low-rank linear map. Such functions vary locally along only a handful of
directions, making the Jacobian nuclear norm a natural regularizer for machine
learning problems. However, this regularizer is intractable for high-dimensional
problems, as it requires computing a large Jacobian matrix and taking its SVD. We
show how to efficiently penalize the Jacobian nuclear norm using techniques tailormade for deep learning. We prove that for functions parametrized as compositions
f = g ◦ h, one may equivalently penalize the average squared Frobenius norms of
Jg and Jh. We then propose a denoising-style approximation that avoids Jacobian
computations altogether. Our method is simple, efficient, and accurate, enabling
Jacobian nuclear norm regularization to scale to high-dimensional deep learning
problems. We complement our theory with an empirical study of our regularizer’s
performance and investigate applications to denoising and representation learning.

1

Introduction

Building models that adapt to the structure of their data is a key challenge in machine learning. As
real-world data typically concentrates on low-dimensional manifolds, a good model f should only
be sensitive to changes to its inputs along the data manifold. One may encourage this behavior by
regularizing f so that its Jacobian Jf [x] has low rank. This causes f to locally behave like a low-rank
linear map and therefore be locally constant in directions that are in the kernel of Jf [x].
How should we regularize f so that its Jacobians have low rank? Directly penalizing rank(Jf [x])
during training is challenging, as the rank function is not differentiable. In light of this, the nuclear
norm ∥Jf [x]∥∗ is an appealing alternative: Being the L1 norm of a matrix’s singular values, it is the
tightest convex relaxation of the rank function, and as it is differentiable almost everywhere, it can be
included in standard deep learning pipelines.
One critical flaw in this strategy is its computational cost. The nuclear norm of a matrix is the sum
of its singular values, so to penalize ∥Jf [x]∥∗ in training, one must (1) compute the Jacobian of a
typically high-dimensional map f : Rn → Rm , (2) take the singular value decomposition (SVD) of
this m × n matrix, (3) sum its singular values, and (4) differentiate through each of these operations.
The combined cost of these operations is prohibitive for high-dimensional data. Consequently, nuclear
norm regularization has yet to be widely adopted by the deep learning community.
This work shows how to efficiently penalize the Jacobian nuclear norm ∥Jf [x]∥∗ using techniques
tailor-made for deep learning. We first show that parametrizing f as a composition f = g ◦ h
– a feature common to all deep learning pipelines – allows one to replace the expensive nuclear
norm ∥Jf [x]∥∗ with two squared Frobenius norms ∥Jh[x]∥2F and ∥Jg[h(x)]∥2F , which admit an
elementwise computation that avoids a costly SVD. We prove that the resulting problem is exactly
equivalent to the original problem with the nuclear norm penalty. We in turn approximate this
by a denoising-style objective that avoids the Jacobian computation altogether. Our method is
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

