DePLM: Denoising Protein Language Models for
Property Optimization

Zeyuan Wang1,2 Keyan Ding2 Ming Qin1,2 Xiaotong Li1,2 Xiang Zhuang1,2
Yu Zhao4 Jianhua Yao4 Qiang Zhang3,2∗ Huajun Chen1,2∗
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
ZJU-Hangzhou Global Scientific and Technological Innovation Center
3
The ZJU-UIUC Institute, International Campus, Zhejiang University
4
Tencent AI Lab, Tencent
{yuanzew,dingkeyan,qinandming,3190104904}@zju.edu.cn
yu.zhao@tum.de
jianhua.yao@gmail.com
{zhuangxiang,qiang.zhang.cs,huajunsir}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Protein optimization is a fundamental biological task aimed at enhancing the
performance of proteins by modifying their sequences. Computational methods
primarily rely on evolutionary information (EI) encoded by protein language
models (PLMs) to predict fitness landscape for optimization. However, these
methods suffer from a few limitations. (1) Evolutionary processes involve the
simultaneous consideration of multiple functional properties, often overshadowing
the specific property of interest. (2) Measurements of these properties tend to be
tailored to experimental conditions, leading to reduced generalizability of trained
models to novel proteins. To address these limitations, we introduce Denoising
Protein Language Models (DePLM), a novel approach that refines the evolutionary
information embodied in PLMs for improved protein optimization. Specifically, we
conceptualize EI as comprising both property-relevant and irrelevant information,
with the latter acting as “noise” for the optimization task at hand. Our approach
involves denoising this EI in PLMs through a diffusion process conducted in the
rank space of property values, thereby enhancing model generalization and ensuring
dataset-agnostic learning. Extensive experimental results have demonstrated that
DePLM not only surpasses the state-of-the-art in mutation effect prediction but
also exhibits strong generalization capabilities for novel proteins.

1

Introduction

Proteins play vital roles in numerous biological processes, shaping their structure and function
over billions of years of evolution. This evolutionary diversity presents significant opportunities
for advancing fields such as drug discovery and materials science [24, 60]. However, the inherent
properties of existing proteins, such as thermostability, often fall short of practical requirements in
various scenarios. Consequently, researchers have dedicated themselves to optimizing proteins to
enhance their properties of interest. Protein optimization is the task that involves modifying protein
sequences and efficiently identifying well-performing proteins.
Traditional deep mutational scans (DMS) and directed evolution (DE) rely on expensive wet-lab
experiments [15, 6, 58]. Recently, computational approaches that accurately model the relationship
between proteins and their property fitness, often termed a “fitness landscape” [51], have become
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

