Learning Multimodal Behaviors from Scratch with
Diffusion Policy Gradient

Zechu Li1,2 Rickmer Krohn1,3 Tao Chen2 Anurag Ajay2
Pulkit Agrawal2 Georgia Chalvatzaki1,3
1
Technical University of Darmstadt 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 3 Hessian.AI
{zechu.li,rickmer.krohn}@stud.tu-darmstadt.de
{taochen,aajay,pulkitag}@mit.edu
{georgia.chalvatzaki}@tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms typically parameterize the policy as a
deep network that outputs either a deterministic action or a stochastic one modeled
as a Gaussian distribution, hence restricting learning to a single behavioral mode.
Meanwhile, diffusion models emerged as a powerful framework for multimodal
learning. However, the use of diffusion policies in online RL is hindered by the
intractability of policy likelihood approximation, as well as the greedy objective of
RL methods that can easily skew the policy to a single mode. This paper presents
Deep Diffusion Policy Gradient (DDiffPG), a novel actor-critic algorithm that
learns from scratch multimodal policies parameterized as diffusion models while
discovering and maintaining versatile behaviors. DDiffPG explores and discovers multiple modes through off-the-shelf unsupervised clustering combined with
novelty-based intrinsic motivation. DDiffPG forms a multimodal training batch
and utilizes mode-specific Q-learning to mitigate the inherent greediness of the RL
objective, ensuring the improvement of the diffusion policy across all modes. Our
approach further allows the policy to be conditioned on mode-specific embeddings
to explicitly control the learned modes. Empirical studies validate DDiffPG’s
capability to master multimodal behaviors in complex, high-dimensional continuous control tasks with sparse rewards, also showcasing proof-of-concept dynamic
online replanning when navigating mazes with unseen obstacles. Our project page
is available at https://supersglzc.github.io/projects/ddiffpg/.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) for continuous control has experienced significant advancements during
the last decade, reshaping its applicability to domains like game playing [65, 27, 4], robotics [26, 33],
and autonomous driving [72, 12]. However, most RL algorithms choose to parameterize policies as
deep neural networks with deterministic outputs [47, 21] or Gaussian distributions [62, 25], limiting
learning to a single behavior mode. Moreover, the standard exploration-exploitation schemes can
easily make a policy greedy towards one mode, in which the algorithm keeps exploiting to maximize
its objective. The aforementioned issues hinder the possibility of training agents that successfully
solve a task while showcasing versatility of behaviors—a property intuitive to intelligent systems like
humans, who can exhibit resourcefulness for completing a task, even amidst unprecedented events.
Learning a multimodal policy has several practical applications. First, such a policy that learns many
solutions to a task is useful when acting in non-stationary environments. Imagine that a routine path
from the office to home is unexpectedly blocked; one needs to choose an alternate route. A policy
that encompasses multiple solutions can better navigate such changing conditions, offering flexibility
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

