Rethinking 3D Convolution in ℓp-norm Space

Li Zhang1,2,4 , Yan Zhong3 , Jianan Wang4 , Zhe Min5 , Rujing Wang1,2 , Liu Liu6∗
1 Hefei Institute of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2 University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
3 School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University. Beijing, China
4 Astribot, Shenzhen, China
5 Shandong University, Jinan, China
6 Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China
zanly@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhongyan@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Convolution is a fundamental operation in the 3D backbone. However, under
certain conditions, the feature extraction ability of traditional convolution methods
may be weakened. In this paper, we introduce a new convolution method based on
ℓp -norm. For theoretical support, we prove the universal approximation theorem
for ℓp -norm based convolution, and analyze the robustness and feasibility of ℓp norms in 3D point cloud tasks. Concretely, ℓ∞ -norm based convolution is prone to
feature loss. ℓ2 -norm based convolution is essentially a linear transformation of the
traditional convolution. ℓ1 -norm based convolution is an economical and effective
feature extractor. We propose customized optimization strategies to accelerate the
training process of ℓ1 -norm based Nets and enhance the performance. Besides, a
theoretical guarantee is given for the convergence by regret argument. We apply
our methods to classic networks and conduct related experiments. Experimental
results indicate that our approach exhibits competitive performance with traditional
CNNs, with lower energy consumption and instruction latency.

1

Introduction

The convolution-based 3D backbone networks have demonstrated substantial success in foundational
tasks such as classification [1], object tracking [2], scene segmentation [3], etc. Some downstream
tasks also heavily rely on these networks, such as interactive perception [4], object manipulation [5],
imitation learning [6], and human-machine collaboration [7]. In the traditional 3D convolution,
suppose K ∈ Rm×n is the filter, and Pt ∈ Rm×n is the sampled matrix from the t-th sliding window
on input data, 1 ≤ t ≤ T . T is the total sliding counts. For any t ≥ 1, the t-th convolution is
calculated as:
X X
Pt ⊙ K =
Pt (i, j) · K(i, j)
(1)
1≤i≤m 1≤j≤n

which is the same as inner product between vectors. To distinguish it from our new convolution
framework, we refer to it as inner product based convolution in the following discussion. A geometric
consideration arises when Pt follows a certain symmetric distribution, such as a Gaussian or uniform
distribution. By symmetry, there exist some of {Pt }Tt=1 situated close to the subspace perpendicular
to K, which means K ⊙ Pt ≈ 0. This inevitably leads to explicit feature loss, diminishing the
model’s ability on information extraction.
∗

Li Zhang and Yan Zhong contribute equally. This work was done when Li Zhang was an intern at Astribot.
Corresponding author: Liu Liu.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

