Learning Mixtures of Unknown Causal Interventions

Abhinav Kumar
LIDS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
akumar03@mit.edu

Kirankumar Shiragur
Microsoft Research
kshiragur@microsoft.com

Caroline Uhler
LIDS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard

Abstract
The ability to conduct interventions plays a pivotal role in learning causal relationships among variables, thus facilitating applications across diverse scientific
disciplines such as genomics, economics, and machine learning. However, in
many instances within these applications, the process of generating interventional
data is subject to noise: rather than data being sampled directly from the intended
interventional distribution, interventions often yield data sampled from a blend of
both intended and unintended interventional distributions.
We consider the fundamental challenge of disentangling mixed interventional and
observational data within linear Structural Equation Models (SEMs) with Gaussian
additive noise without the knowledge of the true causal graph. We demonstrate that
conducting interventions, whether do or soft, yields distributions with sufficient
diversity and properties conducive to efficiently recovering each component within
the mixture. Furthermore, we establish that the sample complexity required to
disentangle mixed data inversely correlates with the extent of change induced by an
intervention in the equations governing the affected variable values. As a result, the
causal graph can be identified up to its interventional Markov Equivalence Class,
similar to scenarios where no noise influences the generation of interventional data.
We further support our theoretical findings by conducting simulations wherein we
perform causal discovery from such mixed data.

1

Introduction

Interventions are experiments that can help us understand the mechanisms governing complex
systems and also modify these systems to achieve desired outcomes [1, 5, 21]. For example, in causal
discovery, interventions are used to infer causal relationships between variables of interest, which has
applications in various fields such as biology [5, 12], economics [8], and psychology [13, 21].
Given their extensive applications, there has been significant research in developing methods and
experimental design strategies to conduct interventions under different scenarios [32, 24]. Despite
significant efforts to develop sophisticated experimental techniques to perform interventions, they
often encounter noise [4, 6, 30]. For example, the CRISPR technology, extensively used to perform
gene perturbations (or interventions), is known to have off-target effects, meaning the interventions
do not always occur on the intended genes [6, 30]. Consequently, in many applications, performing
interventions generates data from a mixture of intended and unintended interventional distributions.
Analyzing such mixed data directly can lead to incorrect conclusions, adversely affecting downstream
applications. Hence, it is essential to disentangle the mixture and recover the components corresponding to each individual intervention for further use in downstream tasks like causal discovery.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

