D EV B ENCH: A multimodal developmental benchmark
for language learning

Alvin W. M. Tan, Sunny Yu,
Bria Long, Wanjing Anya Ma, Tonya Murray,
Rebecca D. Silverman, Jason D. Yeatman, Michael C. Frank
Stanford University
{tanawm, syu03, bria, wanjingm, tonyamur,
rdsilver, jyeatman, mcfrank}@stanford.edu

Abstract
How (dis)similar are the learning trajectories of vision–language models and children? Recent modeling work has attempted to understand the gap between models’
and humans’ data efficiency by constructing models trained on less data, especially
multimodal naturalistic data. However, such models are often evaluated on adultlevel benchmarks, with limited breadth in language abilities tested, and without
direct comparison to behavioral data. We introduce D EV B ENCH, a multimodal
benchmark comprising seven language evaluation tasks spanning the domains of
lexical, syntactic, and semantic ability, with behavioral data from both children
and adults. We evaluate a set of vision–language models on these tasks, comparing
models and humans on their response patterns, not their absolute performance.
Across tasks, models exhibit variation in their closeness to human response patterns, and models that perform better on a task also more closely resemble human
behavioral responses. We also examine the developmental trajectory of OpenCLIP
over training, finding that greater training results in closer approximations to adult
response patterns. D EV B ENCH thus provides a benchmark for comparing models
to human language development. These comparisons highlight ways in which
model and human language learning processes diverge, providing insight into entry
points for improving language models.

1

Introduction

Humans are remarkably good language learners, acquiring language rapidly in the first few years of
life without much explicit supervision. Recent machine learning models are also able to acquire some
aspects of human language, although they require much larger quantities of language input than a
typical human would receive [1, 2]. This “data gap” reflects differences in the learning processes and
mechanisms employed by human language learners and language models; understanding the nature
of these differences is pivotal for the joint goals of building better cognitive models of language
learning and building more data-efficient language models.
Recent work has attempted to bridge this data gap by constructing models that are trained on less
data, including on naturalistic data from children [2–5]. However, these models have typically
been evaluated using benchmarks that reflect adult human performance, whether explicitly (i.e.,
with comparison data collected from adult participants) or implicitly (i.e., high accuracy on some
recognition task). Such evaluation methods are not appropriate to the goal of understanding whether
developmentally realistic data leads to human-like learning. We would not expect child performance
to be similar to adult performance on these tasks for various reasons related to both language
competence (i.e., children’s vocabulary knowledge) and to their co-developing cognitive abilities
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

