RankUp: Boosting Semi-Supervised Regression with
an Auxiliary Ranking Classifier

Pin-Yen Huang
Academia Sinica
Taipei, Taiwan
pyhuang97@gmail.com

Szu-Wei Fu
NVIDIA
Taipei, Taiwan
szuweif@nvidia.com

Yu Tsao
Academia Sinica
Taipei, Taiwan
yu.tsao@citi.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract
State-of-the-art (SOTA) semi-supervised learning techniques, such as FixMatch
and it’s variants, have demonstrated impressive performance in classification tasks.
However, these methods are not directly applicable to regression tasks. In this
paper, we present RankUp, a simple yet effective approach that adapts existing semisupervised classification techniques to enhance the performance of regression tasks.
RankUp achieves this by converting the original regression task into a ranking
problem and training it concurrently with the original regression objective. This
auxiliary ranking classifier outputs a classification result, thus enabling integration
with existing semi-supervised classification methods. Moreover, we introduce
regression distribution alignment (RDA), a complementary technique that further
enhances RankUp’s performance by refining pseudo-labels through distribution
alignment. Despite its simplicity, RankUp, with or without RDA, achieves SOTA
results in across a range of regression benchmarks, including computer vision,
audio, and natural language processing tasks. Our code and log data are opensourced at https://github.com/pm25/semi-supervised-regression.

1

Introduction

The effectiveness of deep learning models heavily depends on the availability of labeled data.
However, obtaining labeled data can be challenging in various scenarios. For instance, tasks like
quality assessment often require multiple human annotators to label a single data point [15, 8, 19],
resulting in a labor-intensive and time-consuming process. In domains where expert annotation
is frequently required, such as medical data, the cost of acquiring labeled data can be extremely
expensive [14, 21, 36]. To address these challenges, semi-supervised learning provides a powerful
approach to reduce reliance on labeled data for training deep learning models [22, 34, 17, 24, 7]. By
effectively leveraging the unlabeled data during model training, semi-supervised learning provides a
means to enhance model performance while minimizing the need for extensive labeled data.
Recent state-of-the-art (SOTA) semi-supervised learning methods, such as FixMatch and its variants,
use a confidence threshold technique to obtain high-quality pseudo-labels [22, 34, 27, 4, 31]. This
approach involves generating pseudo-labels from unlabeled data and then filtering out those with low
confidence scores. The model is then trained to produce predictions consistent with these high-quality
pseudo-labels. Despite its success across various classification tasks, directly applying this technique
to regression tasks encounters several challenges. First, unlike classification models, regression
models typically lack confidence measures for their predictions, making the confidence threshold
technique unfeasible. Additionally, one of the motivations behind using pseudo-labels is to increase
the model’s confidence in its predictions for unlabeled data, based on the low-density assumption
[6, 25]. However, as there are no confidence measures in the predictions of regression models, relying
on the low-density assumption and increasing the confidence of unlabeled data becomes unfeasible.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

