GOMAA-Geo: GOal Modality Agnostic Active
Geo-localization

Anindya Sarkar1∗ , Srikumar Sastry1∗ , Aleksis Pirinen2,3 ,
Chongjie Zhang1 , Nathan Jacobs1 , Yevgeniy Vorobeychik1
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis
2
RISE Research Institutes of Sweden
3
Swedish Centre for Impacts of Climate Extremes (climes)
Corresponding authors:

{anindya, s.sastry}@wustl.edu

Abstract
We consider the task of active geo-localization (AGL) in which an agent uses a
sequence of visual cues observed during aerial navigation to find a target specified
through multiple possible modalities. This could emulate a UAV involved in a
search-and-rescue operation navigating through an area, observing a stream of
aerial images as it goes. The AGL task is associated with two important challenges.
Firstly, an agent must deal with a goal specification in one of multiple modalities
(e.g., through a natural language description) while the search cues are provided in
other modalities (aerial imagery). The second challenge is limited localization time
(e.g., limited battery life, urgency) so that the goal must be localized as efficiently
as possible, i.e. the agent must effectively leverage its sequentially observed aerial
views when searching for the goal. To address these challenges, we propose
GOMAA-Geo – a goal modality agnostic active geo-localization agent – for zeroshot generalization between different goal modalities. Our approach combines
cross-modality contrastive learning to align representations across modalities with
supervised foundation model pretraining and reinforcement learning to obtain
highly effective navigation and localization policies. Through extensive evaluations,
we show that GOMAA-Geo outperforms alternative learnable approaches and that
it generalizes across datasets – e.g., to disaster-hit areas without seeing a single
disaster scenario during training – and goal modalities – e.g., to ground-level
imagery or textual descriptions, despite only being trained with goals specified as
aerial views. Our code is available at: https://github.com/mvrl/GOMAA-Geo.

1

Introduction

A common objective among many search-and-rescue (SAR) operations is to locate missing individuals
within a defined search area, such as a specific neighborhood. To this end, one may leverage indirect
information about the location of these individuals that may come from natural language descriptions,
photographs, etc, e.g. through social media or eyewitness accounts. However, such information may
not allow us to precisely identify actual locations (for example, these may not be provided on social
media), and potential GPS information may be unreliable. In such situations, deploying a UAV to
explore the area from an aerial perspective can be effective for accurate localization and subsequent
assistance to those who are missing. However, the field of view of a UAV is typically limited (at
least in comparison with the area to be explored), and the inherent urgency of search-and-rescue
tasks imposes an effective temporal budget constraint. We refer to this general task and modeling
framework as goal modality agnostic active geo-localization. Pirinen et al. [24] recently introduced a
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

