Multi-times Monte Carlo Rendering for
Inter-reflection Reconstruction
Tengjie Zhu ∗

Zhuo Chen *

Jingnan Gao

Yichao Yan†

Xiaokang Yang

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{zhutengjie, ningci5252, gjn0310, yanyichao, xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Inverse rendering methods have achieved remarkable performance in reconstructing
high-fidelity 3D objects with disentangled geometries, materials, and environmental
light. However, they still face huge challenges in reflective surface reconstruction.
Although recent methods model the light trace to learn specularity, the ignorance
of indirect illumination makes it hard to handle inter-reflections among multiple
smooth objects. In this work, we propose Ref-MC2 that introduces the multitimes Monte Carlo sampling which comprehensively computes the environmental
illumination and meanwhile considers the reflective light from object surfaces. To
address the computation challenge as the times of Monte Carlo sampling grow,
we propose a specularity-adaptive sampling strategy, significantly reducing the
computational complexity. Besides the computational resource, higher geometry
accuracy is also required because geometric errors accumulate multiple times.
Therefore, we further introduce a reflection-aware surface model to initialize the
geometry and refine it during inverse rendering. We construct a challenging dataset
containing scenes with multiple objects and inter-reflections. Experiments show
that our method outperforms other inverse rendering methods on various object
groups. We also show downstream applications, e.g., relighting and material
editing, to illustrate the disentanglement ability of our method. Our project page:
https://zhutengjie.github.io/Ref-MC2/.

1

Introduction

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [26] and 3DGS [16] have demonstrated their excellent performance
on novel view synthesis. However, it is difficult to directly apply their reconstructed 3D model to the
current industrial pipeline, leading to the lack of flexibility in many downstream applications, e.g.,
relighting and material editing. To better cooperate with mature techniques, inverse rendering bases
the physical rendering [24] and utilizes the neural network to learn disentangled materials that can be
seamlessly plunged into the industrial pipeline for further manipulation.
Previous methods [28, 9, 45, 57] have explored how to disentangle geometry, diffuse, roughness,
metalness, and environmental light from multi-view images, but they still face challenges in shading
and reflective objects. Specifically, Nvdiffrec [28] proposes a differentiable pipeline that enables
gradient-based optimization on both meshes and volumetric textures. These methods ignore the
shadow when modeling the illumination, resulting in failed disentanglement for diffuse and shading
appearances. To model more realistic shadings, Nvdiffrecmc [9] further incorporates ray tracing
and Monte Carlo sampling [27] into inverse rendering, significantly improving the decomposition
of shape, materials, and lighting. However, it ignores the indirect illuminations during path tracing
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

