Verified Safe Reinforcement Learning for Neural
Network Dynamic Models

Junlin Wu
Computer Science & Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
junlin.wu@wustl.edu

Huan Zhang
Electrical & Computer Engineering
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
huan@huan-zhang.com

Yevgeniy Vorobeychik
Computer Science & Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
yvorobeychik@wustl.edu

Abstract
Learning reliably safe autonomous control is one of the core problems in trustworthy autonomy. However, training a controller that can be formally verified to
be safe remains a major challenge. We introduce a novel approach for learning
verified safe control policies in nonlinear neural dynamical systems while maximizing overall performance. Our approach aims to achieve safety in the sense of
finite-horizon reachability proofs, and is comprised of three key parts. The first
is a novel curriculum learning scheme that iteratively increases the verified safe
horizon. The second leverages the iterative nature of gradient-based learning to
leverage incremental verification, reusing information from prior verification runs.
Finally, we learn multiple verified initial-state-dependent controllers, an idea that
is especially valuable for more complex domains where learning a single universal
verified safe controller is extremely challenging. Our experiments on five safe control problems demonstrate that our trained controllers can achieve verified safety
over horizons that are as much as an order of magnitude longer than state-of-the-art
baselines, while maintaining high reward, as well as a perfect safety record over
entire episodes. Our code is available at https://github.com/jlwu002/VSRL.

1

Introduction

The ability to synthesize safe control policies is one of the core challenges in autonomous systems.
This problem has been explored from numerous directions across multiple disciplines, including
control theory and AI [Achiam et al., 2017, Dawson et al., 2022]. While considerable progress has
been made, particularly when dynamics are linear [Wabersich and Zeilinger, 2018], the ability to
synthesize controllers that can be successfully verified to be safe while maintaining high performance
in nonlinear dynamical systems remains a major open problem. Indeed, even the subproblem of
safety verification in nonlinear systems is viewed in itself as a major challenge and is an active area
of research, particularly for neural network controllers [Bastani et al., 2018, Ivanov et al., 2019, Wei
and Liu, 2022]. State-of-the-art approaches for safe control synthesis, including most that leverage
reinforcement learning [Gu et al., 2022], typically only offer empirical evaluation of safety, and rely
on safety proofs that hold either asymptotically (rather than for concrete problems) [Xiong et al.,
2024] or under idealized assumptions which do not hold in practice [Berkenkamp et al., 2017].
Two common properties are typically leveraged in safety verification: forward invariance and
reachability. The former aims to identify a set of starting subsets of safe states under which one-step
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

