Vision-Language Models are Strong Noisy Label
Detectors
Tong Wei1,2,3

Hao-Tian Li1,2 Chun-Shu Li1,2 Jiang-Xin Shi3,4
Yu-Feng Li3,4 Min-Ling Zhang1,2
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
2
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University),
Ministry of Education, China
3
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{weit,liht}@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent research on fine-tuning vision-language models has demonstrated impressive performance in various downstream tasks. However, the challenge of obtaining accurately labeled data in real-world applications poses a significant obstacle
during the fine-tuning process. To address this challenge, this paper presents a
Denoising Fine-Tuning framework, called D E FT, for adapting vision-language
models. D E FT utilizes the robust alignment of textual and visual features pretrained on millions of auxiliary image-text pairs to sieve out noisy labels. The proposed framework establishes a noisy label detector by learning positive and negative
textual prompts for each class. The positive prompt seeks to reveal distinctive features of the class, while the negative prompt serves as a learnable threshold for separating clean and noisy samples. We employ parameter-efficient fine-tuning for the
adaptation of a pre-trained visual encoder to promote its alignment with the learned
textual prompts. As a general framework, D E FT can seamlessly fine-tune many
pre-trained models to downstream tasks by utilizing carefully selected clean samples. Experimental results on seven synthetic and real-world noisy datasets validate
the effectiveness of D E FT in both noisy label detection and image classification
tasks. Our source code is available at https://github.com/HotanLee/DeFT.

1

Introduction

Vision-language models pre-trained on large-scale image-text pairs, such as Contrastive LanguageImage Pretraining (CLIP) [29], have gained widespread adoption in various machine learning tasks
including few-shot learning [53, 52], multi-label learning [33, 14], and long-tail recognition [7, 30].
Recently, CLIP has shown impressive generalization performance to many downstream tasks without
the need for adaptation [36, 31]. Zero-shot CLIP leverages the strong alignment of learned visual and
textual features and classifies unseen images by comparing the similarity of image embedding with
textual class prompts. Despite the good zero-shot performance, fine-tuning becomes necessary when
the data distribution of downstream tasks significantly deviates from the CLIP training source. Two
popular fine-tuning paradigms are commonly employed for adaptation, i.e., full fine-tuning (FFT),
which modifies all model parameters, and parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT), which fixes the
pre-trained parameters while adding a few learnable parameters for adaptation. While promising,
fine-tuning CLIP necessitates perfectly labeled datasets which may not be readily available in many
real-world tasks, thereby hindering their broader applicability.
To tackle this issue, this paper investigates the fine-tuning of CLIP utilizing imperfectly labeled
datasets, i.e., datasets with noisy labels. Intuitively, direct adaptation using noisy labels can signifi38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

