How Sparse Can We Prune A Deep Network: A
Fundamental Limit Perspective

Qiaozhe Zhang, Ruijie Zhang, Jun Sun∗, Yingzhuang Liu
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
qiaozhezhang@hust.edu.cn, ruijiezhang@ucsb.edu
juns@hust.edu.cn, liuyz@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Network pruning is a commonly used measure to alleviate the storage and computational burden of deep neural networks. However, the fundamental limit of
network pruning is still lacking. To close the gap, in this work we’ll take a
first-principles approach, i.e. we’ll directly impose the sparsity constraint on
the loss function and leverage the framework of statistical dimension in convex geometry, thus enabling us to characterize the sharp phase transition point,
which can be regarded as the fundamental limit of the pruning ratio. Through
this limit, we’re able to identify two key factors that determine the pruning ratio limit, namely, weight magnitude and network sharpness. Generally speaking,
the flatter the loss landscape or the smaller the weight magnitude, the smaller
pruning ratio. Moreover, we provide efficient countermeasures to address the
challenges in the computation of the pruning limit, which mainly involves the
accurate spectrum estimation of a large-scale and non-positive Hessian matrix.
Moreover, through the lens of the pruning ratio threshold, we can also provide
rigorous interpretations on several heuristics in existing pruning algorithms. Extensive experiments are performed which demonstrate that our theoretical pruning
ratio threshold coincides very well with the experiments. All codes are available at:
https://github.com/QiaozheZhang/Global-One-shot-Pruning

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved huge success in the past decade, which relies heavily
on the overparametrization, i.e. the number of parameters is normally several order of magnitudes
more than the number of data samples. Though being a key enabler for the striking performance of
DNN, overparametrization poses huge burden for computation and storage in practice. It is therefore
tempting to ask: 1) Can we prune the DNN by a large ratio without performance sacrifice? 2) What’s
the fundamental limit of network pruning?
For the first question, a key approach is to perform network pruning, which was first introduced
by [21]. Network pruning can substantially decrease the number of parameters, thus alleviating
the computational and storage burden. The basic idea of network pruning is simple, i.e., to devise
metrics to evaluate the significance of parameters and remove the insignificant ones. Various pruning
algorithms have been proposed so far: [21; 12; 13; 23; 42; 35; 36; 24; 22; 15] and [13].
In contrast, our understanding on the second question, i.e., the fundamental limit of network pruning,
is far less. Some relevant works are: [19] proposed to characterize the degrees of freedom of a
DNN by exploiting the framework of Gaussian width. [25] directly applied the above degrees of
freedom result to the pruning problem, in the main purpose of unveiling the mechanisms behind the
∗

Jun Sun (juns@hust.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

