Graph Diffusion Transformers for
Multi-Conditional Molecular Generation
Gang Liu, Jiaxin Xu, Tengfei Luo, Meng Jiang
University of Notre Dame
{gliu7, jxu24, tluo, mjiang2}@nd.edu

Abstract
Inverse molecular design with diffusion models holds great potential for advancements in material and drug discovery. Despite success in unconditional molecular
generation, integrating multiple properties such as synthetic score and gas permeability as condition constraints into diffusion models remains unexplored. We
present the Graph Diffusion Transformer (Graph DiT) for multi-conditional molecular generation. Graph DiT integrates an encoder to learn numerical and categorical
property representations with the Transformer-based denoiser. Unlike previous
graph diffusion models that add noise separately on the atoms and bonds in the
forward diffusion process, Graph DiT is trained with a novel graph-dependent
noise model for accurate estimation of graph-related noise in molecules. We extensively validate Graph DiT for multi-conditional polymer and small molecule
generation. Results demonstrate the superiority of Graph DiT across nine metrics
from distribution learning to condition control for molecular properties. A polymer
inverse design task for gas separation with feedback from domain experts further
demonstrates its practical utility.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models for molecular graphs are essential for inverse design of materials and drugs by
generating molecules and polymers (macro-molecules) [40, 46], because the models can be effectively
trained to predict discrete graph structures and atom/bond types in denoising processes [43]. Practical
inverse designs consider multiple factors such as molecular synthetic score and various properties [15],
known as the task of multi-conditional graph generation.
Existing work converted multiple conditions into a single one and solved the task as single-condition
generation [5, 25]. However, multi-property relations may not be properly or explicitly defined [5].
First, the properties have diverse scales and units. For example, the synthetic complexity ranges from
1 to 5 [8], while the gas permeability varies widely, exceeding 10,000 in Barrier units [4]. This gap
makes it hard for models to balance the conditions. Second, multi-conditions consist of a mix of
categorical and numerical properties. The common practice of addition [47] or multiplication [25] is
inadequate for combination.
Figure 1(a) empirically illustrates the challenges in multi-conditional generation, i.e., discovering
molecules meeting multiple properties. We used a test set of 100 data points with three properties: synthesizability (Synth.) [12], O2 and N2 permeability (O2 Perm and N2 Perm) [4]. A single-conditional
diffusion model generated up to 30 graphs for each condition, resulting in a total of 90 graphs for three
conditions. We sort the 30 graphs in each set using a polymer property Oracle (see appendix B.3).
Then, we check whether a shared polymer structure that meets multi-property constraints can be
identified across different condition sets. If we find the polymer, its rank K (where K is between 1
and 30) indicates how high it appears on the lists, considering all condition sets. If not, we set K
as 30. Figure 1(a) shows the frequency distribution of K on the 100 test cases. The median K was
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

