Gradient Methods for Online DR-Submodular
Maximization with Stochastic Long-Term Constraints

Guanyu Nie
Iowa State University
Ames, IA 50010
nieg@iastate.edu

Vaneet Aggarwal
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
vaneet@purdue.edu

Christopher John Quinn
Iowa State University
Ames, IA 50010
cjquinn@iastate.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the problem of online monotone DR-submodular maximization subject to long-term stochastic constraints. Specifically, at each round
t ∈ [T ], after committing an action xt , a random reward ft (xt ) and an unbiased gradient estimate of the point e
∇ft (xt ) (semi-bandit feedback) are revealed.
Meanwhile, a budget of gt (xt ), which is linear and stochastic, is consumed of
its total allotted budget√BT . We propose a gradient ascent based algorithm that
achieves 12 -regret of O( T ) with O(T 3/4 ) constraint violation with high probability. Moreover, when first-order full-information feedback
is available, we propose
√
an algorithm that achieves (1 − 1/e)-regret of O( T ) with O(T 3/4 ) constraint
violation. These algorithms significantly improve over the state-of-the-art in terms
of query complexity.

1

Introduction

Online optimization confronts diverse challenges as information gradually unfolds, compelling
irreversible decisions at each step amidst uncertainty about future information. Typically, an online
optimization problem can be framed as a recurring game between a learner or algorithm and an
adversary or environment: during each iteration, the learner chooses an action from a predefined
domain set, and the environment subsequently reveals feedback in the form of utility or reward
for the selected action. Over time, the learner aims to learn from past experiences and improve
decision-making strategies to maximize cumulative rewards.
In instances where the objective function is concave and the feasible set is convex, the problem has
been extensively explored in the literature under the name of online convex optimization (OCO)
[13]. OCO has found considerable success in various machine learning applications, leveraging the
well-established theories
√ of convex optimization. Within OCO, it is established that any algorithm
incurs a regret of Ω( T ) in the worst case [13]. Notably, there exist algorithms that match this lower
bound, such as Online Gradient Descent (OGD) [43].
Even though optimizing convex/concave functions can be done efficiently, most problems in artificial
intelligence are non-convex. Examples include training deep neural networks, Bayesian inference,
and clustering, among many others. One important example of such functions is called submodular
set function. Submodular set functions exhibit a natural property known as diminishing returns, akin
to concave functions in continuous domains. They have been applied in various machine learning
contexts, including viral marketing [16], sensor placement [11], recommendation systems [23], data
summarization [22], and numerous others. However, submodularity extends beyond set functions and
can also be defined for continuous functions. DR-submodularity represents a special class of such
continuous functions [5].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

