From News to Forecast: Integrating Event Analysis in
LLM-Based Time Series Forecasting with Reflection

Xinlei Wang1 , Maike Feng2 , Jing Qiu1 , Jinjin Gu1,* , Junhua Zhao2,3∗
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Sydney
2
School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
{xinlei.wang, jeremy.qiu, jinjin.gu}@sydney.edu.au, zhaojunhua@cuhk.edu.cn
1

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel approach that leverages Large Language Models
(LLMs) and Generative Agents to enhance time series forecasting by reasoning
across both text and time series data. With language as a medium, our method
adaptively integrates social events into forecasting models, aligning news content
with time series fluctuations to provide richer insights. Specifically, we utilize
LLM-based agents to iteratively filter out irrelevant news and employ human-like
reasoning to evaluate predictions. This enables the model to analyze complex
events, such as unexpected incidents and shifts in social behavior, and continuously
refine the selection logic of news and the robustness of the agent’s output. By integrating selected news events with time series data, we fine-tune a pre-trained LLM
to predict sequences of digits in time series. The results demonstrate significant
improvements in forecasting accuracy, suggesting a potential paradigm shift in
time series forecasting through the effective utilization of unstructured news data.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting [18, 21] serves as an essential foundation for decision-making across a
wide range of economic, infrastructural, and social domains [2, 13, 14, 16, 56]. The purpose of
analyzing time series data is to decode the evolving relationships within complex, dynamic realworld systems. Traditional forecasting methods, while effective at identifying patterns in historical
data, perform well when time series distributions remain consistent over time. However, they have
limitations in addressing sudden disruptions or anomalies caused by external random events, and do
not systematically connect complex social events with fluctuations in time series data. Integrating
insights from real-world events and their effects on social and economic behavior is crucial for
improving the reliability and accuracy of time series forecasting.
News articles provide crucial insights into unexpected incidents, policy changes, technological
developments, and public sentiment shifts—factors that numerical data alone may not capture.
Integrating news into forecasting enriches its inputs with context that closely mirrors the complexities
of human behavior and societal changes. On the one hand, news offers a real-time snapshot of events,
enabling the model to adjust predictions based on updated information. On the other hand, qualitative
data from news sources enables the model to account for non-linear and non-numeric influences.
By combining both quantitative and qualitative insights, the model can improve forecast accuracy,
especially in rapidly changing environments, making it more reflective of real-world dynamics.
In this work, we propose a unified approach that embeds news and supplementary information into
time series data using textual prompts. By fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) [54, 55, 66],
∗
†

Junhua Zhao and Jinjin Gu are the corresponding authors.
Code and data are available at https://github.com/ameliawong1996/From_News_to_Forecast.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

