Recurrent neural networks: vanishing and exploding
gradients are not the end of the story

Nicolas Zucchet
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
nzucchet@ethz.ch

Antonio Orvieto
ELLIS Institute Tübingen
MPI for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen AI Center
antonio@tue.ellis.eu

Abstract
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) notoriously struggle to learn long-term memories, primarily due to vanishing and exploding gradients. The recent success of
deep state-space models (SSMs), a subclass of RNNs, to overcome such difficulties
challenges our theoretical understanding. In this paper, we delve into the optimization challenges of RNNs and discover that, as the memory of a network increases,
changes in its parameters result in increasingly large output variations, making
gradient-based learning highly sensitive, even without exploding gradients. Our
analysis further reveals the importance of the element-wise recurrence design pattern combined with careful parametrizations in mitigating this effect. This feature
is present in deep SSMs, as well as in other architectures, such as LSTMs. Overall,
our insights provide a new explanation for some of the difficulties in gradient-based
learning of RNNs and why some architectures perform better than others.
Recurrent neural networks [RNNs; 1, 2] have long been the canonical architecture for modeling
temporal data [3, 4]. However, they are notoriously difficult to train on long sequences, as error
signals flowing backward in time tend to either vanish or explode [5–8]. Attention mechanisms [9],
as featured in transformers [10], address these issues by enabling direct token-to-token communication, considerably simplifying signal propagation across long time intervals. Yet, their superior
performance comes with increased computational and memory costs, due to their quadratic scaling in
the sequence length. This limitation has motivated significant research aimed at making transformers
more efficient [11–15].
A promising line of research in this direction involves a new type of linear recurrent networks known
as deep state-space models [SSMs; 16–22]. These models trade expressivity for faster training speed,
and they have been shown to be particularly effective at capturing long-range dependencies. In
this paper, we wonder whether this effectiveness can be solely attributed to their ability to avoid
vanishing and exploding gradients. The simplicity of such models presents an opportunity for in-depth
theoretical analysis. We focus on signal propagation within these models.
After reviewing classical results on recurrent neural networks in Section 1, we demonstrate that
they can suffer from an understudied problem: as the recurrent network encodes longer memories,
the network’s activity becomes increasingly sensitive to changes in its parameters, even when its
dynamics remains stable. In Section 3, we then show that SSMs, as well as other architectures
such as LSTMs, are well equipped to mitigate this issue. We then analyze a simple teacher-student
task (Section 4). This task already reveals the remarkable complexity underlying the learning of
linear recurrent networks and enables us to verify empirically our theory. Finally, we discuss how
our findings extend to more realistic scenarios (Section 5), both in terms of architectures and data.
Overall, our paper provides theoretical insights into the training of recurrent neural networks, an area
where such analysis is rare. While vanishing and exploding gradients are well-known challenges, our
results demonstrate that this is not the end of the story - there exists an additional layer of complexity
beyond them.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

