Learning to Cooperate with Humans
using Generative Agents

Yancheng Liang, Daphne Chen, Abhishek Gupta, Simon S. Du*, Natasha Jaques*
University of Washington
{yancheng, daphc, abhgupta, ssdu, nj}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Training agents that can coordinate zero-shot with humans is a key mission in
multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). Current algorithms focus on training
simulated human partner policies which are then used to train a Cooperator agent.
The simulated human is produced either through behavior cloning over a dataset of
human cooperation behavior, or by using MARL to create a population of simulated
agents. However, these approaches often struggle to produce a Cooperator that
can coordinate well with real humans, since the simulated humans fail to cover
the diverse strategies and styles employed by people in the real world. We show
learning a generative model of human partners can effectively address this issue.
Our model learns a latent variable representation of the human that can be regarded
as encoding the human’s unique strategy, intention, experience, or style. This
generative model can be flexibly trained from any (human or neural policy) agent
interaction data. By sampling from the latent space, we can use the generative
model to produce different partners to train Cooperator agents. We evaluate our
method—Generative Agent Modeling for Multi-agent Adaptation (GAMMA)—on
Overcooked, a challenging cooperative cooking game that has become a standard
benchmark for zero-shot coordination. We conduct an evaluation with real human
teammates, and the results show that GAMMA consistently improves performance,
whether the generative model is trained on simulated populations or human datasets.
Further, we propose a method for posterior sampling from the generative model that
is biased towards the human data, enabling us to efficiently improve performance
with only a small amount of expensive human interaction data. 1

1

Introduction

Producing agents that can cooperate well with unseen partners such as humans [28] is an important
problem for a variety of multi-agent systems across domains like robotics or software agents. While
being cooperative is a notable characteristic of human intelligence [7, 32], training an artificial agent
that cooperates well with humans poses a significant challenge. Human behaviors are uncertain and
diverse, encompassing a wide range of preferences, abilities, and intentions. While humans can
rapidly adapt to different partners, AI agents are particularly poor at generalizing to working with a
novel human partner. Solving this issue of distribution shift between the human player’s strategy and
those seen during the training of an AI agent is crucial to achieving human-AI cooperation.
It is tempting to tackle this problem of learning to cooperate with humans using only data of humanhuman interactions [1]. While this may certainly provide some leverage, in many situations the
amount of human-human data available is far less than the amount of data required by data-hungry
sequential decision making algorithms. This suggests that we need a way to generate synthetic data at
1

See our website for human-AI study videos and an interactive demo. The training code is also available.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

