Towards Unified Multimodal Editing
with Enhanced Knowledge Collaboration

Kaihang Pan1,∗ , Zhaoyu Fan1,∗ , Juncheng Li1,† , Qifan Yu1 , Hao Fei2
Siliang Tang1 , Richang Hong3 , Hanwang Zhang4 , Qianru Sun5
Zhejiang University1 , National University of Singapore2
Hefei University of Technology3 , Nanyang Technological University4
Singapore Management University5
{kaihangpan, zyfan, junchengli, yuqifan, siliang}@zju.edu.cn
haofei37@nus.edu.sg, hongrc.hfut@gmail.com
hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg, qianrusun@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
The swift advancement in Multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) also presents significant
challenges for effective knowledge editing. Current methods, including intrinsic
knowledge editing and external knowledge resorting, each possess strengths and
weaknesses, struggling to balance the desired properties of reliability, generality,
and locality when applied to MLLMs. In this paper, we propose UniKE, a novel
multimodal editing method that establishes a unified perspective and paradigm
for intrinsic knowledge editing and external knowledge resorting. Both types
of knowledge are conceptualized as vectorized key-value memories, with the
corresponding editing processes resembling the assimilation and accommodation
phases of human cognition, conducted at the same semantic levels. Within such a
unified framework, we further promote knowledge collaboration by disentangling
the knowledge representations into the semantic and truthfulness spaces. Extensive
experiments validate the effectiveness of our method, which ensures that the postedit MLLM simultaneously maintains excellent reliability, generality, and locality.
The code for UniKE is available at https://github.com/beepkh/UniKE.

1

Introduction

The rapid development of Large Language Models (LLMs) [35, 36] has made it increasingly important
to ensure the real-time accuracy of their outputs in an efficient manner. To this end, in the NLP
community, Knowledge Editing [41, 45] has been proposed as a data- and time-efficient way to edit
LLMs, correcting errors or outdated responses while ensuring no negative impacts are created. The
post-edit model is required to generate the desired output given the input (Reliability), also generalize
over other equivalent neighbors of inputs (Generality) without altering the output over other irrelevant
inputs (Locality). Knowledge editing methods can be divided into two main categories based on the
type of knowledge involved: intrinsic knowledge editing [11, 28] where we update specific model
parameters to store new knowledge in a parametric manner; external knowledge resorting [46, 29]
that LLMs perceive the new knowledge contained in the relevant context (e.g., via in-context learning).
Both types of methods have shown good effectiveness in editing LLMs.
Going a step further, with the emergence of advanced multimodal large language models (MLLMs [1]),
there has been a further exploration into Multimodal Editing. Unfortunately, [4] finds that though
* Equal Contribution.
†

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

