NeuroGauss4D-PCI: 4D Neural Fields and Gaussian
Deformation Fields for Point Cloud Interpolation

Chaokang Jiang1∗ , Dalong Du1∗ , Jiuming Liu2 , Siting Zhu2 ,
Zhenqiang Liu1 , Zhuang Ma1 , Zhujin Liang1 , Jie Zhou3†
1
PhiGent Robotics, 2 Shanghai Jiaotong University, 3 Tsinghua University ∗

Abstract
Point Cloud Interpolation confronts challenges from point sparsity, complex spatiotemporal dynamics, and the difficulty of deriving complete 3D point clouds
from sparse temporal information. This paper presents NeuroGauss4D-PCI, which
excels at modeling complex non-rigid deformations across varied dynamic scenes.
The method begins with an iterative Gaussian cloud soft clustering module, offering
structured temporal point cloud representations. The proposed temporal radial basis
function Gaussian residual utilizes Gaussian parameter interpolation over time, enabling smooth parameter transitions and capturing temporal residuals of Gaussian
distributions. Additionally, a 4D Gaussian deformation field tracks the evolution
of these parameters, creating continuous spatiotemporal deformation fields. A
4D neural field transforms low-dimensional spatiotemporal coordinates (x, y, z, t)
into a high-dimensional latent space. Finally, we adaptively and efficiently fuse
the latent features from neural fields and the geometric features from Gaussian
deformation fields. NeuroGauss4D-PCI outperforms existing methods in point
cloud frame interpolation, delivering leading performance on both object-level
(DHB) and large-scale autonomous driving datasets (NL-Drive), with scalability to
auto-labeling and point cloud densification tasks. The source code is released at
github.com/jiangchaokang/NeuroGauss4D-PCI.

1

Introduction

Point cloud frame interpolation (PCI) [1; 2] aims to estimate intermediate frames given two or more
point cloud frames. This task enables the generation of temporally smooth and continuous point
cloud sequences at arbitrary timestamps, which is crucial for applications such as autonomous driving
[3; 4] and virtual reality [5; 6; 7]. PCI can be expressed with the following formula:
 red
N ×3
FΘ ({P ∈ RNi ×3 }t=0,4,8··· , Tt=0,4,8··· ),
FΘ (Pt=i , Tt=i , Tt=j ) → PP
. (1)
t=j ∈ R
|
{z
}
|
{z
}
Training Data

Inference Input

PCI faces several challenges due to the unique characteristics of point cloud data and the complexity
of modeling spatiotemporal dynamics: 1) Point clouds are inherently sparse and unordered, lacking
the regular structure of images. For instance, NeuralPCI [3] simply concatenates spatial and temporal
coordinates as inputs to an MLP, struggling to adequately represent the motion and correlation of
multiple unordered point clouds over time. 2) PCI involves modeling the spatiotemporal dynamics
of point clouds, requiring the interpolation model FΘ to capture the spatial structure and temporal
evolution of the scene from 4D training data ({P ∈ RNi ×3 }t=0,4,8··· , Tt=0,4,8··· ), and model the
non-rigid deformations and non-linear trajectories of discrete 3D points. This leads to the linear
motion assumption of PointINet [8], which uses bidirectional scene flow to warp input frames for
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

