Utilizing Human Behavior Modeling to Manipulate
Explanations in AI-Assisted Decision Making:
The Good, the Bad, and the Scary

Zhuoyan Li
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, 47906
li4178@purdue.edu

Ming Yin
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, 47906
mingyin@purdue.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in AI models have increased the integration of AI-based decision
aids into the human decision making process. To fully unlock the potential of AIassisted decision making, researchers have computationally modeled how humans
incorporate AI recommendations into their final decisions, and utilized these models
to improve human-AI team performance. Meanwhile, due to the “black-box” nature
of AI models, providing AI explanations to human decision makers to help them
rely on AI recommendations more appropriately has become a common practice. In
this paper, we explore whether we can quantitatively model how humans integrate
both AI recommendations and explanations into their decision process, and whether
this quantitative understanding of human behavior from the learned model can
be utilized to manipulate AI explanations, thereby nudging individuals towards
making targeted decisions. Our extensive human experiments across various tasks
demonstrate that human behavior can be easily influenced by these manipulated
explanations towards targeted outcomes, regardless of the intent being adversarial
or benign. Furthermore, individuals often fail to detect any anomalies in these
explanations, despite their decisions being affected by them.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in AI models have significantly increased the integration of AI-based decision aids
into human decision making process. The widespread adoption of such AI-based decision aids has
opened up a new paradigm of human-AI collaboration–the AI model provides recommendations for
a given decision making task, while human decision makers are responsible for making the final
decisions. To fully unlock the potential of AI-based decision aids in enhancing human decision
making, a few studies [1–5] have developed computational models to capture how humans factor
AI recommendations into their decision-making process, and explored how these behavioral models
can be utilized to improve human-AI team performance. For example, Vodrahalli, Gerstenberg,
and Zou [6] developed a human behavior model to characterize the impact of AI predictions and
confidence levels on human final decisions. This model was then utilized to adjust the model
confidence displayed to people, with the objective of calibrating human trust in AI assistance.
Meanwhile, the black-box nature of prevalent AI models has driven a greater integration of model
explanations, generated through various explainable AI (XAI) methods [7–11], into AI-assisted
decision making. These explanations seek to provide some insights into the the underlying decision
rationales of AI models, assisting humans in evaluating the reliability of AI decisions and identifying
the optimal strategies to rely on AI recommendations. However, many empirical studies [12–18],
which evaluate the effectiveness of current XAI methods for improving people’s understanding
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

