Cloud Object Detector Adaptation by Integrating
Different Source Knowledge

Shuaifeng Li1 Mao Ye1∗ Lihua Zhou1 Nianxin Li1 Siying Xiao1 Song Tang2 Xiatian Zhu3
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
University of Shanghai for Science and Technology
3
University of Surrey
hotwindlsf@gmail.com, cvlab.uestc@gmail.com, xiatian.zhu@surrey.ac.uk
https://github.com/Flashkong/COIN

Abstract
We propose to explore an interesting and promising problem, Cloud Object Detector Adaptation (CODA), where the target domain leverages detections provided
by a large cloud model to build a target detector. Despite with powerful generalization capability, the cloud model still cannot achieve error-free detection in a
specific target domain. In this work, we present a novel Cloud Object detector
adaptation method by Integrating different source kNowledge (COIN). The key
idea is to incorporate a public vision-language model (CLIP) to distill positive
knowledge while refining negative knowledge for adaptation by self-promotion
gradient direction alignment. To that end, knowledge dissemination, separation,
and distillation are carried out successively. Knowledge dissemination combines
knowledge from cloud detector and CLIP model to initialize a target detector and
a CLIP detector in target domain. By matching CLIP detector with the cloud
detector, knowledge separation categorizes detections into three parts: consistent,
inconsistent and private detections such that divide-and-conquer strategy can be
used for knowledge distillation. Consistent and private detections are directly used
to train target detector; while inconsistent detections are fused based on a consistent
knowledge generation network, which is trained by aligning the gradient direction
of inconsistent detections to that of consistent detections, because it provides a
direction toward an optimal target detector. Experiment results demonstrate that
the proposed COIN method achieves the state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

The emergence of large language models like GPT-4 [45] heralds a future in which cloud model
possesses remarkable capabilities tailored to specific tasks. But the performance always will be
degraded for special target domain. Naturally, the problem of Cloud Domain Adaptation (CDA)
emerges, where the knowledge from cloud model is transferred to the target domain by cloud API
requests. This work focuses on Cloud Object Detector Adaptation (CODA), a new problem setting
in domain adaptation. This problem is training a detector for any target domain under the conditions
that there exists a large cloud detector offering API service while target domain samples have not any
labels. As shown in Fig.1(a), compared with previous settings, there are two main advantages: (1)
open target scenarios and object categories; (2) without high domain similarity between domains.
There have been some advances in related fields. Source-free Object Detection (SFOD) [35, 33]
transfers a pre-trained model from the source domain to the target domain without considering the
∗

The corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

