LSH-MoE: Communication-efficient MoE Training via
Locality-Sensitive Hashing

Xiaonan Nie1 Qibin Liu1 Fangcheng Fu1 Shenhan Zhu1 Xupeng Miao2
Xiaoyang Li3 Yang Zhang3 Shouda Liu3 Bin Cui1
1
Peking University 2 Purdue University 3 ByteDance
1
{xiaonan.nie,2101212782,ccchengff,shenhan.zhu,bin.cui}@pku.edu.cn
2
xupeng@purdue.edu 3 {lixiaoyang.x,zhangyang.elfin,liushouda}@bytedance.com

Abstract
Larger transformer models always perform better on various tasks but require more
costs to scale up the model size. To efficiently enlarge models, the mixture-ofexperts (MoE) architecture is widely adopted, which consists of a gate network
and a series of experts and keep the training cost constant by routing the input data
to a fixed number of experts instead of all. In existing large-scale MoE training
systems, experts would be distributed among different GPUs for parallelization,
and thus input data requires additional all-to-all communications to access the
target experts and conduct corresponding computations. However, upon evaluating
the training process of three mainstream MoE models on commonly used GPU
clusters, we found that the all-to-all communication ratio averaged around 45%,
which significantly hinders the efficiency and scalability of training MoE models.
In this paper, we propose LSH-MoE, a communication-efficient MoE training framework using locality-sensitive hashing (LSH). We first present the problems of
scaling MoE training in existing systems and highlight the potential of exploiting
token similarity to facilitate data compression. Then, we introduce an efficient
LSH-based compression technique, which utilizes the cross-polytope hashing for
rapid clustering and implements a residual-based error compensation scheme to
alleviate the adverse impact of compression. To verify the effectiveness of our
methods, we conduct experiments on both language models (e.g., RoBERTa, GPT,
and T5) and vision models (e.g., Swin) for pre-training and fine-tuning tasks. The
results demonstrate that our method substantially outperforms its counterparts
across different tasks by 1.28× - 2.2× of speedup.

1

Introduction

In recent years, large-scale pre-trained models have significantly advanced the performance of
deep learning across various complex tasks, including computer vision [8, 20], natural language
processing [3, 7, 28], and multi-modal learning [19]. Commonly referred to as foundation models,
these pre-trained models are primarily built on Transformer architectures [34] and undergo extensive
pre-training on large datasets, utilizing substantial GPU resources. OpenAI has validated the scaling
law for large language models [15] and suggests that increasing the model’s parameter size, the volume
of training data, and the duration of training can significantly enhance the model’s performance.
However, this approach results in a considerable rise in training costs, making the development of
foundation models extremely expensive.
Xiaonan Nie, Qibin Liu, Fangcheng Fu, Shenhan Zhu, and Bin Cui are with the School of Computer Science
and Key Lab of High Confidence Software Technologies (MOE), Peking University. Bin Cui is also with the
Institute of Computational Social Science, Peking University (Qingdao).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

