BoNBoN Alignment for Large Language Models
and the Sweetness of Best-of-n Sampling
Lin Gui1 , Cristina Gârbacea2 , and Victor Veitch1,2
1

Department of Statistics, University of Chicago
2
Data Science Institute, University of Chicago

Abstract
This paper concerns the problem of aligning samples from large language models
to human preferences using best-of-n sampling, where we draw n samples, rank
them, and return the best one. We consider two fundamental problems. First:
what is the relationship between best-of-n and approaches to alignment that
train LLMs to output samples with a high expected reward (e.g., RLHF or DPO)?
To answer this, we embed both the best-of-n distribution and the sampling
distributions learned by alignment procedures in a common class of tiltings of
the base LLM distribution. We then show that, within this class, best-of-n is
essentially optimal in terms of the trade-off between win-rate against the base
model vs KL distance from the base model. That is, best-of-n is the best choice
of alignment distribution if the goal is to maximize win rate. However, best-of-n
requires drawing n samples for each inference, a substantial cost. To avoid
this, the second problem we consider is how to fine-tune a LLM to mimic the
best-of-n sampling distribution. We derive BoNBoN Alignment to achieve this by
exploiting the special structure of the best-of-n distribution. Experiments show
that BoNBoN alignment yields substantial improvements in producing a model
that is preferred to the base policy while minimally affecting off-target aspects.
Code is available at https://github.com/gl-ybnbxb/BoNBoN.

1

Introduction

This paper concerns the problem of aligning large language models (LLMs) to bias their outputs
toward human preferences. There are now a wealth of approaches to this problem [e.g., Ouy+22;
Chr+17; Kau+23; Li+24; Raf+23; Aza+24]. Here, we interested in the best-of-n (BoN) sampling
strategy. In BoN sampling, we draw n samples from the LLM, rank them on the attribute of
interest, and return the best one. This simple procedure is surprisingly effective in practice
[Bei+24; Wan+24; GSH23; Eis+23]. We consider two fundamental questions about BoN:
1. What is the relationship between BoN and other approaches to alignment?
2. How can we effectively train a LLM to mimic the BoN sampling distribution?
In brief: we find that the BoN distribution is (essentially) the optimal policy for maximizing
win rate while minimally affecting off-target aspects of generation, and we develop an effective
method for aligning LLMs to mimic this distribution. Together, these results yield a highly effective
alignment method; see Figure 1 for an illustration.
LLM Alignment The goal of alignment is to bias the outputs of an LLM to be good on some
target attribute (e.g., helpfulness), while minimally changing the behavior of the model on
off-target attributes (e.g., reasoning ability). Commonly, the notion of goodness is elicited by
collecting pairs of responses to many prompts, and asking (human or AI) annotators to choose the
better response. Then, these pairs are used to define a training procedure for updating the base
LLM to a new, aligned, LLM that outputs responses that are better in the target attribute.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

