Variational Delayed Policy Optimization

Qingyuan Wu ∗
University of Southampton

Simon Sinong Zhan ∗
Northwestern University

Yuhui Wang
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology

Chen Lv
Nanyang Technological University

Yixuan Wang
Northwestern University

Chung-Wei Lin
National Taiwan University

Qi Zhu
Northwestern University

Chao Huang †
University of Southampton

Abstract
In environments with delayed observation, state augmentation by including actions within the delay window is adopted to retrieve Markovian property to enable
reinforcement learning (RL). However, state-of-the-art (SOTA) RL techniques
with Temporal-Difference (TD) learning frameworks often suffer from learning
inefficiency, due to the significant expansion of the augmented state space with
the delay. To improve learning efficiency without sacrificing performance, this
work introduces a novel framework called Variational Delayed Policy Optimization (VDPO), which reformulates delayed RL as a variational inference problem.
This problem is further modelled as a two-step iterative optimization problem,
where the first step is TD learning in the delay-free environment with a small
state space, and the second step is behaviour cloning which can be addressed
much more efficiently than TD learning. We not only provide a theoretical analysis of VDPO in terms of sample complexity and performance, but also empirically demonstrate that VDPO can achieve consistent performance with SOTA
methods, with a significant enhancement of sample efficiency (approximately
50% less amount of samples) in the MuJoCo benchmark. Code is available at
https://github.com/QingyuanWuNothing/VDPO.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved considerable success across various domains, including
board game [32], video game [27], cyber-physical systems [40, 41, 43]. Most of these achievements
lack stringent timing constraints, and, therefore, overlook delays in agent-environment interaction.
However, delays are prevalent in many real-world applications stemming from various sensors,
computation, etc, and significantly affect learning efficiency [17], performance [6], and safety [26].
While observation-delay, action-delay, and reward-delay [10] are all crucial, observation-delay
receives the most attention [7, 33, 42]. Unlike reward-delay, observation-delay, which is proved to be
a superset of action-delay [19, 29], disrupts the Markovian property inherent to the environments. In
this work, we focus on the reinforcement learning with a constant observation-delay ∆: at any time
step t, the agent can only observe the state st−∆ , without access to states from t − ∆ + 1 to t.
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Correspondence to: Chao Huang, chao.huang@soton.ac.uk

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

