Speculative Monte-Carlo Tree Search

Scott Cheng♢♠

Mahmut Taylan Kandemir♢

Ding-Yong Hong♠

♢

♠

The Pennsylvania State University, USA
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan

{ypc5394,mtk2}@psu.edu

dyhong@iis.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract
Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS) is an influential sequential decision-making algorithm notably employed in AlphaZero. Despite its success, the primary challenge
in AlphaZero training lies in its prolonged time-to-solution due to the high latency
imposed by the sequential MCTS process. To address this challenge, this paper
proposes and evaluates an inter-decision parallelization strategy called speculative
MCTS, a new type of parallelism in AlphaZero which implements speculative
execution. This approach allows for the parallel execution of future moves before
the current MCTS computations are completed, thus reducing the latency. Additionally, we analyze factors contributing to the overall speedup by studying the
synergistic effects of speculation and neural network caching in MCTS. We also
provide an analytical model that can be used to evaluate the potential of different
speculation strategies before they are implemented and deployed. Our empirical
findings indicate that the proposed speculative MCTS can reduce training latency
by 5.81× in 9x9 Go games. Moreover, our study shows that speculative execution
can enhance the NN cache hit rate by 26% during midgame. Overall, our end-toend evaluation indicates 1.91× speedup in 19x19 Go training time, compared to
the state-of-the-art KataGo program.

1

Introduction

Monte-Carlo tree search (MCTS) [1, 2] is a sequential decision-making algorithm that has achieved
breakthroughs in various fields, such as chemistry [3, 4], medicine [5, 6], and many others. Most
notably, AlphaZero [7] leverages MCTS to reach superhuman-level performance in “board games”
such as Go, Chess, and Shogi. AlphaZero training consists of two phases: 1 self-play and 2 neural
network (NN) training, as depicted in Figure 1. During the self-play stage, AlphaZero generates
game records by playing against itself, with each move determined by MCTS simulations and NN
inferences. After the self-play phase, the NN is trained on these self-play game records. By alternating
between these two phases, AlphaZero continuously enhances its strategies through MCTS.
Despite AlphaZero’s remarkable decision-making capabilities, the training is considerably timeconsuming, and several factors contribute to long training times. First, AlphaZero training requires
lots of training data per parameter, which is even higher than the well-known resource-consuming
large language model (LLM) training.1 Second, the MCTS algorithm involves sequential decisionmaking, where each game move depends on the outcome of the previous move. This sequential
nature introduces significant latency. Third, the MCTS simulations evaluate the values of game
positions with neural network (NN) inferences, which also contributes to the prolonged training
times. In this work, we aim to reduce the training time by exploiting speculation-based pipeline
1
AlphaZero’s training data per parameter can be estimated by (21M games × 150 positions/game) / (24M
parameters) = 131 positions/parameter. In comparison, LLM’s training sample per parameter is about 20
according to the Chinchilla scaling law [8].

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

