GREAT Score: Global Robustness Evaluation of
Adversarial Perturbation using Generative Models

ZAITANG LI
Pin-Yu Chen
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
IBM Research
Sha Tin, Hong Kong
New York, USA
ztli@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
pin-yu.chen@ibm.com
Tsung-Yi Ho
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Sha Tin, Hong Kong
tyho@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Current studies on adversarial robustness mainly focus on aggregating local robustness results from a set of data samples to evaluate and rank different models.
However, the local statistics may not well represent the true global robustness of the
underlying unknown data distribution. To address this challenge, this paper makes
the first attempt to present a new framework, called GREAT Score, for global robustness evaluation of adversarial perturbation using generative models. Formally,
GREAT Score carries the physical meaning of a global statistic capturing a mean
certified attack-proof perturbation level over all samples drawn from a generative
model. For finite-sample evaluation, we also derive a probabilistic guarantee on
the sample complexity and the difference between the sample mean and the true
mean. GREAT Score has several advantages: (1) Robustness evaluations using
GREAT Score are efficient and scalable to large models, by sparing the need of running adversarial attacks. In particular, we show high correlation and significantly
reduced computation cost of GREAT Score when compared to the attack-based
model ranking on RobustBench [12]. (2) The use of generative models facilitates
the approximation of the unknown data distribution. In our ablation study with
different generative adversarial networks (GANs), we observe consistency between
global robustness evaluation and the quality of GANs. (3) GREAT Score can be
used for remote auditing of privacy-sensitive black-box models, as demonstrated
by our robustness evaluation on several online facial recognition services.
Project Demo and Code Page:
https://huggingface.co/spaces/TrustSafeAI/GREAT-Score
https://github.com/IBM/GREAT-Score

1

Introduction

Adversarial robustness is the study of model performance in the worst-case scenario, which is a key
element in trustworthy machine learning. Adversarial robustness evaluation refers to the process of
assessing a model’s resilience against adversarial attacks, which are inputs intentionally designed to
deceive the model. Without further remediation, state-of-the-art machine learning models, especially
neural networks, are known to be overly sensitive to small human-imperceptible perturbations to data
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

