On the Role of Attention Masks
and LayerNorm in Transformers

Xinyi Wu1

Amir Ajorlou1
Yifei Wang2
Stefanie Jegelka3,2
Ali Jadbabaie1
1
2
3
MIT LIDS
MIT CSAIL
TU Munich
{xinyiwu,ajorlou,yifei_w,stefje,jadbabai}@mit.edu

Abstract
Self-attention is the key mechanism of transformers, which are the essential building blocks of modern foundation models. Recent studies have shown that pure
self-attention suffers from an increasing degree of rank collapse as depth increases,
limiting model expressivity and further utilization of model depth. The existing
literature on rank collapse, however, has mostly overlooked other critical components in transformers that may alleviate the rank collapse issue. In this paper, we
provide a general analysis of rank collapse under self-attention, taking into account
the effects of attention masks and layer normalization (LayerNorm). In particular,
we find that although pure masked attention still suffers from exponential collapse
to a rank one subspace, sparse or local masked attention can provably slow down
the collapse rate. In the case of self-attention with LayerNorm, we first show
that for certain classes of value matrices, collapse to a rank one subspace still
happens exponentially. However, through construction of nontrivial counterexamples, we then establish that with proper choice of value matrices, a general
class of sequences may not converge to a rank one subspace, and the self-attention
dynamics with LayerNorm can simultaneously possess a rich set of equilibria with
any possible rank between one and full. Our result refutes the previous hypothesis
that LayerNorm plays no role in the rank collapse of self-attention and suggests
that self-attention with LayerNorm constitutes a much more expressive, versatile
nonlinear dynamical system than what was originally thought.

1

Introduction

The celebrated attention mechanism has proven highly effective in the architecture of transformers [35], which serve as the key building block of modern foundation models including large language
models. From a theoretical perspective, understanding the underlying mechanism of transformers
and attention in general has become pivotal for elucidating existing models and paving the way for
developing more powerful future models [12, 15].
Transformers are known to exhibit the rank collapse phenomenon1 [12, 15, 20, 27, 33, 37], which
refers to the observation that increasing the number of self-attention layers leads to homogeneous
token representations. To gain more insight into the rank collapse issue and better understand the
effects of self-attention in multi-layer models, it is essential to study the long-term behavior of tokens
under self-attention dynamics [12, 15, 16].
However, many existing studies do not take into account architectural components that are commonly
used in practice. For instance, first, the theoretical analysis of long-term self-attention dynamics
often assumes that attention is fully bidirectional — that is, all tokens are allowed to attend to all
other tokens in the sequence [12, 15, 16, 27], which only applies to certain attention mechanisms
1

This is also referred to as the oversmoothing [15, 33, 37] or the token uniformity [12, 27] problem.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

