LESS: Label-Efficient and Single-Stage
Referring 3D Segmentation

Xuexun Liu1∗, Xiaoxu Xu1∗, Jinlong Li2∗, Qiudan Zhang1 , Xu Wang1†, Nicu Sebe2 , Lin Ma3
1
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University,
Shenzhen, 518060, China.
2
University of Trento, Italy.
3
Meituan Inc., China.

Abstract
Referring 3D Segmentation is a visual-language task that segments all points of the
specified object from a 3D point cloud described by a sentence of query. Previous
works perform a two-stage paradigm, first conducting language-agnostic instance
segmentation then matching with given text query. However, the semantic concepts
from text query and visual cues are separately interacted during the training,
and both instance and semantic labels for each object are required, which is time
consuming and human-labor intensive. To mitigate these issues, we propose a novel
Referring 3D Segmentation pipeline, Label-Efficient and Single-Stage, dubbed
LESS, which is only under the supervision of efficient binary mask. Specifically, we
design a Point-Word Cross-Modal Alignment module for aligning the fine-grained
features of points and textual embedding. Query Mask Predictor module and
Query-Sentence Alignment module are introduced for coarse-grained alignment
between masks and query. Furthermore, we propose an area regularization loss,
which coarsely reduces irrelevant background predictions on a large scale. Besides,
a point-to-point contrastive loss is proposed concentrating on distinguishing points
with subtly similar features. Through extensive experiments, we achieve stateof-the-art performance on ScanRefer dataset by surpassing the previous methods
about 3.7% mIoU using only binary labels. Code is available at https://github.
com/mellody11/LESS.

1

Introduction

Referring 3D Segmentation task aims to segment the specific object from a 3D point cloud scene with
a free-form natural language expression. It allows users to interact and analyze 3D data through verbal
instructions or queries. This approach is particularly beneficial in applications that necessitate direct
interaction with 3D environments, such as augmented reality (AR) systems, embodied-AI, robotics,
virtual reality (VR) environments, and in fields like architecture and medical imaging, where precise
identification and segmentation of objects based on descriptive queries can significantly enhance user
experience and operational efficiency.
Previous Referring 3D Segmentation [13; 29] mainly leverage a two-stage workaround, as shown
in Fig.1 (a). They typically adopt a 3D instance semantic segmentation network to get the instance
proposals at the first stage. The predicted instance proposals will be utilized to match with the queries
and finally get the final prediction mask according to the matching score. Although those method have
achieved remarkable performance, there still exist some problems. First, owing to the large-scale and
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

