W ILD T EAMING at Scale: From In-the-Wild
Jailbreaks to (Adversarially) Safer Language Models

Liwei Jiang1,2 Kavel Rao∗,1 Seungju Han∗,3 Allyson Ettinger2
Faeze Brahman2 Sachin Kumar2 Niloofar Mireshghallah1 Ximing Lu1
Maarten Sap2,4 Yejin Choi1 Nouha Dziri2
1

University of Washington 2 Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
3
Seoul National University 4 Carnegie Mellon University

lwjiang@cs.washington.edu nouhad@allenai.org ∗ Co-second-authors
© Code & Models: https://github.com/allenai/wildteaming
Data: https://huggingface.co/datasets/allenai/wildjailbreak

Abstract
We introduce W ILD T EAMING, an automatic red-teaming framework that mines
in-the-wild user-chatbot interactions to discover 5.7K unique clusters of novel jailbreak tactics, and then composes selections of multiple mined tactics for systematic
exploration of novel and even more challenging jailbreaks. Compared to prior
work that performed red-teaming via recruited human workers, gradient-based
optimization, or iterative revision with large language models (LLMs), our work
investigates jailbreaks from chatbot users in-the-wild who were not specifically
instructed to break the system. W ILD T EAMING reveals previously unidentified
vulnerabilities of frontier LLMs, resulting in up to 4.6x more diverse and successful
adversarial attacks compared to state-of-the-art jailbreaking methods.
While there exist many datasets for jailbreak evaluation, very few open-source
datasets exist for jailbreak training, as safety training data has been closed among all
frontier models even when their weights are open. Therefore, with W ILD T EAMING
we create W ILD JAILBREAK, a large-scale open-source synthetic safety dataset
with 262K vanilla (direct request) and adversarial (complex jailbreak) promptresponse pairs. In order to mitigate exaggerated safety behaviors, W ILD JAILBREAK
provides two contrastive types of queries: 1) harmful queries (both vanilla and
adversarial) and 2) benign queries that resemble harmful queries in form but contain
no harmful intent. As W ILD JAILBREAK considerably upgrades the quality and
scale of existing safety resources, it uniquely enables us to examine the scaling
effects of data and the interplay of data properties and model capabilities during
safety training. Through extensive model training and evaluations, we identify the
training properties that enable an ideal balance of safety behaviors: appropriate
safeguarding without over-refusal, effective handling of both vanilla and adversarial
queries, and minimal, if any, decrease in general capabilities. All the components
of W ILD JAILBREAK contribute to achieving balanced safety behaviors of models.

1

Introduction

Despite ongoing efforts to enhance their safety, frontier LLMs remain vulnerable against unsafe user
queries, especially adversarial attacks [6, 102]. The fact that models can be easily jailbroken raises
significant concerns among researchers and policymakers [32, 5, 1], motivating the research for
systematically discovering and guarding against potential jailbreaks. In this work, we introduce the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

