Variational Distillation of Diffusion Policies into
Mixture of Experts

Hongyi Zhou ∗i† Denis Blessing‡ Ge Li‡ Onur Celik‡§
Xiaogang Jia†‡ Gerhard Neumann‡§ Rudolf Lioutikov†
†
Intuitive Robots Lab, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
‡
Autonomous Learning Robots, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
§
FZI Research Center for Information Technology

Abstract
This work introduces Variational Diffusion Distillation (VDD), a novel method
that distills denoising diffusion policies into Mixtures of Experts (MoE) through
variational inference. Diffusion Models are the current state-of-the-art in generative
modeling due to their exceptional ability to accurately learn and represent complex,
multi-modal distributions. This ability allows Diffusion Models to replicate the
inherent diversity in human behavior, making them the preferred models in behavior
learning such as Learning from Human Demonstrations (LfD). However, diffusion
models come with some drawbacks, including the intractability of likelihoods and
long inference times due to their iterative sampling process. The inference times,
in particular, pose a significant challenge to real-time applications such as robot
control. In contrast, MoEs effectively address the aforementioned issues while
retaining the ability to represent complex distributions but are notoriously difficult
to train. VDD is the first method that distills pre-trained diffusion models into MoE
models, and hence, combines the expressiveness of Diffusion Models with the
benefits of Mixture Models. Specifically, VDD leverages a decompositional upper
bound of the variational objective that allows the training of each expert separately,
resulting in a robust optimization scheme for MoEs. VDD demonstrates across
nine complex behavior learning tasks, that it is able to: i) accurately distill complex
distributions learned by the diffusion model, ii) outperform existing state-of-the-art
distillation methods, and iii) surpass conventional methods for training MoE. The
code and videos are available at https://intuitive-robots.github.io/vdd-website.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [1–4] have gained increasing attention with their great success in various domains
such as realistic image generation [5–8]. More recently, diffusion models have shown promise
in Learning from Human Demonstrations (LfDs) [9–13]. A particularly challenging aspect of
LfD is the high variance and multi-modal data distribution resulting from the inherent diversity
in human behavior [14]. Due to the ability to generalize and represent complex, multi-modal
distributions, diffusion models are a particularly suitable class of policy representations for LfD.
However, diffusion models suffer from several drawbacks such as long inference time and intractable
likelihood calculation. Many diffusion steps are required for high-quality samples leading to a long
inference time, limiting the use in real-time applications such as robot control, where decisions are
needed at a high frequency. Moreover, important statistical properties such as exact likelihoods are
not easily obtained for diffusion models, which poses a significant challenge for conducting post hoc
∗

Correspondence to hongyi.zhou@kit.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

