Metric Space Magnitude for Evaluating the Diversity
of Latent Representations

Katharina Limbeck1,2

Rayna Andreeva3

Rik Sarkar3

Bastian Rieck1,2,4

1

2

Helmholtz Munich
Technical University of Munich
3
University of Edinburgh
4
University of Fribourg

Abstract
The magnitude of a metric space is a novel invariant that provides a measure of the
‘effective size’ of a space across multiple scales, while also capturing numerous
geometrical properties, such as curvature, density, or entropy. We develop a family
of magnitude-based measures of the intrinsic diversity of latent representations,
formalising a novel notion of dissimilarity between magnitude functions of finite
metric spaces. Our measures are provably stable under perturbations of the data,
can be efficiently calculated, and enable a rigorous multi-scale characterisation and
comparison of latent representations. We show their utility and superior performance across different domains and tasks, including (i) the automated estimation of
diversity, (ii) the detection of mode collapse, and (iii) the evaluation of generative
models for text, image, and graph data.

1

Introduction

Diversity is a key concept in representation learning, referring to the relative abundance and distinctiveness of model outputs. Given the inherent complexity of deep learning models, the evaluation of
diversity is thus crucial, enabling (i) the assessment of the intrinsic richness of latent representations,
and (ii) the evaluation of the extent to which models are capable of preserving the properties of
an input distribution. While the quantitative evaluation of generative models in particular relies on
assessing trade-offs between fidelity and diversity with regards to a known reference distribution,
reference-free diversity measures are becoming increasingly relevant when a ground-truth distribution
is unknown or intractable. However, reference-based diversity metrics such as recall are notoriously
fallible, sensitive to parameter choices and therefore prone to incorrectly approximate the true data
manifold, whereas reference-free diversity measures often rely on simple mean summaries that fail to
pass basic consistency checks [13]. Thus, existing methods lack expressivity to fully capture what it
means for a space to be diverse, resulting in a critical need for novel measures that are (i) theoretically
motivated, (ii) robust to noise, and (iii) capable of encoding the intrinsic diversity of data across
varying levels of similarity rather than at a single fixed threshold.
Our contributions. Addressing this need, we propose a novel family of diversity measures based
on metric space magnitude, a mathematical invariant that captures numerous important multi-scale
geometric characteristics of metric spaces, including curvature, density, and entropy of an input space.
Metric space magnitude merely requires a notion of dissimilarity between data points, permitting
it to operate on both local and global scales. Hence, magnitude is poised to compare latent spaces,
yielding a compact holistic summary of diversity that satisfies relevant theoretical requirements. Our
work is the first to (i) introduce magnitude as a general tool for evaluating the diversity of latent
representations, and (ii) formalise a notion of difference between the magnitude of two spaces across
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

