Randomized Exploration in Cooperative Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning

Hao-Lun Hsu∗, Weixin Wang∗, Miroslav Pajic, Pan Xu
Duke University
{hao-lun.hsu,weixin.wang,miroslav.pajic,pan.xu}@duke.edu

Abstract
We present the first study on provably efficient randomized exploration in cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). We propose a unified algorithm
framework for randomized exploration in parallel Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs), and two Thompson Sampling (TS)-type algorithms, CoopTS-PHE and
CoopTS-LMC, incorporating the perturbed-history exploration (PHE) strategy and
the Langevin Monte Carlo exploration (LMC) strategy respectively, which are
flexible in design and easy to implement in practice. For a special class of parallel
MDPs where the transition is (approximately) linear, we theoretically
prove that
√
e 3/2 H 2 M K) regret bound
both CoopTS-PHE and CoopTS-LMC achieve a O(d
2
e
with communication complexity O(dHM
), where d is the feature dimension, H
is the horizon length, M is the number of agents, and K is the number of episodes.
This is the first theoretical result for randomized exploration in cooperative MARL.
We evaluate our proposed method on multiple parallel RL environments, including a deep exploration problem (i.e., N -chain), a video game, and a real-world
problem in energy systems. Our experimental results support that our framework
can achieve better performance, even under conditions of misspecified transition
models. Additionally, we establish a connection between our unified framework
and the practical application of federated learning.

1

Introduction

Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has emerged as a potent tool with wide-ranging
applications in diverse fields including robotics [23, 54], gaming [74, 92, 84], and numerous realworld systems [10, 25, 85]. This is particularly evident in cooperative scenarios, where MARL’s
effectiveness is enhanced through both direct and indirect communication channels among agents.
This requires MARL algorithms to adeptly and flexibly coordinate communications to optimize
the benefits of cooperation. One of the classical challenges in MARL is balancing exploration and
exploitation so that agents effectively utilize existing information while acquiring new knowledge.
Recent literature highlights the intricacies of this balance, focusing on cooperative exploration
strategies [27] and dynamic exploitation tactics [68]. Achieving this equilibrium is crucial for the
practical deployment of MARL systems in real-world scenarios, where unpredictability and the need
for rapid adaptation are prevalent [27, 14, 55].
Optimism in the Face of Uncertainty (OFU) is a popular strategy to address the explorationexploitation problem [1]. OFU strategy leads to numerous upper confidence bound (UCB)-type
algorithms in contextual bandits [18, 1, 50], single-agent reinforcement learning [36, 76], and more
recently multi-agent reinforcement learning [24, 56]. These algorithms compute statistical confidence
regions for the model or the value function, given the observed history, and perform the greedy
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

