Private Stochastic Convex Optimization with Heavy
Tails: Near-Optimality from Simple Reductions

Hilal Asi
Apple Inc.
hilal.asi94@gmail.com

Daogao Liu ∗
University of Washington
liudaogao@gmail.com

Kevin Tian
University of Texas at Austin
kjtian@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of differentially private stochastic convex optimization
(DP-SCO) with heavy-tailed gradients, where we assume a k th -moment bound
on the Lipschitz constants of sample functions, rather than a uniform bound.
We propose a new reduction-based approach that enables us to obtain the first
optimal rates (up to√logarithmic factors) in the heavy-tailed setting, achieving error
1
G2 · √1n + Gk · ( nεd )1− k under (ε, δ)-approximate differential privacy, up to a
mild polylog( 1δ ) factor, where G22 and Gkk are the 2nd and k th moment bounds
on sample Lipschitz constants, nearly-matching a lower bound of [LR23]. We
further give a suite of private algorithms in the heavy-tailed setting which improve
upon our basic result under additional assumptions, including an optimal algorithm
under a known-Lipschitz constant assumption, a near-linear time algorithm for
smooth functions, and an optimal linear time algorithm for smooth generalized
linear models.

1

Introduction

Differentially private stochastic convex optimization (DP-SCO), where an algorithm aims to minimize
a population loss given samples from a distribution, is a fundamental problem in statistics and machine
learning. In this problem, given n samples from a distribution P over a sample space S, our goal is
to privately find an approximate minimizer x̂ ∈ X ⊂ Rd for the population loss
FP (x) := Es∼P [f (x; s)] ,
where f (·; s) is a convex function for all s ∈ S. The quality of an algorithm is measured by the
excess population loss of its output x̂, that is FP (x̂) − minx⋆ ∈X FP (x⋆ ).
Extensive research efforts have been devoted to DP-SCO, resulting in important progress over the
past few years [BFTT19, FKT20, AFKT21, BGN21, ALD21, KLL21]. In an important milestone,
[BFTT19] developed optimal algorithms (in terms of the excess population loss) for DP-SCO under a
uniform Lipschitz assumption (i.e., where every f (·; s) is assumed to have the same Lipschitz bound),
and [FKT20] followed this result with efficient and optimal algorithms that run in linear time for
smooth functions. DP-SCO has also been explored in other notable settings, including developing
faster algorithms for non-smooth settings [AFKT21, KLL21, CJJ+ 23], different geometries imposed
on the solution space [AFKT21, BGN21, GLL+ 23], and different notions of privacy [ALD21].
Most existing results in DP-SCO are based on the assumption that the function f (·; s) is uniformly
G-Lipschitz for all s ∈ S. This assumption is convenient for private algorithm design, because it
allows us to straightforwardly bound the sensitivity of iterates of private algorithms, i.e., how far a
pair of iterates defined via algorithms induced by neighboring datasets drift apart. Under the uniform
Lipschitz assumption, the DP-SCO problem is relatively well-understood, as optimal and efficient
∗

Part of this work was done while interning at Apple.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

