Weisfeiler and Leman Go Loopy: A New Hierarchy
for Graph Representational Learning

Raffaele Paolino∗,1,2 Sohir Maskey∗,1 Pascal Welke3 Gitta Kutyniok1,2,4,5
1
Department of Mathematics, LMU Munich
2
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)
3
Faculty of Computer Science, TU Wien
4
Institute for Robotics and Mechatronics, DLR-German Aerospace Center
5
Department of Physics and Technology, University of Tromsø

Abstract
We introduce r-loopy Weisfeiler-Leman (r-`WL), a novel hierarchy of graph
isomorphism tests and a corresponding GNN framework, r-`MPNN, that can
count cycles up to length r+2. Most notably, we show that r-`WL can count
homomorphisms of cactus graphs. This extends 1-WL, which can only count
homomorphisms of trees and, in fact, we prove that r-`WL is incomparable to
k-WL for any fixed k. We empirically validate the expressive and counting power
of r-`MPNN on several synthetic datasets and demonstrate the scalability and
strong performance on various real-world datasets, particularly on sparse graphs.
Our code is available on GitHub.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Scarselli et al., 2009; Bronstein et al., 2017) have become a
prevalent architecture for processing graph-structured data, contributing significantly to various
applied sciences, such as drug discovery (Stokes et al., 2020), recommender systems (Fan et al.,
2019), and fake news detection (Monti et al., 2019).
Among various architectures, Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) (Gilmer et al., 2017)
are widely used in practice, as they encompass only local computation, leading to fast and scalable
models. Despite their success, the representational power of MPNNs is bounded by the WeisfeilerLeman (WL) test, a classical algorithm for graph isomorphism testing (Xu et al., 2019; Morris et al.,
2019). This limitation hinders MPNNs from recognizing basic substructures like cycles (Chen et al.,
2020). However, specific substructures can be crucial in many applications. For example, in organic
chemistry, the presence of cycles can impact various chemical properties of the underlying molecules
(Deshpande et al., 2002; Koyutürk et al., 2004). Therefore, it is crucial to investigate whether GNNs
can count certain substructures and to design architectures that surpass the limited power of MPNNs.
Several models have been proposed to surpass the limitations of WL. Many of these models draw
inspiration from higher-order WL variants (Morris et al., 2019), enabling them to count a broader
range of substructures. For instance, GNNs emulating 3-WL can count cycles up to length 7. However,
this increased expressivity comes at a high computational cost, as 3-WL does not respect the sparsity
of real-world graphs, posing serious scalability issues. Hence, there is a critical need to design
expressive GNNs that respect the inherent sparsity of real-world graphs (Morris et al., 2023).
*Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors: paolino@math.lmu.de, maskey@math.lmu.de.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

