Towards Understanding Extrapolation: a Causal Lens
Lingjing Kong1∗ Guangyi Chen1,2∗

Petar Stojanov3
Kun Zhang1,2

Haoxuan Li2

Eric P. Xing1,2

1

Carnegie Mellon University
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
3
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cancer Program, Eric and Wendy Schmidt Center
2

Abstract
Canonical work handling distribution shifts typically necessitates an entire target
distribution that lands inside the training distribution. However, practical scenarios
often involve only a handful of target samples, potentially lying outside the training
support, which requires the capability of extrapolation. In this work, we aim to
provide a theoretical understanding of when extrapolation is possible and offer
principled methods to achieve it without requiring an on-support target distribution.
To this end, we formulate the extrapolation problem with a latent-variable model
that embodies the minimal change principle in causal mechanisms. Under this
formulation, we cast the extrapolation problem into a latent-variable identification
problem. We provide realistic conditions on shift properties and the estimation
objectives that lead to identification even when only one off-support target sample is
available, tackling the most challenging scenarios. Our theory reveals the intricate
interplay between the underlying manifold’s smoothness and the shift properties.
We showcase how our theoretical results inform the design of practical adaptation
algorithms. Through experiments on both synthetic and real-world data, we validate
our theoretical findings and their practical implications.

1

Introduction

Extrapolation necessitates the capability of generalizing beyond the training distribution support, which is essential for the robust deployment of machine learning models in real-world
scenarios. Specifically, given access to a source distribution Dsrc := p(xsrc , ysrc ) with support
Xsrc := Supp(psrc (x)) and one or a few out-of-support samples xtgt ∈
/ Xsrc , the goal of extrapolation
is to predict the target label ytgt . For example, if the training distribution includes dog images, we
aim to accurately classify dogs under unseen camera angles, lighting conditions, and backgrounds.
While intuitive for humans, machine learning models can be brittle to minor distribution shifts [1–4].
Addressing distribution shifts has garnered significant attention from the community. Unsupervised
domain adaptation under covariate shifts addresses the shift of the marginal distribution p(x) across
domains. However, canonical techniques such as importance sampling and re-weighting [5–9]
are predicated on the assumptions of overlapping supports Supp(ptgt (x)) ⊂ Supp(psrc (x)) and the
availability of the entire target marginal distribution ptgt (x). Similarly, domain generalization [10–12]
assumes access to multiple source distributions psrc (x, y) whose supports jointly cover the target
distribution. In addition to these methods, test-time adaptation (TTA) [13–16] is particularly relevant
to our discussion of extrapolation. TTA addresses out-of-distribution test samples at the individual
sample level. Canonical methods include updating the source model with entropy-based or selfsupervised losses on target samples. However, most TTA research focuses on empirical aspects,
with limited theoretical formalization [17]. Most related to our work, Kong et al. [18] and Li et al.
∗

Equal Contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

