A SARS-CoV-2 Interaction Dataset and VHH
Sequence Corpus for Antibody Language Models

Hirofumi Tsuruta1,2 , Hiroyuki Yamazaki1,3 , Ryota Maeda1,3 ,
Ryotaro Tamura1,2 , Akihiro Imura1,3
1
COGNANO Inc., 2 SAKURA internet Inc., 3 Biorhodes, Inc.
{tsuruta, yamazaki, maeda, ryotarotamura, akihiroimura}@cognano.co.jp

Abstract
Antibodies are crucial proteins produced by the immune system to eliminate harmful foreign substances and have become pivotal therapeutic agents for treating
human diseases. To accelerate the discovery of antibody therapeutics, there is
growing interest in constructing language models using antibody sequences. However, the applicability of pre-trained language models for antibody discovery has
not been thoroughly evaluated due to the scarcity of labeled datasets. To overcome these limitations, we introduce AVIDa-SARS-CoV-2, a dataset featuring the
antigen-variable domain of heavy chain of heavy chain antibody (VHH) interactions obtained from two alpacas immunized with severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) spike proteins. AVIDa-SARS-CoV-2 includes binary
labels indicating the binding or non-binding of diverse VHH sequences to 12 SARSCoV-2 mutants, such as the Delta and Omicron variants. Furthermore, we release
VHHCorpus-2M, a pre-training dataset for antibody language models, containing
over two million VHH sequences. We report benchmark results for predicting
SARS-CoV-2-VHH binding using VHHBERT pre-trained on VHHCorpus-2M
and existing general protein and antibody-specific pre-trained language models.
These results confirm that AVIDa-SARS-CoV-2 provides valuable benchmarks for
evaluating the representation capabilities of antibody language models for binding
prediction, thereby facilitating the development of AI-driven antibody discovery.
The datasets are available at https://datasets.cognanous.com.

1

Introduction

Antibodies are vital proteins produced by the immune system to remove harmful foreign substances
called antigens. Antibody-based therapeutics, which can bind to target antigens with high affinity and
specificity, have become a major class of therapeutic agents and are currently used to treat a wide
range of diseases [1, 2]. Among their successes, the rapid development and subsequent approval of
antibodies against severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) epitomize the
impactful response of this therapeutic class in addressing urgent global health challenges [74, 30].
However, the development of therapeutic antibodies remains a time-consuming and costly endeavor
due to the complexity and difficulty of artificially manipulating the vast search space of antibody
sequences [21]. Therefore, computational approaches for accelerating antibody discovery have
become increasingly popular in recent years [72, 24, 4].
Recent advances in language models offer new possibilities for understanding the information
contained in antibody sequences because an antibody sequence can be represented as a string of
letters representing a type of amino acid. With the construction of the observed antibody space (OAS)
database [26, 46] that currently contains over two billion antibody sequences, a sufficient number of
antibody sequences is now available to train antibody-specific language models [56, 27, 47, 70, 49, 5,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

