D2R2: Diffusion-based Representation with Random
Distance Matching for Tabular Few-shot Learning

Ruoxue Liu ∗
HKUST
rliuaj@connect.ust.hk

Linjiajie Fang ∗
HKUST
lfangad@connect.ust.hk

Wenjia Wang †
HKUST (GZ) and HKUST
wenjiawang@ust.hk

Bing-Yi Jing †
SUSTech
jingby@sustech.edu.cn

Abstract
Tabular data is widely utilized in a wide range of real-world applications. The
challenge of few-shot learning with tabular data stands as a crucial problem in
both industry and academia, due to the high cost or even impossibility of annotating additional samples. However, the inherent heterogeneity of tabular features,
combined with the scarcity of labeled data, presents a significant challenge in
tabular few-shot classification. In this paper, we propose a novel approach named
Diffusion-based Representation with Random Distance matching (D2R2) for tabular few-shot learning. D2R2 leverages the powerful expression ability of diffusion
models to extract essential semantic knowledge crucial for denoising process. This
semantic knowledge proves beneficial in few-shot downstream tasks. During the
training process of our designed diffusion model, we introduce a random distance
matching to preserve distance information in the embeddings, thereby improving
effectiveness for classification. During the classification stage, we introduce an
instance-wise iterative prototype scheme to improve performance by accommodating the multimodality of embeddings and increasing clustering robustness. Our
experiments reveal the significant efficacy of D2R2 across various tabular few-shot
learning benchmarks, demonstrating its state-of-the-art performance in this field.

1

Introduction

Learning with a large set of data with only a few labeled samples is an essential requirement for
industry and academia, primarily due to the high cost of annotating samples. However, accurately classifying new data with a scantily labeled training set and an unlabeled training set poses a formidable
challenge, as the effectiveness of statistical and modern deep learning systems in supervised learning
heavily relies on the large size of the labeled set [36]. This underscores the need for research in
few-shot learning in situations where labeled data is scarce. For example, in one-shot learning, each
class of the training set contains only one labeled sample, and the goal is to classify new test samples.
While few-shot learning has garnered considerable attention in computer vision (CV) [9, 21] and
natural language processing (NLP) [30, 31], it remains relatively under-explored in the field of tabular
data. Nevertheless, few-shot learning holds great importance in the context of tabular data, as limited
labeled tabular data is inherently common in many real-world applications, such as fraud detection
[7], disease diagnosis [40], and social science [27]. However, modeling with limited labeled tabular
data presents three significant challenges.
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

