Causal discovery with endogenous context variables

Wiebke Günther1,2∗ Oana-Iuliana Popescu1,2∗ Martin Rabel1,3,4∗
Urmi Ninad1,2 Andreas Gerhardus1 Jakob Runge1,2,3,4
1
German Aerospace Center (DLR), Institute of Data Science, Jena, Germany
2
Technische Universität Berlin, Institute of Computer Engineering
and Microelectronics, Berlin, Germany
3
Center for Scalable Data Analytics and Artificial Intelligence (ScaDS.AI)
Dresden / Leipzig, Germany
4
Technische Universität Dresden, Faculty of Computer Science, Dresden, Germany
oana-iulia.popescu@dlr.de
∗
equal contribution

Abstract
Causal systems often exhibit variations of the underlying causal mechanisms
between the variables of the system. Often, these changes are driven by different
environments or internal states in which the system operates, and we refer to
context variables as those variables that indicate this change in causal mechanisms.
An example are the causal relations in soil moisture-temperature interactions and
their dependence on soil moisture regimes: Dry soil triggers a dependence of soil
moisture on latent heat, while environments with wet soil do not feature such a
feedback, making it a context-specific property. Crucially, a regime or context
variable such as soil moisture need not be exogenous and can be influenced by the
dynamical system variables – precipitation can make a dry soil wet – leading to
joint systems with endogenous context variables. In this work we investigate the
assumptions for constraint-based causal discovery of context-specific information
in systems with endogenous context variables. We show that naive approaches
such as learning different regime graphs on masked data, or pooling all data, can
lead to uninformative results. We propose an adaptive constraint-based discovery
algorithm and give a detailed discussion on the connection to structural causal
models, including sufficiency assumptions, which allow to prove the soundness
of our algorithm and to interpret the results causally. Numerical experiments
demonstrate the performance of the proposed method over alternative baselines,
but they also unveil current limitations of our method.

1

Introduction

In recent years, causal discovery (CD), that is, learning cause-effect relationships from observational
data, has garnered significant interest across various domains, from Earth sciences and genomics to
industrial settings (11; 26; 27; 1). Such complex systems often exhibit a change of causal mechanisms
over time or across different environments, including changes in the associated causal graph. An
example are the causal relations between surface heat and latent heat and their dependence on soil
moisture regimes: When the soil is dry, it triggers a dependence of soil moisture on latent heat due
to the dry soil reflecting heat, while environments with wet soil do not feature such a feedback.
These changing causal mechanisms can be represented using so-called contexts, where the causal
mechanisms and structures vary depending on the states of one or more context variables that augment
the assumed underlying structural causal model (7; 17; 15). Both time-series (29) and non-time-series
data can exhibit such behavior. Context-dependent systems have been widely studied; see Mooij et al.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

