Homology Consistency Constrained Efficient Tuning
for Vision-Language Models

Huatian Zhang, Lei Zhang, Yongdong Zhang, Zhendong Mao∗
University of Science and Technology of China
huatianzhang@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {leizh23,zhyd73,zdmao}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Efficient transfer learning has shown remarkable performance in tuning largescale vision-language models (VLMs) toward downstream tasks with limited
data resources. The key challenge of efficient transfer lies in adjusting imagetext alignment to be task-specific while preserving pre-trained general knowledge.
However, existing methods adjust image-text alignment merely on a set of observed
samples, e.g., data set and external knowledge base, which cannot guarantee
to keep the correspondence of general concepts between image and text latent
manifolds without being disrupted and thereby a weak generalization of the adjusted
alignment. In this work, we propose a Homology Consistency (HC) constraint
for efficient transfer on VLMs, which explicitly constrains the correspondence of
image and text latent manifolds through structural equivalence based on persistent
homology in downstream tuning. Specifically, we build simplicial complex on the
top of data to mimic the topology of latent manifolds, then track the persistence of
the homology classes of topological features across multiple scales, and guide the
directions of persistence tracks in image and text manifolds to coincide each other,
with a deviating perturbation additionally. For practical application, we tailor the
implementation of our proposed HC constraint for two main paradigms of adapter
tuning. Extensive experiments on few-shot learning over 11 datasets and domain
generalization demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of our method.

1

Introduction

Large-scale vision-language models (VLMs) such as CLIP [1] and ALIGN [2] trained on web-scale
data have learned broad visual concepts and demonstrated promising generalization capability on a
wide range of downstream tasks, such as classification [3, 4], detection [5, 6] and segmentation [7, 8].
In transferring to downstream tasks with limited data resources, the conventional full fine-tuning
on VLMs often forgets the general knowledge learned in pre-training and falls into overfitting. To
mitigate this, how to efficiently transfer the knowledge from pre-trained VLMs to downstream tasks
in a low-data regime has been intensively studied.
To possess both task-specific knowledge exploration and general knowledge preservation, efficient
transfer learning proposes to adapt VLMs to fit downstream tasks by tuning a few parameters, which
mainly exists in two paradigms: prompt tuning and adapter tuning. Prompt tuning methods adapt
VLMs toward downstream tasks by introducing learnable prompts on the input side. Topics in this
branch include the configuration of learnable prompts [9–13] and injecting semantic priors, such as
external knowledge [14, 15], category distribution [16] or visual diversity [17, 18], in tuning. As a
promising alternative, adapter tuning inserts a learnable lightweight adapter into the frozen pre-trained
VLMs on the output side and the insertion manner allows modifying flexibly. By residual blending,
CLIP-Adapter [19] tuned the image or text embeddings by appending a learnable bottleneck layer
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

