Aligning Embeddings and Geometric Random Graphs:
Informational Results and Computational Approaches
for the Procrustes-Wasserstein Problem
Mathieu Even
DI ENS, CRNS, PSL University, INRIA Paris

Luca Ganassali
Université Paris-Saclay, LMO

Jakob Maier
D.I ENS, CRNS, PSL University, INRIA Paris
Laurent Massoulié
D.I ENS, CRNS, PSL University, INRIA, MSR-INRIA Joint Centre, Paris

Abstract
The Procrustes-Wasserstein problem consists in matching two high-dimensional
point clouds in an unsupervised setting, and has many applications in natural
language processing and computer vision. We consider a planted model with two
datasets X, Y that consist of n datapoints in Rd , where Y is a noisy version of
X, up to an orthogonal transformation and a relabeling of the data points. This
setting is related to the graph alignment problem in geometric models. In this work,
we focus on the euclidean transport cost between the point clouds as a measure
of performance for the alignment. We first establish information-theoretic results,
in the high (d ≫ log n) and low (d ≪ log n) dimensional regimes. We then
study computational aspects and propose the ‘Ping-Pong algorithm’, alternatively
estimating the orthogonal transformation and the relabeling, initialized via a FrankeWolfe convex relaxation. We give sufficient conditions for the method to retrieve
the planted signal after one single step. We provide experimental results to compare
the proposed approach with the state-of-the-art method of Grave et al. [2019].

1

Introduction

Finding an alignment between high dimensional vectors or across two point clouds of embeddings
has been the focus of recent threads of research and has a variety of applications in computer vision,
such as inferring scene geometry and camera motion from a stream of images [Tomasi and Kanade,
1992], as well as in natural language processing such as automatic unsupervised translation [Rapp,
1995, Fung, 1995].
Many practical algorithms proposed for this task view this problem as minimizing the distance across
distributions in Rd . Some approaches are based e.g. on optimal transport and Gromov-Wasserstein
distance Alvarez-Melis and Jaakkola [2018] or adversarial learning [Zhang et al., 2017, Conneau
et al., 2018]. Another line of methods adapt the iterative closest points procedure (ICP) – originally
introduced in Besl and McKay [1992] for 3-D shapes – to higher dimensions Hoshen and Wolf
[2018]. Another recent contribution is that of Grave et al. [2019], where a method is proposed to
jointly learn an orthogonal transformation and an alignment between two point clouds by alternating
the objectives in the corresponding minimization problem.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

