Inference via Interpolation:
Contrastive Representations Provably Enable
Planning and Inference
Benjamin Eysenbach∗
Princeton University
eysenbach@princeton.edu

Vivek Myers∗
UC Berkeley
vmyers@berkeley.edu

Ruslan Salakhutdinov
Carnegie Mellon University
rsalakhu@cs.cmu.edu

Sergey Levine
UC Berkeley
svlevine@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Given time series data, how can we answer questions like “what will happen in
the future?” and “how did we get here?” These sorts of probabilistic inference
questions are challenging when observations are high-dimensional. In this paper,
we show how these questions can have compact, closed form solutions in terms of
learned representations. The key idea is to apply a variant of contrastive learning
to time series data. Prior work already shows that the representations learned
by contrastive learning encode a probability ratio. By extending prior work to
show that the marginal distribution over representations is Gaussian, we can then
prove that joint distribution of representations is also Gaussian. Taken together,
these results show that representations learned via temporal contrastive learning
follow a Gauss-Markov chain, a graphical model where inference (e.g., prediction,
planning) over representations corresponds to inverting a low-dimensional matrix.
In one special case, inferring intermediate representations will be equivalent to
interpolating between the learned representations. We validate our theory using
numerical simulations on tasks up to 46-dimensions.1

1

Introduction

Probabilistic modeling of time-series data has applications ranging from robotic control [1] to material
science [2], from cell biology [3] to astrophysics [4]. These applications are often concerned with
two questions: predicting future states (e.g., what will this cell look like in an hour), and inferring
trajectories between two given states. However, answering these questions often requires reasoning
over high-dimensional data, which can be challenging as most tools in the standard probabilistic
toolkit require generation. Might it be possible to use discriminative methods (e.g., contrastive
learning) to perform such inferences?
Many prior works aim to learn representations that are easy to predict while retaining salient bits
of information. For time-series data, we want the representation to remain a sufficient statistic
for distributions related to time — for example, they should retain bits required to predict future
states (or representations thereof). While generative methods [5–8] have this property, they tend to
be computationally expensive (see, e.g., [9]) and can be challenging to scale to high-dimensional
observations.
* Equal contribution.
1

Code: https://github.com/vivekmyers/contrastive_planning

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

