Spiking Graph Neural Network on Riemannian
Manifolds
Li Sun∗
North China Electric Power University
Beijing 102206, China
ccesunli@ncepu.edu.cn

Zhenhao Huang
North China Electric Power University
Beijing 102206, China
huangzhenhao@necpu.edu.cn

Qiqi Wan
North China Electric Power University
Beijing 102206, China
wanqiqi@ncepu.edu.cn

Hao Peng
Beihang University
Beijing 100191, China
penghao@buaa.edu.cn

Philip S. Yu
University of Illinois at Chicago
IL, USA
psyu@uic.edu

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have become the dominant solution for learning
on graphs, the typical non-Euclidean structures. Conventional GNNs, constructed
with the Artificial Neuron Network (ANN), have achieved impressive performance
at the cost of high computation and energy consumption. In parallel, spiking GNNs
with brain-like spiking neurons are drawing increasing research attention owing to
the energy efficiency. So far, existing spiking GNNs consider graphs in Euclidean
space, ignoring the structural geometry, and suffer from the high latency issue
due to Back-Propagation-Through-Time (BPTT) with the surrogate gradient. In
light of the aforementioned issues, we are devoted to exploring spiking GNN on
Riemannian manifolds, and present a Manifold-valued Spiking GNN (MSG). In
particular, we design a new spiking neuron on geodesically complete manifolds
with the diffeomorphism, so that BPTT regarding the spikes is replaced by the proposed differentiation via manifold. Theoretically, we show that MSG approximates
a solver of the manifold ordinary differential equation. Extensive experiments on
common graphs show the proposed MSG achieves superior performance to previous
spiking GNNs and energy efficiency to conventional GNNs.

1

Introduction

Graphs are the ubiquitous, non-Euclidean structures that describe the relationship among objects.
Graph neural networks (GNNs), constructed with the floating-point Artificial Neuron Network (ANN),
have achieved state-of-the-art accuracy for learning on graphs [1; 2; 3; 4]. However, they raise the
concerns about computation and energy consumption, particularly when dealing with real-world
graphs of considerable scale [5; 6]. In contrast, Spiking Neuron Networks (SNNs), inspired by the
biological mechanism of brains, utilize neurons that communicate using sparse and discrete spikes,
showcasing their superiority in energy efficiency [7; 8]. Attempting to bring the best of both worlds,
spiking GNNs are drawing increasing research attention.
∗

Corresponding Author: Li Sun, ccesunli@ncepu.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

