SCRREAM : SCan, Register, REnder And Map:
A Framework for Annotating Accurate and Dense
3D Indoor Scenes with a Benchmark
HyunJun Jung
Technical University of Munich
hyunjun.jung@tum.de

Weihang Li
Technical University of Munich

Shun-Cheng Wu
Technical University of Munich

William Bittner
Technical University of Munich

Nikolas Brasch
Technical University of Munich
Zhensong Zhang
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Jifei Song
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Arthur Moreau
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Eduardo Pérez-Pellitero
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Nassir Navab
Technical University of Munich

Benjamin Busam
Technical University of Munich
b.busam@tum.de

Abstract
Traditionally, 3d indoor datasets have generally prioritized scale over ground-truth
accuracy in order to obtain improved generalization. However, using these datasets
to evaluate dense geometry tasks, such as depth rendering, can be problematic as
the meshes of the dataset are often incomplete and may produce wrong ground truth
to evaluate the details. In this paper, we propose SCRREAM, a dataset annotation
framework that allows annotation of fully dense meshes of objects in the scene and
registers camera poses on the real image sequence, which can produce accurate
ground truth for both sparse 3D as well as dense 3D tasks. We show the details of the
dataset annotation pipeline and showcase four possible variants of datasets that can
be obtained from our framework with example scenes, such as indoor reconstruction
and SLAM, scene editing & object removal, human reconstruction and 6d pose
estimation. Recent pipelines for indoor reconstruction and SLAM serve as new
benchmarks. In contrast to previous indoor dataset, our design allows to evaluate
dense geometry tasks on eleven sample scenes against accurately rendered ground
truth depth maps. (https://sites.google.com/view/scrream/about)

1

introduction

Indoor tasks are heavily related to human activities. As a consequence, perceiving 3D indoor scenes
is one of the major tasks in 3D computer vision. A series of indoor datasets [1–8] with different
annotation methods has been introduced to the vision community to provide the data necessary for
training and for performance evaluation. Such datasets, however, are generally capturing a scene with
a depth sensor from a limited number of viewpoints, trying to avoid making any changes to the scene
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

