Idiographic Personality Gaussian Process for
Psychological Assessment

Yehu Chen, Muchen Xi, Jacob Montgomery
Joshua Jackson, Roman Garnett
Washington University in St Louis
chenyehu,m.xi,j.jackson,jacob.montgomery,garnett@wustl.edu

Abstract
We develop a novel measurement framework based on a Gaussian process coregionalization model to address a long-lasting debate in psychometrics: whether
psychological features like personality share a common structure across the population, vary uniquely for individuals, or some combination. We propose the
idiographic personality Gaussian process (IPGP) framework, an intermediate model
that accommodates both shared trait structure across a population and “idiographic”
deviations for individuals. IPGP leverages the Gaussian process coregionalization model to handle the grouped nature of battery responses, but adjusted to
non-Gaussian ordinal data. We further exploit stochastic variational inference for
efficient latent factor estimation required for idiographic modeling at scale. Using
synthetic and real data, we show that IPGP improves both prediction of actual
responses and estimation of individualized factor structures relative to existing
benchmarks. In a third study, we show that IPGP also identifies unique clusters of
personality taxonomies in real-world data, displaying great potential to advance
individualized approaches to psychological diagnosis and treatment.

1

Introduction

Building models for the evaluation of latent traits from observed responses is crucial to understand
long-term behaviors through repeated quantitative assessments. These are used, for example, to study
emotional stability after medical treatment or the development of academic ability during secondary
education [1–3]. However, existing frameworks face several interrelated limitations. First, there
are strong reasons to believe that standard taxonomies may over-generalize, failing to distinguish
between related psychological phenomena that often differ in etiology, symptoms, and biological
processes between individuals [e.g., 1, 4], and this may lead to inaccuracy when making predictions
[5]. A related issue is that measurement models are rarely individualized, instead assuming that (1)
the correlation between latent traits of interest and survey responses are invariant across individuals
and (2) the relationship between the latent traits themselves are the same for everyone. Lastly, current
models are almost always developed for cross-sectional data that are collected only once from each
respondent, which overlooks any potential dynamics of psychological processes.
To address these limitations, previous research has adopted three different approaches, each inadequate
in its own way. First, recent work has proposed an idiographic approach that builds a completely
distinct taxonomy for each individual [6–8]. However, complete personalization can sacrifice
generalizability and interpretability for clinicians, as any possible population commonality is ignored.
A second line of research focuses on building dynamic psychometric models of time-series data via
some variant of item response theory [9, 10, 3], longitudinal structural equation modeling [11–13],
vectorized autoregression [14, 15] and/or Gaussian process (GP) latent trajectories [16–18]. However,
all these models adopt the nomothetic approach, assuming that the responses of all individuals
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

