SpikedAttention: Training-Free and Fully
Spike-Driven Transformer-to-SNN Conversion with
Winner-Oriented Spike Shift for Softmax Operation

Sangwoo Hwang
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology (DGIST)
nemesis0523@dgist.ac.kr
Seunghyun Lee
School of Electrical Engineering
Korea University
coder@korea.ac.kr

Dahoon Park
School of Electrical Engineering
Korea University
manyteacher93@korea.ac.kr

Donghun Lee
School of Electrical Engineering
Korea University
dhleeids@korea.ac.kr

Jaeha Kung∗
School of Electrical Engineering
Korea University
jhkung@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Event-driven spiking neural networks (SNNs) are promising neural networks that
reduce the energy consumption of continuously growing AI models. Recently,
keeping pace with the development of transformers, transformer-based SNNs were
presented. Due to the incompatibility of self-attention with spikes, however, existing transformer-based SNNs limit themselves by either restructuring self-attention
architecture or conforming to non-spike computations. In this work, we propose
a novel transformer-to-SNN conversion method that outputs an end-to-end spikebased transformer, named SpikedAttention. Our method directly converts the
well-trained transformer without modifying its attention architecture. For the vision task, the proposed method converts Swin Transformer into an SNN without
post-training or conversion-aware training, achieving state-of-the-art SNN accuracy
on ImageNet dataset, i.e., 80.0% with 28.7M parameters. Considering weight accumulation, neuron potential update, and on-chip data movement, SpikedAttention
reduces energy consumption by 42% compared to the baseline ANN, i.e., Swin-T.
Furthermore, for the first time, we demonstrate that SpikedAttention successfully
converts a BERT model to an SNN with only 0.3% accuracy loss on average consuming 58% less energy on GLUE benchmark. Our code is available at Github (
https://github.com/sangwoohwang/SpikedAttention ).

1

Introduction

Recently, many practical AI applications such as conversational question answering (1), intelligent
code completion (2), weather forecasting (3), and text-to-image generation (4) have rapidly evolved
with the advances in artificial neural networks (ANNs) based on transformer architecture. Transform∗

J. Kung is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

