Long-Tailed Object Detection Pre-training: Dynamic
Rebalancing Contrastive Learning with Dual
Reconstruction
Chen-Long Duan1 , Yong Li1 , Xiu-Shen Wei2∗, Lin Zhao1
2

1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
School of Computer Science and Engineering, and Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial
Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary Applications, Southeast University

Abstract
Pre-training plays a vital role in various vision tasks, such as object recognition
and detection. Commonly used pre-training methods, which typically rely on
randomized approaches like uniform or Gaussian distributions to initialize model
parameters, often fall short when confronted with long-tailed distributions, especially in detection tasks. This is largely due to extreme data imbalance and the
issue of simplicity bias. In this paper, we introduce a novel pre-training framework for object detection, called Dynamic Rebalancing Contrastive Learning with
Dual Reconstruction (2DRCL). Our method builds on a Holistic-Local Contrastive
Learning mechanism, which aligns pre-training with object detection by capturing both global contextual semantics and detailed local patterns. To tackle the
imbalance inherent in long-tailed data, we design a dynamic rebalancing strategy
that adjusts the sampling of underrepresented instances throughout the pre-training
process, ensuring better representation of tail classes. Moreover, Dual Reconstruction addresses simplicity bias by enforcing a reconstruction task aligned with
the self-consistency principle, specifically benefiting underrepresented tail classes.
Experiments on COCO and LVIS v1.0 datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method, particularly in improving the mAP/AP scores for tail classes.

1

Introduction

With the advancement of deep learning, computer vision has seen significant progress, particularly
in the development of large-scale pre-training and fine-tuning optimization paradigms [55, 59, 63,
65]. Numerous pre-training methods capture domain-specific or task-relevant concepts, boosting
downstream performance [7, 14, 15, 27, 30–32, 48, 52]. In the field of object detection, current
methods typically leverage ImageNet [10] and COCO [35] for pre-training, allowing partial model
components, such as the backbone, to achieve satisfactory pre-training. However, these pre-training
paradigms leave some key detection components randomly initialized and tend to overlook the
suboptimal performance issues caused by long-tailed distributions during pre-training process.
In the traditional supervised pre-training paradigm, models are constrained by the distribution of
labeled data, making it difficult for them to perform well in long-tailed settings, for example, in
∗
Corresponding author. The first two authors contribute equally to this work. This work was supported by
National Key R&D Program of China (2021YFA1001100), National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant (62272231, 62172222), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (4009002401), and
the Big Data Computing Center of Southeast University.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

