Reciprocal Learning

Julian Rodemann
Department of Statistics
LMU Munich
j.rodemann@lmu.de

Christoph Jansen
Computing & Communications
Lancaster University Leipzig
c.jansen@lancaster.ac.uk

Georg Schollmeyer
Department of Statistics
LMU Munich
g.schollmeyer@lmu.de

Abstract
We demonstrate that numerous machine learning algorithms are specific instances
of one single paradigm: reciprocal learning. These instances range from active
learning over multi-armed bandits to self-training. We show that all these algorithms not only learn parameters from data but also vice versa: They iteratively
alter training data in a way that depends on the current model fit. We introduce
reciprocal learning as a generalization of these algorithms using the language of
decision theory. This allows us to study under what conditions they converge.
The key is to guarantee that reciprocal learning contracts such that the Banach
fixed-point theorem applies. In this way, we find that reciprocal learning converges
at linear rates to an approximately optimal model under some assumptions on the
loss function, if their predictions are probabilistic and the sample adaption is both
non-greedy and either randomized or regularized. We interpret these findings and
provide corollaries that relate them to active learning, self-training, and bandits.

1

Introduction

The era of data abundance is drawing to a close. While GPT-3 [9] still had to make do with 300 billion
tokens, Llama 3 [102] was trained on 15 trillion. With the stock of high-quality data growing at a
much smaller rate [67], adequate training data might run out within this decade [58, 107]. Generally
and beyond language models, machine learning is threatened by degrading data quality and quantity
[60]. Apparently, learning ever more parameters from ever more data is not the exclusive route to
success. Models also have to learn from which data to learn. This has sparked a lot of interest in
sample efficiency [70, 92, 111, 7, 46, 27, 105], subsampling [47, 101, 71], coresets [62, 76, 86], data
subset selection [55, 113, 13, 82], and data pruning [32, 118, 57, 5] in recent years.
Instead of proposing yet another method along these lines, we demonstrate that a broad spectrum of
well-established machine learning algorithms already exhibits a reciprocal relationship between data
and parameters. That is, parameters are not only learned from data, but data is also iteratively chosen
based on currently optimal parameters with the aim of increasing sample efficiency. For instance,
consider self-training algorithms in semi-supervised learning [106, 12, 103, 87], see section 2.1.
They iteratively add pseudo-labeled variants of unlabeled data to the labeled training data. The
pseudo-labels are predicted by the current model, and thus depend on the parameters learned by
the model from the labeled data in the first place. Other examples comprise active learning [93],
Bayesian optimization [63, 64, 98], superset learning [35, 34, 85, 36], and multi-armed bandits [3,
81], see Appendix A for details.
In this paper, we develop a unifying framework, called reciprocal learning, that allows for a principled
analysis of all these methods. After an initial model fit to the training data, reciprocal learning
algorithms alter the latter in a way that depends on the fit. This dependence can have various facets,
ranging from predicting labels (self-training) over taking actions (bandits) to querying an oracle
(active learning), all based on the current model fit. It can entail both adding and removing data.
Figure 7 illustrates this oscillating procedure and compares it to a well-known illustration of classical
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

