Solving Sparse & High-Dimensional-Output
Regression via Compression

Renyuan Li
Department of Industrial Systems Engineering & Management
National University of Singapore
renyuan.li@u.nus.edu

Zhehui Chen
Google
zhehuichen@google.com

Guanyi Wang
Department of Industrial Systems Engineering & Management
National University of Singapore
guanyi.w@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Multi-Output Regression (MOR) has been widely used in scientific data analysis
for decision-making. Unlike traditional regression models, MOR aims to simultaneously predict multiple real-valued outputs given an input. However, the increasing
dimensionality of the outputs poses significant challenges regarding interpretability
and computational scalability for modern MOR applications. As a first step to
address these challenges, this paper proposes a Sparse & High-dimensional-Output
REgression (SHORE) model by incorporating additional sparsity requirements to
resolve the output interpretability, and then designs a computationally efficient twostage optimization framework capable of solving SHORE with provable accuracy
via compression on outputs. Theoretically, we show that the proposed framework
is computationally scalable while maintaining the same order of training loss and
prediction loss before-and-after compression under arbitrary or relatively weak
sample set conditions. Empirically, numerical results further validate the theoretical
findings, showcasing the efficiency and accuracy of the proposed framework.

1

Introduction

Multi-Output Regression (MOR) problem [8, 44] is a preponderant tool for factor prediction and
decision-making in modern data analysis. Compared with traditional regression models that focus on
a scalar output for each sample, MOR aims to predict multiple outputs y ∈ RK simultaneously based
on a given input x ∈ Rd , i.e.,
n
1X
y := arg min dist(u, gb(x)) with gb := arg min
ℓ(y i , g(xi )) ,
n i=1
u∈Y
g∈G
where we use {(xi , y i )}ni=1 to denote its given sample set with xi ∈ Rd i-th input feature vector
and y i ∈ RK corresponding output vector, define ℓ : RK × RK → R as the loss function, dist :
RK × RK → R as some prediction/distance metric, Y as the structure/constraint set for multiple
outputs, and G as the candidate set for predicting model g : Rd → RK . Hence, MOR and its variants
have been used for numerous regression tasks with structure requirements on multi-dimensional
outputs arising from real applications, such as simultaneous estimation of biophysical parameters
from remote sensing images [40], channel estimation through the prediction of several received
signals [35], the grounding (e.g., factuality check [16]) in the Large Language Model (LLM, [34, 11])
era, to name but a few.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

