GEPS: Boosting Generalization in Parametric PDE
Neural Solvers through Adaptive Conditioning

Armand Kassaï Koupaï 1 ∗ Jorge Mifsut Benet 1 Yuan Yin 2
Jean-Noël Vittaut3 Patrick Gallinari1, 4
1

3

Sorbonne Université, CNRS, ISIR, 75005 Paris, France 2 Valeo.ai, Paris, France
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LIP6, 75005 Paris, France 4 Criteo AI Lab, Paris, France

Abstract
Solving parametric partial differential equations (PDEs) presents significant challenges for data-driven methods due to the sensitivity of spatio-temporal dynamics
to variations in PDE parameters. Machine learning approaches often struggle to
capture this variability. To address this, data-driven approaches learn parametric
PDEs by sampling a very large variety of trajectories with varying PDE parameters.
We first show that incorporating conditioning mechanisms for learning parametric
PDEs is essential and that among them, adaptive conditioning, allows stronger
generalization. As existing adaptive conditioning methods do not scale well with
respect to the number of parameters to adapt in the neural solver, we propose
GEPS, a simple adaptation mechanism to boost GEneralization in Pde Solvers via
a first-order optimization and low-rank rapid adaptation of a small set of context
parameters. We demonstrate the versatility of our approach for both fully datadriven and for physics-aware neural solvers. Validation performed on a whole
range of spatio-temporal forecasting problems demonstrates excellent performance
for generalizing to unseen conditions including initial conditions, PDE coefficients,
forcing terms and solution domain. Project page: https://geps-project.github.io/

1

Introduction

Solving parametric partial differential equations, i.e. PDE in which certain parameters—such as initial
and boundary conditions, coefficients, or forcing terms—can vary, is a crucial task in scientific and
engineering disciplines, as it plays a central role in enhancing our ability to model and control systems,
quantify uncertainties, and predict future events (Cohen & Devore, 2015). Neural networks (NNs) are
increasingly employed as surrogate models for solving PDEs by approximating their solutions (Long
et al., 2018; Lu et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021). A primary challenge with these data-driven solvers
is their ability to generalize across varying contexts of the physical phenomena. This is especially
pronounced for dynamical systems, which can exhibit significantly different behaviors when subject
to small changes in PDE parameters.
The usual approach for solving a parametric PDE with neural networks involves sampling instances
from the PDE parameter distribution (e.g., the PDE coefficients), and then sampling trajectories
for each instance of the underlying PDE (Takamoto et al., 2022). The training set thus consists of
multiple trajectories per parameter instance, with the objective of generalizing to new instances. This
approach aligns with the classical empirical risk minimization (ERM) framework: it assumes that
the training dataset is large enough to represent the distribution of the dynamical system behaviors
and that this distribution is i.i.d. (Bodnar et al., 2024). However, given the complexity of dynamical
∗

Corresponding author: armand.kassai@isir.upmc.fr

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

