Non-geodesically-convex optimization in the
Wasserstein space

Hoang Phuc Hau Luu
Hanlin Yu
Bernardo Williams
Petrus Mikkola
Marcelo Hartmann
Kai Puolamäki
Arto Klami
Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki

Abstract
We study a class of optimization problems in the Wasserstein space (the space of
probability measures) where the objective function is nonconvex along generalized
geodesics. Specifically, the objective exhibits some difference-of-convex structure
along these geodesics. The setting also encompasses sampling problems where
the logarithm of the target distribution is difference-of-convex. We derive multiple
convergence insights for a novel semi Forward-Backward Euler scheme under
several nonconvex (and possibly nonsmooth) regimes. Notably, the semi ForwardBackward Euler is just a slight modification of the Forward-Backward Euler
whose convergence is—to our knowledge—still unknown in our very general
non-geodesically-convex setting.

1

Introduction

Sampling and optimization are intertwined. For example, the (overdamped) Langevin dynamics,
typically considered a sampling algorithm, can be considered as gradient descent optimization where
a suitable amount of Gaussian noise is injected at each step. There are also deeper connections. At
the limit of infinitesimal stepsize, the law of the Langevin dynamics is governed by the Fokker-Planck
equation describing a diffusion over time of probability measures. In the seminal paper [39], Jordan,
Kinderlehrer, and Otto reinterpreted the Fokker-Planck equation as the gradient flow of the functional
relative entropy, a.k.a. Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, in the (Wasserstein) space of finite secondmoment probability measures equipped with the Wasserstein metric. The discovery connects the two
fields and encourages optimization in the Wasserstein space, even conceptually, as it directly gives
insight into the sampling context. Studies in continuous-time dynamics [21, 12, 66, 30] seem natural
and enjoy nice theoretical properties without discretization errors. Another line of research studies
discretization of Wasserstein gradient flow by either quantifying the discretization error between the
continuous-time flow and the discrete-time flow [39, 67, 27, 23, 28] or viewing discrete-time flows as
iterative optimization schemes in the Wasserstein space [65, 26, 70, 11] where the primary focus is
on (geodesically) convex optimization problems.
Nonconvex, nonsmooth optimization is challenging, even in Euclidean space, quoting Rockafellar
[63]: “In fact the great watershed in optimization isn’t between linearity and nonlinearity, but
convexity and nonconvexity.” The landscape of nonconvex problems is mostly underexplored in the
Wasserstein space. In the sampling language, it amounts to sampling from a non-log-concave and
possibly non-log-Lipschitz-smooth target distribution. Recently, Balasubramanian et al. [9] advocated
the need for a sound theory for non-log-concave sampling and provided some guarantees for the
unadjusted Langevin algorithm (ULA) in sampling from log-smooth (Lipschitz/Hölder smooth)
densities. These results are preliminary for the ULA (and its variants) with a specific class of densities
(smooth). Theoretical understandings of other classes of algorithms and densities are needed.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

