FlowTurbo: Towards Real-time Flow-Based Image
Generation with Velocity Refiner

Wenliang Zhao∗
Department of Automation
Tsinghua University
wenliangzhao.thu@gmail.com
Xumin Yu
Department of Automation
Tsinghua University
yuxumin98@gmail.com

Minglei Shi∗
Department of Automation
Tsinghua University
stephenserrylei@gmail.com

Jie Zhou
Department of Automation
Tsinghua University
jzhou@tsinghua.edu.cn

Jiwen Lu
Department of Automation
Tsinghua University
lujiwen@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Building on the success of diffusion models in visual generation, flow-based models
reemerge as another prominent family of generative models that have achieved
competitive or better performance in terms of both visual quality and inference
speed. By learning the velocity field through flow-matching, flow-based models
tend to produce a straighter sampling trajectory, which is advantageous during
the sampling process. However, unlike diffusion models for which fast samplers
are well-developed, efficient sampling of flow-based generative models has been
rarely explored. In this paper, we propose a framework called FlowTurbo to
accelerate the sampling of flow-based models while still enhancing the sampling
quality. Our primary observation is that the velocity predictor’s outputs in the
flow-based models will become stable during the sampling, enabling the estimation
of velocity via a lightweight velocity refiner. Additionally, we introduce several
techniques including a pseudo corrector and sample-aware compilation to further
reduce inference time. Since FlowTurbo does not change the multi-step sampling
paradigm, it can be effectively applied for various tasks such as image editing,
inpainting, etc. By integrating FlowTurbo into different flow-based models, we
obtain an acceleration ratio of 53.1%∼58.3% on class-conditional generation and
29.8%∼38.5% on text-to-image generation. Notably, FlowTurbo reaches an FID
of 2.12 on ImageNet with 100 (ms / img) and FID of 3.93 with 38 (ms / img),
achieving the real-time image generation and establishing the new state-of-the-art.
Code is available at https://github.com/shiml20/FlowTurbo.

1

Introduction

In recent years, diffusion models have emerged as powerful generative models, drawing considerable
interest and demonstrating remarkable performance across various domains[10, 38, 30, 12]. Diffusion
models utilize a denoising network, ϵθ , to learn the reverse of a diffusion process that gradually
adds noise to transform the data distribution into a Gaussian distribution. While the formulation of
diffusion models enables stable training and flexible condition injection[30], sampling from these
models requires iterative denoising. This process necessitates multiple evaluations of the denoising
network, thereby increasing computational costs. To address this, several techniques such as fast
∗

Equal contribution.

†

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

