Empowering Visible-Infrared Person Re-Identification
with Large Foundation Models

Zhangyi Hu1∗ Bin Yang1∗ Mang Ye1†
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software,
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
{zhangyi_hu,yangbin_cv,yemang}@whu.edu.cn
https://github.com/WHU-HZY/TVI-LFM

1

Abstract
Visible-Infrared Person Re-identification (VI-ReID) is a challenging cross-modal
retrieval task due to significant modality differences, primarily resulting from the
absence of color information in the infrared modality. The development of large
foundation models like Large Language Models (LLMs) and Vision Language
Models (VLMs) motivates us to explore a feasible solution to empower VI-ReID
with off-the-shelf large foundation models. To this end, we propose a novel Textenhanced VI-ReID framework driven by Large Foundation Models (TVI-LFM).
The core idea is to enrich the representation of the infrared modality with textual
descriptions automatically generated by VLMs. Specifically, we incorporate a
pre-trained VLM to extract textual features from texts generated by VLM and
augmented by LLM, and incrementally fine-tune the text encoder to minimize the
domain gap between generated texts and original visual modalities. Meanwhile, to
enhance the infrared modality with extracted textual representations, we leverage
modality alignment capabilities of VLMs and VLM-generated feature-level filters.
This enables the text model to learn complementary features from the infrared
modality, ensuring the semantic structural consistency between the fusion modality
and the visible modality. Furthermore, we introduce modality joint learning to
align features across all modalities, ensuring that textual features maintain stable
semantic representation of overall pedestrian appearance during complementary
information learning. Additionally, a modality ensemble retrieval strategy is proposed to leverage complementary strengths of each query modality to improve
retrieval effectiveness and robustness. Extensive experiments on three expanded
VI-ReID datasets demonstrate that our method significantly improves the retrieval
performance, paving the way for the utilization of large foundation models in
downstream multi-modal retrieval tasks.

1

Introduction

Person Re-Identification (ReID) aims to retrieve images of the same identity across different cameras,
which is an important task for intelligent surveillance and urban security [14, 62]. Although RGBbased methods [22, 16, 8, 23, 33, 25, 69, 55, 47, 63, 68, 13] have shown promising results during the
daytime, their performance significantly declines at night, as RGB cameras fail to capture sufficient
information about individuals in low-light conditions. Infrared cameras can capture pedestrian
appearances in dark environments. Therefore, Visible-Infrared Person Re-Identification (VI-ReID) is
proposed to match images of individuals captured by visible and infrared cameras, enabling 24-hour
surveillance. However, the absence of crucial information, such as color, in infrared images results in
significant differences between infrared and visible modalities, posing a major challenge for VI-ReID.
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

