Learning from higher-order correlations, efficiently:
hypothesis tests, random features, and neural networks

Eszter Székely† ∗

Lorenzo Bardone †

Federica Gerace‡

Sebastian Goldt§
International School of Advanced Studies (SISSA)
Trieste, Italy

Abstract
Neural networks excel at discovering statistical patterns in high-dimensional data
sets. In practice, higher-order cumulants, which quantify the non-Gaussian correlations between three or more variables, are particularly important for the performance of neural networks. But how efficient are neural networks at extracting
features from higher-order cumulants? We study this question in the spiked cumulant model, where the statistician needs to recover a privileged direction or
“spike” from the order-p ≥ 4 cumulants of d-dimensional inputs. We first discuss
the fundamental statistical and computational limits of recovering the spike by
analysing the number of samples n required to strongly distinguish between inputs
from the spiked cumulant model and isotropic Gaussian inputs. Existing literature
established the presence of a wide statistical-to-computational gap in this problem.
We deepen this line of work by finding an exact formula for the likelihood ratio
norm which proves that statistical distinguishability requires n ≳ d samples, while
distinguishing the two distributions in polynomial time requires n ≳ d2 samples
for a wide class of algorithms, i.e. those covered by the low-degree conjecture.
Numerical experiments show that neural networks do indeed learn to distinguish
the two distributions with quadratic sample complexity, while “lazy” methods like
random features are not better than random guessing in this regime. Our results
show that neural networks extract information from higher-order correlations in
the spiked cumulant model efficiently, and reveal a large gap in the amount of
data required by neural networks and random features to learn from higher-order
cumulants.

1

Introduction

Discovering statistical patterns in high-dimensional data sets is the key objective of machine learning.
In a classification task, the differences between inputs in different classes arise at different statistical
levels of the inputs: two different classes of images will usually have different means, different
covariances, and different higher-order cumulants (HOCs), which describe the non-Gaussian part of
the correlations between three or more pixels. While differences in the mean and covariance allow
for rudimentary classification, Refinetti et al. [1] recently highlighted the importance of HOCs for the
performance of neural networks: when they removed the HOCs per class of the CIFAR10 training
∗

Current address: CCFE, Culham Science Centre, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 3DB, UK
These authors contributed equally.
‡
Current address: Dipartimento di Matematica, Universita’ di Bologna, Bologna (BO), Italy
§
Correspondence to: {eszekely, lbardone, fgerace, sgoldt}@sissa.it
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

