Symbolic Regression with a Learned Concept Library

Arya Grayeli∗
UT Austin, Foundry Technologies

Atharva Sehgal∗
UT Austin

Miles Cranmer
University of Cambridge

Omar Costilla-Reyes
MIT

Swarat Chaudhuri
UT Austin

Abstract
We present a novel method for symbolic regression (SR), the task of searching for
compact programmatic hypotheses that best explain a dataset. The problem is commonly solved using genetic algorithms; we show that we can enhance such methods
by inducing a library of abstract textual concepts. Our algorithm, called L A SR,
uses zero-shot queries to a large language model (LLM) to discover and evolve
abstract concepts occurring in known high-performing hypotheses. We discover
new hypotheses using a mix of standard evolutionary steps and LLM-guided steps
(obtained through zero-shot LLM queries) conditioned on discovered concepts.
Once discovered, hypotheses are used in a new round of concept abstraction and
evolution. We validate L A SR on the Feynman equations, a popular SR benchmark,
as well as a set of synthetic tasks. On these benchmarks, L A SR substantially
outperforms a variety of state-of-the-art SR approaches based on deep learning and
evolutionary algorithms. Moreover, we show that L A SR can be used to discover a
new and powerful scaling law for LLMs.

1

Introduction

Symbolic regression (SR) [33] is the task of finding succinct programmatic hypotheses — written in
a flexible, domain-specific programming language — that best explain a dataset. Initially proposed in
the 1970s, SR has recently emerged as a prominent approach to automated scientific discovery, with
applications in domains from astrophysics [30, 12] to chemistry [2, 22] to medicine [51].
Computational complexity is a fundamental challenge in SR, as the space of hypotheses that an SR
algorithm must search is discrete and exponential. Previous work has approached this challenge
using methods like genetic programming [41, 10], neural-guided search [11, 43], deep reinforcement
learning [38] and hybrid algorithms [28]. However, new tools to enhance the scalability of SR remain
a critical need for applications in SR and scientific discovery.
In this paper, we show that abstraction and knowledge-directed discovery can be powerful principles
in building such scaling tools in SR. State-of-the-art genetic algorithms for SR [10] evolve pools of
candidate hypotheses using random mutation and crossover operations. By contrast, a human scientist
does not just randomly mutate their explanations of data. Instead, they synthesize background
knowledge and empirical observations into abstract concepts, then use these concepts to derive new
explanations. We show that zero-shot queries to large language models (LLMs) can be used to
implement such a discovery process on top of a standard SR algorithm.
Concretely, we present a new method for symbolic regression, called L A SR, that discovers a library
of abstract, reusable and interpretable textual concepts and uses it to accelerate SR. L A SR alternates
between three phases: (i) concept-directed hypothesis evolution, where standard genetic operations
∗

Equal contribution; Correspondence to atharvas@utexas.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

