Generalization Bound and Learning Methods for
Data-Driven Projections in Linear Programming

Shinsaku Sakaue
The University of Tokyo and RIKEN AIP
Tokyo, Japan
sakaue@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Taihei Oki
Hokkaido University
Hokkaido, Japan
oki@icredd.hokudai.ac.jp

Abstract
How to solve high-dimensional linear programs (LPs) efficiently is a fundamental
question. Recently, there has been a surge of interest in reducing LP sizes using
random projections, which can accelerate solving LPs independently of improving
LP solvers. This paper explores a new direction of data-driven projections, which
use projection matrices learned from data instead of random projection matrices.
Given training data of n-dimensional LPs, we learn an n × k projection matrix
with n > k. When addressing a future LP instance, we reduce its dimensionality
from n to k via the learned projection matrix, solve the resulting LP to obtain a kdimensional solution, and apply the learned matrix to it to recover an n-dimensional
solution. On the theoretical side, a natural question is: how much data is sufficient
to ensure the quality of recovered solutions? We address this question based on
the framework of data-driven algorithm design, which connects the amount of
data sufficient for establishing generalization bounds to the pseudo-dimension of
performance metrics. We obtain an Õ(nk 2 ) upper bound on the pseudo-dimension,
where Õ compresses logarithmic factors. We also provide an Ω(nk) lower bound,
implying our result is tight up to an Õ(k) factor. On the practical side, we explore
two simple methods for learning projection matrices: PCA- and gradient-based
methods. While the former is relatively efficient, the latter can sometimes achieve
better solution quality. Experiments demonstrate that learning projection matrices
from data is indeed beneficial: it leads to significantly higher solution quality than
the existing random projection while greatly reducing the time for solving LPs.

1

Introduction

Linear programming (LP) has been one of the most fundamental tools used in various industrial
domains [23, 18], and how to address high-dimensional LPs efficiently has been a major research
subject in operations research. To date, researchers have developed various fast LP solvers, most of
which stem from the simplex or interior-point method. Recent advances include a parallelized simplex
method [27] and a randomized interior-point method [16]. Besides the improvements in LP solvers,
there has been a growing interest in reducing LP sizes via random projections [44, 37, 2], motivated by
the success of random sketching in numerical linear algebra [48]. Such a projection-based approach
is solver-agnostic in that it can work with any solvers, including the aforementioned recent solvers,
for solving reduced-size LPs. This solver-agnostic nature is beneficial, especially considering that LP
solvers have evolved in distinct directions of simplex and interior-point methods.
In the context of numerical linear algebra, there has been a notable shift towards learning sketching
matrices from data, instead of using random matrices [28, 29, 12, 33, 40]. This data-driven approach is
effective when we frequently address similar instances. The line of previous research has demonstrated
that learned sketching matrices can greatly improve the performance of sketching-based methods.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

