Proximal Causal Inference with Text Data
Jacob M. Chen
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
jchen459@jhu.edu

Rohit Bhattacharya
Department of Computer Science
Williams College
rb17@williams.edu

Katherine A. Keith
Department of Computer Science
Williams College
kak5@williams.edu

Abstract
Recent text-based causal methods attempt to mitigate confounding bias by estimating proxies of confounding variables that are partially or imperfectly measured
from unstructured text data. These approaches, however, assume analysts have supervised labels of the confounders given text for a subset of instances, a constraint
that is sometimes infeasible due to data privacy or annotation costs. In this work,
we address settings in which an important confounding variable is completely
unobserved. We propose a new causal inference method that uses two instances
of pre-treatment text data, infers two proxies using two zero-shot models on the
separate instances, and applies these proxies in the proximal g-formula. We prove,
under certain assumptions about the instances of text and accuracy of the zero-shot
predictions, that our method of inferring text-based proxies satisfies identification
conditions of the proximal g-formula while other seemingly reasonable proposals
do not. To address untestable assumptions associated with our method and the
proximal g-formula, we further propose an odds ratio falsification heuristic that
flags when to proceed with downstream effect estimation using the inferred proxies.
We evaluate our method in synthetic and semi-synthetic settings—the latter with
real-world clinical notes from MIMIC-III and open large language models for zeroshot prediction—and find that our method produces estimates with low bias. We
believe that this text-based design of proxies allows for the use of proximal causal
inference in a wider range of scenarios, particularly those for which obtaining
suitable proxies from structured data is difficult.

1

Introduction

Data-driven decision making relies on estimating the effect of interventions, i.e. causal effect estimation. For example, a doctor must decide which medicine she will give her patient, ideally the one with
the greatest effect on positive outcomes. Many causal effects are estimated via randomized controlled
trials—considered the gold standard in causal inference; however, if an experiment is unfeasible or
unethical, one must use observational data. In observational settings, a primary obstacle to unbiased
causal effect estimation is confounding variables, variables that affect both the treatment (e.g., which
medicine) and the outcome.
Recently, some studies have attempted to mitigate confounding by incorporating (pre-treatment)
unstructured text data as proxies for confounding variables or by specifying confounding variables as
linguistic properties, e.g., topic (Veitch et al., 2020; Roberts et al., 2020), tone (Sridhar and Getoor,
2019), or use of specific word types (Olteanu et al., 2017). A wide range of fields have used text in
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

