Conditional Outcome Equivalence: A Quantile
Alternative to CATE
Josh Givens
University of Bristol
josh.givens@bristol.ac.uk
Song Liu
University of Bristol
song.liu@bristol.ac.uk

Henry W J Reeve
University of Bristol
henry.reeve@bristol.ac.uk
Katarzyna Reluga
University of Bristol
katarzyna.reluga@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
The conditional quantile treatment effect (CQTE) can provide insight into the effect of a treatment beyond the conditional average treatment effect (CATE). This
ability to provide information over multiple quantiles of the response makes the
CQTE especially valuable in cases where the effect of a treatment is not wellmodelled by a location shift, even conditionally on the covariates. Nevertheless,
the estimation of the CQTE is challenging and often depends upon the smoothness
of the individual quantiles as a function of the covariates rather than smoothness
of the CQTE itself. This is in stark contrast to the CATE where it is possible to
obtain high-quality estimates which have less dependency upon the smoothness
of the nuisance parameters when the CATE itself is smooth. Moreover, relative
smoothness of the CQTE lacks the interpretability of smoothness of the CATE
making it less clear whether it is a reasonable assumption to make. We combine
the desirable properties of the CATE and CQTE by considering a new estimand,
the conditional quantile comparator (CQC). The CQC not only retains information about the whole treatment distribution, similar to the CQTE, but also having
more natural examples of smoothness and is able to leverage simplicity in an auxiliary estimand. We provide finite sample bounds on the error of our estimator,
demonstrating its ability to exploit simplicity. We validate our theory in numerical simulations which show that our method produces more accurate estimates
than baselines. Finally, we apply our methodology to a study on the effect of
employment incentives on earnings across different age groups. We see that our
method is able to reveal heterogeneity of the effect across different quantiles.

1

Introduction

In many real world scenarios such as personalised treatment allocation and individual level policy
decisions, understanding the effect of a treatment/intervention at an individual level is invaluable
in providing bespoke care. The field which aims to understand a treatment’s effect given certain
covariates is referred to as heterogeneous treatment effect (HTE) estimation and has seen popularity
across many applications [11, 10, 24, 20]. Within HTE, the conditional average treatment effect
(CATE) has proved itself to be a popular target of study in this area due to its simplicity and interpretability [2, 13, 28]. A key limitation of the CATE however, is that it fails to paint a full picture of
the differences between distributions of the two responses. In addition, it can be sensitive to outliers,
with extreme values leading to a biased outcome. As such, the conditional quantile treatment effect
(CQTE), an estimand which compares the conditional quantiles of the distributions in the treated
and untreated populations, has established itself as a popular alternative [1, 5, 26].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

