Rethinking LLM Memorization through the Lens of
Adversarial Compression

Avi Schwarzschild∗
schwarzschild@cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University

Zhili Feng∗
zhilif@andrew.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University

Zachary C. Lipton
Carnegie Mellon University

Pratyush Maini
pratyushmaini@cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University

J. Zico Kolter
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) trained on web-scale datasets raise substantial
concerns regarding permissible data usage. One major question is whether these
models “memorize” all their training data or they integrate many data sources in
some way more akin to how a human would learn and synthesize information. The
answer hinges, to a large degree, on how we define memorization. In this work,
we propose the Adversarial Compression Ratio (ACR) as a metric for assessing
memorization in LLMs. A given string from the training data is considered memorized if it can be elicited by a prompt (much) shorter than the string itself—in other
words, if these strings can be “compressed” with the model by computing adversarial prompts of fewer tokens. The ACR overcomes the limitations of existing
notions of memorization by (i) offering an adversarial view of measuring memorization, especially for monitoring unlearning and compliance; and (ii) allowing
for the flexibility to measure memorization for arbitrary strings at a reasonably low
compute. Our definition serves as a practical tool for determining when model
owners may be violating terms around data usage, providing a potential legal tool
and a critical lens through which to address such scenarios.
Find the Minimal Prompt
that elicits Target String

PROMPT: urgesTOBE quote!

Target String

: To be or not to be, that is the question.

Minimal Prompt

Is Memorized?

4 tokens
urgesTOBE quote!

12 Tokens > 4 Tokens
High ACR, Yes

Minimal Prompt

Is Memorized?

12 tokens
To be or not to be, that
is the question.

Target String
26 tokens
The power of light
struck him soon after
he left [....] States

MiniPrompt
(Compression Engine)

45 tokens
latestholder \seating
walls [....] artist
expatriate RomeSoon

26 Tokens < 45 Tokens
Low ACR, No

Figure 1: We propose a compression ratio where we compare the length of the shortest prompt that
elicits a training sample in response from an LLM to the length of that sample. If a string in the
training data can be compressed, i.e. the minimal prompt is shorter than the sample, then we call it
memorized. Our test is an easy-to-describe tool that is useful in the effort to gauge the misuse of data.
∗

Equal contribution
Project page: https://locuslab.github.io/acr-memorization

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

