Coded Computing for Resilient Distributed
Computing: A Learning-Theoretic Framework

Parsa Moradi
University of Minnesota
moradi@umn.edu

Behrooz Tahmasebi
MIT CSAIL
bzt@mit.edu

Mohammad Ali Maddah-Ali
University of Minnesota
maddah@umn.edu

Abstract
Coded computing has emerged as a promising framework for tackling signiﬁcant
challenges in large-scale distributed computing, including the presence of slow,
faulty, or compromised servers. In this approach, each worker node processes a
combination of the data, rather than the raw data itself. The ﬁnal result then is decoded from the collective outputs of the worker nodes. However, there is a signiﬁcant gap between current coded computing approaches and the broader landscape
of general distributed computing, particularly when it comes to machine learning
workloads. To bridge this gap, we propose a novel foundation for coded computing, integrating the principles of learning theory, and developing a framework that
seamlessly adapts with machine learning applications. In this framework, the objective is to ﬁnd the encoder and decoder functions that minimize the loss function,
deﬁned as the mean squared error between the estimated and true values. Facilitating the search for the optimum decoding and functions, we show that the loss
function can be upper-bounded by the summation of two terms: the generalization error of the decoding function and the training error of the encoding function.
Focusing on the second-order Sobolev space, we then derive the optimal encoder
and decoder. We show that in the proposed solution, the mean squared error of
the estimation decays with the rate of O(S 3 N −3 ) and O(S 8/5 N −3/5 ) in noiseless
and noisy computation settings, respectively, where N is the number of worker
nodes with at most S slow servers (stragglers). Finally, we evaluate the proposed
scheme on inference tasks for various machine learning models and demonstrate
that the proposed framework outperforms the state-of-the-art in terms of accuracy
and rate of convergence.

1

Introduction

The theory of coded computing has been developed to improve the reliability and security of largescale machine learning platforms, effectively tackling two major challenges: (1) the detrimental
impact of slow workers (stragglers) on overall computation efﬁciency, and (2) the threat of faulty
or malicious workers that can compromise data accuracy and integrity. These challenges have been
well-documented in the literature, including the seminal work [1] from Google. For instance, [2]
reported that in a sample set of 3000 matrix multiplication jobs on AWS Lambda, while the median
job time was 40 seconds, approximately 5% of worker nodes took 100 seconds to respond, and two
nodes took as long as 375 seconds. Furthermore, coded computing has also been instrumental in
addressing privacy concerns, a crucial aspect of distributed computing systems [3–12].
The concept of coded computing has been motivated by the success of coding in communication
over unreliable channels, where instead of transmitting raw data, the transmitter sends a (linear)
combination of the data, known as coded data. This redundancy in the coded data enables the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

