To Err Like Human: Affective Bias-Inspired Measures
for Visual Emotion Recognition Evaluation

1

Chenxi Zhao 1,2 Jinglei Shi ∗ 1 Liqiang Nie 3 Jufeng Yang 1,2,4
VCIP & TMCC & DISSec, College of Computer Science, Nankai University
2
Nankai International Advanced Research Institute (SHENZHEN· FUTIAN)
3
Harbin Institute of Technology (SHENZHEN)
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory
zhaochenxi@mail.nankai.edu.cn, jinglei.shi@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Accuracy is a commonly adopted performance metric in various classification tasks,
which measures the proportion of correctly classified samples among all samples.
It assumes equal importance for all classes, hence equal severity for misclassifications. However, in the task of emotional classification, due to the psychological
similarities between emotions, misclassifying a certain emotion into one class may
be more severe than another, e.g., misclassifying ‘excitement’ as ‘anger’ apparently
is more severe than as ‘awe’. Albeit high meaningful for many applications, metrics
capable of measuring these cases of misclassifications in visual emotion recognition tasks have yet to be explored. In this paper, based on Mikel’s emotion wheel
from psychology, we propose a novel approach for evaluating the performance in
visual emotion recognition, which takes into account the distance on the emotion
wheel between different emotions to mimic the psychological nuances of emotions.
Experimental results in semi-supervised learning on emotion recognition and user
study have shown that our proposed metrics is more effective than the accuracy
to assess the performance and conforms to the cognitive laws of human emotions.
The code is available at https://github.com/ZhaoChenxi-nku/ECC.

1

Introduction
"The best and most beautiful things in the world cannot be seen or even touched.
They must be felt with the heart."
-Helen Keller

Emotion, as a complex state of feeling that results in physical and psychological changes and influences thoughts and behavior, involves subjective experiences, physiological arousal, cognitive
appraisal and behavioral expressions [33]. Emotional similarity is a significant characteristic of
emotions, revealing the commonalities among diverse emotional states in their essence, modes of
expression, and influencing factors. And the essence of emotion can be explored through understanding the hierarchical nature of human cognitive processes. The Reverse Hierarchy Theory [14]
in neuroscience suggests that, instead of exhibiting absolute object classification ability, humans
first recognize coarse-grained categories and then proceed to identify finer-grained detailed information [21, 22]. This process involves comparing with prior information to make a comparative
classification [10]. Under the same cognitive mechanism, both emotion recognition and object
recognition follow a similar pattern of recognition [24], i.e., progressing from global to local, and
from coarse-grained to fine-grained identification processes. And such emotional cognitive process
is often characterized by the term Emotion Granularity in psychology [31, 18], where it involves
the degree of nuance with which individuals can perceive. It also implies that there exists relative
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

