Small steps no more: Global convergence of stochastic
gradient bandits for arbitrary learning rates

Jincheng Mei 1
1

Google DeepMind

Bo Dai 1 3
Alekh Agarwal 2
Sharan Vaswani 5
14
Csaba Szepesvári
Dale Schuurmans 1 4
2

Anant Raj 6

Google Research 3 Georgia Institute of Technology 4 University of Alberta
5
Simon Fraser University 6 Indian Institute of Science

{jcmei,bodai,alekhagarwal,szepi,schuurmans}@google.com
vaswani.sharan@gmail.com anantraj@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
We provide a new understanding of the stochastic gradient bandit algorithm by
showing that it converges to a globally optimal policy almost surely using any constant learning rate. This result demonstrates that the stochastic gradient algorithm
continues to balance exploration and exploitation appropriately even in scenarios
where standard smoothness and noise control assumptions break down. The proofs
are based on novel findings about action sampling rates and the relationship between cumulative progress and noise, and extend the current understanding of how
simple stochastic gradient methods behave in bandit settings.

1

Introduction

The stochastic gradient method has been ubiquitous in the field of machine learning for decades [4].
When applied to reinforcement learning (RL), a representative instantiation of stochastic gradient
is the well known policy gradient [32] (or REINFORCE [34]) algorithm, where in each iteration
an online sample is gathered using the current policy, from which a gradient estimate is obtained
to conduct parameter updates. In the simplest setting of a stochastic bandit problem [16], where
decisions matter only for one step, the REINFORCE policy gradient method becomes equivalent to
the stochastic gradient bandit algorithm [31, Section 2.8]. Compared to other statistical methods,
such as the upper confidence bound algorithm (UCB, [14, 3]), and Thompson sampling (TS, [33, 2]),
the stochastic gradient bandit algorithm is conceptually simpler and more computationally efficient,
as it does not calculate exploration bonuses nor posterior distributions. Moreover, the stochastic
gradient method is highly scalable and naturally applicable to large scale neural networks [29, 30].
However, unlike UCB or TS, the stochastic gradient bandit algorithm does not have an equivalently
well established and comprehensive theoretical footing. Given its pervasive success and widespread
application in RL [30] and fine-tuning for large language models [26, 27]), it remains an important
question to understand the success of stochastic gradient based algorithms in bandit-like settings, not
only to bridge the gap between theory and practice, but also to identify more effective and robust
variants. In this paper, we make a significant contribution to the theoretical understanding of the
stochastic gradient bandit algorithm, bringing its justification closer to that of other less scalable but
theoretically well established methods. In particular, we establish the surprising result that:
For any constant learning rate η > 0, the stochastic gradient bandit algorithm is guaranteed to
converge to the globally optimal policy almost surely.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

