Exploring Molecular Pretraining Model at Scale

Xiaohong Ji1∗, Zhen Wang1∗, Zhifeng Gao1∗, Hang Zheng1
Linfeng Zhang1,2 , Guolin Ke1 , Weinan E2,3,4
1
DP Technology, Beijing, 100080, China.
2
AI for Science Institute, Beijing 100080, China.
3
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China.
4
Center for Machine Learning Research, Peking University, Beijing 100084, China.
{jixh, wangz, gaozf, zhengh, zhanglf, kegl}@dp.tech
weinan@math.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
In recent years, pretraining models have made significant advancements in the fields
of natural language processing (NLP), computer vision (CV), and life sciences.
The significant advancements in NLP and CV are predominantly driven by the
expansion of model parameters and data size, a phenomenon now recognized as
the scaling laws. However, research exploring scaling law in molecular pretraining
models remains unexplored. In this work, we present Uni-Mol2 , an innovative
molecular pretraining model that leverages a two-track transformer to effectively
integrate features at the atomic level, graph level, and geometry structure level.
Along with this, we systematically investigate the scaling law within molecular
pretraining models, characterizing the power-law correlations between validation
loss and model size, dataset size, and computational resources. Consequently,
we successfully scale Uni-Mol2 to 1.1 billion parameters through pretraining on
800 million conformations, making it the largest molecular pretraining model to
date. Extensive experiments show consistent improvement in the downstream tasks
as the model size grows. The Uni-Mol2 with 1.1B parameters also outperforms
existing methods, achieving an average 27% improvement on the QM9 and 14%
on COMPAS-1D dataset.

1

Introduction

With the exponential growth of available biological data, there arises a critical need for innovative
computational methodologies to utilize this wealth of information effectively. While traditional
molecular representations like fingerprint-based models [1, 2] lack the ability to capture fine-grained
structural features and struggle to handle large or complex molecules effectively. Molecular Representation Learning (MRL) using molecular pretraining emerges as a promising approach, leveraging
the power of machine learning to imbue algorithms with a deep understanding of molecular structures
and functions. Various modalities of molecular representation by pretraining have been extensively
studied in the past. The typical approach for representing molecules involves two main strategies.
One strategy is to represent molecules as one-dimensional sequential strings, such as SMILES [3,
4] and InChI [5]. The representative work is SMILES-BERT[3], which learns from large-scale
unlabeled data through the masked SMILES recovery task. Another strategy is to represent molecules
as two-dimensional graphs [6, 7, 8]. MolCLR [8], a typical method, learns the representations from
unlabeled data by contrasting positive molecule graph pairs against negative ones. Additionally, a
growing trend is to leverage three-dimensional information in MRL to enable tasks like 3D geometry
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

