Transformer Doctor: Diagnosing and
Treating Vision Transformers

Jiacong Hu1,4 , Hao Chen1 , Kejia Chen2 , Yang Gao6 ,
∗
Jingwen Ye3 , Xingen Wang1,6 , Mingli Song1,4,5 , Zunlei Feng2,4,5
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University,
2
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University,
3
Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore,
4
State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University,
5
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security,
6
Bangsheng Technology Co., Ltd.
{jiaconghu,hao_chen_,chenkejia,roygao}@zju.edu.cn,
jingweny@nus.edu.sg,{newroot,brooksong,zunleifeng}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Due to its powerful representational capabilities, Transformers have gradually
become the mainstream model in the field of machine vision. However, the vast
and complex parameters of Transformers impede researchers from gaining a deep
understanding of their internal mechanisms, especially error mechanisms. Existing
methods for interpreting Transformers mainly focus on understanding them from
the perspectives of the importance of input tokens or internal modules, as well
as the formation and meaning of features. In contrast, inspired by research on
information integration mechanisms and conjunctive errors in the biological visual
system, this paper conducts an in-depth exploration of the internal error mechanisms of Transformers. We first propose an information integration hypothesis for
Transformers in the machine vision domain and provide substantial experimental
evidence to support this hypothesis. This includes the dynamic integration of
information among tokens and the static integration of information within tokens
in Transformers, as well as the presence of conjunctive errors therein. Addressing
these errors, we further propose heuristic dynamic integration constraint methods
and rule-based static integration constraint methods to rectify errors and ultimately
improve model performance. The entire methodology framework is termed as
Transformer Doctor, designed for diagnosing and treating internal errors within
transformers. Through a plethora of quantitative and qualitative experiments, it has
been demonstrated that Transformer Doctor can effectively address internal errors
in transformers, thereby enhancing model performance. For more information,
please visit https://transformer-doctor.github.io/.

1

Introduction

In the field of machine vision, models based on Transformers [1, 2] have gradually replaced convolutional neural networks as the mainstream approach. Particularly in recent years, various visual
architectures improved upon Transformers have emerged incessantly [3–6], continuously pushing
the performance boundaries of visual tasks. However, the vast and complex parameters of Transformers hinder researchers from gaining a deep understanding of their internal mechanisms [7],
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

