WFCRL: A Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Benchmark for Wind Farm Control
Claire Bizon Monroc
Inria and DI ENS, École Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University, Paris, France
IFP Energies nouvelles
claire.bizon-monroc@inria.fr
Ana Bušić
Inria and DI ENS, École Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University
Paris, France
Donatien Dubuc
IFP Energies nouvelles
Solaize, France

Jiamin Zhu
IFP Energies nouvelles
Rueil-Malmaison, France

Abstract
The wind farm control problem is challenging, since conventional model-based
control strategies require tractable models of complex aerodynamical interactions
between the turbines and suffer from the curse of dimension when the number of
turbines increases. Recently, model-free and multi-agent reinforcement learning
approaches have been used to address this challenge. In this article, we introduce
WFCRL (Wind Farm Control with Reinforcement Learning), the first open suite
of multi-agent reinforcement learning environments for the wind farm control
problem. WFCRL frames a cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
(MARL) problem: each turbine is an agent and can learn to adjust its yaw, pitch or
torque to maximize the common objective (e.g. the total power production of the
farm). WFCRL also offers turbine load observations that will allow to optimize
the farm performance while limiting turbine structural damages. Interfaces with
two state-of-the-art farm simulators are implemented in WFCRL: a static simulator
(FLORIS) and a dynamic simulator (FAST.Farm). For each simulator, 10 wind
layouts are provided, including 5 real wind farms. Two state-of-the-art online
MARL algorithms are implemented to illustrate the scaling challenges. As learning
online on FAST.Farm is highly time-consuming, WFCRL offers the possibility of
designing transfer learning strategies from FLORIS to FAST.Farm.

1

Introduction

The development of wind energy plays a crucial part in the global transition away from fossil energies,
and it is driven by the deployment of very large offshore wind farms [44, 32]. Significant gains
in wind energy production can be made by increasing the amount of wind power captured by the
farms [32]. The power production of a wind farm is greatly influenced by wake effects: an operating
upstream turbine causes a decrease in wind velocity and an increase in wind turbulence behind its
rotor, which creates sub-optimal wind conditions for other wind turbines downstream. An illustration
of this phenomenon can be seen on Figure 1. Wake effects are a major cause of power loss in wind
farms, with the decrease in power output estimated to be between 10% and 20% in large offshore
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

