Learning the Optimal Policy for Balancing
Short-Term and Long-Term Rewards

1

Qinwei Yang1 , Xueqing Liu1 , Yan Zeng1 , Ruocheng Guo2 , Yang Liu3 , Peng Wu1∗
Beijing Technology and Business University 2 ByteDance Research 3 UC Santa Cruz

Abstract
Learning the optimal policy to balance multiple short-term and long-term rewards
has extensive applications across various domains. Yet, there is a noticeable scarcity
of research addressing policy learning strategies in this context. In this paper, we
aim to learn the optimal policy capable of effectively balancing multiple short-term
and long-term rewards, especially in scenarios where the long-term outcomes are
often missing due to data collection challenges over extended periods. Towards this
goal, the conventional linear weighting method, which aggregates multiple rewards
into a single surrogate reward through weighted summation, can only achieve suboptimal policies when multiple rewards are related. Motivated by this, we propose a
novel decomposition-based policy learning (DPPL) method that converts the whole
problem into subproblems. The DPPL method is capable of obtaining optimal
policies even when multiple rewards are interrelated. Nevertheless, the DPPL
method requires a set of preference vectors specified in advance, posing challenges
in practical applications where selecting suitable preferences is non-trivial. To
mitigate this, we further theoretically transform the optimization problem in DPPL
into an ε-constraint problem, where ε represents the minimum acceptable levels of
other rewards while maximizing one reward. This transformation provides intuitive
into the selection of preference vectors. Extensive experiments are conducted on
the proposed method and the results validate the effectiveness of the method.

1

Introduction

Learning an optimal policy for balancing multiple short-term and long-term rewards holds extensive
applications across various domains. For instance, content providers can optimize recommendations
to avoid short-term clickbait strategies, ensuring sustained user engagement and revenue growth [1].
IT companies can design web pages catering to immediate user preferences while enhancing longterm engagement and satisfaction [2]. Economists explore the effects of early childhood interventions
on lifetime earnings, seeking optimal policies (e.g., class size) maximizing short-term test scores
and long-term earnings simultaneously [3]. Policymakers can improve job training program design,
considering both immediate income impacts and subsequent employment status improvements [4, 5].
Medical practitioners can refine drug prescriptions, considering short-term alleviation and long-term
outcomes in chronic diseases like Alzheimer’s and AIDS [6]. Marketing professionals can optimize
incentive strategies to positively influence customer behavior in both short and long terms [7].
Despite the importance of balancing multiple short-term and long-term rewards, policy learning
methods in this area remain largely unexplored. Recent literature [8] employs a linear weighting
method to achieve this goal. It combines multiple rewards into a single surrogate reward by weighted
summation, which is optimized to learn the optimal policy. However, this strategy has several
limitations. First, it can only find optimal solutions in convex regions of objective space and cannot
obtain the optimal solutions in non-convex regions [9]. Second, it achieves the optimal solution only
∗

Corresponding author: pengwu@btbu.edu.cn.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

