Bounds for the smallest eigenvalue of the NTK for
arbitrary spherical data of arbitrary dimension

Kedar Karhadkar1 , Michael Murray1 , Guido Montúfar1,2,3
1
Department of Mathematics, UCLA
2
Department of Statistics & Data Science, UCLA
3
Max Planck Institute MiS

Abstract
Bounds on the smallest eigenvalue of the neural tangent kernel (NTK) are a key
ingredient in the analysis of neural network optimization and memorization. However, existing results require distributional assumptions on the data and are limited
to a high-dimensional setting, where the input dimension d0 scales at least logarithmically in the number of samples n. In this work we remove both of these
requirements and instead provide bounds in terms of a measure of distance between
data points: notably these bounds hold with high probability even when d0 is
held constant versus n. We prove our results through a novel application of the
hemisphere transform.

1

Introduction

A popular approach for studying the optimization dynamics of neural networks is analyzing the
neural tangent kernel (NTK), which corresponds to the Gram matrix obtained from the Jacobian of
the network parametrization map (Jacot et al., 2018). When the network parameters are adjusted
by gradient descent, the network function follows a kernel gradient descent in function space with
respect to the NTK. By bounding the smallest eigenvalue of the NTK away from zero it is possible to
obtain global convergence guarantees for gradient descent parameter optimization (Du et al., 2019b;
Oymak & Soltanolkotabi, 2020) as well as results on generalization (Arora et al., 2019a; Montanari
& Zhong, 2022) and data memorization capacity (Montanari & Zhong, 2022; Nguyen et al., 2021;
Bombari et al., 2022). These key advances highlight the importance of deriving tight, quantitative
bounds for the smallest eigenvalue of the NTK at initialization.
While initial breakthroughs on the convergence of gradient optimization in neural networks (Li
& Liang, 2018; Du et al., 2019a; Allen-Zhu et al., 2019) required unrealistic conditions on the
width of the layers, subsequent and substantive efforts have reduced the level of overparametrization
required to ensure that the NTK is well conditioned at initialization (Zou & Gu, 2019; Oymak &
Soltanolkotabi, 2020). In particular, Nguyen (2021); Nguyen et al. (2021); Banerjee et al. (2023)
showed that layer width scaling linearly in the number of training samples n suffices to bound the
smallest eigenvalue and Montanari & Zhong (2022); Bombari et al. (2022) obtained results for
networks with sub-linear layer width and the minimum possible number of parameters Ω̃(n) up to
logarithmic factors. However, and as discussed in Section 2, the bounds provided in prior works
require that the data is drawn from a distribution satisfying a Lipschitz
√ concentration property, and
only hold with high probability if the input dimension d0 scales as n (Bombari et al., 2022) or
polylog(n) (Nguyen et al., 2021). These existing results therefore require that the dimension of the
data grows unbounded as the number of training samples n increases and as such there is a gap in our
understanding of cases where the data is sampled from a fixed, or lower-dimensional space.
In this work we present new lower and upper bounds on the smallest eigenvalue of a randomly
initialized, fully connected ReLU network: compared with prior work, our results hold for arbitrary
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

