PIVOT-R: Primitive-Driven Waypoint-Aware World
Model for Robotic Manipulation

Kaidong Zhang1∗ Pengzhen Ren2∗ Bingqian Lin1 Junfan Lin2
Shikui Ma3 Hang Xu4 Xiaodan Liang1,2†
1
Sun Yat-sen University 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory 3 Dataa Robotics 4 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
https://abliao.github.io/PIVOT-R

Abstract
Language-guided robotic manipulation is a challenging task that requires an embodied agent to follow abstract user instructions to accomplish various complex
manipulation tasks. Previous work generally maps instructions and visual perceptions directly to low-level executable actions, neglecting the modeling of critical
waypoints (e.g., key states of “close to/grab/move up” in action trajectories) in
manipulation tasks. Trivially fitting the data without revealing the relation between
instruction and low-level executable actions, these models are prone to memorizing
the surficial pattern of the data instead of acquiring the transferable knowledge,
and thus are fragile to dynamic environment changes. To address this issue, we
propose a PrImitive-driVen waypOinT-aware world model for Robotic manipulation (PIVOT-R) that focuses solely on the prediction of task-relevant waypoints.
Specifically, PIVOT-R consists of a Waypoint-aware World Model (WAWM) and
a lightweight action prediction module. The former performs primitive action
parsing and primitive-driven waypoint prediction, while the latter focuses on decoding low-level actions. Additionally, we also design an asynchronous hierarchical
executor (AHE) for PIVOT-R, which can use different execution frequencies for
different modules of the model, thereby helping the model reduce computational
redundancy and improve model execution efficiency. Our PIVOT-R outperforms
state-of-the-art (SoTA) open-source models on the SeaWave benchmark, achieving an average relative improvement of 19.45% across four levels of instruction
tasks. Moreover, compared to the synchronously executed PIVOT-R, the execution
efficiency of PIVOT-R with AHE is increased by 28-fold, with only a 2.9% drop
in performance. These results provide compelling evidence that our PIVOT-R can
significantly improve both the performance and efficiency of robotic manipulation.

1

Introduction

Language-guided robotic manipulation [22, 33, 61, 50, 12, 38] is a key research problem of Embodied
AI. This field aims to enable agents to follow abstract language instructions for performing various
manipulation tasks. To complete the tasks, the agent needs to transform high-level language instructions into low-level actions as well as capturing environmental dynamics for precise manipulation
decision-making.
Witnessed the immense success of vision-language foundation models (VLMs) [2, 40, 37], many
works have explored the utilization of VLMs for facilitating language-guided robotic manipulation in
* Equal contribution
†

Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

