EMVP: Embracing Visual Foundation Model for
Visual Place Recognition with Centroid-Free Probing

Qibo Qiu1,2,∗ Shun Zhang3,∗ Haiming Gao3
Honghui Yang1 Haochao Ying4,† Wenxiao Wang5 Xiaofei He1
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
2
China Mobile (Zhejiang) Research & Innovation Institute, 3 Zhejiang Lab
4
School of Public Health and Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine
5
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
qiuqibo_zju@zju.edu.cn, haochaoying@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual Place Recognition (VPR) is essential for mobile robots as it enables them
to retrieve images from a database closest to their current location. The progress
of Visual Foundation Models (VFMs) has significantly advanced VPR by capturing representative descriptors in images. However, existing fine-tuning efforts
for VFMs often overlook the crucial role of probing in effectively adapting these
descriptors for improved image representation. In this paper, we propose the
Centroid-Free Probing (CFP) stage, making novel use of second-order features for
more effective use of descriptors from VFMs. Moreover, to control the preservation of task-specific information adaptively based on the context of the VPR, we
introduce the Dynamic Power Normalization (DPN) module in both the recalibration and CFP stages, forming a novel Parameter Efficiency Fine-Tuning (PEFT)
pipeline (EMVP) tailored for the VPR task. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the superiority of the proposed CFP over existing probing methods. Moreover, the
EMVP pipeline can further enhance fine-tuning performance in terms of accuracy
and efficiency. Specifically, it achieves 93.9%, 96.5%, and 94.6% Recall@1 on the
MSLS Validation, Pitts250k-test, and SPED datasets, respectively, while saving
64.3% of trainable parameters compared with the existing SOTA PEFT method.
The code is available at https://github.com/vincentqqb/EMVP.

1

Introduction

Visual Place Recognition (VPR) is indispensable for mobile robots and autonomous vehicles, enabling
key functions such as global localization [1], Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [2],
and scene understanding [3]. VPR is often tackled as an image retrieval problem, where the objective
is to match the query (an image representing the current location) with images from previously visited
places. To achieve efficient matching, typically based on distance metrics like Euclidean distance, the
VPR system aggregates the local descriptors of each image into a global descriptor. However, VPR
faces unique challenges compared to conventional image retrieval tasks, including drastic changes
in image perspectives, seasonal variations, and occlusions. Consequently, many researchers are
dedicated to exploring robust local descriptors that exhibit invariance to these challenges. The advent
of deep learning significantly brings VPR to a new stage characterized by enhanced robustness and
improved accuracy [4; 5; 6; 7; 8; 9; 10; 11].
Despite the carefully designed pipelines, these methods typically involve training a model from
scratch on environment-specific data. However, the diversity of application environments making
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

