Text2NKG: Fine-Grained N-ary Relation Extraction
for N-ary relational Knowledge Graph Construction

Haoran Luo1 , Haihong E1∗, Yuhao Yang2 , Tianyu Yao1 ,
Yikai Guo3 , Zichen Tang1 , Wentai Zhang1 , Shiyao Peng1 , Kaiyang Wan1 ,
Meina Song1 , Wei Lin4 , Yifan Zhu1 , Luu Anh Tuan5
1
School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
School of Automation Science and Electrical Engineering, Beihang University, China
3
Beijing Institute of Computer Technology and Application 4 Inspur Group Co., Ltd., China
5
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{luohaoran, ehaihong, yifan_zhu}@bupt.edu.cn, anhtuan.luu@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Beyond traditional binary relational facts, n-ary relational knowledge graphs
(NKGs) are comprised of n-ary relational facts containing more than two entities, which are closer to real-world facts with broader applications. However, the
construction of NKGs remains at a coarse-grained level, which is always in a
single schema, ignoring the order and variable arity of entities. To address these
restrictions, we propose Text2NKG, a novel fine-grained n-ary relation extraction
framework for n-ary relational knowledge graph construction. We introduce a
span-tuple classification approach with hetero-ordered merging and output merging
to accomplish fine-grained n-ary relation extraction in different arity. Furthermore, Text2NKG supports four typical NKG schemas: hyper-relational schema,
event-based schema, role-based schema, and hypergraph-based schema, with high
flexibility and practicality. The experimental results demonstrate that Text2NKG
achieves state-of-the-art performance in F1 scores on the fine-grained n-ary relation
extraction benchmark. Our code and datasets are publicly available1 .

1

Introduction

Modern knowledge graphs (KGs), such as Free- Natural Language Text
N-ary relational Knowledge Graph
n-ary relational fact_2
base [2], Google Knowledge Vault [7], and Wiki...
data [21], utilize a multi-relational graph strucEinstein received his Doctorate
degree in Physics from the
ture to represent knowledge. Because of the
University of Zurich. From 1909
to 1911, Einstein was Professor
advantage of intuitiveness and interpretability,
for Theoretical Physics at
the University of Zurich.
KGs find various applications in question anEinstein was awarded the Nobel
Prize in Physics in 1921 for his
services to Theoretical Physics,
swering [28], query response [1], logical reaand especially for his discovery
of the law of the Photoelectric
soning [4], and recommendation systems [29].
Effect.
...
n-ary relational fact_1
Traditional KGs are mostly composed of binary
n-ary relational fact_3
relational facts (subject, relation, object),
which represent the relationship between two
Figure 1: An example of NKG construction.
entities [3]. However, it has been observed [20]
that over 30% of real-world facts involve n-ary
relation facts with more than two entities (n ≥ 2). As shown in Figure 1, an n-ary relational knowledge graph (NKG) is composed of many n-ary relation facts, offering richer knowledge expression
1909

fine-grained
n-ary relation
extraction

1911

University of Zurich

Doctorate

Physics

Professor

Theoretical Physics

Einstein

1921

Photoelectric Effect

Nobel Prize in Physics

∗
1

Corresponding author.
https://github.com/LHRLAB/Text2NKG

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

