Deep linear networks for regression are implicitly
regularized towards flat minima

Pierre Marion
Institute of Mathematics
EPFL
Station Z, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
pierre.marion@epfl.ch

Lénaïc Chizat
Institute of Mathematics
EPFL
Station Z, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
lenaic.chizat@epfl.ch

Abstract
The largest eigenvalue of the Hessian, or sharpness, of neural networks is a key
quantity to understand their optimization dynamics. In this paper, we study the
sharpness of deep linear networks for univariate regression. Minimizers can have
arbitrarily large sharpness, but not an arbitrarily small one. Indeed, we show a
lower bound on the sharpness of minimizers, which grows linearly with depth.
We then study the properties of the minimizer found by gradient flow, which is
the limit of gradient descent with vanishing learning rate. We show an implicit
regularization towards flat minima: the sharpness of the minimizer is no more than
a constant times the lower bound. The constant depends on the condition number
of the data covariance matrix, but not on width or depth. This result is proven both
for a small-scale initialization and a residual initialization. Results of independent
interest are shown in both cases. For small-scale initialization, we show that the
learned weight matrices are approximately rank-one and that their singular vectors
align. For residual initialization, convergence of the gradient flow for a Gaussian
initialization of the residual network is proven. Numerical experiments illustrate
our results and connect them to gradient descent with non-vanishing learning rate.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have intricate optimization dynamics due to the non-convexity of their objective. A
key quantity to understand these dynamics is the largest eigenvalue of the Hessian or sharpness S(W)
(see Section 3 for a formal definition), in particular because of its connection with the choice of
learning rate η. Classical theory from convex optimization indicates that the sharpness should remain
lower than 2/η to avoid divergence (Nesterov, 2018). The relevance of this point of view for deep
learning has recently been questioned since neural networks have been shown to often operate at the
edge of stability (Cohen et al., 2021), where the sharpness oscillates around 2/η, while the loss still
steadily decreases, albeit non-monotonically. Damian et al. (2023) explained the stability of gradient
descent slightly above the 2/η threshold to be a general phenomenon for non-quadratic objectives,
where the third-order derivatives of the loss induce a self-stabilization effect. They also show that,
under appropriate assumptions, gradient descent on a risk RL implicitly solves the constrained
minimization problem
2
min RL (W) such that S(W) ⩽ .
(1)
W
η
Trainability of neural networks initialized with a sharpness larger than 2/η is also studied by
Lewkowycz et al. (2020), which describes a transient catapult regime, which lasts until the sharpness
goes below 2/η. These results beg the question of quantifying the largest learning rate that enables
successful training of neural networks. For classification with linearly separable data and logistic loss,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

