A Theoretical Perspective for Speculative Decoding
Algorithm

Ming Yin˚
Princeton University
my0049@princeton.edu

Minshuo Chen
Northwestern University
minshuo.chen@northwestern.edu

Kaixuan Huang
Princeton University
kaixuanh@princeton.edu

Mengdi Wang
Princeton University
mengdiw@princeton.edu

Abstract
Transformer-based autoregressive sampling has been the major bottleneck for
slowing down large language model inferences. One effective way to accelerate
inference is Speculative Decoding, which employs a small model to sample a
sequence of draft tokens and a large model to validate. Given its empirical effectiveness, the theoretical understanding of Speculative Decoding is falling behind.
This paper tackles this gap by conceptualizing the decoding problem via markov
chain abstraction and studying the key properties, output quality and inference
acceleration, from a theoretical perspective. Our analysis covers the theoretical
limits of speculative decoding, batch algorithms, and output quality-inference
acceleration tradeoffs. Our results reveal the fundamental connections between
different components of LLMs via total variation distances and show how they
jointly affect the efficiency of decoding algorithms.

1

Introduction

The recent surge of scaling Transformer models has led to the flourishing of AI, where success
has been witnessed in wide areas such as natural language [39, 1], computer vision [12, 17], video
generations [3, 19], and robotics [8, 31]. In the meantime, the decoding process also becomes more
and more time-consuming as the model size scales up. This is mainly due to the autoregressive nature
of Transformers, where each generated token also serves as the input for future generations. As a
result, decoding T tokens would take T forward passes of the full model.
A recent effort to tackle this challenge is speculative decoding (SD) [10, 24], where the autoregressive
sampling is performed on a small draft model and the large language model verifies tokens generated
by draft model to decide whether it should be accepted/rejected. Once a token is rejected, the
generation process will start from the most recently accepted token, until a full response is completed.
Speculative decoding achieves 2-2.5ˆ LLM inference speedup empirically, while preserving the
quality of generation.
Subsequently, numerous studies [26, 25, 23, 46] have expanded this methodology, enabling further
inference acceleration. Intuitively, for speculative decoding, when the generation distribution of small
model p and large model q are close to each other, decoding is faster (since less rejection occurs), and
when the distribution overlap between p and q is small, the opposite happens. However, a precise
understanding of inference accelerating given the small model p and large model q remains elusive.
This motivates us to ask the following question:
˚

Correspondence to: my0049@princeton.edu, mengdiw@princeton.edu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

