BIOSCAN-5M: A Multimodal Dataset for
Insect Biodiversity

Zahra Gharaee3∗ , Scott C. Lowe5∗ , ZeMing Gong4∗ , Pablo Millan Arias3∗ ,
Nicholas Pellegrino3 , Austin T. Wang4 , Joakim Bruslund Haurum7 ,
Iuliia Zarubiieva2,5 , Lila Kari3 ,
1,2†
Dirk Steinke , Graham W. Taylor2,5† , Paul Fieguth3† , Angel X. Chang4,6†
1
Centre for Biodiversity Genomics, 2 University of Guelph, 3 University of Waterloo,
4
Simon Fraser University, 5 Vector Institute, 6 Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii),
7
Aalborg University and Pioneer Centre for AI
https://biodiversitygenomics.net/5M-insects/

Abstract
As part of an ongoing worldwide effort to comprehend and monitor insect biodiversity, this paper presents the BIOSCAN-5M Insect dataset to the machine learning
community and establish several benchmark tasks. BIOSCAN-5M is a comprehensive dataset containing multi-modal information for over 5 million insect specimens,
and it significantly expands existing image-based biological datasets by including
taxonomic labels, raw nucleotide barcode sequences, assigned barcode index numbers, geographical, and size information. We propose three benchmark experiments
to demonstrate the impact of the multi-modal data types on the classification and
clustering accuracy. First, we pretrain a masked language model on the DNA barcode sequences of the BIOSCAN-5M dataset, and demonstrate the impact of using
this large reference library on species- and genus-level classification performance.
Second, we propose a zero-shot transfer learning task applied to images and DNA
barcodes to cluster feature embeddings obtained from self-supervised learning,
to investigate whether meaningful clusters can be derived from these representation embeddings. Third, we benchmark multi-modality by performing contrastive
learning on DNA barcodes, image data, and taxonomic information. This yields a
general shared embedding space enabling taxonomic classification using multiple
types of information and modalities. The code repository of the BIOSCAN-5M
Insect dataset is available at https://github.com/bioscan-ml/BIOSCAN-5M.

1

Introduction

Biodiversity plays a multifaceted role in sustaining ecosystems and supporting human well-being.
Primarily, it serves as a cornerstone for ecosystem stability and resilience, providing a natural defence
against disturbances such as climate change and invasive species (Cardinale et al., 2012). Additionally,
biodiversity serves as a vital resource for the economy, supplying essentials like food, medicine, and
genetic material (Sala et al., 2000). Understanding biodiversity is paramount for sustainable resource
management, ensuring the availability of these resources for future generations (Duraiappah et al.,
2005). To understand and monitor biodiversity, Gharaee et al. (2023) introduced the BIOSCAN-1M
Insect dataset, which pairs DNA with images, as a stepping stone to developing AI tools for automatic
classification of organisms.
∗

Joint first author. † Joint senior/last author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

