Parameter-free Clipped Gradient Descent Meets
Polyak

Yuki Takezawa1,2 , Han Bao1,2 , Ryoma Sato3 , Kenta Niwa4 , Makoto Yamada2
1
Kyoto University, 2 OIST, 3 NII, 4 NTT Communication Science Laboratories

Abstract
Gradient descent and its variants are de facto standard algorithms for training
machine learning models. As gradient descent is sensitive to its hyperparameters, we need to tune the hyperparameters carefully using a grid search. However,
the method is time-consuming, particularly when multiple hyperparameters exist.
Therefore, recent studies have analyzed parameter-free methods that adjust the
hyperparameters on the fly. However, the existing work is limited to investigations
of parameter-free methods for the stepsize, and parameter-free methods for other
hyperparameters have not been explored. For instance, although the gradient clipping threshold is a crucial hyperparameter in addition to the stepsize for preventing
gradient explosion issues, none of the existing studies have investigated parameterfree methods for clipped gradient descent. Therefore, in this study, we investigate
the parameter-free methods for clipped gradient descent. Specifically, we propose
Inexact Polyak Stepsize, which converges to the optimal solution without any hyperparameters tuning, and its convergence rate is asymptotically independent of L
under L-smooth and (L0 , L1 )-smooth assumptions of the loss function, similar to
that of clipped gradient descent with well-tuned hyperparameters. We numerically
validated our convergence results using a synthetic function and demonstrated the
effectiveness of our proposed methods using LSTM, Nano-GPT, and T5.

1

Introduction

We consider the convex optimization problem:
min f (x),
x∈Rd

(1)

where the loss function f is convex and lower bounded. In this setting, gradient descent and its
variants (Duchi et al., 2011; Kingma and Ba, 2015) are the de facto standard algorithms to minimize
the loss function. The performance of the algorithm is highly sensitive to the hyperparameter settings,
necessitating the careful tuning of the hyperparameters to achieve best performance. More specifically,
when the loss function is L-smooth, gradient descent can achieve the optimal convergence rate
⋆ 2
O( L∥x0T−x ∥ ) when we set the stepsize to L1 where x0 is the initial parameter and x⋆ is the optimal
solution (Nesterov, 2018). Unfortunately, parameter L is problem-specific and unavailable in practice.
Thus, gradient descent must be executed in many times with different hyperparameters to identify
the good hyperparameter settings, which is a very time-consuming process. Notably, when multiple
hyperparameters are under consideration, this hyperparameter search becomes computationally more
demanding.
Several recent studies have examined parameter-free methods for tuning hyperparameters on the fly
(Berrada et al., 2020; Defazio and Mishchenko, 2023; Orvieto et al., 2022; Jiang and Stich, 2023;
Ivgi et al., 2023; Khaled et al., 2023; Orabona and Tommasi, 2017; Carmon and Hinder, 2022).1
1
We use parameter-free methods to describe algorithms that provably converge to the optimal solution
without any problem-specific parameters for setting their stepsizes and other hyperparameters.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

