Sparse High Rank Adapters

Kartikeya Bhardwaj∗ § Nilesh Prasad Pandey∗† Sweta Priyadarshi† Viswanath Ganapathy†
Shreya Kadambi Rafael Esteves Shubhankar Borse Paul Whatmough§
Risheek Garrepalli Mart Van Baalen Harris Teague§ Markus Nagel§
Qualcomm AI Research‡
§
{kbhardwa,pwhatmou,hteague,markusn}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
Low Rank Adaptation (LoRA) has gained massive attention in the recent generative
AI research. One of the main advantages of LoRA is its ability to be fused with
pretrained models, adding no overhead during inference. However, from a mobile
deployment standpoint, we can either avoid inference overhead in the fused mode
but lose the ability to switch adapters rapidly, or suffer significant (up to 30%
higher) inference latency while enabling rapid switching in the unfused mode.
LoRA also exhibits concept-loss when multiple adapters are used concurrently.
In this paper, we propose Sparse High Rank Adapters (SHiRA), a new paradigm
which incurs no inference overhead, enables rapid switching, and significantly
reduces concept-loss. Specifically, SHiRA can be trained by directly tuning only
1-2% of the base model weights while leaving others unchanged. This results in a
highly sparse adapter which can be switched directly in the fused mode. We further
provide theoretical and empirical insights on how high sparsity in SHiRA can aid
multi-adapter fusion by reducing concept loss. Our extensive experiments on LVMs
and LLMs demonstrate that finetuning only a small fraction of the parameters in the
base model significantly outperforms LoRA while enabling both rapid switching
and multi-adapter fusion. Finally, we provide a latency- and memory-efficient
SHiRA implementation based on Parameter-Efficient Finetuning (PEFT) Library
which trains at nearly the same speed as LoRA while consuming up to 16% lower
peak GPU memory, thus making SHiRA easy to adopt for practical use cases.
To demonstrate rapid switching benefits during inference, we show that loading
SHiRA on a base model can be 5×-16× faster than LoRA fusion on a CPU.¶

1

Introduction

Low Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [13] is an established technique to tune the behavior of large generative
models such as Large Language Models (LLMs) [30, 29] and Stable Diffusion [24, 22]. As the name
suggests, LoRA requires very few parameters since it trains low rank projection weights that consume
very low memory during the finetuning process while producing excellent results. Moreover, these
low rank weights can be fused analytically into the base model, thereby incurring no additional
overhead during inference.
Despite its success, there are still several limitations of low rank adaptation methods. First, if LoRA
parameters are fused into the corresponding pretrained base model weights, they modify the entire
weight tensor. Therefore, deploying LoRA on large models such as LLaMA-1/2 (7B+ parameters) or
Stable Diffusion (1.5B+ parameters) on mobile devices would require changing a large number of
weights during inference. Consequently, for mobile scenarios, if an application requires rapid adapter
switching, existing low rank methods would incur a significant memory and latency cost. This is a
major deployment challenge because, unlike large GPUs, local memory of small AI accelerators is
limited and cannot store all weights at the same time. These challenges can be partially addressed by
∗
Equal contribution. † Work done while employed at Qualcomm AI Research. ‡ Qualcomm AI Research is an
initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. ¶ Code: https://github.com/Qualcomm-AI-research/SHiRA.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

