Seeing Beyond the Crop: Using Language Priors
for Out-of-Bounding Box Keypoint Prediction

Bavesh Balaji1,2,3 , Jerrin Bright2,3 , Yuhao Chen2,3 , Sirisha Rambhatla1,3 ,
John S. Zelek2,3 , David Anthony Clausi2,3 ,
1
Critical ML Lab, 2 Vision and Image Processing Lab, 3 University of Waterloo,

Abstract
Accurate estimation of human pose and the pose of interacting objects, like a
hockey stick, is crucial for action recognition and performance analysis, particularly in sports. Existing methods capture the object along with the human in the
bounding boxes, assuming all keypoints are visible within the bounding box. This
necessitates larger bounding boxes to capture the object, introducing unnecessary
visual features and hindering performance in real-world cluttered environments. We
propose a simple image and text-based multimodal solution TokenCLIPose that
addresses this limitation. Our approach focuses solely on human keypoints within
the bounding box, treating objects as unseen. TokenCLIPose leverages the rich
semantic representations endowed by language for inducing keypoint-specific context, even for occluded keypoints. We evaluate the performance of TokenCLIPose
on a real-world ice hockey dataset, and demonstrate its generalizability through
zero-shot transfer to a smaller Lacrosse dataset. Additionally, we showcase its
flexibility on CrowdPose, a popular occlusion benchmark with keypoints within the
bounding box. Our method significantly improves over state-of-the-art approaches
on ice hockey, Lacrosse, and CrowdPose datasets, with gains of 4.36%, 2.35%, and
3.8%, respectively.

1

Introduction

The goal of 2D human pose estimation is to localize the human anatomical keypoints from an image,
which is essential for scene understanding, action recognition [1, 2], and human-object interaction
detection [3, 4]. This is particularly challenging in cluttered real-world scenarios due to occlusions and
other non-idealities [5, 6]. With the emerging applications in Virtual Reality (VR), and Augmented
Reality (AR), and real-time sports analysis [7], there is a fundamental need to understand how objects
are manipulated via human-object interaction [8]. Often, in such scenarios, the objects that humans
hold and interact with, which we define as extensions, can provide crucial information that aids in
accurately estimating the human pose and the actions being performed [1].
Contemporary SOTA deep learning-based pose estimation methods predominantly follow a top-down
approach: cropping each person in an image using bounding boxes before estimating their pose
individually[9–16]. While using existing top-down pose estimators seems intuitive for joint prediction
of the humans and their extensions, this approach suffers from limitations, yielding suboptimal results
as shown in Fig. 1(a).
Our key observation is: capturing the extension in the bounding box expands the field-of-view and
introduces unnecessary visual features, which can be confusing to the model. A simple yet powerful
fix is to confine the bounding box to capture the human body, treating the extension’s keypoints as
unseen. This approach reduces background interference, as we do not explicitly capture the extension.
However, it leads to the loss of important visual information about the extension, making them unseen.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

