Rethinking Memory and Communication Costs for
Efficient Data Parallel Training of Large Language
Models
Hanxiao Zhang, Lin Ju, Chan Wu, Jinjing Huang, Youshao Xiao∗
Zhenglei Zhou, Zhiming Fan, Zhaoxin Huan, Siyuan Li, Fanzhuang Meng
Lei Liang, Xiaolu Zhang, Jun Zhou∗
Ant Group, Hangzhou, China
{zhanghanxiao.zhx,julin.jl,wuchan.wu,huangjinjing.hjj,youshao.xys,
zhouzhenglei.zzl,zhiming.fzm,zhaoxin.hzx,lisiyuan.li,mengfanzhuang.mfz,
leywar.liang,yueyin.zxl,jun.zhoujun}@antgroup.com

Abstract
Recently, various strategies for distributed training of large language models
(LLMs) have been proposed. By categorizing them into basic strategies and
composite strategies, we have discovered that existing basic strategies provide
limited options in specific scenarios, leaving considerable room for optimization in
training speed. In this paper, we rethink the impact of memory and communication
costs on the training speed of LLMs when employ data parallelism based techniques. We take the impact of intra- and inter-group communication performance
disparities into account , and then propose a new set of basic strategies named
the Partial Redundancy Optimizer (PaRO). PaRO Data Parallelism (PaRO-DP)
accelerates LLM training through refined model state partitioning and tailored
training procedures. Additionally, PaRO Collective Communications (PaRO-CC)
speeds up collective communication operations by rearranging the topology. We
also propose a guideline for choosing different DP strategies based on simple quantitative calculations, which yields minimal ranking errors. Our experiments show
that PaRO improves the training speed of LLMs by up to 266% that of ZeRO-3
as basic DP strategies. Moreover, employing PaRO-CC independently for model
parallel strategies, such as Megatron, can also boost the training speed by 17%.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated extraordinary capabilities across various domains,
expanding their parameter sizes into the tens or even hundreds of billions [3, 4, 29]. To tackle the
intricate challenge of training such large models, different distributed training strategies have been
proposed.
Data Parallelism (DP) [1, 18, 34] divides the input data into multiple mini-batches, with each GPU
independently processing a mini-batch through the forward and backward passes, followed by
synchronization of the gradients. ZeRO [25] as a DP strategy, suggests partitioning model states
across multiple GPUs. This strategy facilitates a trade-off between memory and communication costs,
offering three distinct partitioning methods, known as ZeRO-1, ZeRO-2 and ZeRO-3.
Model Parallelism (MP) [23, 19], which encompasses Tensor Parallelism (TP) [27, 35, 31, 2] and
Pipeline Parallelism (PP) [13, 10], distributes the model components across multiple GPUs. For
instance, Megatron-LM [27] achieves 1D tensor parallelism by distributing the row or column
∗

Corresponding Authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

