What does guidance do?
A fine-grained analysis in a simple setting

Muthu Chidambaram ∗
Khashayar Gatmiry ∗
Sitan Chen†
Duke University
MIT
Harvard University
muthu@cs.duke.edu
gatmiry@mit.edu
sitan@seas.harvard.edu
Holden Lee†
Jianfeng Lu†
Johns Hopkins University
Duke University
hlee283@jhu.edu
jianfeng@math.duke.edu

Abstract
The use of guidance in diffusion models was originally motivated by the premise
that the guidance-modified score is that of the data distribution tilted by a conditional likelihood raised to some power. In this work we clarify this misconception
by rigorously proving that guidance fails to sample from the intended tilted distribution. Our main result is to give a fine-grained characterization of the dynamics
of guidance in two cases, (1) mixtures of compactly supported distributions and (2)
mixtures of Gaussians, which reflect salient properties of guidance that manifest
on real-world data. In both cases, we prove that as the guidance parameter increases, the guided model samples more heavily from the boundary of the support
of the conditional distribution. We also prove that for any nonzero level of score
estimation error, sufficiently large guidance will result in sampling away from the
support, theoretically justifying the empirical finding that large guidance results in
distorted generations. In addition to verifying these results empirically in synthetic
settings, we also show how our theoretical insights can offer useful prescriptions
for practical deployment.

1

Introduction

With diffusion models having emerged as the leading approach to generative modeling in domains
like image, video, and audio [31, 34, 18, 12, 33, 35, 36, 29, 26], there is a pressing need to develop
principled methods for modulating their output. For example, how do we impose certain constraints
on generated samples, or control their “temperature”? To formalize this, suppose one has access
to an unconditional diffusion model approximating the data distribution p, as well as a conditional
diffusion model approximating the conditional distribution p(· | z) for various choices of class labels
or prompts z.3 Given z and a parameter w, one might wish to sample from the distribution p tilted by
the conditional likelihood, i.e. the distribution pz,w with density
pz,w (x) ∝ p(x) · p(z | x)1+w .
(Throughout, we use lower-case letters to denote densities, and capital letters to denote distributions.)
By varying w, we can naturally trade off between diversity and quality: If w = −1 then pz,w is the
unconditional distribution, if w = 0 then pz,w is the conditional distribution p(· | z) by Bayes’ rule,
and as w → ∞, pz,w converges to being supported on the maximizers of the conditional likelihood.
∗

Lead authors, equal contribution
Equal contribution
3
In some settings, instead of having access to p(· | z), one has access to some model for the conditional
likelihood p(z | ·). The distinction between the “classifier-free” setting [19] and the “classifier” setting is
immaterial to this paper, and our theory applies to both.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

