FineCLIP: Self-distilled Region-based CLIP
for Better Fine-grained Understanding

Dong Jing∗1 , Xiaolong He∗1 , Yutian Luo1 , Nanyi Fei2 ,
Guoxing Yang1 , Wei Wei3 , Huiwen Zhao3 , Zhiwu Lu †1
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
MetaBrain AGI Lab, Shanghai, China
3
R&D Management Department, Honor Device Co., Ltd
{jingdong98, xiaolonghe, luzhiwu}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) achieves impressive performance
on tasks like image classification and image-text retrieval by learning on largescale image-text datasets. However, CLIP struggles with dense prediction tasks
due to the poor grasp of the fine-grained details. Although existing works pay
attention to this issue, they achieve limited improvements and usually sacrifice the
important visual-semantic consistency. To overcome these limitations, we propose
FineCLIP, which keeps the global contrastive learning to preserve the visualsemantic consistency and further enhances the fine-grained understanding through
two innovations: 1) A real-time self-distillation scheme that facilitates the transfer
of representation capability from global to local features. 2) A semantically-rich
regional contrastive learning paradigm with generated region-text pairs, boosting
the local representation capabilities with abundant fine-grained knowledge. Both
cooperate to fully leverage diverse semantics and multi-grained complementary
information. To validate the superiority of our FineCLIP and the rationality of each
design, we conduct extensive experiments on challenging dense prediction and
image-level tasks. All the observations demonstrate the effectiveness of FineCLIP.

1

Introduction

Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) [18, 40] emerges as the foundational work in
vision-language representation learning. By training on large-scale, noisy image-text pairs, CLIP
aligns global image and text embeddings within a unified latent space, demonstrating remarkable
successes across image-level tasks [1, 25, 61], e.g. image classification and cross-modal retrieval.
However, CLIP has shown notable limitations in understanding fine-grained details, such as identifying object attributes and their relationships [37, 41, 62, 70]. Especially, when applied to downstream
tasks, CLIP struggles to extract valuable region representations from visual dense features, limiting
its effectiveness in complex recognition scenarios [33, 72]. Recent works [60, 70] attribute this issue
to the task domain shift: CLIP matches an image as a whole to text description but fails to capture
fine-grained alignment between image regions and corresponding textual attributes.
To address this problem, researchers have attempted to enhance fine-grained alignment using two
primary strategies. The first strategy [27, 59, 66, 70] directly leverages CLIP to match image
regions with template labels using large quantities of grounding annotations in a classification
setting. However, the pre-defined template labels lack sufficient semantic diversity, restricting its
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

