Kangaroo: Lossless Self-Speculative Decoding for
Accelerating LLMs via Double Early Exiting

Fangcheng Liu†

Yehui Tang† Zhenhua Liu† Yunsheng Ni† Duyu Tang‡
Kai Han†,∗ Yunhe Wang†,∗
†
‡
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Consumer Business Group, Huawei
{liufangcheng3,yehui.tang,kai.han,yunhe.wang}@huawei.com

Abstract
Speculative decoding has demonstrated its effectiveness in accelerating the inference of large language models (LLMs) while maintaining an identical sampling
distribution. However, the conventional approach of training separate draft model
to achieve a satisfactory token acceptance rate can be costly and impractical. In
this paper, we propose a novel self-speculative decoding framework Kangaroo with
double early exiting strategy, which leverages the shallow sub-network and the
LM Head of the well-trained target LLM to construct a self-drafting model. Then,
the self-verification stage only requires computing the remaining layers over the
early-exited hidden states in parallel. To bridge the representation gap between
the sub-network and the full model, we train a lightweight and efficient adapter
module on top of the sub-network. One significant challenge that comes with
the proposed method is that the inference latency of the self-draft model may no
longer be negligible compared to the big model. To boost the token acceptance rate
while minimizing the latency of the self-drafting model, we introduce an additional
early exiting mechanism for both single-sequence and the tree decoding scenarios.
Specifically, we dynamically halt the small model’s subsequent prediction during
the drafting phase once the confidence level for the current step falls below a certain
threshold. This approach reduces unnecessary computations and improves overall
efficiency. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks demonstrate our effectiveness, where Kangaroo achieves walltime speedups up to 2.04×, outperforming
Medusa-1 with 88.7% fewer additional parameters. The code for Kangaroo is
available at https://github.com/Equationliu/Kangaroo.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] have demonstrated remarkable performance across
various natural language processing tasks, such as chain-of-thought reasoning [7] and agents [8].
Beyond model performance, recent research has also focused on inference efficiency [9, 10], particularly in scenarios involving the deployment of LLMs for service applications. However, constrained
by the bottleneck of memory bandwidth [11], the primary latency for autoregressive decoding of
LLMs arises mainly from memory read/write operations rather than arithmetic computations, leading
to inadequate parallelism. For instance, decoding Vicuna-33B [12] on four NVIDIA V100 GPUs
yields a throughput of only seven new tokens per second.
To address this challenge, Speculative Decoding (SD) techniques [13, 14] have been developed,
aiming to accelerate autoregressive decoding by verifying multiple tokens generated by a draft model
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

