MimicTalk: Mimicking a personalized and expressive
3D talking face in minutes
Zhenhui Ye † ‡ 1,2 Tianyun Zhong † ‡ 1,2 Yi Ren 2 Ziyue Jiang ‡ 1,2 Jiawei Huang ‡ 1,2
Rongjie Huang 1 Jinglin liu 2 Jinzheng He 1 Chen Zhang 2 Zehan Wang 1
Xize Chen 1 Xiang Yin 2 Zhou Zhao ∗ 1
1
Zhejiang University, 2 ByteDance
{zhenhuiye,zhaozhou}@zju.edu.cn,
{ren.yi,yinxiang.stephen}@bytedance.com

Abstract
Talking face generation (TFG) aims to animate a target identity’s face to create
realistic talking videos. Personalized TFG is a variant that emphasizes the perceptual identity similarity of the synthesized result (from the perspective of appearance and talking style). While previous works typically solve this problem by
learning an individual neural radiance ﬁeld (NeRF) for each identity to implicitly
store its static and dynamic information, we ﬁnd it inefﬁcient and non-generalized
due to the per-identity-per-training framework and the limited training data. To
this end, we propose MimicTalk, the ﬁrst attempt that exploits the rich knowledge
from a NeRF-based person-agnostic generic model for improving the efﬁciency
and robustness of personalized TFG. To be speciﬁc, (1) we ﬁrst come up with a
person-agnostic 3D TFG model as the base model and propose to adapt it into a
speciﬁc identity; (2) we propose a static-dynamic-hybrid adaptation pipeline to
help the model learn the personalized static appearance and facial dynamic features; (3) To generate the facial motion of the personalized talking style, we propose an in-context stylized audio-to-motion model that mimics the implicit talking
style provided in the reference video without information loss by an explicit style
representation. The adaptation process to an unseen identity can be performed in
15 minutes, which is 47 times faster than previous person-dependent methods. Experiments show that our MimicTalk surpasses previous baselines regarding video
quality, efﬁciency, and expressiveness. Source code and video samples are available at https://mimictalk.github.io.

1

Introduction

Audio-driven talking face generation (TFG) (Prajwal et al., 2020; Hong et al., 2022; Tian et al., 2024;
Xu et al., 2024) is a cross-modal task that leverages multi-modal knowledge from speech, vision,
and computer graphics to animate a target identity’s face given arbitrary driving audio, aiming to
create lifelike talking videos or interactive avatars. Personalized TFG (Suwajanakorn et al., 2017;
Thies et al., 2020a; Guo et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2021b) is a variant of TFG with several real-world
applications, such as video conferencing and audio-visual chatbots, in which we emphasize that
the generated results should have excellent perceptual similarity to a speciﬁc individual (from the
perspective of both visual quality and expressiveness). In this setting, a video clip of the target
identity (from several seconds to minutes) is provided as a detailed reference for the target person’s
† Equal contribution.
‡ Interns at ByteDance.
∗ Corresponding author.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

