Fine-grained Image-to-LiDAR Contrastive Distillation
with Visual Foundation Models
Yifan Zhang and Junhui Hou∗
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
yzhang3362-c@my.cityu.edu.hk;jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Contrastive image-to-LiDAR knowledge transfer, commonly used for learning
3D representations with synchronized images and point clouds, often faces a selfconflict dilemma. This issue arises as contrastive losses unintentionally dissociate
features of unmatched points and pixels that share semantic labels, compromising
the integrity of learned representations. To overcome this, we harness Visual Foundation Models (VFMs), which have revolutionized the acquisition of pixel-level
semantics, to enhance 3D representation learning. Specifically, we utilize offthe-shelf VFMs to generate semantic labels for weakly-supervised pixel-to-point
contrastive distillation. Additionally, we employ von Mises-Fisher distributions to
structure the feature space, ensuring semantic embeddings within the same class
remain consistent across varying inputs. Furthermore, we adapt sampling probabilities of points to address imbalances in spatial distribution and category frequency,
promoting comprehensive and balanced learning. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach mitigates the challenges posed by traditional methods and
consistently surpasses existing image-to-LiDAR contrastive distillation methods in
downstream tasks. Code is available at https://github.com/Eaphan/OLIVINE.

1

Introduction

LiDAR sensors deliver critical information in the 3D environment, crucial for applications such as
autonomous driving [78, 75, 79]. State-of-the-art neural networks have shown promising performance
on point clouds processing, which rely on extensive annotated datasets [29, 77, 17]. However, the
process of annotating point clouds is not only time-consuming but also costly, presenting significant
challenges in terms of scalability and practicality [36]. Self-supervision offers a solution by leveraging
vast quantities of unlabeled data to pre-train networks and subsequently fine-tuning them with a
smaller, labeled dataset. This approach significantly reduces the reliance on extensive annotated data
sets [10].
A prevalent method for learning 3D representations involves contrastive pixel-to-point knowledge
transfer, using synchronized and calibrated images and point clouds. PPKT [39] enables a 3D
network to derive extensive knowledge from a pre-trained 2D image backbone through a pixelto-point contrastive loss. This entire pre-training process necessitates no annotations for either
images or point clouds. Then SLidR [50] employs superpixels to cluster pixels and points from
visually coherent regions, leading to a more meaningful contrastive task. Building on this, Seal [38]
utilizes semantically rich superpixels generated by visual foundation models and introduces temporal
consistency regularization across point segments at different times. Meanwhile, HVDistill [73]
innovates by implementing cross-modality contrastive distillation that integrates both image-plane
and bird-eye views.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

