SongCreator: Lyrics-based Universal Song Generation

Shun Lei1 , Yixuan Zhou1† , Boshi Tang1 , Max W. Y. Lam2 , Feng Liu2 , Hangyu Liu2 ,
Jingcheng Wu2 , Shiyin Kang2 , Zhiyong Wu1,3∗, Helen Meng3
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen
2
Independent Researcher
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR
{leis21, yx-zhou23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, zywu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Music is an integral part of human culture, embodying human intelligence and
creativity, of which songs compose an essential part. While various aspects of song
generation have been explored by previous works, such as singing voice, vocal
composition and instrumental arrangement, etc., generating songs with both vocals
and accompaniment given lyrics remains a significant challenge, hindering the
application of music generation models in the real world. In this light, we propose
SongCreator, a song-generation system designed to tackle this challenge. The
model features two novel designs: a meticulously designed dual-sequence language
model (DSLM) to capture the information of vocals and accompaniment for song
generation, and a series of attention mask strategies for DSLM, which allows our
model to understand, generate and edit songs, making it suitable for various songrelated generation tasks by utilizing specific attention masks. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of SongCreator by achieving state-of-the-art or
competitive performances on all eight tasks. Notably, it surpasses previous works
by a large margin in lyrics-to-song and lyrics-to-vocals. Additionally, it is able to
independently control the acoustic conditions of the vocals and accompaniment
in the generated song through different audio prompts, exhibiting its potential
applicability. Our samples are available at https://thuhcsi.github.io/SongCreator/.

1

Introduction

Music is an integral part of human culture, embodying human intelligence and creativity. Songs
combining vocals and accompaniment compose an essential part of it, whose generation has been
a hotspot in both academia and industry in recent years. Although with the rapid advancements in
generative models, communities have witnessed the applications of Artificial Intelligence Generated
Content (AIGC) models in the generation of texts [1–3], images [4–6] and speeches [7–11], it still
remains a big question whether we can replicate the successes in song generation, which demands
coordination among various complex elements such as instruments, rhythm, melody and vocals.
Currently creating high-level songs with both vocals and accompaniment still requires substantial
human effort in composition, instrument arrangement, singing, and so on, a process requiring a great
deal of time and expertise. Lyrics-to-song generative models could lower the barrier to entry for
novices and improve the workflow of experienced artists.
Previous works mostly explored specific aspects of song generation, as listed in Table 1. Although
they exhibit abilities in vocal composition, instrumental arrangement and harmonious generation,
none of them is able to combine these three for high-quality lyrics-to-song generation. To this
end, Jukebox [12] can be seen as the first and only attempt from published literature so far to
∗

Corresponding author, † Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

