Perplexity-aware Correction for
Robust Alignment with Noisy Preferences

Keyi Kong1,∗

Xilie Xu2,∗ Di Wang3 Jingfeng Zhang4,5,† Mohan Kankanhalli2
Shandong University 2 National University of Singapore
3
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology 4 The University of Auckland
5
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP)
luxinyayaya@mail.sdu.edu.cn, xuxilie@comp.nus.edu.sg
di.wang@kaust.edu.sa, jingfeng.zhang@auckland.ac.nz, mohan@comp.nus.edu.sg
1

Abstract
Alignment techniques are critical in ensuring that large language models (LLMs)
output helpful and harmless content by enforcing the LLM-generated content to
align with human preferences. However, the existence of noisy preferences (NPs),
where the responses are mistakenly labelled as chosen or rejected, could spoil the
alignment, thus making the LLMs generate useless and even malicious content.
Existing methods mitigate the issue of NPs from the loss perspective by adjusting
the alignment loss based on a clean validation dataset. Orthogonal to these lossoriented methods, we propose perplexity-aware correction (PerpCorrect) from
the data perspective for robust alignment which detects and corrects NPs based
on the differences between the perplexity of the chosen and rejected responses
(dubbed as PPLDiff). Intuitively, a higher PPLDiff indicates a higher probability
of the NP because a rejected/chosen response which is mistakenly labelled as
chosen/rejected is less preferable to be generated by an aligned LLM, thus having
a higher/lower perplexity. PerpCorrect works in three steps: (1) PerpCorrect aligns
a surrogate LLM using the clean validation data to make the PPLDiff able to
distinguish clean preferences (CPs) and NPs. (2) PerpCorrect further aligns the
surrogate LLM by incorporating the reliable clean training data whose PPLDiff is
extremely small and reliable noisy training data whose PPLDiff is extremely large
after correction to boost the discriminatory power. (3) Detecting and correcting
NPs according to the PPLDiff obtained by the aligned surrogate LLM to obtain
a denoised training dataset for robust alignment. Comprehensive experiments
validate that our proposed PerpCorrect can achieve state-of-the-art alignment
performance under NPs. Notably, PerpCorrect demonstrates practical utility by
requiring only a modest amount of validation data and being compatible with
various alignment techniques. Our code is available at PerpCorrect.

1

Introduction

Alignment enables the safe utilization of the remarkable capabilities acquired by large language
models (LLMs) through self-supervised learning on vast corpora [6, 24, 4]. It refers to the process of
ensuring that the contents generated by LLMs are helpful, harmless, and aligned with human values
and preferences [19]. Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) [9] has emerged
as a primary technique for achieving alignment. Current technical routes [39, 40, 29] require a
reward model to simulate human preference and use it to optimize the policy model outputs with
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

