Adversarially Robust Dense-Sparse Tradeoffs via
Heavy-Hitters

David P. Woodruff
Department of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
dwoodruf@andrew.cmu.edu

Samson Zhou
Department of Computer Science
Texas A&M University
samsonzhou@gmail.com

Abstract
In the adversarial streaming model, the input is a sequence of adaptive updates
that defines an underlying dataset and the goal is to approximate, collect, or
compute some statistic while using space sublinear in the size of the dataset. In
2022, Ben-Eliezer, Eden, and Onak showed a dense-sparse trade-off technique
that elegantly combined sparse recovery with known techniques using differential
privacy and sketch switching to achieve adversarially robust algorithms for Lp
estimation and other algorithms on turnstile streams. However, there has been no
progress since, either in terms of achievability or impossibility. In this work, we
first give improved algorithms for adversarially robust Lp -heavy hitters, utilizing
deterministic turnstile heavy-hitter algorithms with better tradeoffs. We then utilize
our heavy-hitter algorithm to reduce the problem to estimating the frequency
moment of the tail vector. We give a new algorithm for this problem in the classical
streaming setting, which achieves additive error and uses space independent in the
size of the tail. We then leverage these ingredients to give an improved algorithm
for adversarially robust Lp estimation on turnstile streams. We believe that our
results serve as an important conceptual message, demonstrating that there is no
inherent barrier at the previous state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Adversarial robustness for big data models is increasingly important not only for ensuring the
reliability and security of algorithmic design against malicious inputs and manipulations, but also to
retain guarantees for honest inputs that are nonetheless co-dependent with previous outputs of the
algorithm. One such big data model is the streaming model of computation, which has emerged as a
central paradigm for studying statistics of datasets that are too large to store. Common examples of
datasets that are well-represented by data streams include database logs generated from e-commerce
transactions, Internet of Things sensors, scientific observations, social network traffic, or stock
markets. To capture these applications, the one-pass streaming model defines an underlying dataset
that evolves over time through a number of sequential updates that are discarded irrevocably after
processing, and the goal is to compute or approximate some fixed function of the dataset while using
space sublinear in both the length m of the data stream and the dimension n of the dataset.
The streaming model of computation. In the classical oblivious streaming model, the stream S of
updates u1 , . . . , um defines a dataset that is fixed in advance, though the ordering of the sequence of
updates may be adversarial. In other words, the dataset is oblivious to any algorithmic design choices,
such as instantiations of internal random variables. This is vital for many streaming algorithms, which
crucially leverage randomness to achieve meaningful guarantees in sublinear space. For example,
the celebrated AMS sketch [AMS99] initializes a random sign vector s and outputs |⟨s, f ⟩| as the
estimate for the L2 norm of the underlying frequency vector f defined by the stream. To show
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

