On Differentially Private Subspace Estimation in a
Distribution-Free Setting

Eliad Tsfadia
Department of Computer Science
Georgetown University
eliadtsfadia@gmail.com

Abstract
Private data analysis faces a significant challenge known as the curse of dimensionality, leading to increased costs. However, many datasets possess an inherent
low-dimensional structure. For instance, during optimization via gradient descent, the gradients frequently reside near a low-dimensional subspace. If the
low-dimensional structure could be privately identified using a small amount of
points, we could avoid paying for the high ambient dimension.
On the negative side, Dwork et al. [2014] proved that privately estimating subspaces,
in general, requires an amount of points that has a polynomial dependency on the
dimension. However, their bounds do not rule out the possibility to reduce the
number of points for “easy” instances. Yet, providing a measure that captures how
much a given dataset is “easy” for this task turns out to be challenging, and was
not properly addressed in prior works.
Inspired by the work of Singhal and Steinke [2021], we provide the first measures
that quantify “easiness” as a function of multiplicative singular-value gaps in the
input dataset, and support them with new upper and lower bounds. In particular,
our results determine the first types of gaps that are sufficient and necessary
for estimating a subspace with an amount of points that is independent of the
dimension. Furthermore, we realize our upper bounds using a practical algorithm
and demonstrate its advantage in high-dimensional regimes compared to prior
approaches.

1

Introduction

Differentially private (DP) Dwork et al. [2006b] algorithms typically exhibit a significant dependence
on the dimensionality of their input, as their error or sample complexity tends to grow polynomially
with the dimension. This cost of dimensionality is inherent in many problems, as Bun et al. [2014],
Steinke and Ullman [2017], Dwork et al. [2015] showed that any method that achieves lower error
rates is vulnerable to tracing attacks (also known as, membership inference attacks). However, these
lower bounds consider algorithms that guarantee accuracy for worst-case inputs and do not rule out
the possibility of achieving higher accuracy for “easy” instances.
Example: DP averaging. As a simple prototypical example, consider the task of DP averaging.
d
In this task, the input dataset
Pn consists of d-dimensional points x1 , . . . , xn ∈ R , and the goal is to
estimate their average n1 i=1 xi using a DP algorithm while minimizing the ℓ2 additive error. One
natural way to capture input “easiness” for this task is via the maximal ℓ2 distance between any two
points (i.e., points that are closer to each other are considered “easier”). Indeed, Tsfadia et al. [2022],
Peter et al. [2024] showed that if the points are γ-close to each other, and we aim for an accuracy
of λγ (i.e., an accuracy that is proportional to the “easiness” parameter γ), then it is sufficient and
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

