Adaptive Visual Scene Understanding:
Incremental Scene Graph Generation

Naitik Khandelwal1, 2 , Xiao Liu1, 2 Mengmi Zhang1, 2
1
2

College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore
Deep NeuroCognition Lab, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore

Address correspondence to mengmi.zhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Scene graph generation (SGG) analyzes images to extract meaningful information
about objects and their relationships. In the dynamic visual world, it is crucial for
AI systems to continuously detect new objects and establish their relationships
with existing ones. Recently, numerous studies have focused on continual learning
within the domains of object detection and image recognition. However, a limited
amount of research focuses on a more challenging continual learning problem in
SGG. This increased difficulty arises from the intricate interactions and dynamic
relationships among objects, and their associated contexts. Thus, in continual
learning, SGG models are often required to expand, modify, retain, and reason scene
graphs within the process of adaptive visual scene understanding. To systematically
explore Continual Scene Graph Generation (CSEGG), we present a comprehensive
benchmark comprising three learning regimes: relationship incremental, scene
incremental, and relationship generalization. Moreover, we introduce a “Replays
via Analysis by Synthesis" method named RAS. This approach leverages the
scene graphs, decomposes and re-composes them to represent different scenes, and
replays the synthesized scenes based on these compositional scene graphs. The
replayed synthesized scenes act as a means to practice and refine proficiency in SGG
in known and unknown environments. Our experimental results not only highlight
the challenges of directly combining existing continual learning methods with
SGG backbones but also demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed approach,
enhancing CSEGG efficiency while simultaneously preserving privacy and memory
usage. All data and source code are publicly available here.

1

Introduction

Scene graph generation (SGG) aims to extract object entities and their relationships in a scene. The
resulting scene graph, carrying semantic scene structures, can be used for a variety of downstream
tasks such as object detection[64], image captioning [20, 1] , and visual question answering [17].
Despite the notable advancements in SGG, current works have largely overlooked the critical aspect
of continual learning. In the dynamic visual world, new objects and relationships are introduced
incrementally, posing challenges for SGG models to account for new changes without forgetting
previously acquired knowledge. This problem of Continual ScenE Graph Generation (CSEGG) holds
great potential for various applications, such as real-time robotic navigation in dynamic environments
and adaptive augmented reality experiences.
The field of continual learning has witnessed significant growth in recent years, with a major focus
on tasks such as image classification [43], object detection [67], and visual question answering
[28]. However, these endeavors have largely neglected the distinctive complexities associated with
CSEGG. Here, we highlight several unique challenges of CSEGG: (1) In contrast to object detection,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

