Unitary convolutions for learning on graphs and
groups
Bobak T. Kiani∗

Lukas Fesser†

Melanie Weber‡

Data with geometric structure is ubiquitous in machine learning often arising from fundamental
symmetries in a domain, such as permutation-invariance in graphs and translation-invariance in
images. Group-convolutional architectures, which encode symmetries as inductive bias, have shown
great success in applications, but can suffer from instabilities as their depth increases and often
struggle to learn long range dependencies in data. For instance, graph neural networks experience
instability due to the convergence of node representations (over-smoothing), which can occur after
only a few iterations of message-passing, reducing their effectiveness in downstream tasks. Here, we
propose and study unitary group convolutions, which allow for deeper networks that are more stable
during training. The main focus of the paper are graph neural networks, where we show that unitary
graph convolutions provably avoid over-smoothing. Our experimental results confirm that unitary
graph convolutional networks achieve competitive performance on benchmark datasets compared to
state-of-the-art graph neural networks. We complement our analysis of the graph domain with the
study of general unitary convolutions and analyze their role in enhancing stability in general group
convolutional architectures.4

1

Introduction

In recent years, the design of specialized machine learning architectures for structured data has
received a surge of interest. Of particular interest are architectures for data domains with inherent
symmetries, such as permutation-invariance in graphs and sets, translation-invariance in images, and
other symmetries that arise from fundamental laws of physics in scientific data.
Group-convolutional architectures allow for explicitly encoding symmetries as inductive biases,
which has led to performance gains in scientific applications [ESM23, WWY20]; theoretical studies have analyzed the impact of geometric inductive biases on the complexity of the architecture [MMM21, BVB21, KLL+ 24]. Graph Neural Networks are among the most popular architectures
for graph machine learning and have found impactful applications in a wide range of disciplines,
including in chemistry [GRK+ 21], drug discovery [ZAL18], particle physics [SBV20], and recommender systems [WSZ+ 22]. However, despite these successes, several limitations remain. A notable
difficulty is the design of stable, deep architectures. Many of the aforementioned applications require
accurate learning of long-range dependencies in the data, which necessitates deeper networks. However, it has been widely observed that group-convolutional networks suffer from instabilities as their
depths increases. On graph domains, these instabilities have been studied extensively in recent years,
notably in the form of over-smoothing effects [RBM23], which characterizes the fast convergence of
the representations of nearby nodes with depth. This effect can often be observed after only a few iterations of message-passing (i.e., small number of layers) and can significantly decrease the utility of
the learned representations in downstream tasks. While interventions for mitigating over-smoothing
have been proposed, including targeted perturbations of the input graph’s connectivity (rewiring)
and skip connections, a more principled architectural approach with theoretical guarantees is still
∗ John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard; e-mail: bkiani@g.harvard.edu

† John

A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard;
e-mail:
lukas fesser@fas.harvard.edu
‡ John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard; e-mail: mweber@g.harvard.edu
4Code available at https://github.com/Weber-GeoML/Unitary_Convolutions

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

