EZ-HOI: VLM Adaptation via Guided Prompt
Learning for Zero-Shot HOI Detection

Qinqian Lei1 Bo Wang2 Robby T. Tan1,3
1
National University of Singapore
2
University of Mississippi
3
ASUS Intelligent Cloud Services (AICS)
qinqian.lei@u.nus.edu , hawk.rsrch@gmail.com , robby_tan@asus.com

Abstract
Detecting Human-Object Interactions (HOI) in zero-shot settings, where models
must handle unseen classes, poses significant challenges. Existing methods that rely
on aligning visual encoders with large Vision-Language Models (VLMs) to tap into
the extensive knowledge of VLMs, require large, computationally expensive models
and encounter training difficulties. Adapting VLMs with prompt learning offers
an alternative to direct alignment. However, fine-tuning on task-specific datasets
often leads to overfitting to seen classes and suboptimal performance on unseen
classes, due to the absence of unseen class labels. To address these challenges, we
introduce a novel prompt learning-based framework for Efficient Zero-Shot HOI
detection (EZ-HOI). First, we introduce Large Language Model (LLM) and VLM
guidance for learnable prompts, integrating detailed HOI descriptions and visual
semantics to adapt VLMs to HOI tasks. However, because training datasets contain
seen-class labels alone, fine-tuning VLMs on such datasets tends to optimize
learnable prompts for seen classes instead of unseen ones. Therefore, we design
prompt learning for unseen classes using information from related seen classes,
with LLMs utilized to highlight the differences between unseen and related seen
classes. Quantitative evaluations on benchmark datasets demonstrate that our EZHOI achieves state-of-the-art performance across various zero-shot settings with
only 10.35% to 33.95% of the trainable parameters compared to existing methods.
Code is available at https://github.com/ChelsieLei/EZ-HOI.

1

Introduction

Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection localizes human-object pairs and identifies the interactions.
HOI has various practical applications, including robot manipulations, human-computer interaction,
and human activity understanding [38, 41, 24, 32, 26, 1]. Additionally, it is a building block for
related tasks such as action recognition, visual question answering, and image generation [18, 24,
4, 43, 11, 54]. However, the limited generalization ability of many existing HOI detectors makes
zero-shot HOI detection particularly challenging, as it requires models to identify unseen HOI classes.
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [47, 29, 2, 30] have gained popularity due to their extensive
knowledge bases and effective ability to process and correlate complex patterns across visual and text
data. Consequently, a group of methods has been developed to align HOI visual features with those
of VLMs, leveraging the extensive knowledge from these models [51, 33, 44, 41, 4]. This alignment
ensures that both the HOI model and the VLM can extract similar features to represent the same
concept (e.g., an action). The degree of feature alignment can be quantified using cosine similarity,
which measures the similarity between feature vectors. However, aligning with VLMs requires
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

