Attack-Aware Noise Calibration
for Differential Privacy

Bogdan Kulynych∗
Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV)
Georgios Kaissis
Technical University Munich

Juan Felipe Gomez∗
Harvard University

Flavio du Pin Calmon
Harvard University

Carmela Troncoso
EPFL

Abstract
Differential privacy (DP) is a widely used approach for mitigating privacy risks
when training machine learning models on sensitive data. DP mechanisms add
noise during training to limit the risk of information leakage. The scale of the
added noise is critical, as it determines the trade-off between privacy and utility.
The standard practice is to select the noise scale to satisfy a given privacy budget
ε. This privacy budget is in turn interpreted in terms of operational attack risks,
such as accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of inference attacks aimed to recover
information about the training data records. We show that first calibrating the noise
scale to a privacy budget ε, and then translating ε to attack risk leads to overly
conservative risk assessments and unnecessarily low utility. Instead, we propose
methods to directly calibrate the noise scale to a desired attack risk level, bypassing
the step of choosing ε. For a given notion of attack risk, our approach significantly
decreases noise scale, leading to increased utility at the same level of privacy. We
empirically demonstrate that calibrating noise to attack sensitivity/specificity, rather
than ε, when training privacy-preserving ML models substantially improves model
accuracy for the same risk level. Our work provides a principled and practical way
to improve the utility of privacy-preserving ML without compromising on privacy.

1

Introduction

Machine learning and statistical models can leak information about individuals in their training
data, which can be recovered by membership inference, attribute inference, and reconstruction
attacks (Fredrikson et al., 2015; Shokri et al., 2017; Yeom et al., 2018; Balle et al., 2022). The
most common defenses against these attacks are based on differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al.,
2014). Differential privacy introduces noise to either the data, the training algorithm, or the model
parameters (Chaudhuri et al., 2011). This noise provably limits the adversary’s ability to run successful
attacks at the cost of reducing the utility of the model.
In DP, the parameters ε and δ control the privacy-utility trade-off. These parameters determine
the scale (e.g., variance) of the noise added during training: Smaller values of these parameters
correspond to larger noise. Larger noise provides stronger privacy guarantees but reduces the utility
of the trained model. Typically, δ is set to a small fixed value (usually between 10−8 and 10−5 ),
leaving ε as the primary tunable parameter. Without additional analyses, the values of parameters
(ε, δ) alone do not provide a tangible and intuitive operational notion of privacy risk (Nanayakkara
et al., 2023). This begs the question: how should practitioners, regulators, and data subjects decide
on acceptable values of ε and δ and calibrate the noise scale to achieve a desired level of protection?
∗

Contributed equally.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

