Parseval Regularization for
Continual Reinforcement Learning

Wesley Chung, Lynn Cherif, David Meger, Doina Precup
Mila, McGill University
chungwes@mila.quebec

Abstract
Loss of plasticity, trainability loss, and primacy bias have been identified as issues
arising when training deep neural networks on sequences of tasks—all referring
to the increased difficulty in training on new tasks. We propose to use Parseval
regularization, which maintains orthogonality of weight matrices, to preserve useful
optimization properties and improve training in a continual reinforcement learning
setting. We show that it provides significant benefits to RL agents on a suite of
gridworld, CARL and MetaWorld tasks. We conduct comprehensive ablations
to identify the source of its benefits and investigate the effect of certain metrics
associated to network trainability including weight matrix rank, weight norms and
policy entropy.

1

Introduction

Continual reinforcement learning (RL) [30], a setting where a single agent has to learn in a complex
environment with potentially changing tasks and dynamics, has remained a challenge for current
agents. The core difficulty stems from training deep neural networks on sequences of tasks. Although
the network may be able to learn the first task easily, after several tasks, progress may be impeded—a
phenomenon termed plasticity loss [12, 44, 38, 37, 57, 1]. Other works have found that neural
networks may be strongly influenced by data in the early phases of learning, leading to weaker
performance on later tasks [5, 43, 2, 29, 58]. Taken together, these works have demonstrated the
difficulty of learning in the presence of nonstationarity, an integral aspect of reinforcement learning
problems.
Optimization has historically been a barrier towards training neural networks, even on single tasks
[25, 46]. The development of suitable parameter initialization schemes was a key ingredient to
successful training, such as Xavier and Kaiming initializations [16, 22]. By prescribing a suitable
variance for random Gaussian weights, these initialization strategies allow gradients to propagate
throughout the network and avoid the vanishing and exploding gradient problems.
This line of work led to the development of orthogonal initialization [53], a technique designed to
ensure better gradient propagation by making the singular values of the weight matrices all equal to 1
and thus maintaining the singular values of the Jacobian of the output with respect to the input to also
be 1—a property known as dynamical isometry. Orthogonal initialization was used to allow training
of a vanilla convolutional network with 10 thousand layers without the use of normalization layers
[61]. Additionally, this technique has found success in RL settings with more shallow networks, being
the default setting for PPO agents and improving upon Gaussian initialization strategies [28, 27].
Overall, this research direction has showcased the importance of encouraging model parameters to lie
in regions amenable to optimization.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

