Self-Distilled Depth Refinement
with Noisy Poisson Fusion

Jiaqi Li1,∗
Yiran Wang1,∗
Jinghong Zheng1
1
2
Zihao Huang
Ke Xian
Zhiguo Cao1,†
Jianming Zhang3
1

School of AIA, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
Adobe Research

2

∗

Equal contribution

†

Corresponding author

{lijiaqi_mail,wangyiran,deepzheng,zihaohuang,kxian,zgcao}@hust.edu.cn
jianmzha@adobe.com
https://github.com/lijia7/SDDR

Abstract
Depth refinement aims to infer high-resolution depth with fine-grained edges and
details, refining low-resolution results of depth estimation models. The prevailing
methods adopt tile-based manners by merging numerous patches, which lacks
efficiency and produces inconsistency. Besides, prior arts suffer from fuzzy depth
boundaries and limited generalizability. Analyzing the fundamental reasons for
these limitations, we model depth refinement as a noisy Poisson fusion problem
with local inconsistency and edge deformation noises. We propose the Self-distilled
Depth Refinement (SDDR) framework to enforce robustness against the noises,
which mainly consists of depth edge representation and edge-based guidance. With
noisy depth predictions as input, SDDR generates low-noise depth edge representations as pseudo-labels by coarse-to-fine self-distillation. Edge-based guidance with
edge-guided gradient loss and edge-based fusion loss serves as the optimization
objective equivalent to Poisson fusion. When depth maps are better refined, the
labels also become more noise-free. Our model can acquire strong robustness to
the noises, achieving significant improvements in accuracy, edge quality, efficiency,
and generalizability on five different benchmarks. Moreover, directly training another model with edge labels produced by SDDR brings improvements, suggesting
that our method could help with training robust refinement models in future works.

1

Introduction

Depth refinement infers high-resolution depth with accurate edges and details, refining the lowresolution counterparts from depth estimation models [30, 51, 1]. With increasing demands for high
resolutions in modern applications, depth refinement becomes a prerequisite for virtual reality [24, 13],
bokeh rendering [27, 28], and image generation [33, 54]. The prevailing methods [25, 21] adopt
two-stage tile-based frameworks. Based on the one-stage refined depth of the whole image, they
merge high-frequency details by fusing extensive patches with complex patch selection strategies.
However, numerous patches lead to heavy computational costs. Besides, as in Fig. 1 (a), excessive
integration of local information leads to inconsistent depth structures, e.g., the disrupted billboard.
Apart from efficiency and consistency, depth refinement [25, 14, 4, 3, 37, 21] is restricted by noisy
and blurred depth edges. Highly accurate depth annotations with meticulous boundaries are necessary
to enforce fine-grained details. For this reason, prior arts [14, 37, 21] only use synthetic datasets [32,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

