Set-based Neural Network Encoding
Without Weight Tying

Bruno Andreis1 , Soro Bedionita1 , Philip H.S. Torr2 , Sung Ju Hwang1,3
KAIST 1 , South Korea
University of Oxford, United Kingdom 2
DeepAuto.ai, South Korea 3
{andries, sorobedio, sjhwang82}@kaist.ac.kr, philip.torr@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a neural network weight encoding method for network property prediction that utilizes set-to-set and set-to-vector functions to efficiently encode
neural network parameters. Our approach is capable of encoding neural networks
in a model zoo of mixed architecture and different parameter sizes as opposed
to previous approaches that require custom encoding models for different architectures. Furthermore, our Set-based Neural network Encoder (SNE) takes into
consideration the hierarchical computational structure of neural networks. To
respect symmetries inherent in network weight space, we utilize Logit Invariance
to learn the required minimal invariance properties. Additionally, we introduce
a pad-chunk-encode pipeline to efficiently encode neural network layers that is
adjustable to computational and memory constraints. We also introduce two new
tasks for neural network property prediction: cross-dataset and cross-architecture.
In cross-dataset property prediction, we evaluate how well property predictors generalize across model zoos trained on different datasets but of the same architecture.
In cross-architecture property prediction, we evaluate how well property predictors
transfer to model zoos of different architecture not seen during training. We show
that SNE outperforms the relevant baselines on standard benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Recently, deep learning methods have been applied to a wide range of fields and problems. With
this broad range of applications, huge volumes of datasets are continually being made available in
the public domain together with neural networks trained on these datasets. Given this abundance
of trained neural network models, the following curiosity arises: what can we deduce about these
networks with access only to the parameter values? More generally, can we predict properties of
these networks such as generalization performance on a testset(without access to the test data), the
dataset on which the model was trained, the choice of optimizer and learning rate, the number of
training epochs, choice of model initialization etc. through an analysis of the model parameters?
The ability to infer such fundamental properties of trained neural networks using only the parameter
values has the potential to open up new application and research paradigms [De Luigi et al., 2023,
Zhou et al., 2023a,b, Navon et al., 2023] such as learning in the latent space of neural network
weights for tasks such as weight generation [Schürholt et al., 2021, Soro et al., 2024], latent space
transfer of weights across datasets allowing for transferring weights from one dataset to another as
was recently demonstrated in Soro et al. [2024] and latent space optimization using gradient descent
where optimization is performed on the weight embeddings [Rusu et al., 2018].
We tackle two specific versions of this problem: predicting a) frequencies of Implicit Neural Representations [Sitzmann et al., 2020] (INRs), and b) the performance of CNNs and Transformers,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

