Meta-Reinforcement Learning with Universal Policy
Adaptation: Provable Near-Optimality under All-task
Optimum Comparator

Siyuan Xu & Minghui Zhu
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16801
{spx5032, muz16}@psu.edu

Abstract
Meta-reinforcement learning (Meta-RL) has attracted attention due to its capability
to enhance reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms, in terms of data efficiency and
generalizability. In this paper, we develop a bilevel optimization framework for
meta-RL (BO-MRL) to learn the meta-prior for task-specific policy adaptation,
which implements multiple-step policy optimization on one-time data collection.
Beyond existing meta-RL analyses, we provide upper bounds of the expected
optimality gap over the task distribution. This metric measures the distance of
the policy adaptation from the learned meta-prior to the task-specific optimum,
and quantifies the model’s generalizability to the task distribution. We empirically
validate the correctness of the derived upper bounds and demonstrate the superior
effectiveness of the proposed algorithm over benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning [58, 15, 25] aims to extract the shared prior knowledge, known as meta-prior, from
the similarities and interdependencies of multiple existing learning tasks, in order to accelerate the
learning process, increase the efficiency of data usage, and improve the overall learning performance
in new tasks. Meta-learning has been extended to solve RL problems, known as meta-RL [15, 5],
and shows its promise to overcome the challenges of traditional RL algorithms, including scarce
real-world data [3, 44, 65], limited computing resources, and slow learning speed [54, 63].
Meta-learning methods can be generally categorized into optimization-based, model-based (black box
methods), and metric-based methods [27, 5]. The optimization-based meta-learning approach [25] is
compatible with any model trained by an optimization algorithm, such as gradient descent, and thus
is applicable to a vast range of learning problems, including RL problems. Specifically, it formulates
meta-learning as a bilevel optimization problem. At the lower-level optimization, the task-specific
model is adapted from a shared meta-parameter by an optimization algorithm. At the upper-level
optimization, the meta-parameter is to maximize the meta-objective, i.e., the performance of the
model adapted from the meta-parameter over training tasks. The existing methods, including MAML
and its variants [15, 38, 12], take a one-step gradient ascent as the lower-level policy optimization
algorithm, which limits its data inefficiency and leads to sub-optimality.
During the meta-test, MAML conducts one-time data collection, i.e., collecting data using one policy
(the meta-policy), and adapts the policy by one step of policy gradient to the new task. However,
the collected data is only used in one policy gradient step, which may not sufficiently leverage the
data and potentially fail to achieve a good performance. To mitigate the issue, a typical practice is to
implement the data collection and the policy gradient alternately multiple times [15]. However, the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

