Neural Assets: 3D-Aware Multi-Object
Scene Synthesis with Image Diffusion Models

Ziyi Wu3,4,† , Yulia Rubanova1 , Rishabh Kabra1,5 , Drew A. Hudson1 ,
Igor Gilitschenski3,4 , Yusuf Aytar1 , Sjoerd van Steenkiste2 ,
Kelsey R. Allen1 , Thomas Kipf1
1
2
Google DeepMind Google Research 3 University of Toronto 4 Vector Institute 5 UCL

Abstract
We address the problem of multi-object 3D pose control in image diffusion models.
Instead of conditioning on a sequence of text tokens, we propose to use a set of perobject representations, Neural Assets, to control the 3D pose of individual objects
in a scene. Neural Assets are obtained by pooling visual representations of objects
from a reference image, such as a frame in a video, and are trained to reconstruct the
respective objects in a different image, e.g., a later frame in the video. Importantly,
we encode object visuals from the reference image while conditioning on object
poses from the target frame. This enables learning disentangled appearance and
pose features. Combining visual and 3D pose representations in a sequence-oftokens format allows us to keep the text-to-image architecture of existing models,
with Neural Assets in place of text tokens. By fine-tuning a pre-trained text-toimage diffusion model with this information, our approach enables fine-grained 3D
pose and placement control of individual objects in a scene. We further demonstrate
that Neural Assets can be transferred and recomposed across different scenes. Our
model achieves state-of-the-art multi-object editing results on both synthetic 3D
scene datasets, as well as two real-world video datasets (Objectron, Waymo Open).
Additional details and video results are available at our project page.

1

Introduction

From animation movies to video games, the field of computer graphics has long relied on a traditional
workflow for creating and manipulating visual content. This approach involves the creation of 3D
assets, which are then placed in a scene and animated to achieve the desired visual effects. With the
recent advance of deep generative models [26, 50, 77, 82], a new paradigm is emerging. Diffusion
models have achieved promising results in content creation [22, 44, 70, 79] by training on web-scale
text-image data [85]. Users can now expect realistic image generation, depicting almost everything
describable in text. However, text alone is often insufficient for precise control over the output image.
To address this challenge, an emerging body of work has investigated alternative ways to control
the image generation process. One line of work studies different forms of conditioning inputs,
such as depth maps, surface normals, and semantic layouts [59, 103, 116]. Another direction is
personalized image generation [30, 58, 81], which aims to synthesize a new image while preserving
particular aspects of a reference image (e.g., placing an object of interest on a desired background).
However, these approaches are still fundamentally limited in their 3D understanding of objects. As a
result, they cannot achieve intuitive object control in the 3D space, e.g., rotation. While some recent
works introduce 3D geometry to the generation process [8, 61, 67], they cannot handle multi-object
real-world scenes as it is hard to obtain scalable training data (paired images and 3D annotations).
†

Work done while interning at Google.
Contact: tkipf@google.com. Project page: neural-assets.github.io
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

