Decision Mamba: Reinforcement Learning via Hybrid
Selective Sequence Modeling
Sili Huang1

Jifeng Hu2
Zhejian Yang3
Liwei Yang4
Tao Luo5
6∗
7
8∗
Hechang Chen
Lichao Sun
Bo Yang
1,8
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education
1,2,3,6
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, China
4,5
Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
7
Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, USA

Abstract
Recent works have shown the remarkable superiority of transformer models
in reinforcement learning (RL), where the decision-making problem is formulated as sequential generation. Transformer-based agents could emerge with selfimprovement in online environments by providing task contexts, such as multiple
trajectories, called in-context RL. However, due to the quadratic computation
complexity of attention in transformers, current in-context RL methods suffer
from huge computational costs as the task horizon increases. In contrast, the
Mamba model is renowned for its efficient ability to process long-term dependencies, which provides an opportunity for in-context RL to solve tasks that require
long-term memory. To this end, we first implement Decision Mamba (DM) by
replacing the backbone of Decision Transformer (DT). Then, we propose a Decision Mamba-Hybrid (DM-H) with the merits of transformers and Mamba in
high-quality prediction and long-term memory. Specifically, DM-H first generates
high-value sub-goals from long-term memory through the Mamba model. Then,
we use sub-goals to prompt the transformer, establishing high-quality predictions.
Experimental results demonstrate that DM-H achieves state-of-the-art in long and
short-term tasks, such as D4RL, Grid World, and Tmaze benchmarks. Regarding
efficiency, the online testing of DM-H in the long-term task is 28× times faster
than the transformer-based baselines.

1

Introduction

Large transformer models [43] have achieved notable successes across a variety of domains, including
text [4], image [9], and audio [1]. In the field of reinforcement learning (RL), large transformer
models can treat RL tasks as a type of sequential prediction problem and have shown impressive
results with offline training [31, 39]. However, these methods lack self-improvement when used in
online environments, where online environments could differ from offline training. To overcome this,
in-context RL has been proposed, which enables continued policy improvement [29].
Recent works demonstrated that in-context RL methods can automatically improve online performance by providing prompt conditions called across-episodic contexts [30]. The construction of
the across-episodic context is flexible and easy to implement, such as multiple historical trajectories arranged in ascending order of returns [20]. Although no gradient updates are required for
self-improvement, current in-context RL still suffers from high computational costs on long-term
tasks [29]. This arises from (1) the quadratic complexity of the self-attention mechanism and (2) the
multiplicative growth of the long-term sequence caused by across-episodic contexts.
∗

Corresponding Author. Bo Yang and Hechang Chen.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

