Robust and Faster Zeroth-Order Minimax
Optimization: Complexity and Applications

1

Weixin An1 , Yuanyuan Liu1∗, Fanhua Shang2∗, Hongying Liu3,4∗
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding of Ministry of Education,
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, China
2
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
3
Medical School, Tianjin University, China
4
Peng Cheng Lab, Shenzhen, China
weixinanut@163.com, yyliu@xidian.edu.cn, fhshang@tju.edu.cn,
hyliu2009@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Many zeroth-order (ZO) optimization algorithms have been developed to solve
nonconvex minimax problems in machine learning and computer vision areas.
However, existing ZO minimax algorithms have high complexity and rely on some
strict restrictive conditions for ZO estimations. To address these issues, we design
a new unified ZO gradient descent extragradient ascent (ZO-GDEGA) algorithm,
which reduces the overall complexity to O(dϵ−6 ) to find an ϵ-stationary point of
the function ψ for nonconvex-concave (NC-C) problems, where d is the variable dimension. To the best of our knowledge, ZO-GDEGA is the first ZO algorithm with
complexity guarantees to solve stochastic NC-C problems. Moreover, ZO-GDEGA
requires weaker conditions on the ZO estimations and achieves more robust theoretical results. As a by-product, ZO-GDEGA has advantages on the condition number
for the NC-strongly concave case. Experimentally, ZO-GDEGA can generate more
effective poisoning attack data with an average accuracy reduction of 5%. The
improved AUC performance also verifies the robustness of gradient estimations.

1

Introduction

We mainly consider a general regularized minimax problem:
min max {Ψ(x, y) = g(x) + f (x, y) − h(y)},

x∈Rdx y∈Rdy

(1)

where f : Rdx×dy → R is nonconvex in x, concave in y and ℓ-smooth, g : Rdx → R and h : Rdy → R
are convex but maybe nonsmooth functions. The problem (1) appears in many scenarios of machine
learning, such as adversarial attack to regularized deep neural networks, regularized fair learning, and
robust training [7, 13]. In this paper, we focus on the black-box setting of Problem (1), where the
gradients are estimated by only functional values.
In the black-box setting, some evolutionary algorithms such as [46] have achieved good performance.
However, they usually lack complexity analysis and may never converge to a solution due to pathological behavior [33]. Thus, ZO algorithms with convergence guarantees came into being. For example,
ZO algorithms provide an alternative to higher-order optimization methods for solving robust network
training with gradient or curvature regularization [37, 13]. Besides, ZO algorithms have also made
considerable progress in escaping from saddle points [56].
∗

Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

