Ada-MSHyper: Adaptive Multi-Scale Hypergraph
Transformer for Time Series Forecasting
Zongjiang Shang, Ling Chen∗, Binqing Wu, Dongliang Cui
State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security
College of Computer Science and Technology
Zhejiang University
{zongjiangshang, lingchen, binqingwu, runnercdl}@cs.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Although transformer-based methods have achieved great success in multi-scale
temporal pattern interaction modeling, two key challenges limit their further development: (1) Individual time points contain less semantic information, and
leveraging attention to model pair-wise interactions may cause the information
utilization bottleneck. (2) Multiple inherent temporal variations (e.g., rising, falling,
and fluctuating) entangled in temporal patterns. To this end, we propose Adaptive
Multi-Scale Hypergraph Transformer (Ada-MSHyper) for time series forecasting. Specifically, an adaptive hypergraph learning module is designed to provide
foundations for modeling group-wise interactions, then a multi-scale interaction
module is introduced to promote more comprehensive pattern interactions at different scales. In addition, a node and hyperedge constraint mechanism is introduced
to cluster nodes with similar semantic information and differentiate the temporal
variations within each scales. Extensive experiments on 11 real-world datasets
demonstrate that Ada-MSHyper achieves state-of-the-art performance, reducing
prediction errors by an average of 4.56%, 10.38%, and 4.97% in MSE for longrange, short-range, and ultra-long-range time series forecasting, respectively. Code
is available at https://github.com/shangzongjiang/Ada-MSHyper.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting has demonstrated its wide applications across many fields [30, 37], e.g.,
energy consumption planning, traffic and economics prediction, and disease propagation forecasting.
In these real-world applications, the observed time series often demonstrate complex and diverse
temporal patterns at different scales[6, 9, 28]. For example, due to periodic human activities, traffic
occupation and electricity consumption show clear daily patterns (e.g., afternoon or evening), weekly
patterns (e.g., weekday or weekend), and even monthly patterns (e.g., summer or winter).
Recently, deep models have achieved great success in time series forecasting. To tackle intricate
temporal patterns and their interactions at different scales, numerous foundational backbones have
emerged, including recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [7, 9, 10], convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [1, 25], graph neural networks (GNNs) [4, 8], and transformers [20, 39]. Particularly, due
to the capabilities of depicting pair-wise interactions and extracting multi-scale representations in
sequences, transformers are widely used in time series forecasting. However, some recent studies
show that even simple multi-scale MLP [11, 35] or naïve series decomposition methods [3, 15] can
outperform transformer-based methods on various benchmarks. We argue the challenges that limit
the effectiveness of transformers in time series forecasting are as follows.
∗

Corresponding author: Ling Chen.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

