Inference of Neural Dynamics Using Switching
Recurrent Neural Networks
Yongxu Zhang Shreya Saxena
Yale University
{yongxu.zhang, shreya.saxena}@yale.edu

Abstract
Neural population activity often exhibits distinct dynamical features across time,
which may correspond to distinct internal processes or behavior. Linear methods
and variations thereof, such as Hidden Markov Model (HMM) and Switching Linear
Dynamical System (SLDS), are often employed to identify discrete states with
evolving neural dynamics. However, these techniques may not be able to capture
the underlying nonlinear dynamics associated with neural propagation. Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNNs) are commonly used to model neural dynamics thanks to
their nonlinear characteristics. In our work, we develop Switching Recurrent Neural
Networks (SRNN), RNNs with weights that switch across time, to reconstruct
switching dynamics of neural time-series data. We apply these models to simulated
data as well as cortical neural activity across mice and monkeys, which allows
us to automatically detect discrete states that lead to the identification of varying
neural dynamics. In a monkey reaching dataset with electrophysiology recordings,
a mouse self-initiated lever pull dataset with widefield calcium recordings, and
a mouse self-initiated decision making dataset with widefield calcium recording,
SRNNs are able to automatically identify discrete states with distinct nonlinear
neural dynamics. The inferred switches are aligned with the behavior, and the
reconstructions show that the recovered neural dynamics are distinct across different
stages of the behavior. We show that the neural dynamics have behaviorally-relevant
switches across time and we are able to use SRNNs to successfully capture these
switches and the corresponding dynamical features.

1

Introduction

How does complex neural activity lead to dynamic behavior? A foundational principle in theoretical
neuroscience suggests that the computations within the nervous system can be explained through
the dynamics of the underlying non-linear systems (Breakspear [2017], Pandarinath et al. [2018],
Durstewitz et al. [2023]). As our ability to record from larger areas of the brain with unprecedented
spatial and temporal resolution increases, we find neural population activity often exhibits distinct
dynamical features across time. These features may correspond to distinct internal processes or
behavior (Saxena and Cunningham [2019], Churchland et al. [2012]). Identifying these dynamical
features may help us understand how cognitive functions are implemented in the brain. Previous works
have revealed a number of computational strategies through analysis of neural dynamics, particularly
across tasks, and during orchestration of precise behavioral states such as during movement generation
(Kaufman et al. [2014], Miri et al. [2017]).
State space modeling is a promising analytical approach for characterizing dynamics of time series;
such models can be highly effective and have received substantial attention over many decades
on analyzing temporal neural dynamics (He et al. [2023], Durstewitz et al. [2023], Sani et al.
[2021]). Well-established methods on inference and learning algorithms have contributed towards
learning the parameters of state space models (Blei et al. [2017], Salimans et al. [2015], Kingma and
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

