Separations in the Representational Capabilities of
Transformers and Recurrent Architectures
Satwik Bhattamishra1† Michael Hahn2
1

University of Oxford

2

Phil Blunsom1,3

Saarland University

3

Varun Kanade1†

Cohere

Abstract
Transformer architectures have been widely adopted in foundation models. Due to
their high inference costs, there is renewed interest in exploring the potential of
efficient recurrent architectures (RNNs). In this paper, we analyze the differences in
the representational capabilities of Transformers and RNNs across several tasks of
practical relevance, including index lookup, nearest neighbor, recognizing bounded
Dyck languages, and string equality. For the tasks considered, our results show
separations based on the size of the model required for different architectures. For
example, we show that a one-layer Transformer of logarithmic width can perform
index lookup, whereas an RNN requires a hidden state of linear size. Conversely,
while constant-size RNNs can recognize bounded Dyck languages, we show that
one-layer Transformers require a linear size for this task. Furthermore, we show
that two-layer Transformers of logarithmic size can perform decision tasks such as
string equality or disjointness, whereas both one-layer Transformers and recurrent
models require linear size for these tasks. We also show that a log-size two-layer
Transformer can implement the nearest neighbor algorithm in its forward pass; on
the other hand recurrent models require linear size. Our constructions are based
on the existence of N nearly orthogonal vectors in O(log N ) dimensional space
and our lower bounds are based on reductions from communication complexity
problems. We supplement our theoretical results with experiments that highlight the
differences in the performance of these architectures on practical-size sequences.

1

Introduction

Transformers [59] are the go-to architecture for building LLMs [11], but recently, there has been
significant interest in reviving recurrent architectures to build LLMs for practical tasks [21, 42, 45] to
circumvent the quadratic complexity of inference for Transformers. While Transformers process all
tokens in parallel, maintaining N vectors, and are in some sense stateless, recurrent models primarily
store information in a fixed-size hidden state that they can update during the course of the computation.
This raises a fundamental question that we explore: Are there tasks that are computationally easier
for one architecture to represent but significantly more difficult for the other one?
Ever since Transformers supplanted LSTMs, there has been significant interest in understanding the
differences in the computational capabilities of the models both theoretically and empirically. On the
one hand, even as Transformers have been widely adopted for building LLMs, several studies found
that they struggled at modeling various formal languages, particularly those that required modular
counting or state-tracking [5, 16, 38]. At the same time, despite substantial effort, it has proven
hard to match the performance of Transformer-based LLMs at scale with recurrent architectures
[15, 45, 21]; in particular, it has been observed that LLMs based on recurrent models struggle on
associative recall or extraction-related tasks [15, 2]. More recently, Arora et al. [2] and Bhattamishra
†

Corresponding Authors: satwik.bmishra, varun.kanade@cs.ox.ac.uk

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

