Span-Based Optimal Sample Complexity for Weakly
Communicating and General Average Reward MDPs

Matthew Zurek
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
matthew.zurek@wisc.edu

Yudong Chen
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
yudong.chen@wisc.edu

Abstract
We study the sample complexity of learning an ε-optimal policy in an averagereward Markov decision process (MDP) under a generative model. For weakly
e SA H2 , where H is
communicating MDPs, we establish the complexity bound O
ε
the span of the bias function of the optimal policy and SA is the cardinality of the
state-action space. Our result is the first that is minimax optimal (up to log factors)
in all parameters S, A, H, and ε, improving on existing work that either assumes
uniformly bounded mixing times for all policies or has suboptimal dependence
on the parameters. We also initiate the study of sample complexity in general
(multichain) average-reward MDPs. We
 argue a new transient time parameter B
e SA B+H
is necessary, establish an O
complexity bound, and prove a matching
ε2
(up to log factors) minimax lower bound. Both results are based on reducing the
average-reward MDP to a discounted MDP, which requires new ideas in the general
setting. To optimally analyze this 
reduction, wedevelop improved 
bounds for
e SA H 2 2 and O
e SA B+H2 2 samples
γ-discounted MDPs, showing that O
(1−γ) ε
(1−γ) ε
suffice to learn ε-optimal policies in weakly communicating and in general MDPs,
respectively.
Both these results circumvent the well-known minimax lower bound

1
e SA
of Ω
(1−γ)3 ε2 for γ-discounted MDPs, and establish a quadratic rather than
cubic horizon dependence for a fixed MDP instance.

1

Introduction

The paradigm of Reinforcement learning (RL) has demonstrated remarkable successes in various
sequential learning and decision-making problems. Empirical successes have motivated extensive
theoretical study of RL algorithms and their fundamental limits. The RL environment is commonly
modeled as a Markov decision process (MDP), where the objective is to find a policy π that maximizes
the expected cumulative
rewards.
Different reward criteria are considered, such as the finite horizon
 PT

P∞
total reward Eπ
R
and
the
infinite horizon total discounted reward Eπ [ t=0 γ t Rt ] with a
t=0 t
discount factor γ < 1. The finite horizon criterion only measures performance for T steps, and the
1
discounted criterion is dominated by rewards from the first 1−γ
time steps. In many situations where
the long-term performance of the policy π is
of
interest,
we
may
prefer to evaluate policies by their
PT −1 
long-run average reward limT →∞ (1/T )Eπ
R
.
t
t=0
A foundational theoretical problem in RL is the sample complexity for learning a near-optimal policy
using a generative model of the MDP [10], meaning the ability to obtain independent samples of the
next state given any initial state and action. For the finite horizon and discounted reward criteria, the
sample complexity of this task has been thoroughly studied (e.g., [2, 3, 15, 19, 1, 12]). However,
despite significant effort (reviewed in Section 1.1), the sample complexity of the average reward
setting is unresolved in existing literature.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

