Flex-MoE: Modeling Arbitrary Modality Combination
via the Flexible Mixture-of-Experts

Sukwon Yun1 , Inyoung Choi2 , Jie Peng3 , Yangfan Wu3 , Jingxuan Bao2 ,
Qiyiwen Zhang2 , Jiayi Xin2 , Qi Long2 , Tianlong Chen1
1

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
2
University of Pennsylvania
3
University of Science and Technology of China
{swyun, tianlong}@cs.unc.edu, {inyoungc, jiayixin}@seas.upenn.edu,
{pengjieb, ustc_wyf}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{jingxuan.bao, qiyiwen.zhang}@pennmedicine.upenn.edu, qlong@upenn.edu

Abstract
Multimodal learning has gained increasing importance across various fields, offering the ability to integrate data from diverse sources such as images, text, and
personalized records, which are frequently observed in medical domains. However,
in scenarios where some modalities are missing, many existing frameworks struggle
to accommodate arbitrary modality combinations, often relying heavily on a single
modality or complete data. This oversight of potential modality combinations
limits their applicability in real-world situations. To address this challenge, we
propose Flex-MoE (Flexible Mixture-of-Experts), a new framework designed to
flexibly incorporate arbitrary modality combinations while maintaining robustness
to missing data. The core idea of Flex-MoE is to first address missing modalities
using a new missing modality bank that integrates observed modality combinations
with the corresponding missing ones. This is followed by a uniquely designed
Sparse MoE framework. Specifically, Flex-MoE first trains experts using samples
with all modalities to inject generalized knowledge through the generalized router
(G-Router). The S-Router then specializes in handling fewer modality combinations by assigning the top-1 gate to the expert corresponding to the observed modality combination. We evaluate Flex-MoE on the ADNI dataset, which encompasses
four modalities in the Alzheimer’s Disease domain, as well as on the MIMIC-IV
dataset. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of Flex-MoE, highlighting its
ability to model arbitrary modality combinations in diverse missing modality scenarios. Code is available at: https://github.com/UNITES-Lab/flex-moe.

1

Introduction

In many fields, including healthcare, language, and vision, multimodal learning [6, 75, 37, 44] has
emerged as a crucial approach for integrating data from multiple sources such as clinical records,
imaging, and genetic data. Multimodal data enables more comprehensive analysis and decisionmaking, offering the potential for improved diagnosis and prediction in various applications [59, 33,
68]. However, a prominent challenge across these domains is the missing modality scenario [76, 60],
where not all modalities are consistently available for every instance due to diverse reasons such as
individualized data collection protocols or the variable availability of certain modalities.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

