SSDiff: Spatial-spectral Integrated Diffusion Model
for Remote Sensing Pansharpening

Yu Zhong†
University of Electronic Science
and Technology of China
yuuzhong1011@gmail.com

Xiao Wu†
University of Electronic Science
and Technology of China
wxwsx1997@gmail.com

Zihan Cao
University of Electronic Science
and Technology of China
iamzihan666@gmail.com

Hong-Xia Dou
Xihua University
hongxiadou1991@126.com

Liang-Jian Deng∗
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
liangjian.deng@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Pansharpening is a significant image fusion technique that merges the spatial
content and spectral characteristics of remote sensing images to generate highresolution multispectral images. Recently, denoising diffusion probabilistic models
have been gradually applied to visual tasks, enhancing controllable image generation through low-rank adaptation (LoRA). In this paper, we introduce a spatialspectral integrated diffusion model for the remote sensing pansharpening task,
called SSDiff, which considers the pansharpening process as the fusion process of
spatial and spectral components from the perspective of subspace decomposition.
Specifically, SSDiff utilizes spatial and spectral branches to learn spatial details
and spectral features separately, then employs a designed alternating projection
fusion module (APFM) to accomplish the fusion. Furthermore, we propose a
frequency modulation inter-branch module (FMIM) to modulate the frequency
distribution between branches. The two components of SSDiff can perform favorably against the APFM when utilizing a LoRA-like branch-wise alternative
fine-tuning method. It refines SSDiff to capture component-discriminating features more sufficiently. Finally, extensive experiments on four commonly used
datasets, i.e., WorldView-3, WorldView-2, GaoFen-2, and QuickBird, demonstrate
the superiority of SSDiff both visually and quantitatively. The code is available at
https://github.com/Z-ypnos/SSdiff_main.

1

Introduction

Due to physical limitations, satellite sensors cannot directly acquire high-resolution multispectral
images (HrMSI). Instead, they can obtain high-resolution panchromatic (PAN) images and lowresolution multispectral images (LrMSI). Pansharpening techniques can merge PAN images with
LrMSI, generating HrMSI that possess both high spatial and spectral resolutions. Pansharpening,
†

Equal contribution.

* Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

