Target-Guided Adversarial Point Cloud Transformer
Towards Recognition Against Real-world Corruptions

1

Jie Wang1 , Tingfa Xu1,† , Lihe Ding2 , Jianan Li1,†
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
https://github.com/Roywangj/APCT

Abstract
Achieving robust 3D perception in the face of corrupted data presents an challenging hurdle within 3D vision research. Contemporary transformer-based point cloud
recognition models, albeit advanced, tend to overfit to specific patterns, consequently undermining their robustness against corruption. In this work, we introduce
the Target-Guided Adversarial Point Cloud Transformer, termed APCT, a novel
architecture designed to augment global structure capture through an adversarial
feature erasing mechanism predicated on patterns discerned at each step during
training. Specifically, APCT integrates an Adversarial Significance Identifier and
a Target-guided Promptor. The Adversarial Significance Identifier, is tasked with
discerning token significance by integrating global contextual analysis, utilizing
a structural salience index algorithm alongside an auxiliary supervisory mechanism. The Target-guided Promptor, is responsible for accentuating the propensity
for token discard within the self-attention mechanism, utilizing the value derived
above, consequently directing the model attention towards alternative segments in
subsequent stages. By iteratively applying this strategy in multiple steps during
training, the network progressively identifies and integrates an expanded array of
object-associated patterns. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
achieves state-of-the-art results on multiple corruption benchmarks.

1

Introduction

3D point cloud recognition has garnered significant interest owing to its promising implications for
robotics and autonomous driving. Prevailing techniques [11, 12, 20, 13] have been predominantly
designed and evaluated on clean data [22, 1], overlooking the extensive corruptions present in realworld scenarios arising from sensor inaccuracies and physical constraints and leading to suboptimal
performance when models are exposed to such conditions. Therefore, enhancing the resilience of
point cloud models against real-world corruption emerges as a paramount yet daunting task.
Due to their elevated performance, existing transformer-based models [4, 15] have emerged as the
mainstream choice. Despite their effectiveness on clean datasets, these methods generally falter
when faced with corrupted data. Upon closer examination, we discerned that prevailing models have
a propensity to overfit to specific patterns (Fig. 1a). Such patterns can degrade in the presence of
real-world corruptions, undermining the model reliability. Relying solely on these localized patterns
for predictions can be fragile, especially with corrupted data. Thus, we theorize that if the model is
encouraged to extract features from a broader region of the object during training, gathering more
diverse perception cues, it would be more resilient, as proved in Fig. 1b. This is because, even if
some local patterns are compromised in corrupted data, the model could still source information from
other intact areas to make accurate predictions.
To address the aforementioned limitation, we present a novel adversarial representation learning
method, named Target-Guided Adversarial Point Cloud Transformer(APCT), for robust 3D perception.
†

Correspondence to: Jianan Li and Tingfa Xu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

