Conformal Inverse Optimization

Bo Lin
University of Toronto
blin@mie.utoronto.ca

Erick Delage
HEC Montréal
Mila – Québec AI Institute
erick.delage@hec.ca

Timothy C. Y. Chan
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
tcychan@mie.utoronto.ca

Abstract
Inverse optimization has been increasingly used to estimate unknown parameters in
an optimization model based on decision data. We show that such a point estimation
is insufficient in a prescriptive setting where the estimated parameters are used
to prescribe new decisions. The prescribed decisions may be of low-quality and
misaligned with human intuition and thus are unlikely to be adopted. To tackle
this challenge, we propose conformal inverse optimization, which seeks to learn an
uncertainty set for the unknown parameters and then solve a robust optimization
model to prescribe new decisions. Under mild assumptions, we show that our
method enjoys provable guarantees on solution quality, as evaluated using both
the ground-truth parameters and the decision maker’s perception of the unknown
parameters. Our method demonstrates strong empirical performance compared to
classic inverse optimization.

1

Introduction

Inverse optimization (IO) is a supervised learning approach that fits parameters in an optimization
model to decision data. The fitted optimization model can then be used to prescribe future decisions.
Such problems naturally arise in AI applications where human preferences are not explicitly given,
and instead need to be inferred from historical decisions. For this pipeline to succeed in practice,
the prescribed decision should not only be of high quality but also align with human intuition
(i.e., perceived to be of high-quality). The latter encourages algorithm adoption (Chen et al., 2023;
Donahue et al., 2023), which is critical in many real-world settings (Liu et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2022).
As an example, rideshare platforms, e.g., Uber and Lyft, provide a shortest-path to the driver at the
start of a trip based on real-time traffic data (Nguyen, 2015). The driver then relies on her perception
of the road network formed through past experience to evaluate the path. The driver may deviate from
the suggested path if it is perceived to be low-quality. Although seasoned drivers are often capable of
identifying a better path due to their tacit knowledge of the road network (Merchán et al., 2022), such
deviations impose operational challenges as it may cause rider safety concerns and affect downstream
decisions, such as arrival time estimation, trip pricing, and rider-driver matching (Hu et al., 2022).
Therefore, the platform may be interested in leveraging historical paths taken by drivers to suggest
high-quality paths for future trips, as evaluated using both the travel time and the driver’s perception.
In this paper, we first show that the classic IO pipeline may generate decisions that are low-quality and
misaligned with human intuition. We next propose conformal IO, which first learns an uncertainty
set from decision data and then solves a robust optimization model with the learned uncertainty set
to prescribe decisions. Finally, we show that the proposed approach has provable guarantees on the
actual and perceived solution quality. Our contributions are as follows.
New framework. We propose a new IO pipeline that integrates i) a novel method to learn uncertainty
sets from decision data and ii) a robust optimization model for decision recommendation.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

