Bisimulation Metrics are Optimal Transport Distances,
and Can be Computed Efficiently

Sergio Calo Anders Jonsson Gergely Neu Ludovic Schwartz
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain

Javier Segovia-Aguas

{sergio.calo,anders.jonsson,gergely.neu,ludovic.schwartz,javier.segovia}@upf.edu

Abstract
We propose a new framework for formulating optimal transport distances between
Markov chains. Previously known formulations studied couplings between the entire joint distribution induced by the chains, and derived solutions via a reduction to
dynamic programming (DP) in an appropriately defined Markov decision process.
This formulation has, however, not led to particularly efficient algorithms so far,
since computing the associated DP operators requires fully solving a static optimal
transport problem, and these operators need to be applied numerous times during
the overall optimization process. In this work, we develop an alternative perspective
by considering couplings between a “flattened” version of the joint distributions
that we call discounted occupancy couplings, and show that calculating optimal
transport distances in the full space of joint distributions can be equivalently formulated as solving a linear program (LP) in this reduced space. This LP formulation
allows us to port several algorithmic ideas from other areas of optimal transport
theory. In particular, our formulation makes it possible to introduce an appropriate
notion of entropy regularization into the optimization problem, which in turn enables us to directly calculate optimal transport distances via a Sinkhorn-like method
we call Sinkhorn Value Iteration (SVI). We show both theoretically and empirically
that this method converges quickly to an optimal coupling, essentially at the same
computational cost of running vanilla Sinkhorn in each pair of states. Along the
way, we point out that our optimal transport distance exactly matches the common
notion of bisimulation metrics between Markov chains, and thus our results also apply to computing such metrics, and in fact our algorithm turns out to be significantly
more efficient than the best known methods developed so far for this purpose.

1

Introduction

Measuring distances between structured objects and sequences is an important problem in a variety
of areas of science. The more structured the objects become, the harder it gets to define appropriate
notions of distances, as good notions of proximity need to take into account the possibly complex
relationships between the constituent parts of each object. The possibility that the objects in question
may be random further complicates the picture, and in such cases it becomes more natural to measure
distances between the underlying joint probability distributions. Within the specific context of
comparing stochastic processes, two natural notions of distance have emerged over the past decades:
the notion of probabilistic bisimulation metrics that takes its root in modal logic and theoretical
computer science [Sangiorgi, 2009, Abate, 2013], and the notion of optimal-transport distances that
originates from probability theory [Villani, 2009, Peyré and Cuturi, 2019]. In this paper, we show
that bisimulation metrics are in fact optimal-transport distances, and we make use of this observation
to derive efficient algorithms for computing distances between stochastic processes.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

