Why the Metric Backbone
Preserves Community Structure

Maximilien Dreveton
EPFL
maximilien.dreveton@epfl.ch

Charbel Chucri
EPFL
charbel.chucri@epfl.ch

Matthias Grossglauser
EPFL
matthias.grossglauser@epfl.ch

Patrick Thiran
EPFL
patrick.thiran@epfl.ch

Abstract
The metric backbone of a weighted graph is the union of all-pairs shortest paths. It
is obtained by removing all edges (u, v) that are not on the shortest path between u
and v. In networks with well-separated communities, the metric backbone tends
to preserve many inter-community edges, because these edges serve as bridges
connecting two communities, but tends to delete many intra-community edges
because the communities are dense. This suggests that the metric backbone would
dilute or destroy the community structure of the network. However, this is not
borne out by prior empirical work, which instead showed that the metric backbone
of real networks preserves the community structure of the original network well.
In this work, we analyze the metric backbone of a broad class of weighted random
graphs with communities, and we formally prove the robustness of the community
structure with respect to the deletion of all the edges that are not in the metric
backbone. An empirical comparison of several graph sparsification techniques
confirms our theoretical finding and shows that the metric backbone is an efficient
sparsifier in the presence of communities.

1

Introduction

Graph clustering partitions the vertex set of a graph into non-overlapping groups, so that the vertices
of each group share some typical pattern or property. For example, each group might be composed
of vertices that interact closely with each other. Graph clustering is one of the main tasks in the
statistical analysis of networks [4, 30].
In many scenarios, the observed pairwise interactions are weighted. In a proximity graph, these
weights measure the degree of similarity between edge endpoints (e.g., frequency of interaction in a
social network), whereas in a distance graph, they measure dissimilarity instead (for example, the
length of segments in a road network or travel times in a flight network). To avoid confusion, we
refer to the weights in a distance graph as costs, so that the cost of a path will be naturally defined as
the sum of the edge costs on this path.1
Distance graphs obtained from real-world data typically violate the triangle inequality. More precisely,
the shortest distance between two vertices in the graph is not always equal to the cost of the direct
edge, but rather equal to the cost of an indirect path via other vertices. For example, the least expensive
1
This additive property does not hold for similarity weights, but a proximity graph can be transformed into a
distance graph by applying an isomorphic non-linear transformation on the weights [36].

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

