PersonalSum: A User-Subjective Guided Personalized
Summarization Dataset for Large Language Models

Lemei Zhang Peng Liu∗ Marcus Tiedemann Oekland Henriksboe
Even W. Lauvrak Jon Atle Gulla Heri Ramampiaro
Department of Computer Science, Norwegian University of Science and Technology
{lemei.zhang, peng.liu, jon.atle.gulla, heri}@ntnu.no

Abstract
With the rapid advancement of Natural Language Processing in recent years, numerous studies have shown that generic summaries generated by Large Language
Models (LLMs) can sometimes surpass those annotated by experts, such as journalists, according to human evaluations. However, there is limited research on whether
these generic summaries meet the individual needs of ordinary people. The biggest
obstacle is the lack of human-annotated datasets from the general public. Existing
work on personalized summarization often relies on pseudo datasets created from
generic summarization datasets or controllable tasks that focus on specific named
entities or other aspects, such as the length and specificity of generated summaries,
collected from hypothetical tasks without the annotators’ initiative. To bridge
this gap, we propose a high-quality, personalized, manually annotated abstractive
summarization dataset called PersonalSum. This dataset is the first to investigate
whether the focus of public readers differs from the generic summaries generated
by LLMs. It includes user profiles, personalized summaries accompanied by source
sentences from given articles, and machine-generated generic summaries along
with their sources. We investigate several personal signals — entities/topics, plot,
and structure of articles—that may affect the generation of personalized summaries
using LLMs in a few-shot in-context learning scenario. Our preliminary results
and analysis indicate that entities/topics are merely one of the key factors that
impact the diverse preferences of users, and personalized summarization remains
a significant challenge for existing LLMs. Our dataset and code are available at
https://github.com/SmartmediaAI/PersonalSum.

1

Introduction

Recent studies have demonstrated significant improvements in generating generic summaries using
Large Language Models (LLMs) like GPT-3.5, achieving state-of-the-art, even human-level, performance on standard summarization benchmarks. However, personalized summarization, which
condenses text to match user preferences while maintaining relevance and non-redundancy remains
largely unexplored.
Kukoleva et al. [1] identified three distinct user reading habits in the news domain: Attentive reading,
where users read the full article attentively, focusing on details, Selective reading, where users focus
only on interesting fragments; and Scanning, where users absorb only the important ideas. User
reading focus and attentive reading time can be achieved by monitoring reading duration and scrolling
depth, or asking users to annotate their interested parts explicitly. However, there are no existing
publicly available resources for research purposes in this area.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

