Learning-to-Cache:
Accelerating Diffusion Transformer via Layer Caching

Xinyin Ma1 Gongfan Fang1 Michael Bi Mi2 Xinchao Wang1∗
National University of Singapore1 Huawei Technologies Ltd.2

(a)
DiT-XL/2

maxinyin@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

(b)
U-ViT-H/2

38.14%
Layers

46.84%
Layers

Figure 1: (a) Generate 512×512 images using DiT-XL/2, sampled by DDIM with 50 NFEs. (b)
Generate 256×256 images using U-ViT-H/2, sampled by DPM-Solver-2 with 50 NFEs.

Abstract
Diffusion Transformers have recently demonstrated unprecedented generative
capabilities for various tasks. The encouraging results, however, come with the cost
of slow inference, since each denoising step requires inference on a transformer
model with a large scale of parameters. In this study, we make an interesting and
somehow surprising observation: the computation of a large proportion of layers in
the diffusion transformer, through introducing a caching mechanism, can be readily
removed even without updating the model parameters. In the case of U-ViT-H/2,
for example, we may remove up to 93.68% of the computation in the cache steps
(46.84% for all steps), with less than 0.01 drop in FID. To achieve this, we introduce
a novel scheme, named Learning-to-Cache (L2C), that learns to conduct caching
in a dynamic manner for diffusion transformers. Specifically, by leveraging the
identical structure of layers in transformers and the sequential nature of diffusion,
we explore redundant computations between timesteps by treating each layer as the
fundamental unit for caching. To address the challenge of the exponential search
space in deep models for identifying layers to cache and remove, we propose a
novel differentiable optimization objective. An input-invariant yet timestep-variant
router is then optimized, which can finally produce a static computation graph.
Experimental results show that L2C largely outperforms samplers such as DDIM
and DPM-Solver, alongside prior cache-based methods at the same inference speed.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

