Modeling Latent Neural Dynamics with Gaussian
Process Switching Linear Dynamical Systems

Amber Hu
Stanford University
amberhu@stanford.edu

David Zoltowski
Stanford University
dzoltow@stanford.edu

Aditya Nair
Caltech & Howard Hughes Medical Institute
adi.nair@caltech.edu

David Anderson
Caltech & Howard Hughes Medical Institute
wuwei@caltech.edu

Lea Duncker∗
Columbia University
ld3149@columbia.edu

Scott Linderman∗
Stanford University
swl1@stanford.edu

Abstract
Understanding how the collective activity of neural populations relates to computation and ultimately behavior is a key goal in neuroscience. To this end, statistical
methods which describe high-dimensional neural time series in terms of lowdimensional latent dynamics have played a fundamental role in characterizing
neural systems. Yet, what constitutes a successful method involves two opposing
criteria: (1) methods should be expressive enough to capture complex nonlinear
dynamics, and (2) they should maintain a notion of interpretability often only warranted by simpler linear models. In this paper, we develop an approach that balances
these two objectives: the Gaussian Process Switching Linear Dynamical System
(gpSLDS). Our method builds on previous work modeling the latent state evolution
via a stochastic differential equation whose nonlinear dynamics are described by a
Gaussian process (GP-SDEs). We propose a novel kernel function which enforces
smoothly interpolated locally linear dynamics, and therefore expresses flexible –
yet interpretable – dynamics akin to those of recurrent switching linear dynamical
systems (rSLDS). Our approach resolves key limitations of the rSLDS such as artifactual oscillations in dynamics near discrete state boundaries, while also providing
posterior uncertainty estimates of the dynamics. To fit our models, we leverage
a modified learning objective which improves the estimation accuracy of kernel
hyperparameters compared to previous GP-SDE fitting approaches. We apply our
method to synthetic data and data recorded in two neuroscience experiments and
demonstrate favorable performance in comparison to the rSLDS.

1

Introduction

Computations in the brain are thought to be implemented through the dynamical evolution of neural
activity. Such computations are typically studied in a controlled experimental setup, where an animal
is engaged in a behavioral task with relatively few relevant variables. Consistent with this, empirical
neural activity has been reported to exhibit many fewer degrees of freedom than there are neurons in
the measured sample during such simple tasks [1]. These observations have driven the use of latent
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

