RefDrop: Controllable Consistency in Image or Video
Generation via Reference Feature Guidance
Jiaojiao Fan
Georgia Tech
sbyebss@gmail.com

Haotian Xue
Georgia Tech
htxue.ai@gatech.edu

Qinsheng Zhang
NVIDIA
qsh.zh27@gmail.com

Yongxin Chen
Georgia Tech
yongchen@gatech.edu

Abstract
There is a rapidly growing interest in controlling consistency across multiple generated images using diffusion models. Among various methods, recent works have
found that simply manipulating attention modules by concatenating features from
multiple reference images provides an efficient approach to enhancing consistency
without fine-tuning. Despite its popularity and success, few studies have elucidated
the underlying mechanisms that contribute to its effectiveness. In this work, we
reveal that the popular approach is a linear interpolation of image self-attention
and cross-attention between synthesized content and reference features, with a
constant rank-1 coefficient. Motivated by this observation, we find that a rank-1
coefficient is not necessary and simplifies the controllable generation mechanism.
The resulting algorithm, which we coin as RefDrop, allows users to control the
influence of reference context in a direct and precise manner. Besides further
enhancing consistency in single-subject image generation, our method also enables more interesting applications, such as the consistent generation of multiple
subjects, suppressing specific features to encourage more diverse content, and
high-quality personalized video generation by boosting temporal consistency. Even
compared with state-of-the-art image-prompt-based generators, such as IP-Adapter,
RefDrop is competitive in terms of controllability and quality while avoiding the
need to train a separate image encoder for feature injection from reference images,
making it a versatile plug-and-play solution for any image or video diffusion model.
Our project webpage is https://sbyebss.github.io/refdrop/.

1

Introduction

Large-scale diffusion models have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in aiding content creation
for artists [43, 7, 3]. Numerous text-to-image models are expediting content production in various
domains, including advertising and art studios. Similarly, video generation models have shown
significant advancements recently [17, 9, 18, 24, 52, 6, 4, 23]. However, enhancing these models to
better support artistic creativity requires improved controllability, particularly in content consistency.
This paper explores consistency from two perspectives: 1) controlling subject consistency across
multiple images, and 2) maintaining subject consistency across multiple frames within a video.
We name a few tasks where the controllable consistency is crucial in AI content generation. In image
generation for storytelling [45, 39, 41, 27] or advertising, content creators often strive to produce
consistent characters, a task that proves challenging with foundational generative models [55].
Personalization approaches based on fine-tuning [50] require a minimum of 5 to 10 images to achieve
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

