Universal In-Context Approximation
By Prompting Fully Recurrent Models

Aleksandar Petrov, Tom A. Lamb, Alasdair Paren, Philip H.S. Torr, Adel Bibi
Department of Engineering Science
University of Oxford
aleks@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Zero-shot and in-context learning enable solving tasks without model fine-tuning,
making them essential for developing generative model solutions. Therefore, it is
crucial to understand whether a pretrained model can be prompted to approximate
any function, i.e., whether it is a universal in-context approximator. While it was
recently shown that transformer models do possess this property, these results rely
on their attention mechanism. Hence, these findings do not apply to fully recurrent
architectures like RNNs, LSTMs, and the increasingly popular SSMs. We demonstrate that RNNs, LSTMs, GRUs, Linear RNNs, and linear gated architectures such
as Mamba and Hawk/Griffin can also serve as universal in-context approximators.
To streamline our argument, we introduce a programming language called LSRL
that compiles to these fully recurrent architectures. LSRL may be of independent
interest for further studies of fully recurrent models, such as constructing interpretability benchmarks. We also study the role of multiplicative gating and observe
that architectures incorporating such gating (e.g., LSTMs, GRUs, Hawk/Griffin)
can implement certain operations more stably, making them more viable candidates
for practical in-context universal approximation.

1

Introduction

Until recently, solving a task with machine learning required training or fine-tuning a model on a
dataset matching the task at hand. However, large foundation models exhibit the ability to solve new
tasks without being specifically fine-tuned or trained for them: often it is sufficient to simply prompt
them in the right way. Prompting has been especially successful because of in-context learning:
the ability to modify the model’s behavior with information provided within the input sequence,
without changing the underlying model parameters (Brown et al., 2020). Yet, we know little about
the theoretical properties of prompting. It is not even clear if there are limits to what can be achieved
with prompting or, conversely, whether it is possible to prompt your way into any behaviour or task.
This can be framed as a universal approximation question. Classically, universal approximation
results show how a class of tractable functions, such as neural networks, approximates another class of
concept functions, e.g., all continuous functions on a bounded domain, with arbitrary accuracy. This
is often done by showing that one can choose model parameters that approximate the target function.
However, in-context learning poses a different challenge as the model parameters are fixed. Instead,
a part of the input (the prompt) is modified to cause the model to approximate the target function.
Hence, we define universal in-context approximation to be the property that there exist fixed weights
such that the resulting model can be prompted to approximate any function from a concept class.
Understanding whether a model can be a universal in-context approximator is especially important as
most commercial models are accessible exclusively via a prompting interface (La Malfa et al., 2023).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

