Promoting Fairness Among Dynamic Agents in
Online-Matching Markets under Known Stationary
Arrival Distributions
Will Ma
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
wm2428@gsb.columbia.edu

Pan Xu
Department of Computer Science
New Jersey Institute of Technology
Newark, NJ 07102
pxu@njit.edu

Abstract
Online (bipartite) matching under known stationary arrivals is a fundamental model
that has been studied extensively with the objective of maximizing the total number
of customers served. We instead study the objective of maximizing the minimum
matching rate across all online types, which is referred to as long-run (individual)
fairness. For Online Matching under long-run Fairness (OM-LF) with a single
offline agent, we show that the first-come-first-serve (FCFS) policy is 1-competitive,
i.e., matching any optimal clairvoyant. For the general case of OM-LF: We present
a sampling algorithm (SAMP) and show that (1) SAMP is of competitiveness of at
least 1 − 1/e and (2) it is asymptotically optimal with competitiveness approaching
one in different regimes when either all offline agents have a sufficiently large
matching capacity, or all online types have a sufficiently large arrival rate, or highly
imbalance between the total offline matching capacity and the number of online
arrivals. To complement the competitive results, we show the following hardness
results for OM-LF: (1) Any non-rejecting policy (matching every arriving online
agent if possible)
√ is no more than 1/2-competitive; (2) Any (randomized) policy is
no more than ( 3 − 1)-competitive; (3) SAMP can be no more than (1 − 1/e)competitive suggesting the tightness of competitive analysis for SAMP. We stress
that all hardness results mentioned here are independent of any benchmarks. We
also consider a few extensions of OM-LF by proposing a few variants of fairness
metrics, including long-run group-level fairness and short-run fairness, and we
devise related algorithms with provable competitive performance.

1

Introduction

In online (bipartite) matching problems, nodes on one side of a bipartite graph are given in advance,
while nodes on the other side arrive one-by-one. We refer to the two sets of nodes as offline and
online agents, respectively. The edges incident to an online agent, which indicate the offline agents
eligible to serve it, are revealed upon its arrival. An online matching algorithm must immediately
serve each arriving agent using up to one eligible and unmatched offline agent; matches once made
cannot be rearranged. The performance of an algorithm is typically evaluated as the total number of
matches made, taking expectations as necessary if there is randomness in the arrivals or the algorithm.
In this paper, we study online matching problems where performance is instead determined by the
fairness in service provided to different online agent types.
Online Matching under Long-Run Fairness (OM-LF). Suppose there is a bipartite graph G =
(I, J, E), where I and J denote the sets of types for offline and online agents, respectively. Here each
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

