Sketched Lanczos uncertainty score: a low-memory
summary of the Fisher information

Marco Miani∗
Technical University of Denmark
mmia@dtu.dk

Lorenzo Beretta∗
Unaffiliated
lorenzo2beretta@gmail.com

Søren Hauberg
Technical University of Denmark
sohau@dtu.dk

Abstract
Current uncertainty quantification is memory and compute expensive, which hinders practical uptake. To counter, we develop S KETCHED L ANCZOS U NCER TAINTY ( SLU ): an architecture-agnostic uncertainty score that can be applied to
pre-trained neural networks with minimal overhead. Importantly, the memory use
of SLU only grows logarithmically with the number of model parameters. We combine Lanczos’ algorithm with dimensionality reduction techniques to compute a
sketch of the leading eigenvectors of a matrix. Applying this novel algorithm to the
Fisher information matrix yields a cheap and reliable uncertainty score. Empirically,
SLU yields well-calibrated uncertainties, reliably detects out-of-distribution examples, and consistently outperforms existing methods in the low-memory regime.

1

Introduction

The best-performing uncertainty quantification methods share the same problem: scaling. Practically
this prevents their use for deep neural networks with high parameter counts. Perhaps, the simplest
way of defining such a score is to independently train several models, perform inference, and check
how consistent predictions are across models. The overhead of the resulting ’Deep Ensemble’
[Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017] notably introduces a multiplicative overhead equal to the ensemble
size. Current approaches aim to reduce the growth in training time costs by quantifying uncertainty
through local information of a single pre-trained model. This approach has shown some success for
methods like Laplace’s approximation [MacKay, 1992, Immer et al., 2021, Khan et al., 2019], SWAG
[Maddox et al., 2019], SCOD [Sharma et al., 2021] or Local Ensembles [Madras et al., 2019]. They
avoid the need to re-train but still have impractical memory needs.
A popular approach to characterizing local information is the empirical Fisher information matrix,
which essentially coincides with the Generalized Gauss-Newton (GGN) matrix [Kunstner et al., 2019].
Unfortunately, for a p-parameter model, the GGN is a p × p matrix, yielding such high memory costs
that it cannot be instantiated for anything but the simplest models. The GGN is, thus, mostly explored
through approximations, e.g. block-diagonal [Botev et al., 2017], Kronecker-factorized [Ritter et al.,
2018a, Lee et al., 2020, Martens and Grosse, 2015] or even diagonal [Ritter et al., 2018b, Miani et al.,
2022]. An alternative heuristic is to only assign uncertainties to a subset of the model parameters
[Daxberger et al., 2021b, Kristiadi et al., 2020], e.g. the last layer.
Instead, we approximate the GGN with a low-rank matrix. A rank-k approximation of the GGN can
be computed using Lanczos algorithm [Madras et al., 2019, Daxberger et al., 2021a] or truncated
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

