AutoPSV: Automated Process-Supervised Verifier

Jianqiao Lu1 , Zhiyang Dou1 , Hongru Wang2 , Zeyu Cao3 ,
Jianbo Dai4 , Yingjia Wan3 , Yunlong Feng5 , Zhijiang Guo3†
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
University of Cambridge 4 University of Edinburgh 5 Independent
jqlu@cs.hku.hk, zg283@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
In this work, we propose a novel method named Automated Process-Supervised
Verifier (AUTO PSV) to enhance the reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs) by automatically annotating the reasoning steps. AUTO PSV begins by
training a verification model on the correctness of final answers, enabling it to generate automatic process annotations. This verification model assigns a confidence
score to each reasoning step, indicating the probability of arriving at the correct
final answer from that point onward. We detect relative changes in the verification’s
confidence scores across reasoning steps to automatically annotate the reasoning
process, enabling error detection even in scenarios where ground truth answers
are unavailable. This alleviates the need for numerous manual annotations or the
high computational costs associated with model-induced annotation approaches.
We experimentally validate that the step-level confidence changes learned by the
verification model trained on the final answer correctness can effectively identify errors in the reasoning steps. We demonstrate that the verification model,
when trained on process annotations generated by AUTO PSV, exhibits improved
performance in selecting correct answers from multiple LLM-generated outputs.
Notably, we achieve substantial improvements across five datasets in mathematics and commonsense reasoning. The source code of AUTO PSV is available at
https://github.com/rookie-joe/AutoPSV.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have shown impressive performance on various reasoning tasks [1–
4]. Prior efforts primarily focus on specific prompting techniques, such as few-shot prompting
with intermediate steps and augmented demonstrations [5–8]. While these methods have shown
promise, their effectiveness is often task-specific, and designing prompts can be labor-intensive,
leading to inconsistent results [9, 10]. Another approach to improve reasoning in LLMs is through
instruction tuning or knowledge distillation [11–14]. These methods typically involve fine-tuning
LLMs and require a large set of examples annotated with chain-of-thoughts (CoT; [5]). However,
these approaches can be resource-intensive and may not always produce reliable results.
To address these challenges, verification techniques have emerged as a promising solution [15, 16].
Verification models are trained to evaluate and potentially correct the reasoning process generated
by LLMs. This approach aims to mitigate the risk of relying solely on the top-1 result, which may
not always be reliable [17, 18]. By reranking candidate responses, verification models can ensure
higher accuracy and consistency in LLM outputs, and provide valuable feedback for improving
LLMs [19, 20] further.
†

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

