Learning predictable and robust neural
representations by straightening image sequences

Xueyan Niu1

Cristina Savin1,2

Eero P. Simoncelli1,3

1

Center for Neural Science, New York University
Center for Data Science, New York University
3
Center for Computational Neuroscience, Flatiron Institute
2

{xn314, csavin, eero.simoncelli}@nyu.edu

Abstract
Prediction is a fundamental capability of all living organisms, and has been proposed as an objective for learning sensory representations. Recent work demonstrates that in primate visual systems, prediction is facilitated by neural representations that follow straighter temporal trajectories than their initial photoreceptor
encoding, which allows for prediction by linear extrapolation. Inspired by these
experimental findings, we develop a self-supervised learning (SSL) objective that
explicitly quantifies and promotes straightening. We demonstrate the power of
this objective in training deep feedforward neural networks on smoothly-rendered
synthetic image sequences that mimic commonly-occurring properties of natural
videos. The learned model contains neural embeddings that are predictive, but
also factorize the geometric, photometric, and semantic attributes of objects. The
representations also prove more robust to noise and adversarial attacks compared
to previous SSL methods that optimize for invariance to random augmentations.
Moreover, these beneficial properties can be transferred to other training procedures
by using the straightening objective as a regularizer, suggesting a broader utility of
straightening as a principle for robust unsupervised learning.

1

Introduction

All organisms make predictions, and their survival generally depends on the accuracy of these
predictions. In simple organisms, these predictions are reflexive and operate over short time scales
(e.g., moving toward or away from light, heat, or food sources). In more complex organisms,
they involve internal state (memories, plans, emotions) and operate over much longer timescales.
Prediction has the potential to provide an organizing principle for overall brain function, and a
source of inspiration for learning representations in artificial systems. However, natural visual scenes
evolve according to highly nonlinear dynamics that make prediction difficult. Recent experiments –
both perceptual (in humans) and neurophysiological (in macaques) – indicate that the visual system
transforms these complex pixel dynamics into straighter temporal trajectories [22, 23]. As an
alternative to full temporal prediction, straight representations facilitate predictability through linear
extrapolations (Fig. 1A, red arrows). Yet, the utility of straightening as a learning principle for
organizing representations remains underexplored.
Here, we ask whether straightening is sufficiently powerful to be used as a primary objective in
self-supervised learning (SSL). Our contributions are as follows:
• We developed an SSL objective function that aims to straighten spatio-temporal visual inputs.
We demonstrated on simulated data that this objective, coupled with a whitening regularizer
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

