MARVEL: Multidimensional Abstraction and
Reasoning through Visual Evaluation and Learning

Yifan Jiang1∗
Jiarui Zhang1∗ Kexuan Sun1∗ Zhivar Sourati1
Kian Ahrabian1 Kaixin Ma2 Filip Ilievski3 Jay Pujara1
1
Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California
2
Tencent AI Lab, Bellevue, WA
3
Department of Computer Science, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
{yjiang44,jzhang37,kexuansu,souratih,ahrabian}@usc.edu
kaixinma@global.tencent.com , f.ilievski@vu.nl, jpujara@isi.edu

Abstract
While multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) have shown significant
progress across popular visual reasoning benchmarks, whether they possess abstract
visual reasoning abilities remains an open question. Similar to the Sudoku puzzles,
abstract visual reasoning (AVR) problems require finding high-level patterns (e.g.,
repetition constraints on numbers) that control the input shapes (e.g., digits) in a
specific task configuration (e.g., matrix). However, existing AVR benchmarks only
consider a limited set of patterns (addition, conjunction), input shapes (rectangle,
square), and task configurations (3 × 3 matrices). And they fail to capture all
abstract reasoning patterns in human cognition necessary for addressing real-world
tasks, such as geometric properties and object boundary understanding in realworld navigation. To evaluate MLLMs’ AVR abilities systematically, we introduce
MARVEL founded on the core knowledge system in human cognition, a multidimensional AVR benchmark with 770 puzzles composed of six core knowledge
patterns, geometric and abstract shapes, and five different task configurations. To
inspect whether the model performance is grounded in perception or reasoning,
MARVEL complements the standard AVR question with perception questions in
a hierarchical evaluation framework. We conduct comprehensive experiments on
MARVEL with ten representative MLLMs in zero-shot and few-shot settings. Our
experiments reveal that all MLLMs show near-random performance on MARVEL,
with significant performance gaps (40%) compared to humans across all patterns
and task configurations. Further analysis of perception questions reveals that
MLLMs struggle to comprehend the visual features (near-random performance).
Although closed-source MLLMs, such as GPT-4V, show a promising understanding
of reasoning patterns (on par with humans) after adding textual descriptions, this
advantage is hindered by their weak perception abilities. We release our entire
code and dataset at https://github.com/1171-jpg/MARVEL_AVR.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in novel training pipelines, computational resources, and data sources have enabled
multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) [21, 49, 37, 16, 8, 10] to show strong visual reasoning
ability in tasks that require combining both visual and textual cues [64], such as visual question
answering [7, 22] and visual commonsense reasoning [70, 76]. These tasks are typically under
real-world settings [40]. On the other hand, abstract visual reasoning (AVR) [27, 77] focuses on
* Authors contributed equally
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

