Tight Bounds for Learning RUMs from Small Slates

Flavio Chierichetti
Sapienza University of Rome

Mirko Giacchini
Sapienza University of Rome

flavio@di.uniroma1.it

giacchini@di.uniroma1.it

Ravi Kumar
Google, Mountain View

Alessandro Panconesi
Sapienza University of Rome

Andrew Tomkins
Google, Mountain View

ravi.k53@gmail.com

ale@di.uniroma1.it

atomkins@gmail.com

Abstract
A Random Utility Model (RUM) is a classical model of user behavior defined by a
distribution over Rn . A user, presented with a subset of {1, . . . , n}, will select the
item of the subset with the highest utility, according to a utility vector drawn from
the specified distribution. In practical settings, the subset is often of small size, as
in the “ten blue links” of web search.
In this paper, we consider a learning setting with complete√information on user
choices from subsets of size at most k. We show that k = Θ( n) is both necessary
and sufficient to predict the distribution of all user choices with an arbitrarily small,
constant error.
Based on the upper bound, we obtain new algorithms for approximate RUM
learning and variations thereof. Furthermore, we employ our lower bound for
approximate RUM learning to derive lower bounds to fractional extensions of the
well-studied k-deck and trace reconstruction problems.

1

Introduction

In many common settings, both online and offline, users select from a set of available candidates:
cars on a dealer’s lot; songs on a streaming service; movies in a Netflix carousel of choices; and so
forth. Often, it is unrealistic to offer the user the entire universe of items. No car dealership has every
new and used car ever produced. Likewise, recommendation services have enormous catalogs of
songs, products, movies, etc, and must carefully curate a more manageable subset of recommended
items that will fit within the constraints of the user interface. Thus, user feedback often arrives as a
choice from slates of items of a certain standard cardinality—think of “ten blue links” in web search
as the classical example.
Random Utility Models (commonly called RUMs) have been the standard mathematical model for
studying user choices over subsets of a universe of items. RUMs are the subject of many decades of
study, and the centerpiece of the 2000 Nobel prize in economics. The model family is straightforward:
a RUM operates over a universe U of items, with |U | = n, and is characterized by a distribution over
Rn . A user draws from this distribution to generate a vector specifying the utility of each item of
U . The user is offered a subset of U called a slate, and must select a single item from the slate; the
user behaves rationally by selecting the available item of the highest utility. The winning distribution
of the slate is a probability distribution over the items of the slate representing the likelihood (over
draws from the utility distribution) that a particular item is selected. To learn a RUM, an algorithm is
given a training set of examples of slates with their winning distributions, and must then guess the
winning distributions of a new test set of slates.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

