DisC-GS: Discontinuity-aware Gaussian Splatting

Haoxuan Qu ∗
Lancaster University
U.K.
h.qu5@lancaster.ac.uk

Zhuoling Li *
Lancaster University
U.K.
z.li81@lancaster.ac.uk

Hossein Rahmani
Lancaster University
U.K.
h.rahmani@lancaster.ac.uk

Jun Liu †
Lancaster University
U.K.
j.liu81@lancaster.ac.uk

Yujun Cai
University of Queensland
Australia
vanora.caiyj@gmail.com

Abstract
Recently, Gaussian Splatting, a method that represents a 3D scene as a collection
of Gaussian distributions, has gained significant attention in addressing the task
of novel view synthesis. In this paper, we highlight a fundamental limitation of
Gaussian Splatting: its inability to accurately render discontinuities and boundaries
in images due to the continuous nature of Gaussian distributions. To address
this issue, we propose a novel framework enabling Gaussian Splatting to perform
discontinuity-aware image rendering. Additionally, we introduce a Bézier-boundary
gradient approximation strategy within our framework to keep the “differentiability”
of the proposed discontinuity-aware rendering process. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the efficacy of our framework.

1

Introduction

Novel view synthesis aims to generate images accurately from novel viewpoints in a captured 3D
scene. Its significance spans across diverse applications, such as autonomous driving [45], virtual
reality [14], and 3D content generation [42]. Recently, for better tackling novel view synthesis,
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [36] and a variety of NeRF-based methods [3, 4] have been proposed,
which represent 3D scenes in an implicit manner as neural radiance fields. However, their general
reliance on a heavy volume rendering mechanism often results in slow rendering speeds [30, 13],
limiting their practicality across real-world applications. While some methods [18, 19] have proposed
to accelerate the rendering process of NeRF from different perspectives, they often achieve this at
the expense of noticeably compromising the quality of the generated images [49], which is evidently
undesirable.
More recently, Gaussian Splatting [30], which explicitly represents the 3D scene as a collection
of Gaussian distributions, has been proposed as an appealing alternative to NeRF. Specifically,
rather than generating novel-view images through the time-consuming process of volume rendering,
Gaussian Splatting enables images from novel viewpoints to be generated by simply splatting
(projecting) [53, 54] these Gaussian distributions onto the image plane. By doing so, Gaussian
Splatting achieves real-time rendering of novel-view images, while maintaining its rendered images
to be of competitively high visual quality compared to NeRF-rendered ones. Due to its compelling
capability, Gaussian Splatting has received lots of research attention [26, 13, 42, 49, 12, 21, 25].
∗
†

Both authors contributed equally to the work.
Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

