Tighter Convergence Bounds for Shuffled SGD
via Primal-Dual Perspective

Xufeng Cai∗
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
xcai74@wisc.edu

Cheuk Yin Lin∗
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
cylin@cs.wisc.edu

Jelena Diakonikolas
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
jelena@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is perhaps the most prevalent optimization
method in modern machine learning. Contrary to the empirical practice of sampling
from the datasets without replacement and with (possible) reshuffling at each epoch,
the theoretical counterpart of SGD usually relies on the assumption of sampling
with replacement. It is only very recently that SGD using sampling without
replacement – shuffled SGD – has been analyzed with matching upper and lower
bounds. However, we observe that those bounds are too pessimistic to explain
often superior empirical performance of data permutations (sampling without
replacement) over vanilla counterparts (sampling with replacement) on machine
learning problems. Through fine-grained analysis in the lens of primal-dual cyclic
coordinate methods and the introduction of novel smoothness parameters, we
present several results for shuffled SGD on smooth and non-smooth convex losses,
where our novel analysis framework provides tighter convergence bounds over all
popular shuffling schemes (IG, SO, and RR). Notably, our new bounds predict
faster
√ convergence than existing bounds in the literature – by up to a factor of
O( n), mirroring benefits from tighter convergence bounds using component
smoothness parameters in randomized coordinate methods. Lastly, we numerically
demonstrate on common machine learning datasets that our bounds are indeed
much tighter, thus offering a bridge between theory and practice.

1

Introduction

Originally proposed in [38], SGD has been broadly studied in the machine learning literature due to
its effectiveness in large-scale settings, where full gradient computations are often computationally
prohibitive. When applied to unconstrained finite-sum problems
n

min f (x), where f (x) :=

x∈Rd

1X
fi (x),
n i=1

(P)

SGD performs the update xt = xt−1 − η∇fit (xt−1 ) for it ∈ [n] ([n] := {1, . . . , n}), in each
iteration t. Traditional theoretical analysis for SGD builds upon the assumption of sampling it ∈ [n]
with replacement according to a fixed distribution p = (p1 , . . . , pn )⊤ over [n], which leads to
* Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

