Diffusion4D: Fast Spatial-temporal Consistent
4D Generation via Video Diffusion Models
Hanwen Liang1∗, Yuyang Yin2∗ , Dejia Xu3 , Hanxue Liang4 ,
Zhangyang Wang3 , Konstantinos N. Plataniotis1 , Yao Zhao2 , Yunchao Wei2 †
1
University of Toronto, 2 Beijing Jiaotong University,
3
University of Texas at Austin, 4 University of Cambridge

Abstract
The availability of large-scale multimodal datasets and advancements in diffusion
models have significantly accelerated progress in 4D content generation. Most
prior approaches rely on multiple images or video diffusion models, utilizing score
distillation sampling for optimization or generating pseudo novel views for direct
supervision. However, these methods are hindered by slow optimization speeds
and multi-view inconsistency issues. Spatial and temporal consistency in 4D
geometry has been extensively explored respectively in 3D-aware diffusion models
and traditional monocular video diffusion models. Building on this foundation, we
propose a strategy to migrate the temporal consistency in video diffusion models
to the spatial-temporal consistency required for 4D generation. Specifically, we
present a novel framework, Diffusion4D, for efficient and scalable 4D content
generation. Leveraging a meticulously curated dynamic 3D dataset, we develop a
4D-aware video diffusion model capable of synthesizing orbital views of dynamic
3D assets. To control the dynamic strength of these assets, we introduce a 3Dto-4D motion magnitude metric as guidance. Additionally, we propose a novel
motion magnitude reconstruction loss and 3D-aware classifier-free guidance to
refine the learning and generation of motion dynamics. After obtaining orbital
views of the 4D asset, we perform explicit 4D construction with Gaussian splatting
in a coarse-to-fine manner. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
surpasses prior state-of-the-art techniques in terms of generation efficiency and
4D geometry consistency across various prompt modalities. Our project page is
https://vita-group.github.io/Diffusion4D.

1

Introduction

The availability of internet-scale image-text-video datasets, coupled with progress in diffusion model
techniques [37, 32, 31], has propelled significant advancements in generating diverse and high-quality
visual content, including images, videos, and 3D assets [23, 13, 19, 34, 6, 48, 2]. These advancements
have further fostered much progress in the realm of 4D content generation [47, 16, 51, 1, 11, 30,
36, 7, 52], which has gained widespread attention across both research and industrial domains. The
ability to generate high-quality 4D content is key to various applications, ranging from the artistic
realms of animation and film production to the dynamic worlds of augmented reality.
However, generating high-quality 4D content efficiently and consistently remains a significant
challenge. ➊ Due to the scarcity of large-scale multi-view consistent 4D datasets, earlier 4D synthesis
works [1, 57, 36] borrow appearance and motion priors from pretrained image- or video-diffusion
models, and leverage score distillation sampling (SDS) [28] for optimization. This strategy is
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

