A scalable generative model for dynamical system
reconstruction from neuroimaging data

Eric Volkmann1,2,∗ , Alena Brändle1,3,4,∗ , Daniel Durstewitz1,3,4,† , Georgia Koppe3,5,6,†
1

Department of Theoretical Neuroscience, Central Institute of Mental Health (CIMH),
Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany
2
Institute for Machine Learning, Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria
3
Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany
4
Faculty of Physics and Astronomy, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany
5
Hector Institute for AI in Psychiatry & Dept. for Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, CIMH
6
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany
∗,†
These authors contributed equally

Abstract
Data-driven inference of the generative dynamics underlying a set of observed
time series is of growing interest in machine learning and the natural sciences. In
neuroscience, such methods promise to alleviate the need to handcraft models based
on biophysical principles and allow to automatize the inference of inter-individual
differences in brain dynamics. Recent breakthroughs in training techniques for
state space models (SSMs) specifically geared toward dynamical systems (DS)
reconstruction (DSR) enable to recover the underlying system including its geometrical (attractor) and long-term statistical invariants from even short time series.
These techniques are based on control-theoretic ideas, like modern variants of
teacher forcing (TF), to ensure stable loss gradient propagation while training.
However, as it currently stands, these techniques are not directly applicable to data
modalities where current observations depend on an entire history of previous states
due to a signal’s filtering properties, as common in neuroscience (and physiology
more generally). Prominent examples are the blood oxygenation level dependent
(BOLD) signal in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) or Ca2+ imaging
data. Such types of signals render the SSM’s decoder model non-invertible, a
requirement for previous TF-based methods. Here, exploiting the recent success of
control techniques for training SSMs, we propose a novel algorithm that solves this
problem and scales exceptionally well with model dimensionality and filter length.
We demonstrate its efficiency in reconstructing dynamical systems, including their
state space geometry and long-term temporal properties, from just short BOLD
time series.

1

Introduction

Models and theories based on dynamical systems (DS) concepts have a long tradition in computational
neuroscience in accounting for physiological phenomena and computational processes of the brain [74,
53, 33, 23]. Constructing such models from first principles (biophysics) is time-consuming and hard,
and utilizing them to account for inter-individual differences in brain dynamics, when model settings
need to be personalized, is even more challenging. Yet, constructing valid models of the brain’s
functional dynamics is immensely important, not only for understanding the neurocomputational
basis of inter-individual differences in cognitive and emotional style [23], but also when aiming at
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

