Self-Consuming Generative Models with Curated
Data Provably Optimize Human Preferences

Damien Ferbach1,2∗, Quentin Bertrand1 , Avishek Joey Bose1,3 , Gauthier Gidel1,4
1
Mila, Université de Montréal 2 Ecole Normale Supérieure de Paris
3
University of Oxford, 4 Canada CIFAR AI Chair

Abstract
The rapid progress in generative models has resulted in impressive leaps in generation quality, blurring the lines between synthetic and real data. Web-scale datasets
are now prone to the inevitable contamination by synthetic data, directly impacting the training of future generated models. Already, some theoretical results on
self-consuming generative models (a.k.a., iterative retraining) have emerged in
the literature, showcasing that either model collapse or stability could be possible
depending on the fraction of generated data used at each retraining step. However,
in practice, synthetic data is often subject to human feedback and curated by users
before being used and uploaded online. For instance, many interfaces of popular
text-to-image generative models, such as Stable Diffusion or Midjourney, produce
several variations of an image for a given query which can eventually be curated
by the users. In this paper, we theoretically study the impact of data curation
on iterated retraining of generative models and show that it can be seen as an
implicit preference optimization mechanism. However, unlike standard preference
optimization, the generative model does not have access to the reward function or
negative samples needed for pairwise comparisons. Moreover, our study doesn’t
require access to the density function, only to samples. We prove that, if the data
is curated according to a reward model, then the expected reward of the iterative
retraining procedure is maximized. We further provide theoretical results on the
stability of the retraining loop when using a positive fraction of real data at each
step. Finally, we conduct illustrative experiments on both synthetic datasets and
on CIFAR10 showing that such a procedure ampliﬁes biases of the reward model.

1

Introduction

Today state-of-the-art generative models can produce multi-modal generations virtually indistinguishable from human-created content, like text (Achiam et al., 2023), images (Stability AI, 2023),
audio (Borsos et al., 2023), or videos (Villegas et al., 2022; Brooks et al., 2024). The democratization of these powerful models by open-sourcing their weights (Stability AI, 2023; Jiang et al., 2023;
Touvron et al., 2023) or allowing public inference (Ramesh et al., 2021; Midjourney, 2023; Achiam
et al., 2023) paves the way to creating synthetic content at an unprecedented scale—the results inevitably populate the Web. In particular, existing datasets are already composed of synthetic data
such as JourneyDB (Pan et al., 2023) and SAC (Pressman et al., 2022). Moreover, Alemohammad
et al. (2024, Fig. 2) showed LAION-5B (Schuhmann et al., 2022), a large-scale Web-crawled dataset
used to train future generative models, already contains synthetically generated images.
There is strong evidence that the synthetic data on the web has been, to a large extent, curated
by human users. For instance, the LAION-Aesthetics datasets contains synthetically generated
∗

Corresponding author: ferbach.damien@gmail.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

