Thought of Search: Planning with Language Models
Through The Lens of Efficiency

Michael Katz
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
michael.katz1@ibm.com

Harsha Kokel
IBM Almaden Research Center
San Jose, CA 95120
harsha.kokel@ibm.com

Kavitha Srinivas
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
kavitha.srinivas@ibm.com

Shirin Sohrabi
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
ssohrab@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Among the most important properties of algorithms investigated in computer
science are soundness, completeness, and complexity. These properties, however,
are rarely analyzed for the vast collection of recently proposed methods for planning
with large language models. In this work, we alleviate this gap. We analyse these
properties of using LLMs for planning and highlight that recent trends abandon both
soundness and completeness for the sake of inefficiency. We propose a significantly
more efficient approach that can, at the same time, maintain both soundness and
completeness. We exemplify on four representative search problems, comparing to
the LLM-based solutions from the literature that attempt to solve these problems.
We show that by using LLMs to produce the code for the search components we
can solve the entire datasets with 100% accuracy with only a few calls to the
LLM. In contrast, the compared approaches require hundreds of thousands of
calls and achieve significantly lower accuracy. We argue for a responsible use of
compute resources; urging research community to investigate sound and complete
LLM-based approaches that uphold efficiency.

1

Introduction

Recent work has addressed the issue of planning in Large Language Models (LLMs), spurred by
their abilities in natural language tasks. The approaches vary widely from giving a planning problem
to an LLM and asking it to output an entire plan to asking an LLM to plan step by step, including
backtracking. Roughly, these approaches can be partitioned into two sets. The first exemplifies yet
another capability of language models, while the second aims at presenting practical tools for solving
planning problems. In the latter case, however, since planning problems are often computationally
hard, it is crucial to understand the properties and the complexity of the algorithms proposed.
The purpose of our work is precisely that. Going over a collection of recent methods for planning
with large language models, we analyse the most important properties of the proposed methods
such as soundness and completeness. We find all these methods to be neither sound nor complete.
We further investigate the computational efficiency of these methods in terms of the number of
invocations of their most expensive routine – LLM evaluation. From a pragmatic perspective, the
cost of LLM evaluations is significant, either in terms of GPU resources, or expensive API calls to
hosted LLMs. We find that abandoning the soundness and completeness does not provide any benefit
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

