On the Ability of Developers’ Training Data
Preservation of Learnware
Hao-Yi Lei, Zhi-Hao Tan, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{leihy, tanzh, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
The learnware paradigm aims to enable users to leverage numerous existing welltrained models instead of building machine learning models from scratch. In
this paradigm, developers worldwide can submit their well-trained models spontaneously into a learnware dock system, and the system helps developers generate
specification for each model to form a learnware. As the key component, a specification should characterize the capabilities of the model, enabling it to be adequately
identified and reused, while preserving the developer’s original data. Recently, the
RKME (Reduced Kernel Mean Embedding) specification was proposed and most
commonly utilized. This paper provides a theoretical analysis of RKME specification about its preservation ability for developer’s training data. By modeling it
as a geometric problem on manifolds and utilizing tools from geometric analysis,
we prove that the RKME specification is able to disclose none of the developer’s
original data and possesses robust defense against common inference attacks, while
preserving sufficient information for effective learnware identification.

1

Introduction

Various machine learning models have been applied into various aspects of modern life successfully [Butler et al., 2018, Jumper et al., 2021]. In conventional machine learning paradigm, developing
a high-quality model for a new task from scratch requires a substantial amount of labeled data, expertise, and computational resources, while it is ideal if the solution of the new task can be built based on
reusing existing models. Generally, source data is crucial for transferring and reusing existing models,
however, concerns over data privacy and proprietary often hinder the sharing among developers.
The Learnware paradigm [Zhou, 2016, Zhou and Tan, 2024] offers a systematical way enabling users
to build a new machine learning solution by exploiting existing well-trained models, rather than
building a model from scratch. A learnware is a well-trained machine learning model facilitated with
a specification, which characterizes the ability and specialty of the model to some degree, enabling
the model to be adequately reused for new users without access to the original data used to train
the model by its developer. Developers all over the world can submit their trained models into
a learnware dock system spontaneously, and the system helps developers generate specifications,
without access to the developer’s training data. When a user wants to tackle her learning task, instead
of starting from scratch, she can submit her requirement to the learnware dock system, which will
then identify and return helpful learnware(s) to the user to reuse, such that the user can get a better
performance than using her own data to train a model from scratch. Note that developers generally
need to preserve their training data. To realize this attractive vision, the key challenge is: To solve new
tasks, how to identify and even reassemble a few helpful models from the huge amount of learnwares
accommodated in the dock system, without accessing each developer’s training data?
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

