Loss landscape Characterization of
Neural Networks without Over-Parametrization
Rustem Islamov1 Niccoló Ajroldi2 Antonio Orvieto2,3,4 Aurelien Lucchi1
1

University of Basel

2

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
4
Tübingen AI Center

3

ELLIS Institute Tübingen

Abstract
Optimization methods play a crucial role in modern machine learning, powering the
remarkable empirical achievements of deep learning models. These successes are
even more remarkable given the complex non-convex nature of the loss landscape
of these models. Yet, ensuring the convergence of optimization methods requires
specific structural conditions on the objective function that are rarely satisfied in
practice. One prominent example is the widely recognized Polyak-Łojasiewicz
(PL) inequality, which has gained considerable attention in recent years. However,
validating such assumptions for deep neural networks entails substantial and often
impractical levels of over-parametrization. In order to address this limitation,
we propose a novel class of functions that can characterize the loss landscape of
modern deep models without requiring extensive over-parametrization and can
also include saddle points. Crucially, we prove that gradient-based optimizers
possess theoretical guarantees of convergence under this assumption. Finally, we
validate the soundness of our new function class through both theoretical analysis
and empirical experimentation across a diverse range of deep learning models.

1

Introduction

The strides in empirical progress achieved by deep neural networks over the past decade have been
truly remarkable. Central to the triumph of these techniques lies the effectiveness of optimization
methods, which is particularly noteworthy given the non-convex nature of the objective functions
under consideration. Worst-case theoretical results point to a pessimistic view since even a degree
four polynomial can be NP-hard to optimize [30] and the loss landscape of some neural networks are
known to include saddle points or bad local minima [6, 70, 88].
Yet, empirical evidence has shown that gradient-based optimizers – including SGD, AdaGrad [21]
and Adam [39] among many others – can effectively optimize the loss of modern deep-learning-based
models. While some have pointed to the ability of gradient-based optimizers to deal with potentially
complex landscapes, e.g. escaping saddle points [36, 17], another potential explanation is that the
loss landscape itself is less complex than previously assumed [27, 51].
Some key factors in this success include the choice of architecture [5, 48, 40, 18], as well as the
over-parametrization [73, 12, 50, 51]. In the well-known infinite-width limit [86, 35, 32], neural
networks are known to exhibit simple landscapes [49]. However, practical networks operate in a
finite range, which still leaves a lot of uncertainty regarding the nature of the loss landscape. This is
especially important given that the convergence guarantees of gradient-based optimizers are derived
by assuming some specific structure on the objective function [37, 79, 71]. Consequently, an essential
theoretical endeavor involves examining the class of functions that neural networks can represent.
In this work, we present a new class of functions that satisfy a newly proposed α-β-condition (see
Eq. (2)). We theoretically and empirically demonstrate that these functions effectively characterize
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

