Partial Structure Discovery is Sufficient for
No-regret Learning in Causal Bandits

Muhammad Qasim Elahi
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
elahi0@purdue.edu

Mahsa Ghasemi
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
mahsa@purdue.edu

Murat Kocaoglu
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University
mkocaoglu@purdue.edu

Abstract
Causal knowledge about the relationships among decision variables and a reward
variable in a bandit setting can accelerate the learning of an optimal decision.
Current works often assume the causal graph is known, which may not always
be available a priori. Motivated by this challenge, we focus on the causal bandit
problem in scenarios where the underlying causal graph is unknown and may
include latent confounders. While intervention on the parents of the reward node
is optimal in the absence of latent confounders, this is not necessarily the case in
general. Instead, one must consider a set of possibly optimal arms/interventions,
each being a special subset of the ancestors of the reward node, making causal
discovery beyond the parents of the reward node essential. For regret minimization,
we identify that discovering the full causal structure is unnecessary; however, no
existing work provides the necessary and sufficient components of the causal graph.
We formally characterize the set of necessary and sufficient latent confounders
one needs to detect or learn to ensure that all possibly optimal arms are identified
correctly. We also propose a randomized algorithm for learning the causal graph
with a limited number of samples, providing a sample complexity guarantee for
any desired confidence level. In the causal bandit setup, we propose a two-stage
approach. In the first stage, we learn the induced subgraph on ancestors of the
reward, along with a necessary and sufficient subset of latent confounders, to
construct the set of possibly optimal arms. We show that for our proposed algorithm,
the number of intervention samples required to learn the set of possibly optimal
arms scales polynomially with respect to the number of nodes. The second phase
involves the application of a standard bandit algorithm, such as the UCB algorithm.
We also establish a regret bound for our two-phase approach, which is sublinear in
the number of rounds.

1

Introduction

Causal bandits have been a topic of interest since their inception and have been studied in various
contexts [1]. The authors assumed precise knowledge of the causal graph and the impact of interventions or actions on the parents of the reward node. Subsequently, there has been a flurry of
research on causal bandits [2, 3, 4]. The primary limitation of the majority of existing works on causal
bandits is their assumption of full knowledge of the causal graph, which is often impractical for many
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

