Copycats: the many lives of a publicly available
medical imaging dataset

Amelia Jiménez-Sánchez1 Natalia-Rozalia Avlona2 Dovile Juodelyte1 Théo Sourget1
Caroline Vang-Larsen1 Anna Rogers1 Hubert Dariusz Zaj ˛
ac2 Veronika Cheplygina1
1
IT University of Copenhagen 2 University of Copenhagen
{amji,vech}@itu.dk

Abstract
Medical Imaging (MI) datasets are fundamental to artificial intelligence in healthcare. The accuracy, robustness, and fairness of diagnostic algorithms depend on
the data (and its quality) used to train and evaluate the models. MI datasets used
to be proprietary, but have become increasingly available to the public, including
on community-contributed platforms (CCPs) like Kaggle or HuggingFace. While
open data is important to enhance the redistribution of data’s public value, we find
that the current CCP governance model fails to uphold the quality needed and
recommended practices for sharing, documenting, and evaluating datasets. In this
paper, we conduct an analysis of publicly available machine learning datasets on
CCPs, discussing datasets’ context, and identifying limitations and gaps in the
current CCP landscape. We highlight differences between MI and computer vision
datasets, particularly in the potentially harmful downstream effects from poor adoption of recommended dataset management practices. We compare the analyzed
datasets across several dimensions, including data sharing, data documentation,
and maintenance. We find vague licenses, lack of persistent identifiers and storage,
duplicates, and missing metadata, with differences between the platforms. Our
research contributes to efforts in responsible data curation and AI algorithms for
healthcare.

1

Introduction

Datasets are fundamental to the fields of machine learning (ML) and computer vision (CV), from
interpreting performance metrics and conclusions of research papers to assessing adverse impacts of
algorithms on individuals, groups, and society. Within these fields, medical imaging (MI) datasets
are especially important to the safe realization of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in healthcare. Although
MI datasets share certain similarities to general CV datasets, they also possess distinctive properties,
and treating them as equivalent can lead to various harmful effects. In particular, we highlight three
properties of MI datasets: (i) de-identification is required for patient-derived data; (ii) since multiple
images can belong to one patient, data splits should clearly differentiate images from each patient; and
(iii) metadata containing crucial information such as demographics or hospital scanner is necessary,
as models without this information could lead to inaccurate and biased results.
In the past, MI datasets were frequently proprietary, confined to particular institutions, and stored
in private repositories. In this particular setting, there is a pressing need for alternative models of
data sharing, documentation, and governance. Within this context, the emergence of CommunityContributed Platforms (CCPs) presented a potential for the public sharing of medical datasets.
Nowadays, more MI datasets have become publicly available and are hosted on open platforms such
as grand-challenges1 , or CCP - including companies like Kaggle or HuggingFace.
1

https://grand-challenge.org

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

