EnsIR: An Ensemble Algorithm for Image Restoration
via Gaussian Mixture Models
Shangquan Sun1,2
Wenqi Ren3,4∗
Zikun Liu5
6
1,2
Hyunhee Park
Rui Wang
Xiaochun Cao3
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
4
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology
5
Samsung Research China - Beijing (SRC-B)
6
Camera Innovation Group, Samsung Electronics
{sunshangquan,wangrui}@iie.ac.cn
{zikun.liu,inextg.park}@samsung.com
{renwq3,caoxiaochun}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Image restoration has experienced significant advancements due to the development
of deep learning. Nevertheless, it encounters challenges related to ill-posed problems, resulting in deviations between single model predictions and ground-truths.
Ensemble learning, as a powerful machine learning technique, aims to address
these deviations by combining the predictions of multiple base models. Most
existing works adopt ensemble learning during the design of restoration models,
while only limited research focuses on the inference-stage ensemble of pre-trained
restoration models. Regression-based methods fail to enable efficient inference,
leading researchers in academia and industry to prefer averaging as their choice
for post-training ensemble. To address this, we reformulate the ensemble problem
of image restoration into Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) and employ an expectation maximization (EM)-based algorithm to estimate ensemble weights for
aggregating prediction candidates. We estimate the range-wise ensemble weights
on a reference set and store them in a lookup table (LUT) for efficient ensemble
inference on the test set. Our algorithm is model-agnostic and training-free, allowing seamless integration and enhancement of various pre-trained image restoration
models. It consistently outperforms regression-based methods and averaging ensemble approaches on 14 benchmarks across 3 image restoration tasks, including
super-resolution, deblurring and deraining. The codes and all estimated weights
have been released in Github.

1

Introduction

Image restoration has witnessed significant progress over the decades, especially with the advent
of deep learning. Numerous architectures have been developed to solve the problem of restoration,
including convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [10, 82], vision Transformers (ViTs) [39, 81,
93] and recently, vision Mambas [27]. However, single models with different architectures or
random initialization states exhibit prediction deviations from ground-truths, resulting in sub-optimal
restoration results.
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

