1

Scalable and Effective Arithmetic Tree Generation
for Adder and Multiplier Designs

1

Yao Lai1 , Jinxin Liu3 , David Z. Pan2 , Ping Luo1
The University of Hong Kong, 2 The University of Texas at Austin,
3
Zhejiang University

Abstract
Across a wide range of hardware scenarios, the computational efficiency and physical size of the arithmetic units significantly influence the speed and footprint of
the overall hardware system. Nevertheless, the effectiveness of prior arithmetic
design techniques proves inadequate, as they do not sufficiently optimize speed
and area, resulting in increased latency and larger module size. To boost computing performance, this work focuses on the two most common and fundamental
arithmetic modules, adders and multipliers. We cast the design tasks as singleplayer tree generation games, leveraging reinforcement learning techniques to
optimize their arithmetic tree structures. This tree generation formulation allows
us to efficiently navigate the vast search space and discover superior arithmetic
designs that improve computational efficiency and hardware size within just a few
hours. Our proposed method, ArithTreeRL, achieves significant improvements
for both adders and multipliers. For adders, our approach discovers designs of
128-bit adders that achieve Pareto optimality in theoretical metrics. Compared
with PrefixRL, it reduces delay and size by up to 26% and 30%, respectively. For
multipliers, compared to RL-MUL, our method enhances speed and reduces size by
as much as 49% and 45%. Additionally, ArithTreeRL’s flexibility and scalability
enable seamless integration into 7nm technology. We believe our work will offer
valuable insights into hardware design, further accelerating speed and reducing size
through the refined search space and our tree generation methodologies. Codes are
released at github.com/laiyao1/ArithmeticTree.

1

Introduction

Since the inception of computers, researchers have striven to boost computing speed and decrease
hardware size. High computing speed is essential for a wide range of real-world applications, such as
artificial intelligence [1], high-performance computing [2], and high-frequency trading [3], particularly for the recent applications of large language models like GPT [4]. Concurrently, the demand for
smaller hardware has escalated due to the growth of wearable devices and IoT technology [5].
Hardware specialists have steadily miniaturized CMOS technology [6] to boost processor speeds
and shrink chip sizes. However, as CMOS technology’s scaling nears its fundamental physical
limits [7], further miniaturization poses significant challenges. Therefore, exploring innovative circuit
design has emerged as a vital alternative to drive performance enhancement and area reduction.
Among the family of arithmetic modules for hardware architectures, adders and multipliers constitute
two essential modules, playing a critical role in various computational operations. For example,
basic addition and multiplication operations compute all convolution and fully connected layers
1

Corresponding to: Ping Luo (pluo@cs.hku.hk).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

