Polynomial-Time Computation of Exact Φ-Equilibria
in Polyhedral Games

Gabriele Farina
MIT
gfarina@mit.edu

Charilaos Pipis
MIT
chpipis@mit.edu

Abstract
It is a well-known fact that correlated equilibria can be computed in polynomial
time in a large class of concisely represented games using the celebrated Ellipsoid
Against Hope algorithm (Papadimitriou and Roughgarden, 2008; Jiang and LeytonBrown, 2015). However, the landscape of efficiently computable equilibria in
sequential (extensive-form) games remains unknown. The Ellipsoid Against Hope
does not apply directly to these games, because they do not have the required
“polynomial type” property. Despite this barrier, Huang and von Stengel (2008)
altered the algorithm to compute exact extensive-form correlated equilibria.
In this paper, we generalize the Ellipsoid Against Hope and develop a simple
algorithmic framework for efficiently computing saddle-points in bilinear zero-sum
games, even when one of the dimensions is exponentially large. Moreover, the
framework only requires a “good-enough-response” oracle, which is a weakened
notion of a best-response oracle.
Using this machinery, we develop a general algorithmic framework for computing
exact linear Φ-equilibria in any polyhedral game (under mild assumptions), including correlated equilibria in normal-form games, and extensive-form correlated equilibria in extensive-form games. This enables us to give the first polynomial-time
algorithm for computing exact linear-deviation correlated equilibria in extensiveform games, thus resolving an open question by Farina and Pipis (2023). Furthermore, even for the cases for which a polynomial time algorithm for exact equilibria
was already known, our framework provides a conceptually simpler solution.

1

Introduction

The correlated equilibrium (CE), introduced by Aumann (1974), is one of the most seminal solution
concepts in multi-player games. Contrary to the Nash equilibrium, in a correlated equilibrium the
players’ strategies are correlated by a fictitious mediator that can recommend (but not enforce)
behavior. It is then up to this mediator to ensure that the distribution of recommendations does not
incentivize any player to deviate from their recommended strategy. It is known that this type of
equilibrium naturally emerges from the repeated interaction of learning agents (Hart and Mas-Colell,
2000). In practice, this means that one can compute ϵ-approximate CEs in normal-form games by
implementing suitable decentralized no-regret dynamics, of which several efficient implementations
are known (see, e.g., Blum and Mansour (2007) and Anagnostides et al. (2022)). However, this
approach requires Ω(poly(1/ϵ)) iterations to compute an ϵ-approximate equilibrium, making it a
non-viable choice for high-precision equilibrium computation. In a celebrated result, Papadimitriou
and Roughgarden (2008) (with later refinements by Jiang and Leyton-Brown (2015)) devised an
algorithm, called Ellipsoid Against Hope, that can compute an exact CE in a concisely represented
normal-form game in polynomial time in the representation of the game. Their algorithm is an
algorithmic version of the clever reduction of Hart and Schmeidler (1989) that casts the computation
of CEs as a two-player zero-sum game.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

