Subsurface Scattering for 3D Gaussian Splatting

Jan-Niklas Dihlmann

Arjun Majumdar

Andreas Engelhardt

Raphael Braun

Hendrik P.A. Lensch
University of Tübingen

Abstract
3D reconstruction and relighting of objects made from scattering materials present
a significant challenge due to the complex light transport beneath the surface.
3D Gaussian Splatting introduced high-quality novel view synthesis at real-time
speeds. While 3D Gaussians efficiently approximate an object’s surface, they fail to
capture the volumetric properties of subsurface scattering. We propose a framework
for optimizing an object’s shape together with the radiance transfer field given multiview OLAT (one light at a time) data. Our method decomposes the scene into an
explicit surface represented as 3D Gaussians, with a spatially varying BRDF, and an
implicit volumetric representation of the scattering component. A learned incident
light field accounts for shadowing. We optimize all parameters jointly via raytraced differentiable rendering. Our approach enables material editing, relighting
and novel view synthesis at interactive rates. We show successful application on
synthetic data and introduce a newly acquired multi-view multi-light dataset of
objects in a light-stage setup. Compared to previous work we achieve comparable
or better results at a fraction of optimization and rendering time while enabling
detailed control over material attributes. Project page: https://sss.jdihlmann.com/

SSS Dataset

PBR Decomposition

3D Reconstruction

Lightstage Capture

Basecolor

Normal

Diffuse

Specular

SSS Residual

Metalness

Roughness

Subsurfaceness

Editable

OLAT Dataset

FPS 150

37 PSNR

Novel View & Light Synthesis

Shinier

IBL Relighting

Change SSS Color

Rougher & Metallic

Object Generation

Figure 1: SSS GS – We propose photorealistic real-time relighting and novel view synthesis of subsurface
scattering objects. We learn to reconstruct the shape and translucent appearance of an object within the Gaussian
Splatting framework. To do so we leverage our newly created multi-view multi-light dataset of synthetic and
real-world objects acquired in a light-stage setup. The object is decomposed in a PBR fashion allowing for easy
material editing and relighting. For a trailer visit our project page at https://sss.jdihlmann.com/.

1

Introduction

Subsurface scattering (SSS) is an important aspect of our visual reality and therefore an indispensable
part of realistic rendering. It is the process by which light penetrates a surface and is scattered
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

