ChatQA: Surpassing GPT-4 on Conversational QA
and RAG
Zihan Liu ∗ 1
Chankyu Lee 1

Wei Ping ∗ 1

Rajarshi Roy 1

Mohammad Shoeybi 1
1

Peng Xu 1

Bryan Catanzaro 1

NVIDIA

Abstract
In this work, we introduce ChatQA, a suite of models that outperform GPT-4
on retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) and conversational question answering (QA). To enhance generation, we propose a two-stage instruction tuning method
that significantly boosts the performance of RAG. For effective retrieval, we introduce a dense retriever optimized for conversational QA, which yields results
comparable to the alternative state-of-the-art query rewriting models, while substantially reducing deployment costs. We also present the C HAT RAG B ENCH,
which encompasses ten datasets covering comprehensive evaluations on RAG,
table-related QA, arithmetic calculations, and scenarios involving unanswerable
questions. Our ChatQA-1.0-70B (score: 54.14), built on Llama2, a weaker foundation model than GPT-4, can slightly outperform GPT-4-0613 (score: 53.90)
and GPT-4-Turbo-2024-04-09 (score: 54.03) on the C HAT RAG B ENCH, without relying on any synthetic data from OpenAI GPT models. Notably, Llama3ChatQA-1.5-70B model surpasses the accuracy of GPT-4-Turbo-2024-04-09 by a
margin. These results demonstrate the exceptional quality of the proposed ChatQA
recipe. To advance research in this field, we open-sourced the model weights,
instruction tuning data, C HAT RAG B ENCH, and retriever for the community:
https://chatqa-project.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Most recently, ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022) and its follow ups (OpenAI, 2023; Anthropic, 2023b;
Google, 2023) have led to the paradigm shift of building question answering (QA) and retrievalaugmented generation (RAG) system in production and research community. In particular, the
following aspects of the models are preferred: i) The users can interact with the QA models in a
conversational way, thus one can easily raise follow-up questions. ii) The models are capable of
integrating retrieved chunks of evidence in both open-domain or long document settings, where
the provided context is much longer than the context window of LLM (e.g., Anthropic, 2023a; Xu
et al., 2023b). iii) The generalist models can answer any questions with respect to table, arithmetic
calculation in zero-shot manner without dataset-specific fine-tuning, while matching the accuracies
of fine-tuned models. To this end, we focus on building the state-of-the-art model with all these key
capabilities that are essentially important for many real-world applications.
However, building such a model that can match the accuracy of the state-of-the-art proprietary models,
e.g., GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), is still a grand challenge for the research community. In this work,
we introduce ChatQA, a family of open-sourced models that can outperform GPT-4 while utilizing
relatively weak open-weights foundation model. We also open-source our training data, detailing
∗

Correspondence to: Zihan Liu <zihanl@nvidia.com>, Wei Ping <wping@nvidia.com>

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

