Noisy Dual Mirror Descent: A Near Optimal
Algorithm for Jointly-DP Convex Resource Allocation

Du Chen∗ Geoffrey A. Chua
Nanyang Business School, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, 639798
chen1443@e.ntu.edu.sg, gbachua@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
We study convex resource allocation problems with m hard constraints under (ε, δ)joint differential privacy (Joint-DP or JDP) in an offline setting. To approximately
solve the problem, we propose a generic algorithm called Noisy Dual Mirror
Descent. The algorithm applies noisy Mirror Descent to a dual problem from
relaxing the hard constraints for private shadow prices, and then uses the shadow
prices to coordinate allocations in the primal problem. Leveraging weak
√ duality
m ln (1/δ)
theory, we show that the optimality gap is upper bounded by O(
),
ε
√
m ln (1/δ)
and constraint violation is no more than O(
) per constraint. When
ε
√
e ln (1/δ) ) by
strong duality holds, both preceding results can be improved to O(
ε
better utilizing the geometric structure of the dual space, which is neglected by
existing works. To complement
our results under strong duality, we derive a

minimax lower bound Ω m
for
any
JDP algorithm outputting feasible allocations.
ε
The lower bound matches our upper bounds up to some logarithmic factors for
ε ≥ max{1, 1/(nγ)}, where nγ is the available resource level. Numerical studies
further confirm the effectiveness of our algorithm.

1

Introduction

The resource allocation problem is a classic optimization problem and has many applications in
machine learning, such as Internet advertising and personalized recommendation, among many others.
The problem is typically modeled as a utility maximization problem, where the central decision
maker has to properly allocate m types of limited resources to n agents in order to maximize the total
utility of all agents. Each agent’s data zi := (ui (·), ai (·), Xi ) consists of three elements: (i) a utility
function ui : Rs+ → R+ that maps an allocation xi to a utility scalar; (ii) a consumption function
s
ai : Rs+ → Rm
+ that maps an allocation xi to a consumption vector; and (iii) a feasible set Xi ⊆ R+
n
that may capture the agent’s special requirements. With a dataset D := {zi }i=1 of n agents, the
problem is modeled as
n
X
ui (xi )
(1)
(Resource Allocation Problem)
max
n
{xi }i=1

s.t.

i=1
n
X

ai (xi ) ≤ nγb;

(2)

i=1

xi ∈ Xi ,

∀i = 1, 2, . . . , n,

(3)

where nγb > 0 is the available level of m types of resources. Evidently, the goal in (1) is to find
the best allocation xi for each agent subject to resource-coupling constraints (2) and to a personal
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

