FiVA: Fine-grained Visual Attribute Dataset for
Text-to-Image Diffusion Models

Tong Wu1,2 , Yinghao Xu1 , Ryan Po1 , Mengchen Zhang3,5 , Guandao Yang1 ,
Jiaqi Wang5 , Ziwei Liu4 , Dahua Lin2,5,6 , Gordon Wetzstein1
1

Stanford University 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
S-Lab, NTU 5 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

3
6

Zhejiang University
CPII under InnoHK

Abstract
Recent advances in text-to-image generation have enabled the creation of highquality images with diverse applications. However, accurately describing desired
visual attributes can be challenging, especially for non-experts in art and
photography. An intuitive solution involves adopting favorable attributes from
source images. Current methods attempt to distill identity and style from source
images. However, "style" is a broad concept that includes texture, color, and artistic
elements, but does not cover other important attributes like lighting and dynamics.
Additionally, a simplified "style" adaptation prevents combining multiple attributes
from different sources into one generated image. In this work, we formulate a more
effective approach to decompose the aesthetics of a picture into specific visual
attributes, letting users apply characteristics like lighting, texture, and dynamics
from different images. To achieve this goal, we constructed the first fine-grained
visual attributes dataset (FiVA) to the best of our knowledge. This FiVA dataset
features a well-organized taxonomy for visual attributes and includes 1 M highquality generated images with visual attribute annotations. Leveraging this dataset,
we propose a fine-grained visual attributes adaptation framework (FiVA-Adapter) ,
which decouples and adapts visual attributes from one or more source images into
a generated one. This approach enhances user-friendly customization, allowing
users to selectively apply desired attributes to create images that meet their unique
preferences and specific content requirements. The data and models will be released
at https://huggingface.co/datasets/FiVA/FiVA.

1

Introduction

Imagine an artist drawing a picture; he or she not only exhibits unique styles, identities, and
spatial structures but also frequently integrates personal elements such as brushstrokes, composition,
and lighting effects into their creations. These detailed visual features capture profound personal
emotions and artistic expressions. However, despite the capability of current text-to-image models to
generate high-quality images from textual or visual prompts, they encounter substantial challenges in
effectively controlling these fine-grained visual concepts, which vary widely across different artistic
domains. This limits the practical applications of text-to-image models in various fields.
Recently, significant research efforts have been made to advance controllable image generation. In
particular, numerous studies have explored the use of personalization techniques to preserve the
identity of an object or person across different scenarios [23, 34]. On the other hand, there have
been attempts to control the generation process by conditioning on the style and spatial structure of
reference images [6, 28, 31, 7, 35], which involves mimicking abstract styles or leveraging spatial
cues such as edge maps, semantic masks, or depth. Yet, these methods are limited to specific aspects
and fall short in terms of generalizability. These methods use complex images as unified references
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

