Optimization Can Learn Johnson Lindenstrauss
Embeddings

Nikos Tsikouras
UOA & Archimedes / Athena RC
n.tsikouras@athenarc.gr

Constantine Caramanis
UT Austin & Archimedes / Athena RC
constantine@utexas.edu

Christos Tzamos
UOA & Archimedes / Athena RC
christos@tzamos.com

Abstract
Embeddings play a pivotal role across various disciplines, offering compact representations of complex data structures. Randomized methods like JohnsonLindenstrauss (JL) provide state-of-the-art and essentially unimprovable theoretical
guarantees for achieving such representations. These guarantees are worst-case
and in particular, neither the analysis, nor the algorithm, takes into account any
potential structural information of the data. The natural question is: must we randomize? Could we instead use an optimization-based approach, working directly
with the data? A first answer is no: as we show, the distance-preserving objective
of JL has a non-convex landscape over the space of projection matrices, with many
bad stationary points. But this is not the final answer.
We present a novel method motivated by diffusion models, that circumvents this
fundamental challenge: rather than performing optimization directly over the space
of projection matrices, we use optimization over the larger space of random solution
samplers, gradually reducing the variance of the sampler. We show that by moving
through this larger space, our objective converges to a deterministic (zero variance)
solution, avoiding bad stationary points.
This method can also be seen as an optimization-based derandomization approach
and is an idea and method that we believe can be applied to many other problems.

1

Introduction

Embeddings are foundational across diverse disciplines, offering compact representations of complex
data structures. Algorithms across different domains leverage embeddings to capture nuanced
relationships between data points, improving efficiency and effectiveness in processing. Within this
field, there are distinct lines of work.
Embeddings have been used as dimensionality-reducing tools, while preserving important structures
in data. They have been a major research focus for years, and have been a key ingredient in several
algorithmic applications such as graph sparsification [Spielman and Srivastava, 2008], nearestneighbor search [Indyk and Motwani, 1998], hashing [Dietzfelbinger et al., 1997] and digital research
[Schmidt, 2018]. A celebrated result in this area has been the Johnson-Lindenstrauss (JL) lemma
Johnson [1984] which shows that a random linear mapping can reduce the dimension of the dataset
while approximately preserving the L2 norm of all points, with high probability. JL embeddings
give bounds on the maximum distortion over all the points. Many variants have been developed and
studied, as we discuss below in Section 2. For this paper, the salient point is that the algorithms that
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

