Advancing Cross-domain Discriminability in
Continual Learning of Vision-Language Models

Yicheng Xu1∗ Yuxin Chen2∗ Jiahao Nie3
Yusong Wang1 Huiping Zhuang4,5† Manabu Okumura1
1
Institute of Science Tokyo 2 University of California Berkeley
3
Nanyang Technological University 4 South China University of Technology
5
Greater Bay Area Institute for Innovation, Hunan University, China
yxu040@e.ntu.edu.sg, yuxinc@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Continual learning (CL) with Vision-Language Models (VLMs) has overcome the
constraints of traditional CL, which only focuses on previously encountered classes.
During the CL of VLMs, we need not only to prevent the catastrophic forgetting on
incrementally learned knowledge but also to preserve the zero-shot ability of VLMs.
However, existing methods require additional reference datasets to maintain such
zero-shot ability and rely on domain-identity hints to classify images across different domains. In this study, we propose Regression-based Analytic Incremental
Learning (RAIL), which utilizes a recursive ridge regression-based adapter to
learn from a sequence of domains in a non-forgetting manner and decouple the
cross-domain correlations by projecting features to a higher-dimensional space.
Cooperating with a training-free fusion module, RAIL absolutely preserves the
VLM’s zero-shot ability on unseen domains without any reference data. Additionally, we introduce Cross-domain Task-Agnostic Incremental Learning (X-TAIL)
setting. In this setting, a CL learner is required to incrementally learn from multiple
domains and classify test images from both seen and unseen domains without
any domain-identity hint. We theoretically prove RAIL’s absolute memorization
on incrementally learned domains. Experiment results affirm RAIL’s state-ofthe-art performance in both X-TAIL and existing Multi-domain Task-Incremental
Learning settings. The code is released at https://github.com/linghan1997/
Regression-based-Analytic-Incremental-Learning.

1

Introduction

Continual learning (CL) [1, 2, 3] is a crucial area in machine learning, which requires a learner to
incrementally learn new data instead of training from scratch. The main challenge in CL is known
as catastrophic forgetting [4], where learning new knowledge results in the forgetting of the old
one. To this end, various CL approaches [5, 6, 7, 8, 3, 9] have been proposed to solve the forgetting
issue. As a typical CL setting, Class-Incremental Learning (CIL) (Fig. 1 (a)) aims to achieve robust
discriminability on all seen classes. Despite the advancements, existing approaches mainly focus on
classifying images only from seen classes, thereby limiting the model’s generalizability.
Consequently, Zheng et al. [10] proposed Multi-domain Task-Incremental Learning (MTIL), which
cooperates CL with the zero-shot ability of Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [11, 12, 13, 14] such
as CLIP [13]. This integration equips models with the ability to classify domains they have not
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author: hpzhuang@scut.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

