An Accelerated Gradient Method for Convex Smooth
Simple Bilevel Optimization

Jincheng Cao
ECE Department
UT Austin
jinchengcao@utexas.edu

Ruichen Jiang
ECE Department
UT Austin
rjiang@utexas.edu

Erfan Yazdandoost Hamedani
SIE Department
The University of Arizona
erfany@arizona.edu

Aryan Mokhtari
ECE Department
UT Austin
mokhtari@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on simple bilevel optimization problems, where we minimize
a convex smooth objective function over the optimal solution set of another convex
smooth constrained optimization problem. We present a novel bilevel optimization
method that locally approximates the solution set of the lower-level problem using
a cutting plane approach and employs an accelerated gradient-based update to
reduce the upper-level objective function over the approximated solution set. We
measure the performance of our method in terms of suboptimality and infeasibility
errors and provide non-asymptotic convergence guarantees for both error criteria.
Specifically, when the feasible set is compact, we show that our method requires
√
at most O(max{1/ ϵf , 1/ϵg }) iterations to find a solution that is ϵf -suboptimal
and ϵg -infeasible. Moreover, under the additional assumption that the lower-level
objective satisfies the r-th Hölderian error bound, we show that our method achieves
− 2r−1

− 2r−1

an iteration complexity of Õ(max{ϵf 2r , ϵg 2r }), which matches the optimal
complexity of single-level convex constrained optimization when r = 1.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we investigate a class of bilevel optimization problems known as simple bilevel optimization, aiming to minimize an upper-level objective function over the solution set of a corresponding
lower-level problem. This class has recently gained attention due to its broad applications in continual learning [1], hyper-parameter optimization [2, 3], meta-learning [4, 5], and over-parameterized
machine learning [6–8]. Specifically, we focus on the following bilevel optimization problem:
min f (x)

x∈Rn

s.t.

x ∈ argmin g(z),

(1)

z∈Z

where, Z is a convex set, and f, g : Rn → R are convex, continuously differentiable functions
on an open set containing Z. We assume that the lower-level objective function g is convex but
not strongly convex, so the lower-level problem may have multiple optimal solutions. Throughout
the paper, we use x∗ to denote an optimal solution of problem (1). We define f ∗ ≜ f (x∗ ) and
g ∗ ≜ g(x∗ ), representing the optimal value of problem (1) and the optimal value of the lower-level
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

