Implicit Bias of Mirror Flow on Separable Data

Scott Pesme
EPFL

Radu-Alexandru Dragomir
Télécom Paris

Nicolas Flammarion
EPFL

Abstract
We examine the continuous-time counterpart of mirror descent, namely mirror
flow, on classification problems which are linearly separable. Such problems are
minimised ‘at infinity’ and have many possible solutions; we study which solution
is preferred by the algorithm depending on the mirror potential. For exponential
tailed losses and under mild assumptions on the potential, we show that the iterates
converge in direction towards a ϕ∞ -maximum margin classifier. The function
ϕ∞ is the horizon function of the mirror potential and characterises its shape ‘at
infinity’. When the potential is separable, a simple formula allows to compute
this function. We analyse several examples of potentials and provide numerical
experiments highlighting our results.

1

Introduction

Heavily over-parametrised yet barely regularised neural networks can easily perfectly fit a noisy
training set while still performing very well on unseen data [Zhang et al., 2017]. This statistical
phenomenon is surprising since it is known that there exists interpolating solutions which have terrible
generalisation performances [Liu et al., 2020]. To understand this benign overfitting, it is essential
to take into account the training algorithm. If overfitting is indeed harmless, it must be because the
optimisation process has steered us towards a solution with favorable generalisation properties.
From this simple observation, a major line of work studying the implicit regularisation of gradient
methods has emerged. These results show that the recovered solution enjoys some type of low norm
property in the infinite space of zero-loss solutions. Gradient descent (and its variations) has therefore
been analysed in various settings, the simplest and most emblematic being that of gradient descent
for least-squares regression: it converges towards the solution which has the lowest ℓ2 distance
from the initialisation [Lemaire, 1996]. In the classification setting with linearly separable data,
iterates of gradient methods must diverge to infinity to minimise the loss. Therefore, the directional
convergence of the iterates is considered and Soudry et al. [2018] show that gradient descent selects
the ℓ2 -max-margin solution amongst all classifiers.
Going beyond linear settings, it has been observed that an underlying mirror-descent structure
very recurrently emerges when analysing gradient descent in a range of non-linear parametrisations [Woodworth et al., 2020, Azulay et al., 2021]. Providing convergence and implicit regularisation
results for mirror descent has therefore gained significant importance.
In this context, for linear regression, Gunasekar et al. [2018] show that the iterates converge to the
solution that has minimal Bregman distance to the initial point. Turning towards the classification
setting, an apparent gap emerges as there is still no clear understanding of what happens: Can
directional convergence be characterised in terms of a max-margin problem? If so, what is the
associated norm? Quite surprisingly, this question remains largely unanswered, as it is only understood
for L-homogeneous potentials [Sun et al., 2023]. Our paper bridges this gap by formally characterising
the implicit bias of mirror descent for separable classification problems.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

