F RIEREN: Efficient Video-to-Audio Generation
Network with Rectified Flow Matching

Yongqi Wang†, Wenxiang Guo†, Rongjie Huang, Jiawei Huang, Zehan Wang,
Fuming You, Ruiqi Li, Zhou Zhao∗
Zhejiang University
cyanbox@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Video-to-audio (V2A) generation aims to synthesize content-matching audio from
silent video, and it remains challenging to build V2A models with high generation
quality, efficiency, and visual-audio temporal synchrony. We propose F RIEREN, a
V2A model based on rectified flow matching. F RIEREN regresses the conditional
transport vector field from noise to spectrogram latent with straight paths and
conducts sampling by solving ODE, outperforming autoregressive and score-based
models in terms of audio quality. By employing a non-autoregressive vector field
estimator based on a feed-forward transformer and channel-level cross-modal
feature fusion with strong temporal alignment, our model generates audio that is
highly synchronized with the input video. Furthermore, through reflow and onestep distillation with guided vector field, our model can generate decent audio in a
few, or even only one sampling step. Experiments indicate that F RIEREN achieves
state-of-the-art performance in both generation quality and temporal alignment on
VGGSound, with alignment accuracy reaching 97.22%, and 6.2% improvement in
inception score over the strong diffusion-based baseline. Audio samples and code
are available at http://frieren-v2a.github.io.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in deep generative models have significantly enhanced the quality and diversity
of AI-generated content, including text [27], images [29, 30, 1], videos [32, 23] and audios [19,
20]. Among various content-generation tasks, video-to-audio (V2A) generation aims to synthesize
semantically relevant and temporally aligned audio from video frames. Due to its immense potential
for application in film dubbing, game development, YouTube content creation and other areas, the
task of V2A has attracted widespread attention.
A widely applicable V2A solution is expected to have outstanding performance in the following
aspects: 1) audio quality: the generated audio should have good perceptual quality, which is the
fundamental requirement of the audio generation task; 2) temporal alignment: the generated audio
should not only match the content but also align temporally with the video frames. This has a
significant impact on user experience due to keen human perception of audio-visual information; and
3) generation efficiency: the model should be efficient in terms of generation speed and resource
utilization, which affects its practicality for large-scale and high-throughput applications.
Currently, considerable methods have been proposed for this task, including GAN-based models [3, 8],
transformer-based autoregressive models [15, 31], and a recent latent-diffusion-based model, DiffFoley [25]. However, these methods have not yet achieved a balanced and satisfactory performance
†
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

