Denoising Diffusion Path: Attribution Noise Reduction
with An Auxiliary Diffusion Model

Yiming Lei1 , Zilong Li1 , Junping Zhang1 , Hongming Shan2∗
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-Inspired Intelligence &
MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Neuroscience and Brain-Inspired Intelligence &
MOE Frontiers Center for Brain Science, Fudan University
{ymlei, hmshan}@fudan.edu.cn
1

Abstract
The explainability of deep neural networks (DNNs) is critical for trust and reliability in AI systems. Path-based attribution methods, such as integrated gradients
(IG), aim to explain predictions by accumulating gradients along a path from a
baseline to the target image. However, noise accumulated during this process can
significantly distort the explanation. While existing methods primarily concentrate
on finding alternative paths to circumvent noise, they overlook a critical issue:
intermediate-step images frequently diverge from the distribution of training data,
further intensifying the impact of noise. This work presents a novel Denoising Diffusion Path (DDPath) to tackle this challenge by harnessing the power of diffusion
models for denoising. By exploiting the inherent ability of diffusion models to
progressively remove noise from an image, DDPath constructs a piece-wise linear
path. Each segment of this path ensures that samples drawn from a Gaussian distribution are centered around the target image. This approach facilitates a gradual
reduction of noise along the path. We further demonstrate that DDPath adheres
to essential axiomatic properties for attribution methods and can be seamlessly
integrated with existing methods such as IG. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that DDPath can significantly reduce noise in the attributions—resulting
in clearer explanations—and achieves better quantitative results than traditional
path-based methods.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable success in various tasks, but their opaque
decision-making processes remain a significant challenge and are critical to those high-staking
scenarios like medical diagnosis [1] and autonomous driving [2]. Explainable Artificial Intelligence
(XAI) aims to bridge this gap by providing insights into how DNNs make their predictions, where the
commonly used interpretation methods include class activation mapping (CAM)-based [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]
and path-based methods [8, 9, 10, 11, 12].
Theoretically, the path-based methods comply with the rigorous axiomatic properties, such as the implementation invariance and symmetry-preserving [8], contributing significantly to the interpretation
field, and we also focus on this kind of technique. Path-based attribution methods, such as integrated
gradients (IG) [8] that is based on game-theoretic idea [13], offer a valuable tool for XAI by accumulating gradients along a path from a baseline image to the target image being explained. However,
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

