HiCoM: Hierarchical Coherent Motion for Streamable
Dynamic Scene with 3D Gaussian Splatting

Training: 6.7 s
Rendering: 274 fps
Storage: 0.8 MB
PSNR: 31.17 dB
Res: 1352 × 1014

Training: 3.9 s
Rendering: 284 fps
Storage: 0.5 MB
PSNR: 26.73 dB
Res: 1280 × 720

Rendering Speed (fps)

Qiankun Gao1, 2 , Jiarui Meng1 , Chengxiang Wen1 , Jie Chen1, 2 Q , Jian Zhang1, 3 Q
1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ultra High Definition Immersive Media Technology,
Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
300 HiCoM-P4 (ours) HiCoM (ours)
3DGStream
200
100

StreamRF

0

2

4

6

8

Training Time (seconds)

10

12

Figure 1: The proposed HiCoM framework for streamable dynamic scene reconstruction achieves
competitive rendering quality with significantly shorter training time, faster rendering speed, and
substantially reduced storage and transmission requirements. The left figures show results of our
HiCoM on N3DV [1] and Meet Room [2] datasets, where “Res” indicates video resolution. The right
figure is tested on the N3DV [1] dataset, where the radius of the circle corresponds to the average
storage per frame and the method in the top left corner demonstrates the best performance.

Abstract
The online reconstruction of dynamic scenes from multi-view streaming videos
faces significant challenges in training, rendering and storage efficiency. Harnessing superior learning speed and real-time rendering capabilities, 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS) has recently demonstrated considerable potential in this field.
However, 3DGS can be inefficient in terms of storage and prone to overfitting by
excessively growing Gaussians, particularly with limited views. This paper proposes an efficient framework, dubbed HiCoM, with three key components. First,
we construct a compact and robust initial 3DGS representation using a perturbation
smoothing strategy. Next, we introduce a Hierarchical Coherent Motion mechanism that leverages the inherent non-uniform distribution and local consistency
of 3D Gaussians to swiftly and accurately learn motions across frames. Finally,
we continually refine the 3DGS with additional Gaussians, which are later merged
into the initial 3DGS to maintain consistency with the evolving scene. To preserve
a compact representation, an equivalent number of low-opacity Gaussians that
minimally impact the representation are removed before processing subsequent
frames. Extensive experiments conducted on two widely used datasets show that
our framework improves learning efficiency of the state-of-the-art methods by about
20% and reduces the data storage by 85%, achieving competitive free-viewpoint
video synthesis quality but with higher robustness and stability. Moreover, by
parallel learning multiple frames simultaneously, our HiCoM decreases the average
training wall time to < 2 seconds per frame with negligible performance degradation, substantially boosting real-world applicability and responsiveness. Code is
avaliable at https://github.com/gqk/HiCoM.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

