Learning Goal-Conditioned Representations for
Language Reward Models

Yuntao Ma

Vaskar Nath∗ †

Dylan Slack∗

Hugh Zhang

Spencer Whitehead‡

Jeff Da
Sean Hendryx‡

Scale AI

Abstract
Techniques that learn improved representations via offline data or self-supervised
objectives have shown impressive results in traditional reinforcement learning.
Nevertheless, it is unclear how improved representation learning can benefit reinforcement learning from human feedback on language models. In this work, we
propose training reward models (RMs) in a contrastive, goal-conditioned fashion
by increasing the representation similarity of future states along sampled preferred
trajectories and decreasing the similarity along randomly sampled dispreferred
trajectories. This objective significantly improves reward model performance by
up to 0.09 AUROC across challenging benchmarks, such as MATH and GSM8k.
These findings extend to general alignment as well – on the Helpful-Harmless
dataset, we observe 2.3% increase in accuracy. Beyond improving reward model
performance, we show this way of training RM representations enables improved
steerability because it allows us to evaluate the likelihood of an action achieving a
particular goal-state (e.g., whether a solution is correct or helpful). Leveraging this
insight, we find that we can filter up to 55% of generated tokens during majority
voting by discarding trajectories likely to end up in an “incorrect” state, which
leads to significant cost savings. We additionally find that these representations
can perform fine-grained control by conditioning on desired future goal-states. For
example, we show that steering a Llama 3 model towards helpful generations with
our approach improves helpfulness by 9.6% over a supervised-fine-tuning trained
baseline. Similarly, steering the model towards complex generations improves
complexity by 21.6% over the baseline. Overall, we find that training RMs in
this contrastive, goal-conditioned fashion significantly improves performance and
enables model steerability. 1

1

Introduction

Aligning Language Models (LMs) with human preferences has proven to be an essential step for the
adoption and safe use of these models, with the dominant paradigm being Reinforcement Learning
from Human Feedback (RLHF) [50]. To accomplish this, a standard setup is to collect labels from
humans for generated responses (e.g., preferences, quality ratings) [50]. These labels can then be
used to train a reward model to produce a ranking/scoring of a given sequence or set of sequences.
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding author: vaskar.nath@scale.com
‡
Equal senior authorship
1
Code available at https://github.com/vaskarnathscale/goal-conditioned-rm

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

