Selective Generation for
Controllable Language Models

Minjae Lee∗
GSAI
POSTECH
minjae.lee@postech.ac.kr

Kyungmin Kim∗
GSAI
POSTECH
kkm959595@postech.ac.kr

Taesoo Kim
SCS & SCP
GaTech
taesoo@gatech.edu

Sangdon Park
GSAI & CSE
POSTECH
sangdon@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Trustworthiness of generative language models (GLMs) is crucial in their deployment to critical decision making systems. Hence, certified risk control methods such
as selective prediction and conformal prediction have been applied to mitigating the
hallucination problem in various supervised downstream tasks. However, the lack
of appropriate correctness metric hinders applying such principled methods to language generation tasks. In this paper, we circumvent this problem by leveraging the
concept of textual entailment to evaluate the correctness of the generated sequence,
and propose two selective generation algorithms which control the false discovery
rate with respect to the textual entailment relation (FDR-E) with a theoretical guarantee: SGenSup and SGenSemi . SGenSup , a direct modification of the selective prediction, is a supervised learning algorithm which exploits entailment-labeled data,
annotated by humans. Since human annotation is costly, we further propose a semisupervised version, SGenSemi , which fully utilizes the unlabeled data by pseudolabeling, leveraging an entailment set function learned via conformal prediction.
Furthermore, SGenSemi enables to use more general class of selection functions,
neuro-selection functions, and provides users with an optimal selection function
class given multiple candidates. Finally, we demonstrate the efficacy of the SGen
family in achieving a desired FDR-E level with comparable selection efficiency to
those from baselines on both open and closed source GLMs. Code and datasets are
provided at https://github.com/ml-postech/selective-generation.

1

Introduction

Generative language models (GLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4] have garnered significant attention for their ability
to generate human-level language [5] primarily due to underlying transformer architectures [6].
However, GLMs raise concerns about generating hallucinated facts [7], which is an undesirable
property when they are used as knowledge retrieval sources. This issue can be mitigated by finetuning with human feedback [7, 8], but it remains expensive in terms of training and labeling costs.
Certified risk control methods such as selective prediction [9] and conformal prediction [10] are
promising cost-efficient alternatives, which have been applied to the hallucination mitigation in
various supervised downstream tasks [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14].
*

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

