CogVLM: Visual Expert for Pretrained Language
Models
Weihan Wang∗1,2 , Qingsong Lv∗1 , Wenmeng Yu1 , Wenyi Hong1,2 , Ji Qi1,2 , Yan Wang1 ,
Junhui Ji1 , Zhuoyi Yang1,2 , Lei Zhao1 , Xixuan Song1,2 , Jiazheng Xu1,2 , Keqin Chen1 ,
Bin Xu2 , Juanzi Li2 , Yuxiao Dong†2 , Ming Ding†1 , Jie Tang†2
1
Zhipu AI 2 Tsinghua University
ming.ding@zhipuai.cn
{yuxiaod, jietang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We introduce CogVLM, a powerful open-source visual language foundation model.
Different from the popular shallow alignment method which maps image features
into the input space of language model, CogVLM bridges the gap between the
frozen pretrained language model and image encoder by a trainable visual expert
module in the attention and FFN layers. As a result, CogVLM enables a deep
fusion of vision language features without sacrificing any performance on NLP
tasks. CogVLM-17B achieves state-of-the-art performance on 15 classic crossmodal benchmarks, including 1) image captioning datasets: NoCaps, Flicker30k, 2)
VQA datasets: OKVQA, ScienceQA, 3) LVLM benchmarks: MM-Vet, MMBench,
SEED-Bench, LLaVABench, POPE, MMMU, MathVista, 4) visual grounding
datasets: RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, RefCOCOg, Visual7W. Codes and checkpoints
are available at Github.

1

Introduction

Vision language models are versatile and powerful. Many vision and cross-modality tasks can be
formulated as next token prediction, e.g., image captioning [Agrawal et al., 2019], visual question
answering [Antol et al., 2015], visual grounding [Yu et al., 2016] and even segmentation [Chen et al.,
2022a]. Useful abilities like in-context learning [Tsimpoukelli et al., 2021, Sun et al., 2023b, Alayrac
et al., 2022] also emerge along with the improvement of downstream tasks when scaling up VLMs.
However, to train a large language model is already non-trivial, and it is more challenging to train
a VLM from scratch with the same NLP performance as well-trained pure language models like
LLaMA2 [Touvron et al., 2023]. Therefore, it is natural to investigate how to train a VLM from an
off-the-shelf pretrained language model.
The popular shallow alignment methods represented by InstructBLIP [Li et al., 2023b] and MiniGPT4 [Zhu et al., 2023] connect a frozen pretrained vision encoder and language model via a trainable
Q-Former or a linear layer, mapping the image features into the input embedding space of the
language model. This method converges rapidly, but its performance is noticeably inferior to that of
LLaVA-1.5 with trainable language parameters, despite their model sizes and training datasets being
almost identical.
The primary challenge in the performance of shallow alignment methods within VLMs can be
attributed to the lack of deep fusion between visual and linguistic data. Shallow alignment methods
struggle because they rely on ‘frozen’ language model weights, which are intrinsically trained to
* WW & QL contributed equally.
†
‡

Corresponding authors
Work done when WW, WH, JQ, ZY, XS, JX and KC interned at Zhipu AI.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

