Diversity Is Not All You Need: Training A Robust
Cooperative Agent Needs Specialist Partners

Rujikorn Charakorn
VISTEC

Poramate Manoonpong
VISTEC, SDU

Nat Dilokthanakul
KMITL

rujikorn.c_s19@vistec.ac.th

poramate.m@vistec.ac.th

nat.di@kmitl.ac.th

Abstract
Partner diversity is known to be crucial for training a robust generalist cooperative
agent. In this paper, we show that partner specialization, in addition to diversity,
is crucial for the robustness of a downstream generalist agent. We propose a
principled method for quantifying both the diversity and specialization of a partner
population based on the concept of mutual information. Then, we observe that the
recently proposed cross-play minimization (XP-min) technique produces diverse
and specialized partners. However, the generated partners are overfit, reducing their
usefulness as training partners. To address this, we propose simple methods, based
on reinforcement learning and supervised learning, for extracting the diverse and
specialized behaviors of XP-min generated partners but not their overfitness. We
demonstrate empirically that the proposed method effectively removes overfitness,
and extracted populations produce more robust generalist agents compared to the
source XP-min populations. This result highlights the importance of considering
both the diversity and specialization of training partners while carefully managing
their overfitness for training robust cooperative generalists.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) algorithms can generate a team of agents for solving
complex cooperative tasks [1, 2]. However, these agents tend to overfit to teammates seen during
training and cannot cooperate effectively with unseen team members [3, 4]. This problem is also
known as the ad-hoc teamwork problem [5]. A crucial aspect of building a robust cooperative
(generalist) agent is the diversity of training partners [6–10]. Recent state-of-the-art partner generation
methods utilize cross-play minimization technique (XP-min) [11–16] to produce diverse partners.
XP-min approaches generate partners that are behaviorally diverse by learning incompatible policies
via some measure of incompatibility, e.g., incompatible with other agents in the same population
[12, 14] or best response agents [15, 16]. Fundamentally, XP-min aims to maximize self-play (SP)
return and minimize return of cross-play (XP) trajectories, in which policies from different teams
interact. However, due to the nature of XP-min objective, generated partners are incentivized to learn
to identify the current partner and use the partner’s identity to decide to cooperate (maximize return)
or sabotage (minimize return). This behavior is also known as handshaking [17, 18]. Importantly,
handshakes—conventions used for handshaking—could be arbitrary and nonsensical, e.g., an agent
will cooperate only if the partner moves in the north direction in the first timestep. Handshaking
behaviors are undesirable if these partner agents were to be used for training a generalist agent,
simply because they overfit to random handshakes established during training. Thus, handshaking is
a form of overfitness, and we use the words “overfitness” and “handshaking” interchangeably.

The root cause of handshaking induced by XP-min is that the partners can learn to sabotage the game
if they identify that the current interaction is an XP trajectory. Recently, the problem of handshaking
behaviors has been tackled by [17, 18]. The core idea of these approaches is to regularize the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

