Personalized Adapter for Large Meteorology Model on
Devices: Towards Weather Foundation Models
Shengchao Chen♦ , Guodong Long♦ , Jing Jiang♦ , and Chengqi Zhang♠
Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute, University of Technology Sydney
♠
Department of Data Science and AI, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
shengchao.chen.uts@gmail.com, {guodong.long, jing.jiang}@uts.edu.au
chengqi.zhang@polyu.edu.hk
♦

Abstract
This paper demonstrates that pre-trained language models (PLMs) are strong
foundation models for on-device meteorological variables modeling. We present
LM-W EATHER, a generic approach to taming PLMs, that have learned massive
sequential knowledge from the universe of natural language databases, to acquire
an immediate capability to obtain highly customized models for heterogeneous
meteorological data on devices while keeping high efficiency. Concretely, we
introduce a lightweight personalized adapter into PLMs and endows it with weather
pattern awareness. During communication between clients and the server, lowrank-based transmission is performed to effectively fuse the global knowledge
among devices while maintaining high communication efficiency and ensuring
privacy. Experiments on real-wold dataset show that LM-W EATHER outperforms
the state-of-the-art results by a large margin across various tasks (e.g., forecasting
and imputation at different scales). We provide extensive and in-depth analyses
experiments, which verify that LM-W EATHER can (1) indeed leverage sequential
knowledge from natural language to accurately handle meteorological sequence, (2)
allows each devices obtain highly customized models under significant heterogeneity, and (3) generalize under data-limited and out-of-distribution (OOD) scenarios.
Code available on https://github.com/shengchaochen82/LM-Weather.

1

Introduction

Accurately modeling weather variation pattern from large amount of meteorological variables sequences is increasingly vital for providing efficient weather analysis support for disaster warning.
Recently, the promise of learning to understand weather pattern from data via deep learning (DL) has
led to an ongoing paradigm shift apart from the long-established physics-based methods [1, 2].
Mining potential patterns from meteorological sequences that collected from different regions, including forecasting and imputation, is one of the most important problems in meteorology. Significant
progress has been made by several latest time series approaches [1, 3, 4]. These approaches formulate
meteorological variable modeling as an end-to-end spatio-temporal learning problem. This overlooks
the reality that ground weather devices distributed globally gather vast amounts of data quickly. The
sheer volume of data, coupled with limited network capacity, necessitates local processing on the
devices, making centralised learning challenging [5]. On-device intelligence enables edge devices to
compute independently, offering a primary solution to the problem.
Federated Learning (FL) [7] is a promising on-device intelligence implementation that collaboratively
train a uniform model across devices without exchanging raw data. However, the model often underperform due to data heterogeneity among clients. Personalized FL (PFL) provides new insights for
on-device intelligence that allows each device obtains customized models for providing personalized
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

