Code Repair with LLMs gives
an Exploration-Exploitation Tradeoff

Hao Tang
Cornell University
haotang@cs.cornell.edu
Jin Peng Zhou
Cornell University
jpzhou@cs.cornell.edu
Wei-Long Zheng
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
weilong@sjtu.edu.cn

Keya Hu
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
hu_keya@sjtu.edu.cn
Sicheng Zhong
University of Toronto
sicheng.zhong@mail.utoronto.ca

Xujie Si
University of Toronto
CIFAR AI Chair, Mila
six@cs.toronto.edu

Kevin Ellis
Cornell University
kellis@cornell.edu

Abstract
Iteratively improving and repairing source code with large language models
(LLMs), known as refinement, has emerged as a popular way of generating programs that would be too complex to construct in one shot. Given a bank of test
cases, together with a candidate program, an LLM can improve that program by
being prompted with failed test cases. But it remains an open question how to best
iteratively refine code, with prior work employing simple greedy or breadth-first
strategies. We show here that refinement exposes an explore-exploit tradeoff: exploit by refining the program that passes the most test cases, or explore by refining
a lesser considered program. We frame this as an arm-acquiring bandit problem,
which we solve with Thompson Sampling. The resulting LLM-based program
synthesis algorithm is broadly applicable: Across loop invariant synthesis, visual
reasoning puzzles, and competition programming problems, we find that our new
method can solve more problems using fewer language model calls.

1

Introduction

An emerging paradigm for problem-solving with large language models (LLMs) is to have the
language model correct, repair, or debug its initial outputs [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], which we refer to here as
refinement. For example, when generating the source code of a program, refinement prompts the
LLM with a buggy program it previously generated, potentially with diagnostic information such as a
stack trace, then asks it to fix its code. This strategy alleviates the need for the LLM to predict perfect
code on the first try, and approximates the iterative code-writing process of software development.
Complex programming problems often require several rounds of refinement, with each round requiring
more LLM calls, each of which is stochastic, and so yields multiple possible outcomes. Therefore,
this process generates a tree of possible programs (Fig. 1 left). This tree is infinitely deep, because
every refinement can itself be further refined. It is also infinitely wide, because the LLM can return
infinitely many possible refinements. Success should, in principle, depend on exactly what policy is
used to expand this tree. Recent work [1, 6, 3] adopts simple expansion policies (e.g., breadth-first),
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

