Aligning Audio-Visual Joint Representations with
an Agentic Workflow

Shentong Mo
CMU / MBZUAI
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
shentongmo@gmail.com

Yibing Song∗
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
Hupan Laboratory
songyibing.syb@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Visual content and accompanied audio signals naturally formulate a joint representation to improve audio-visual (AV) related applications. While studies develop various AV representation learning frameworks, the importance of AV data
alignment is usually undermined for achieving high-quality representation. We
observe that an audio signal may contain background noise interference. Also, nonsynchronization may appear between audio and video streams. These non-strict
data alignment limits representation quality and downgrade application performance. In this paper, we propose to improve AV joint representations from a
data-centric perspective by aligning audio signals to visual data. Our alignment is
conducted in an agentic workflow controlled by an LLM-based assistant named
AVAgent. For each input AV data pair, our AVAgent uses a multi-modal LLM
to convert audio and visual data into language descriptions separately (i.e., tool
use). Then, AVAgent reasons whether this paired data is aligned well and plans to
edit the audio signal if needed (i.e., planning). The audio editing is executed by
predefined actions that filter noise or augment data. Moreover, we use a VLM to
evaluate how modified audio signals match the visual content and provide feedback
to AVAgent (i.e., reflection). The tool use, planning, and reflection steps operate cyclically to become an agentic workflow where audio signals are gradually
aligned to visual content. To this end, existing methods can directly leverage the
aligned AV data via our agentic workflow to improve AV joint representations. The
experimental results comprehensively demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance
of the proposed approach against previous baselines in diverse downstream tasks.

1

Introduction

Video stream is usually captured with sound recording. Intuitively, the audio signal supplements video
data to formulate a joint AV representation. Compared to a single visual or audio representation, the
joint representation benefits both single and cross-modality applications such as automatic captioning,
content retrieval, and human-computer interaction. Learning audio-visual representations has been
heavily investigated in the audio-visual recognition [1, 2, 3], sound source separation [4, 5, 6],
and self-supervised form [7, 8]. These studies design various representation learning framework
to leverage existing AV data pairs to obtain joint representations, which are further applied into
downstream audio and visual related scenarios.
The audio and visual pairs may not align well in practice during data capturing. We observe there
are two main issues. First, the audio signal may contain background noise interference. In the real
capturing scene, the microphone may record sound unrelated to the visual content. Second, the
recorded sound may not correspond to the video frames temporally. This may be because of the
∗

Y. Song is the corresponding author. The project page can be found at: https://avagent.github.io

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

