Image2Struct: Benchmarking Structure Extraction for
Vision-Language Models

Josselin Somerville Roberts∗
Stanford University

Michihiro Yasunaga
Stanford University

Tony Lee∗
Stanford University

Yifan Mai
Stanford University

Chi Heem Wong∗
Stanford University
Hitachi America, Ltd
Percy Liang
Stanford University

Abstract
We introduce Image2Struct, a benchmark to evaluate vision-language models
(VLMs) on extracting structure from images. Our benchmark 1) captures realworld use cases, 2) is fully automatic and does not require human judgment, and
3) is based on a renewable stream of fresh data. In Image2Struct, VLMs are
prompted to generate the underlying structure (e.g., LaTeX code or HTML) from
an input image (e.g., webpage screenshot). The structure is then rendered to
produce an output image (e.g., rendered webpage), which is compared against
the input image to produce a similarity score. This round-trip evaluation allows
us to quantitatively evaluate VLMs on tasks with multiple valid structures. We
create a pipeline that downloads fresh data from active online communities upon
execution and evaluates the VLMs without human intervention. We introduce three
domains (Webpages, LaTeX, and Musical Scores) and use five image metrics (pixel
similarity, cosine similarity between the Inception vectors, learned perceptual image
patch similarity, structural similarity index measure, and earth mover similarity)
that allow efficient and automatic comparison between pairs of images. We evaluate
Image2Struct on 14 prominent VLMs and find that scores vary widely, indicating
that Image2Struct can differentiate between the performances of different VLMs.
Additionally, the best score varies considerably across domains (e.g., 0.402 on
sheet music vs. 0.830 on LaTeX equations), indicating that Image2Struct contains
tasks of varying difficulty. For transparency, we release the full results at https:
//crfm.stanford.edu/helm/image2struct/v1.0.1/.

1

Introduction

Vision-language models (VLMs) unlock the ability to process both visual and language information.
They have found uses in generative search engines [34], visual question-answering [31], text-driven
image creation and alteration [15], image captioning [6], and robotics [47]. However, evaluating
responses from the VLMs is a major challenge in VLM benchmarking. Many existing benchmarks
either require humans to evaluate long and complex outputs [25] or are designed as multiple choice
question answering (MCQA) [43]. The former is costly and slow while the latter cannot represent
many real-world use cases such as code generation.
We address these issues in Image2Struct, a benchmark that measures the ability of VLMs to extract
structures such as tables, equations, figures, or document forms from images. Our proposed task
encompasses many real-world use cases such as converting an image of an equation to LaTeX or
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

