V-PETL Bench: A Unified Visual Parameter-Efficient
Transfer Learning Benchmark
Yi Xin1⇤, Siqi Luo2,1⇤ , Xuyang Liu3⇤ , Yuntao Du4⇤ , Haodi Zhou1 , Xinyu Cheng1 ,
Christina Lee5,6 , Junlong Du7 , Haozhe Wang8 , Mingcai Chen1 , Ting Liu9 , Guimin Hu10 ,
Zhongwei Wan11 , Rongchao Zhang12 , Aoxue Li13 , Mingyang Yi14 , Xiaohong Liu2†
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 3 Sichuan University, 4 BIGAI, 5 MIT, 6 Cerebras,
7
Tencent, 8 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 9 NUDT, 10 University of Copenhagen,
11
Ohio State University, 12 Peking University, 13 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 14 Renmin University of China
2

Project Page: https://v-petl-bench.github.io/

Abstract
Parameter-efficient transfer learning (PETL) methods show promise in adapting a
pre-trained model to various downstream tasks while training only a few parameters. In the computer vision (CV) domain, numerous PETL algorithms have been
proposed, but their direct employment or comparison remains inconvenient. To
address this challenge, we construct a Unified Visual PETL Benchmark (V-PETL
Bench) for the CV domain by selecting 30 diverse, challenging, and comprehensive datasets from image recognition, video action recognition, and dense
prediction tasks. On these datasets, we systematically evaluate 25 dominant PETL
algorithms and open-source a modular and extensible codebase for fair evaluation
of these algorithms. V-PETL Bench runs on NVIDIA A800 GPUs and requires
approximately 310 GPU days. We release all the benchmark, making it more efficient and friendly to researchers. Additionally, V-PETL Bench will be continuously
updated for new PETL algorithms and CV tasks.

1

Introduction

Large scale vision transformers (ViT) have achieved remarkable success in various computer vision
(CV) tasks such as image classification [1, 2, 3, 4], segmentation [5, 6, 7] and object detection [8, 9].
However, training these ViT models directly requires massive computational resources to achieve
superior performance, which is often unavailable to many academics and institutions. To alleviate
this dilemma, the “Pre-train & Finetuning” paradigm is proposed. Specifically, teams with sufficient
computational resources utilize enormous datasets [10, 11, 12, 13, 14] to train superior ViT models
and release the pre-trained weights. Researchers with limited computational resources can then
transfer the knowledge from these pre-trained ViT models to downstream tasks through a fine-tuning
stage. However, the standard Full fine-tuning, though effective, still requires substantial computational
and memory resources. This becomes particularly costly for models with billions or even trillions of
parameters. Additionally, for each task, maintaining the task-specific weights of the model brings a
storage burden, as the number of tasks increases.
⇤
†

Equal contribution: xinyi@smail.nju.edu.cn, siqiluo647@sjtu.edu.cn.
Corresponding author: xiaohongliu@sjtu.edu.cn.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

