CorDA: Context-Oriented Decomposition Adaptation
of Large Language Models for Task-Aware
Parameter-Efficient Fine-tuning

Yibo Yang1 ,

Xiaojie Li2,3 ,

Zhongzhu Zhou4 ,

Liqiang Nie2,† ,

Shuaiwen Leon Song4 ,

Jianlong Wu2

Bernard Ghanem1,†

1

2

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen) 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory 4 University of Sydney
† : corresponding authors
https://github.com/iboing/CorDA

Abstract
Current parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods build adapters widely
agnostic of the context of downstream task to learn, or the context of important
knowledge to maintain. As a result, there is often a performance gap compared
to full-parameter fine-tuning, and meanwhile the fine-tuned model suffers from
catastrophic forgetting of the pre-trained world knowledge. In this paper, we propose CorDA, a Context-oriented Decomposition Adaptation method that builds
learnable task-aware adapters from weight decomposition oriented by the context
of downstream task or the world knowledge to maintain. Concretely, we collect a
few data samples, and perform singular value decomposition for each linear layer of
a pre-trained LLM multiplied by the covariance matrix of the input activation using
these samples. The inverse of the covariance matrix is multiplied with the decomposed components to reconstruct the original weights. By doing so, the context of
the representative samples is captured through deciding the factorizing orientation.
Our method enables two options, the knowledge-preserved adaptation and the
instruction-previewed adaptation. For the former, we use question-answering
samples to obtain the covariance matrices, and use the decomposed components
with the smallest r singular values to initialize a learnable adapter, with the others
frozen such that the world knowledge is better preserved. For the latter, we use
the instruction data from the fine-tuning task, such as math or coding, to orientate
the decomposition and train the largest r components that most correspond to the
task to learn. We conduct extensive experiments on Math, Code, and Instruction
Following tasks. Our knowledge-preserved adaptation not only achieves better
performance than LoRA on fine-tuning tasks, but also mitigates the forgetting of
world knowledge. Our instruction-previewed adaptation is able to further enhance
the fine-tuning performance to be comparable with full fine-tuning, surpassing the
state-of-the-art PEFT methods such as LoRA, DoRA, and PiSSA.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable abilities in a wide range of challenging tasks,
including questing-answering [11, 51], common sense reasoning [6], and instruction following [85].
While being powerful, LLMs demand exorbitant computation and memory cost when fine-tuning
the whole model on downstream tasks due to the huge model capacity. To enable resource-friendly
adaptation on downstream tasks, parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods are proposed to
largely reduce the number of trainable parameters, by only fine-tuning the newly added adapters
[20, 21, 17] or tokens [31, 37, 53], with the original pre-trained weights frozen.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

