Mitigating Object Hallucination via
Concentric Causal Attention
Yun Xing1∗ Yiheng Li1∗ Ivan Laptev2 Shijian Lu1†
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 MBZUAI
https://github.com/xing0047/cca-llava.git

Abstract
Recent Large Vision Language Models (LVLMs) present remarkable zero-shot
conversational and reasoning capabilities given multimodal queries. Nevertheless,
they suffer from object hallucination, a phenomenon where LVLMs are prone to
generate textual responses not factually aligned with image inputs. Our pilot study
reveals that object hallucination is closely tied with Rotary Position Encoding
(RoPE), a widely adopted positional dependency modeling design in existing
LVLMs. Due to the long-term decay in RoPE, LVLMs tend to hallucinate more
when relevant visual cues are distant from instruction tokens in the multimodal
input sequence. Additionally, we observe a similar effect when reversing the
sequential order of visual tokens during multimodal alignment. Our tests indicate
that long-term decay in RoPE poses challenges to LVLMs while capturing visualinstruction interactions across long distances. We propose Concentric Causal
Attention (CCA), a simple yet effective positional alignment strategy that mitigates
the impact of RoPE long-term decay in LVLMs by naturally reducing relative
distance between visual and instruction tokens. With CCA, visual tokens can better
interact with instruction tokens, thereby enhancing model’s perception capability
and alleviating object hallucination. Without bells and whistles, our positional
alignment method surpasses existing hallucination mitigation strategies by large
margins on multiple object hallucination benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) [46, 45, 84, 71, 6, 15, 5] have drawn increasing attention
from the AI research community due to their impressive power in understanding the visual world
and unprecedented ability to interact with humans via conversations. Their capability to process
multimodal sequences has opened up new possibilities for a wide range of vision and language
tasks [32, 2], such as handling interleaved image-text inputs [4, 35] and interactive user queries [82].
However, existing LVLMs still suffer from object hallucination [57, 41, 44, 14], a tendency to
generate inaccurate responses that are not factually aligned with image inputs. Such phenomenon
challenges the faithfulness and reliability of LVLMs in practical use, impeding their deployments to
real-world applications [14].
A wide range of approaches have been proposed to mitigate object hallucination in LVLMs. One
straightforward approach involves post-hoc correction using revisor models [73, 83], reducing
occurrences of hallucinated responses. Another viable approach is to improve supervised fine-tuning
by diversifying instruction tuning data [43] or additionally aligning model responses with human
preference [62, 76]. Despite their effectiveness in mitigating LVLM object hallucination, acquiring
high-quality annotations can be labor-intensive, making these approaches costly to implement.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

