Improved Particle Approximation Error for
Mean Field Neural Networks
Atsushi Nitanda
CFAR and IHPC, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A⋆STAR), Singapore
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
atsushi_nitanda@cfar.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract
Mean-field Langevin dynamics (MFLD) minimizes an entropy-regularized nonlinear convex
functional defined over the space of probability distributions. MFLD has gained attention
due to its connection with noisy gradient descent for mean-field two-layer neural networks.
Unlike standard Langevin dynamics, the nonlinearity of the objective functional induces
particle interactions, necessitating multiple particles to approximate the dynamics in a finiteparticle setting. Recent works (Chen et al., 2022; Suzuki et al., 2023b) have demonstrated
the uniform-in-time propagation of chaos for MFLD, showing that the gap between the
particle system and its mean-field limit uniformly shrinks over time as the number of
particles increases. In this work, we improve the dependence on logarithmic Sobolev
inequality (LSI) constants in their particle approximation errors which can exponentially
deteriorate with the regularization coefficient. Specifically, we establish an LSI-constantfree particle approximation error concerning the objective gap by leveraging the problem
structure in risk minimization. As the application, we demonstrate improved convergence of
MFLD, sampling guarantee for the mean-field stationary distribution, and uniform-in-time
Wasserstein propagation of chaos in terms of particle complexity.

1

Introduction

In this work, we consider the following entropy-regularized mean-field optimization problem:
L(µ) = F (µ) + λEnt(µ),

(1)

d
where F : P
is a convex functional on the space of probability distributions P2 (Rd ) and
R 2 (R ) → Rdµ
Ent(µ) = µ(dx) log dx (x) is a negative entropy. Especially we focus on the learning problem
of mean-field neural networks, that is, F (µ) is a risk of (infinitely wide) two-layer neural networks
EX∼µ [h(X, ·)] where h(X, ·) represents a single neuron with parameter X. One advantage of this
problem is that the convexity of F with respect to µ can be leveraged to analyze gradient-based
PN
methods for a finite-size two-layer neural network: N1 i=1 h(xi , ·) (xi ∈ Rd ). This is achieved
by translating the optimization dynamics of the finite-dimensional parameters (x1 , . . . , xN ) ∈ RdN
PN
into the dynamics of µ via the mean-field limit: N1 i=1 δxi → µ (N → ∞). This connection was
pointed out by Nitanda and Suzuki (2017); Mei et al. (2018); Chizat and Bach (2018); Rotskoff and
Vanden-Eijnden (2022); Sirignano and Spiliopoulos (2020b,a) in the case of λ = 0, and used for
showing the global convergence of the gradient flow for (1) by Mei et al. (2018); Chizat and Bach
(2018).

One may consider adding Gaussian noise to the gradient descent to make the method more stable.
Then, we arrive at the following mean-field Langevin dynamics (MFLD) (Hu et al., 2019; Mei et al.,
2018) as a continuous-time representation under N = ∞ of this noisy gradient descent.
dXt = −∇

√
δF (µt )
(Xt )dt + 2λdWt , µt = Law(Xt ),
δµ

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

(2)

