The Iterative Optimal Brain Surgeon: Faster Sparse
Recovery by Leveraging Second-Order Information
Diyuan Wu1

Ionut-Vlad Modoranu1

Denis Kuznedelev2,3
1

Mher Safaryan1

Dan Alistarh1

Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA)

2

Yandex Research

3

Skoltech

Abstract
The rising footprint of machine learning has led to a focus on imposing model
sparsity as a means of reducing computational and memory costs. For deep neural
networks (DNNs), the state-of-the-art accuracy-vs-sparsity is achieved by heuristics
inspired by the classical Optimal Brain Surgeon (OBS) framework [LeCun et al.,
1989, Hassibi and Stork, 1992, Hassibi et al., 1993], which leverages loss curvature
information to make better pruning decisions. Yet, these results still lack a solid
theoretical understanding, and it is unclear whether they can be improved by
leveraging connections to the wealth of work on sparse recovery algorithms. In this
paper, we draw new connections between these two areas and present new sparse
recovery algorithms inspired by the OBS framework that comes with theoretical
guarantees under reasonable assumptions and have strong practical performance.
Specifically, our work starts from the observation that we can leverage curvature
information in OBS-like fashion upon the projection step of classic iterative sparse
recovery algorithms such as IHT. We show for the first time that this leads both
to improved convergence bounds under standard assumptions. Furthermore, we
present extensions of this approach to the practical task of obtaining accurate sparse
DNNs, and validate it experimentally at scale for Transformer-based models on
vision and language tasks.

1

Introduction

The increased focus on efficiency in machine learning has led to significant interest in sparsity as
a means of reducing both the computational and memory costs of training and executing accurate
models, with literally hundreds of methods being proposed recently [Hoefler et al., 2021].The key
trade-off in this context is between the degree of sparsity imposed and the accuracy of the dense
(uncompressed) model.
Currently, the best performing post-training methods for DNNs are inspired by the Optimal Brain
Damage (OBD) framework of LeCun et al. [1989], generalized via the Optimal Brain Surgeon (OBS)
approach of Hassibi and Stork [1992], Hassibi et al. [1993].1 In brief, OBD/OBS poses accurate
pruning as a constrained optimization problem, and approximates the optimal solution by leveraging
second-order information about the loss function to make better pruning decisions. Recently, there
has been significant work on versions of OBS that can scale to deep neural networks (DNNs), leading
to surprisingly good results at scale [Frantar and Alistarh, 2022, 2023]. Yet, no theoretical guarantees
are known for OBS-type algorithms.
1
The two frameworks primarily differ in the second-order approximation. Since OBS is a strict generalization
of OBD, in the following we use OBS to denote the pruning framework.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

