Online Learning with Sublinear Best-Action Queries

Matteo Russo
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
mrusso@diag.uniroma1.it

Andrea Celli
Bocconi University, Italy
andrea.celli2@unibocconi.it

Riccardo Colini-Baldeschi
Meta, Central Applied Science, UK
rickuz@meta.com

Federico Fusco
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
fuscof@diag.uniroma1.it

Daniel Haimovich
Meta, Central Applied Science, UK
danielha@meta.com

Dima Karamshuk
Meta, Central Applied Science, UK
karamshuk@meta.com

Stefano Leonardi
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
leonardi@diag.uniroma1.it

Niek Tax
Meta, Central Applied Science, UK
niek@meta.com

Abstract
In online learning, a decision maker repeatedly selects one of a set of actions,
with the goal of minimizing the overall loss incurred. Following the recent line
of research on algorithms endowed with additional predictive features, we revisit
this problem by allowing the decision maker to acquire additional information on
the actions to be selected. In particular, we study the power of best-action queries,
which reveal beforehand the identity of the best action at a given time step. In
practice, predictive features may be expensive, so we allow the decision maker
to issue at most k such queries. We establish tight bounds on the performance
any algorithm can achieve when given access to k best-action queries for different
types of feedback models. In particular, we prove that in the√full feedback model, k
queries are enough to achieve an optimal regret of Θ(min{ T , T/k}). This finding
highlights the significant multiplicative advantage
in the regret rate achievable with
√
even a modest (sublinear) number k ∈ Ω( T ) of queries. Additionally, we study
the challenging setting in which the only available feedback is obtained during the
time steps corresponding√to the k best-action queries. There, we provide a tight
√
2
regret rate of Θ(min{T/ k, T /k2 }), which improves over the standard Θ(T/ k)
regret rate for label efficient prediction for k ∈ Ω(T 2/3 ).

1

Introduction

Online learning is a foundational problem in machine learning. In its simplest version, a decision
maker repeatedly interacts with a fixed set of n actions over a time horizon T . At each time, the
decision maker needs to choose one of a set of actions; subsequently, it receives an action-dependent
loss and observes some feedback. These loss functions are generated by an omniscient (but oblivious)
adversary and are only revealed on-the-go. The goal of the decision maker is to design a learning
algorithm that achieves small regret with respect to the best fixed action in hindsight, i.e., the difference
between the decision maker’s loss and that of the fixed action. Several online learning algorithms
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

