Panacea: Pareto Alignment via Preference Adaptation
for LLMs
Yifan Zhong1,2∗ , Chengdong Ma1,2∗ , Xiaoyuan Zhang3∗ , Ziran Yang4 , Haojun Chen1,2
Qingfu Zhang3 , Siyuan Qi2 , Yaodong Yang1

Abstract
Current methods for large language model alignment typically use scalar human preference labels. However, this convention tends to oversimplify the multidimensional and heterogeneous nature of human preferences, leading to reduced
expressivity and even misalignment. This paper presents Panacea, an innovative
approach that reframes alignment as a multi-dimensional preference optimization
problem. Panacea trains a single model capable of adapting online and Paretooptimally to diverse sets of preferences without the need for further tuning. A
major challenge here is using a low-dimensional preference vector to guide the
model’s behavior, despite it being governed by an overwhelmingly large number
of parameters. To address this, Panacea is designed to use singular value decomposition (SVD)-based low-rank adaptation, which allows the preference vector to
be simply injected online as singular values. Theoretically, we prove that Panacea
recovers the entire Pareto front with common loss aggregation methods under
mild conditions. Moreover, our experiments demonstrate, for the first time, the
feasibility of aligning a single LLM to represent an exponentially vast spectrum
of human preferences through various optimization methods. Our work marks a
step forward in effectively and efficiently aligning models to diverse and intricate
human preferences in a controllable and Pareto-optimal manner.

1

Introduction

AI alignment aims to ensure AI systems align with human intentions, and there has been notable
progress in this area, especially for large language models (LLMs) [29, 12, 30, 2]. The prevailing
approach for LLM alignment involves curating a dataset {(x, y1 , y2 , z)}, where each prompt x is
associated with a pair of responses (y1 , y2 ) and a scalar label z ∈ {0, 1} that indicates if y1 is a “better”
response. These labels are typically generated based on detailed guidelines that encompass various
criteria, reflecting multiple dimensions i ∈ {1, · · · , m} of human preferences (e.g., helpfulness,
harmlessness, conciseness, humor, formality). Pre-trained models are subsequently further optimized
on this dataset using methods including reinforcement learning, supervised learning, or gametheoretical approaches [27, 42, 32, 6, 44, 4, 47, 40]. However, this single-objective alignment
methodology may not fully capture the complexity of real-world scenarios for two reasons (Figure 1).
First, this method can lead to inconsistency and ambiguity in data labels. Human labelers assign
scalar labels z by implicitly evaluating responses across every dimension i with different preference
weights to i, and reaching a final judgment. These differences often result in conflicting labels, causing
misalignment or learning failures (Appendix B), substantiated by the low average label agreement
reported in [5]. Second, optimizing a single objective leads to only one model that attempts to fit
the potentially conflicting labeling preferences, i.e., the helpfulness-harmlessness dilemma. This
∗

Equal contribution. 1 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University. 2 State Key Laboratory of
General Artificial Intelligence. 3 Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong. 4 Yuanpei
College, Peking University. Correspondence to: Yaodong Yang <yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn>
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

