How does Gradient Descent Learn Features – A Local
Analysis for Regularized Two-Layer Neural Networks

Mo Zhou∗
University of Washington
mozhou17@cs.washington.edu

Rong Ge
Duke University
rongge@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
The ability of learning useful features is one of the major advantages of neural
networks. Although recent works show that neural network can operate in a neural
tangent kernel (NTK) regime that does not allow feature learning, many works
also demonstrate the potential for neural networks to go beyond NTK regime
and perform feature learning. Recently, a line of work highlighted the feature
learning capabilities of the early stages of gradient-based training. In this paper we
consider another mechanism for feature learning via gradient descent through a
local convergence analysis. We show that once the loss is below a certain threshold,
gradient descent with a carefully regularized objective will capture ground-truth
directions. We further strengthen this local convergence analysis by incorporating
early-stage feature learning analysis. Our results demonstrate that feature learning
not only happens at the initial gradient steps, but can also occur towards the end of
training.

1

Introduction

Feature learning has long been considered to be a major advantage of neural networks. However,
how gradient-based training algorithms can learn useful features is not well-understood. In particular,
the most widely applied analysis for overparametrized neural networks is the neural tangent kernel
(NTK) (Jacot et al., 2018; Du et al., 2019; Allen-Zhu et al., 2019b). In this setting, the neurons don’t
move far from their initialization and the features are determined by the network architecture and
random initialization (Chizat et al., 2019).
While there are empirical and theoretical evidence on the limitation of NTK regime (Chizat et al.,
2019; Arora et al., 2019), extending the analysis beyond the NTK regime has been challenging. For
2-layer networks, an alternative framework for analyzing overparametrized neural networks called
mean-field analysis was introduced. Earlier mean-field analysis (e.g., Chizat and Bach, 2018; Mei
et al., 2018) require either infinite or exponentially many neurons. Later works (e.g., Li et al., 2020;
Ge et al., 2021; Bietti et al., 2022; Mahankali et al., 2024) can analyze the training dynamics of
mildly overparametrized networks with polynomially many neurons with stronger assumptions on
the ground-truth function.
Recently, a growing line of works (Daniely and Malach, 2020; Damian et al., 2022; Abbe et al., 2021,
2022, 2023; Yehudai and Shamir, 2019; Shi et al., 2022; Ba et al., 2022; Mousavi-Hosseini et al.,
2023; Barak et al., 2022; Dandi et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024; Nichani et al., 2024a,b) showed that
early stages of gradient training (either one/a few steps of gradient descent or a small amount of time
of gradient flow) can be useful in feature learning. These works show that after the early stages of
gradient training, the first layer in a 2-layer neural network already captures useful features (usually
in the form of a low dimensional subspace), and continuing training the second layer weights will
∗

Work done at Duke University.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

