Linking In-context Learning in Transformers to
Human Episodic Memory

Li Ji-An ∗
Neurosciences Graduate Program
University of California, San Diego
jil095@ucsd.edu

Corey Y Zhou ∗
Department of Cognitive Science
University of California, San Diego
yiz329@ucsd.edu

Marcus K. Benna †
Department of Neurobiology
University of California, San Diego
mbenna@ucsd.edu

Marcelo G. Mattar †
Department of Psychology
New York University
marcelo.mattar@nyu.edu

Abstract
Understanding connections between artificial and biological intelligent systems
can reveal fundamental principles of general intelligence. While many artificial
intelligence models have a neuroscience counterpart, such connections are largely
missing in Transformer models and the self-attention mechanism. Here, we examine the relationship between interacting attention heads and human episodic
memory. We focus on induction heads, which contribute to in-context learning in
Transformer-based large language models (LLMs). We demonstrate that induction
heads are behaviorally, functionally, and mechanistically similar to the contextual
maintenance and retrieval (CMR) model of human episodic memory. Our analyses
of LLMs pre-trained on extensive text data show that CMR-like heads often emerge
in the intermediate and late layers, qualitatively mirroring human memory biases.
The ablation of CMR-like heads suggests their causal role in in-context learning.
Our findings uncover a parallel between the computational mechanisms of LLMs
and human memory, offering valuable insights into both research fields.

1

Introduction

Neural networks often bear striking similarities to biological intelligence. For instance, convolutional
networks trained on computer vision tasks can predict neuronal activities in the visual cortex [1–4].
Recurrent neural networks trained on spatial navigation develop neural representations similar to
the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus [5, 6], and those trained on reward-based tasks recapitulate
biological decision-making behaviors [7]. Feedforward networks trained on category learning
exhibit human-like attentional bias [8]. Identifying commonalities between artificial and biological
intelligence offers unique insights into both model properties and the brain’s cognitive functions.
In contrast to this long tradition of drawing parallels between AI models and biology, exploration of
the biological relevance of the Transformer architecture — originally proposed for natural language
translation [9] — remains limited, with many researchers in neuroscience, cognitive science, and
deep learning viewing it as being fundamentally different from the brain. So far, Transformers have
been linked to generalized Hopfield networks [10], neural activities in the language cortex [11–13],
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Co-senior author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

