Global Distortions from Local Rewards: Neural
Coding Strategies in Path-Integrating Neural Systems

Francisco Acosta
Department of Physics
UC Santa Barbara
facosta@ucsb.edu

Fatih Dinc
CNC Program
Stanford University

William T. Redman
Applied Physics Laboratory
Johns Hopkins University

Manu Madhav
Biomedical Engineering
University of British Columbia

David Klindt
NeuroAI
CSHL

Nina Miolane
Electrical & Computer Engineering
UC Santa Barbara

Abstract
Grid cells in the mammalian brain are fundamental to spatial navigation, and
therefore crucial to how animals perceive and interact with their environment. Traditionally, grid cells are thought support path integration through highly symmetric
hexagonal lattice firing patterns. However, recent findings show that their firing
patterns become distorted in the presence of significant spatial landmarks such as
rewarded locations. This introduces a novel perspective of dynamic, subjective,
and action-relevant interactions between spatial representations and environmental
cues. Here, we propose a practical and theoretical framework to quantify and
explain these interactions. To this end, we train path-integrating recurrent neural
networks (piRNNs) on a spatial navigation task, whose goal is to predict the agent’s
position with a special focus on rewarded locations. Grid-like neurons naturally
emerge from the training of piRNNs, which allows us to investigate how the two
aspects of the task, space and reward, are integrated in their firing patterns. We
find that geometry, but not topology, of the grid cell population code becomes
distorted. Surprisingly, these distortions are global in the firing patterns of the grid
cells despite local changes in the reward. Our results indicate that after training
with location-specific reward information, the preserved representational topology supports successful path integration, whereas the emergent heterogeneity in
individual responses due to global distortions may encode dynamically changing
environmental cues. By bridging the gap between computational models and the
biological reality of spatial navigation under reward information, we offer new
insights into how neural systems prioritize environmental landmarks in their spatial
navigation code.

1

Introduction

Motivation Neuroscientists describe computations in the brain by jointly considering the firing
activity of a population of N neurons in neural state space RN . In this space, each basis vector
corresponds to one neuron, one point summarizes the activity of all neurons at a given instant, and
a trajectory in neural state space describes the time evolution of the firing of all neurons. Across
many brain regions and modalities, these trajectories have been observed to be mostly constrained
to a lower dimensional manifold within the state space: the neural manifold (see Figure 1 right).
Such manifolds have been observed in the motor cortex [1, 2], the hippocampus [3, 4], visual
cortex [5, 6], head direction circuit [7, 8], and grid cells in the entorhinal cortex [9]. Characterizing
the geometric properties of neural manifolds including their dimension, topology, and curvature
enables a wholistic understanding of multi-neuron activity through time, and a quantified approach to
describe computations in the brain [10, 11, 12].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

