VISA: Variational Inference with Sequential
Sample-Average Approximations

Heiko Zimmermann
h.zimmermann@uva.nl

Christian A. Naesseth
c.a.naesseth@uva.nl

Jan-Willem van de Meent
j.w.vandemeent@uva.nl

Amsterdam Machine Learning Lab
University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Abstract
We present variational inference with sequential sample-average approximations
(VISA), a method for approximate inference in computationally intensive models,
such as those based on numerical simulations. VISA extends importance-weighted
forward-KL variational inference (IWFVI) by employing a sequence of sampleaverage approximations, which are considered valid inside a trust region. This
makes it possible to reuse model evaluations across multiple gradient steps, thereby
reducing computational cost. We perform experiments on high-dimensional Gaussians, Lotka-Volterra dynamics, and a Pickover attractor. We demonstrate that
VISA can achieve comparable approximation accuracy to standard importanceweighted forward-KL variational inference while requirering significantly fewer
samples for conservatively chosen learning rates.

1

Introduction

Gradient-based methods have become the workhorse for inference in simulation-based models. When
a model defines a fully differentiable density, methods based on Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (Duane
et al., 1987; Neal et al., 2011) and reparameterized variational inference (Kingma & Welling, 2013;
Rezende et al., 2014) are often considered the gold standard for generating high quality samples
from the posterior distribution. However, it is not always practical or possible to use a differentiable
model. The implementation of the simulator may not support differentiation, or the model itself
may not be differentiable, for example because it employs discrete random variables or stochastic
control flow. In such cases, inference falls back on methods based on score-function estimators
(Glynn, 1990; Wingate & Weber, 2013; Ranganath et al., 2014) or IWFVI, which derives from
reweighted wake-sleep methods (Bornschein & Bengio, 2015; Le et al., 2018). These methods are
often less efficient, as a larger number of samples is required to compensate for higher variance
gradient estimates. This can be problematic when a model is expensive to evaluate, for example
because evaluation involves numerical simulations. Nonetheless, these methods remain the most
viable option in a substantial number of use cases.
In this paper, we present VISA, a method that can substantially improve the computational efficiency
of variational inference for models that are non-differentiable and computationally intensive. VISA is
designed for applications where evaluation of the variational approximation is cheap relative to that
of the model. Here we can save computation by reusing model evaluations across multiple updates
of the variational posterior. To this end, we adapt IWFVI to employ a series of sample-average
approximations (SAAs) (Nemirovski et al., 2009; Kim et al., 2015), which use a fixed set of samples
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

