CryoGEM: Physics-Informed Generative
Cryo-Electron Microscopy

Jiakai Zhang1,2

∗

∗

Qihe Chen1,2

Xuming He1
1

Yan Zeng1,2

Zhijie Liu1,3

Wenyuan Gao1

Jingyi Yu1

ShanghaiTech University
2
Cellverse
3
iHuman Institute

{zhangjk,chenqh2024, zengyan2024,gaowy,hexm,liuzhj,yujingyi}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
In the past decade, deep conditional generative models have revolutionized the
generation of realistic images, extending their application from entertainment to
scientific domains. Single-particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) is crucial
in resolving near-atomic resolution 3D structures of proteins, such as the SARSCOV-2 spike protein. To achieve high-resolution reconstruction, a comprehensive
data processing pipeline has been adopted. However, its performance is still limited
as it lacks high-quality annotated datasets for training. To address this, we introduce
physics-informed generative cryo-electron microscopy (CryoGEM), which for the
first time integrates physics-based cryo-EM simulation with a generative unpaired
noise translation to generate physically correct synthetic cryo-EM datasets with
realistic noises. Initially, CryoGEM simulates the cryo-EM imaging process based
on a virtual specimen. To generate realistic noises, we leverage an unpaired noise
translation via contrastive learning with a novel mask-guided sampling scheme.
Extensive experiments show that CryoGEM is capable of generating authentic cryoEM images. The generated dataset can be used as training data for particle picking
and pose estimation models, eventually improving the reconstruction resolution.

1

Introduction

In the past decade, deep generative models like VAEs [24], GANs [13], and diffusion models [16]
have achieved significant success in conditional image generation. Recently, Stable Diffusion [43]
can produce high-quality images given simple textual descriptions. Additional controls [62] can be
imposed to produce tailored visual effects, e.g., theatrical lighting [39] and specific perspectives [31].
In fact, the successes of image generation have gone way beyond visual pleasantness, stimulating
significant advances in scientific explorations. Examples include brain magnetic resonance imaging to
computational tomography (MRI-to-CT) translation [58], X-ray image generation [49], etc. Different
from entertainment applications, generation techniques for scientific imaging should faithfully follow
the physical process: the generated results would eventually be applied to real-world downstream
tasks such as medical image diagnosis. In this work, we extend image generation to a specific
biomolecular imaging technique, single-particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) to improve
the performance of its downstream tasks. Cryo-EM aims to recover the near-atomic resolution 3D
structure of proteins, with its latest application in recovering the SARS-COV-2 spike protein [59]
structure for drug development.
∗

The authors contributed equally to this work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

