Rethinking the Capacity of Graph Neural Networks
for Branching Strategy

Ziang Chen
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
ziang@mit.edu

Jialin Liu
University of Central Florida
jialin.liu@ucf.edu

Xiaohan Chen
Xinshang Wang
Wotao Yin
Alibaba US, DAMO Academy
{xiaohan.chen,xinshang.w,wotao.yin}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been widely used to predict properties and
heuristics of mixed-integer linear programs (MILPs) and hence accelerate MILP
solvers. This paper investigates the capacity of GNNs to represent strong branching
(SB), the most effective yet computationally expensive heuristic employed in the
branch-and-bound algorithm. In the literature, message-passing GNN (MP-GNN),
as the simplest GNN structure, is frequently used as a fast approximation of SB and
we find that not all MILPs’s SB can be represented with MP-GNN. We precisely
define a class of "MP-tractable" MILPs for which MP-GNNs can accurately approximate SB scores. Particularly, we establish a universal approximation theorem: for
any data distribution over the MP-tractable class, there always exists an MP-GNN
that can approximate the SB score with arbitrarily high accuracy and arbitrarily
high probability, which lays a theoretical foundation of the existing works on
imitating SB with MP-GNN. For MILPs without the MP-tractability, unfortunately,
a similar result is impossible, which can be illustrated by two MILP instances with
different SB scores that cannot be distinguished by any MP-GNN, regardless of
the number of parameters. Recognizing this, we explore another GNN structure
called the second-order folklore GNN (2-FGNN) that overcomes this limitation,
and the aforementioned universal approximation theorem can be extended to the
entire MILP space using 2-FGNN, regardless of the MP-tractability. A small-scale
numerical experiment is conducted to directly validate our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Mixed-integer linear programming (MILP) involves optimization problems with linear objectives and
constraints, where some variables must be integers. These problems appear in various fields, from
logistics and supply chain management to planning and scheduling, and are in general NP-hard. The
branch-and-bound (BnB) algorithm [33] is the core of a MILP solver. It works by repeatedly solving
relaxed versions of the problem, called linear relaxations, which allow the integer variables to take on
fractional values. If a relaxation’s solution satisfies the integer requirements, it is a valid solution to
the original problem. Otherwise, the algorithm divides the problem into two subproblems and solves
their relaxations. This process continues until it finds the best solution that meets all the constraints.
Branching is the process of dividing a linear relaxation into two subproblems. When branching,
the solver selects a variable with a fractional value in the relaxation’s solution and create two new
subproblems. In one subproblem, the variable is forced to be less than or equal to the nearest integer
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

