Computerized Adaptive Testing via
Collaborative Ranking
Zirui Liu1 , Yan Zhuang1 , Qi Liu1,2∗, Jiatong Li1 , Yuren Zhang1 , Zhenya Huang1 ,
Jinze Wu3 , Shijin Wang3
1: State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence,
University of Science and Technology of China
2: Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
3: iFLYTEK Co., Ltd
{liuzirui,zykb,cslijt,yr160698,hxwjz}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{qiliuql,huangzhy}@ustc.edu.cn, sjwang3@iflytek.com

Abstract
As the deep integration of machine learning and intelligent education, Computerized Adaptive Testing (CAT) has received more and more research attention.
Compared to traditional paper-and-pencil tests, CAT can deliver both personalized
and interactive assessments by automatically adjusting testing questions according
to the performance of students during the test process. Therefore, CAT has been
recognized as an efficient testing methodology capable of accurately estimating
a student’s ability with a minimal number of questions, leading to its widespread
adoption in mainstream selective exams such as the GMAT and GRE. However,
just improving the accuracy of ability estimation is far from satisfactory in the
real-world scenarios, since an accurate ranking of students is usually more important (e.g., in high-stakes exams). Considering the shortage of existing CAT
solutions in student ranking, this paper emphasizes the importance of aligning
test outcomes (student ranks) with the true underlying abilities of students. Along
this line, different from the conventional independent testing paradigm among
students, we propose a novel collaborative framework, Collaborative Computerized Adaptive Testing (CCAT), that leverages inter-student information to enhance
student ranking. By using collaborative students as anchors to assist in ranking
test-takers, CCAT can give both theoretical guarantees and experimental validation
for ensuring ranking consistency.

1

Introduction

With the rapid advancements in computer science, online education has undergone significant
transformation, reshaping and displacing traditional offline educational assessment techniques. In
this evolving landscape, Computerized Adaptive Testing (CAT) [1, 2] has emerged as a prominent
methodology for standardized testing, widely adopted in selective exams such as the GMAT [3], GRE
[4], and TOEFL [5]. Diverging from traditional paper-and-pencil tests, CAT offers personalized and
interactive assessments, where the difficulty and characteristics of questions are continuously adapted
based on real-time responses. By aligning questions with current estimation of students’ abilities,
CAT refines the estimation process each iterative step [6]. Upon test completion, the final ability
score shown in Figure 1(a) is provided as score report to students. This score plays a pivotal role in
influencing their educational and career prospects.
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

