Pretraining with Random Noise for Fast and Robust
Learning without Weight Transport

Jeonghwan Cheon1 Sang Wan Lee1,2,3 Se-Bum Paik1
1
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences,
2
Graduate School of Data Science, 3 Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
{jeonghwan518, sangwan, sbpaik}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
The brain prepares for learning even before interacting with the environment, by
refining and optimizing its structures through spontaneous neural activity that
resembles random noise. However, the mechanism of such a process has yet to
be understood, and it is unclear whether this process can benefit the algorithm
of machine learning. Here, we study this issue using a neural network with a
feedback alignment algorithm, demonstrating that pretraining neural networks with
random noise increases the learning efficiency as well as generalization abilities
without weight transport. First, we found that random noise training modifies
forward weights to match backward synaptic feedback, which is necessary for
teaching errors by feedback alignment. As a result, a network with pre-aligned
weights learns notably faster and reaches higher accuracy than a network without
random noise training, even comparable to the backpropagation algorithm. We
also found that the effective dimensionality of weights decreases in a network
pretrained with random noise. This pre-regularization allows the network to learn
simple solutions of a low rank, reducing the generalization error during subsequent
training. This also enables the network to robustly generalize a novel, out-ofdistribution dataset. Lastly, we confirmed that random noise pretraining reduces
the amount of meta-loss, enhancing the network ability to adapt to various tasks.
Overall, our results suggest that random noise training with feedback alignment
offers a straightforward yet effective method of pretraining that facilitates quick
and reliable learning without weight transport.

1

Introduction

The brain refines its network structure and synaptic connections even before birth, without exposure
to sensory stimuli [1–4]. In the early developmental stages, the spontaneous neuronal activity that
appears in various brain regions is considered to play a critical role during the development of
neuronal circuits by pruning neural wiring and adjusting synaptic plasticity [5–8]. If this activity is
disrupted during the developmental stages, the outcome can be long-lasting neuronal deficits [9–11].
Computational studies suggest that such a refined network structure enables certain crucial functions
of the brain, such as initializing function [12–15] and structure [16, 17]. These experimental and
theoretical studies commonly indicate that spontaneous, random neuronal activity plays a critical
role in the development of the biological neural network before data are encountered by the network.
However, the detailed mechanism of how these prenatal processes contribute to learning after birth,
i.e., with subsequent sensory stimuli, remains elusive.
At the synaptic level, learning can be defined as the process by which the brain adjusts the strength
of synaptic connections between neurons to optimize the network for a specific task [18–20]. The
synaptic weights of each neuron can change to minimize the error between the expected and the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

