Self-Taught Recognizer: Toward Unsupervised
Adaptation for Speech Foundation Models

Yuchen Hu1,† Chen Chen1,† Chao-Han Huck Yang2 Chengwei Qin1
Pin-Yu Chen3 Eng Siong Chng1 Chao Zhang4
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 NVIDIA Research
3
IBM Research 4 Tsinghua University
{yuchen005, chen1436}@e.ntu.edu.sg, hucky@nvidia.com

Abstract
We propose an unsupervised adaptation framework, Self-TAught Recognizer
(STAR), which leverages unlabeled data to enhance the robustness of automatic
speech recognition (ASR) systems in diverse target domains, such as noise and
accents. STAR is developed for prevalent speech foundation models based on
Transformer-related architecture with auto-regressive decoding (e.g., Whisper,
Canary; SeamlessM4T). Specifically, we propose a novel indicator that empirically integrates step-wise information during decoding to assess the token-level
quality of pseudo labels without ground truth, thereby guiding model updates for
effective unsupervised adaptation. Experimental results show that STAR achieves
an average of 13.5% relative reduction in word error rate across 14 target domains, and it sometimes even approaches the upper-bound performance of supervised adaptation. Meanwhile, we observe that STAR prevents the adapted
model from the catastrophic forgetting problem without recalling source-domain
data. Furthermore, STAR exhibits high data efficiency that only requires less
than one-hour unlabeled data, and seamless generality to alternative large speech
models in recognition and translation tasks. Our code is publicly available at:
https://github.com/YUCHEN005/STAR-Adapt.

1

Introduction

Human speech, characterized by its inherent acoustic nuances [70] and variability across speakers [27],
is further complicated by the diverse and unpredictable environments. These factors contribute to
significant domain distinctions in the speech signal, with differences in accent, speaking style, and
background noise (visualized in Appendix B). Consequently, this diversity poses significant challenges
in the field of automatic speech recognition (ASR), especially under diverse conditions [51].
In recent years, advancements in ASR technology [30, 84, 12, 73] have been boosted, primarily
by the use of deep neural models and supervised learning with high-quality datasets. In particular,
end-to-end ASR models pre-trained on industry-scale datasets have been made publicly available
to the research community, such as OpenAI Whisper [73], Meta SeamlessM4T [4] and NVIDIA
Canary [71]. Considering the high diversity of speech domains, even a well-trained ASR foundation
model usually performs less satisfactorily when encountering a domain shift problem [49, 83, 85].
This performance degradation stems from a critical dilemma: collecting and labelling sufficient
training data in the target domain is immensely time-consuming and labour-intensive, thus hindering
the domain adaptation process of ASR models. Some existing efforts [32, 44] focus on leveraging
labelled source domain and unlabeled target domain data to enhance the ASR performance, as shown
† Equal Contribution.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

