Neural Collapse versus Low-rank Bias:
Is Deep Neural Collapse Really Optimal?

Peter Súkeník
Institute of Science and Technology Austria
3400 Klosterneuburg, Austria
peter.sukenik@ista.ac.at

Christoph Lampert∗
Institute of Science and Technology Austria
3400 Klosterneuburg, Austria
chl@ista.ac.at

Marco Mondelli∗
Institute of Science and Technology Austria
3400 Klosterneuburg, Austria
marco.mondelli@ista.ac.at

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) exhibit a surprising structure in their final layer
known as neural collapse (NC), and a growing body of works has currently investigated the propagation of neural collapse to earlier layers of DNNs – a phenomenon
called deep neural collapse (DNC). However, existing theoretical results are restricted to special cases: linear models, only two layers or binary classification.
In contrast, we focus on non-linear models of arbitrary depth in multi-class classification and reveal a surprising qualitative shift. As soon as we go beyond two
layers or two classes, DNC stops being optimal for the deep unconstrained features
model (DUFM) – the standard theoretical framework for the analysis of collapse.
The main culprit is a low-rank bias of multi-layer regularization schemes: this bias
leads to optimal solutions of even lower rank than the neural collapse. We support
our theoretical findings with experiments on both DUFM and real data, which show
the emergence of the low-rank structure in the solution found by gradient descent.

1

Introduction

What is the geometric structure of layers and learned representations in deep neural networks (DNNs)?
To address this question, Papyan et al. [39] focused on the very last layer of DNNs at convergence
and experimentally measured what is now widely known as Neural Collapse (NC). This phenomenon
refers to four properties that simultaneously emerge during the terminal phase of training: feature
vectors of training samples from the same class collapse to the common class-mean (NC1); the class
means form a simplex equiangular tight frame or an orthogonal frame (NC2); the class means are
aligned with the rows of the last layer’s weight matrix (NC3); and, finally, the classifier in the last
layer is a nearest class center classifier (NC4). Since the influential paper [39], a line of research has
aimed at explaining the emergence of NC theoretically, mostly focusing on the unconstrained features
model (UFM) [36]. In this model, motivated by the network’s perfect expressivity, one treats the last
layer’s feature vectors as a free variable and explicitly optimizes them together with the last layer’s
weight matrix, “peeling off” the rest of the network [9, 23]. With UFM, the NC was demonstrated in
a variety of settings, both as the global optimum and as the convergence point of gradient flow.
The emergence of the NC in the last layer led to a natural research question – does some form of
collapse propagate beyond the last layer to earlier layers of DNNs? A number of empirical works
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

