How Does Variance Shape the Regret
in Contextual Bandits?
Zeyu Jia
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
zyjia@mit.edu

Jian Qian
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
jianqian@mit.edu

Alexander Rakhlin
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
rakhlin@mit.edu

Chen-Yu Wei
University of Virginia
chenyu.wei@virginia.edu

Abstract
We consider realizable contextual bandits with general function approximation,
investigating how small reward variance can lead to better-than-minimax regret
bounds. Unlike in minimax regret bounds, we show that the eluder dimension
delu —a measure of the complexity of the function class—plays a crucial role in
variance-dependent bounds. We consider two types of adversary:
• Weak adversary: The adversary sets the reward variance before
p observing the
learner’s action. In this setting, we
prove
that
a
regret
of
Ω(
min{A, delu }Λ +
√
delu ) is unavoidable when delu ≤ AT , where A is the number of actions, T is
the total number of rounds, and Λ is the total variance over T√rounds. For the
A ≤ delu regime, we derive a nearly matching upper bound Õ( AΛ + delu ) for
the special case where the variance is revealed at the beginning of each round.
• Strong adversary: The adversary sets the reward
variance after observing the
√
learner’s action. We
show
that
a
regret
of
Ω(
d
Λ
+ delu ) is unavoidable when
elu
√
√
delu Λ√+ delu ≤ AT . In this setting, we provide an upper bound of order
Õ(delu Λ + delu ).
Furthermore, we examine the setting where the function class additionally provides
distributional information of the reward,
√ as studied by Wang et al. (2024). We
demonstrate that the regret bound Õ( √delu Λ + delu ) established in their work is
√
unimprovable when delu Λ + delu ≤ AT . However, with a slightly different
definition of the total variance and with the assumption
√ that the reward follows a
Gaussian distribution, one can achieve a regret of Õ( AΛ + delu ).

1

Introduction

We consider the contextual bandit problem that models repeated interactions between the learner and
the environment. In each round, the learner chooses an action based on the received context, and
observes the reward of the chosen action. Algorithms designed to achieve minimax regret guarantees
under a variety of statistical assumptions and computational models have been extensively studied
(Auer et al., 2002; Dudik et al., 2011; Agarwal et al., 2012, 2014; Foster and Rakhlin, 2020; Xu and
Zeevi, 2020; Simchi-Levi and Xu, 2022; Zhang, 2022).
However, these algorithms often fail to leverage the potentially benign nature of the environment.
In this work, we refine the regret bound by considering the variance of the reward. Such variancedependent regret bounds, also known as second-order regret bounds, have been primarily studied
under linear function approximation (Zhang et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2023). Notably,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

