DMNet: Self-comparison Driven Model for
Subject-independent Seizure Detection

Shihao Tu
Zhejiang University
shihao.tu@zju.edu.cn

Linfeng Cao
The Ohio State University
cao.1378@osu.edu

Junru Chen
Zhejiang University
jrchen_cali@zju.edu.cn

Lvbin Ma
Zhejiang Huayun
Information Technology Co. Ltd
gmmmfly@163.com

Daoze Zhang
Zhejiang University
zhangdz@zju.edu.cn
Yin Zhang
Zhejiang University
yinzh@zju.edu.cn

Yang Yang†
Zhejiang University
yangya@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Automated seizure detection (ASD) using intracranial electroencephalography
(iEEG) is critical for effective epilepsy treatment. However, the significant domain shift of iEEG signals across subjects poses a major challenge, limiting their
applicability in real-world clinical scenarios. In this paper, we address this issue
by analyzing the primary cause behind the failure of existing iEEG models for
subject-independent seizure detection, and identify a critical universal seizure
pattern: seizure events consistently exhibit higher average amplitude compared to
adjacent normal events. To mitigate the domain shifts and preserve the universal
seizure patterns, we propose a novel self-comparison mechanism. This mechanism
effectively aligns iEEG signals across subjects and time intervals. Based on these
findings, we propose Difference Matrix-based Neural Network (DMNet), a subjectindependent seizure detection model, which leverages self-comparison based on
two constructed (contextual, channel-level) references to mitigate shifts of iEEG,
and utilize a simple yet effective difference matrix to encode the universal seizure
patterns. Extensive experiments show that DMNet significantly outperforms previous SOTAs while maintaining high efficiency on a real-world clinical dataset that
we collected, as well as two public datasets for subject-independent seizure detection. Moreover, the visualization results demonstrate that the generated difference
matrix can effectively capture the seizure activity changes throughout the seizure
evolution process. Additionally, we deploy our method in an online diagnosis
system to illustrate its effectiveness in real clinical applications.

1

Introduction

Epilepsy, a chronic neurological disorder, affects more than 65 million people around the world. Up
to 70% of people with epilepsy can be free from seizure only if the seizure onset zone (SOZ) can
be located and surgically removed [26]. To diagnose epilepsy, doctors rely on the assessment of
†

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

