Constrained Latent Action Policies for
Model-Based Offline Reinforcement Learning
∗

Marvin Alles1,2 Philip Becker-Ehmck1 Patrick van der Smagt1,3 Maximilian Karl1
1
Machine Learning Research Lab, Volkswagen Group 2 Technical University of Munich
3
Eötvös Loránd University Budapest
{marvin.alles, philip.becker-ehmck, maximilian.karl}@volkswagen.de

Abstract
In offline reinforcement learning, a policy is learned using a static dataset in
the absence of costly feedback from the environment. In contrast to the online
setting, only using static datasets poses additional challenges, such as policies
generating out-of-distribution samples. Model-based offline reinforcement learning
methods try to overcome these by learning a model of the underlying dynamics
of the environment and using it to guide policy search. It is beneficial but, with
limited datasets, errors in the model and the issue of value overestimation among
out-of-distribution states can worsen performance. Current model-based methods
apply some notion of conservatism to the Bellman update, often implemented
using uncertainty estimation derived from model ensembles. In this paper, we
propose Constrained Latent Action Policies (C-LAP) which learns a generative
model of the joint distribution of observations and actions. We cast policy learning
as a constrained objective to always stay within the support of the latent action
distribution, and use the generative capabilities of the model to impose an implicit
constraint on the generated actions. Thereby eliminating the need to use additional
uncertainty penalties on the Bellman update and significantly decreasing the number
of gradient steps required to learn a policy. We empirically evaluate C-LAP on the
D4RL and V-D4RL benchmark, and show that C-LAP is competitive to state-ofthe-art methods, especially outperforming on datasets with visual observations.1

1

Introduction

Deep-learning methods are widely used in applications around computer vision and natural language
processing, related to the fact that datasets are abundant. But when used for control of physical
systems, in particular with reinforcement learning, obtaining data involves interaction with an
environment. Learning through trial-and-error and extensive exploration of an environment can
be done in simulation, but hard to achieve in real world scenarios [1, 2, 3]. Offline reinforcement
learning tries to solve this by using pre-collected datasets eliminating costly and unsafe training in
real-world environments [4, 5, 6].
Using online reinforcement learning methods in an offline setting often fails. A key issue is the
distributional shift: the state-action distribution of the offline dataset, driven by the behavior policy,
differs from the distribution generated by a learned policy. This leads to actions being inferred for
states outside the training distribution. Therefore, value-based methods are prone to overestimating
values due to evaluating policies on out-of-distribution states. This leads to poor performance and
unstable training because of bootstrapping [6, 7, 8]. Offline reinforcement learning methods address
∗
1

Corresponding author.
Code is available at: https://github.com/marvinalles/c-lap

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

