NanoBaseLib: A Multi-Task Benchmark Dataset for
Nanopore Sequencing

Guangzhao Cheng1

Chengbo Fu1

Lu Cheng1,2,∗

1

2

Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Finland
Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland, Finland

Abstract
Nanopore sequencing is the third-generation sequencing technology with capabilities of generating long-read sequences and directly measuring modifications on
DNA/RNA molecules, which makes it ideal for biological applications such as
human Telomere-to-Telomere (T2T) genome assembly, Ebola virus surveillance
and COVID-19 mRNA vaccine development. However, accuracies of computational methods in various tasks of Nanopore sequencing data analysis are far from
satisfactory. For instance, the base calling accuracy of Nanopore RNA sequencing
is ∼90%, while the aim is ∼99.9%. This highlights an urgent need of contributions
from the machine learning community. A bottleneck that prevents machine learning
researchers from entering this field is the lack of a large integrated benchmark
dataset. To this end, we present NanoBaseLib, a comprehensive multi-task benchmark dataset. It integrates 16 public datasets with over 30 million reads for four
critical tasks in Nanopore data analysis. To facilitate method development, we have
preprocessed all the raw data using a uniform workflow, stored all the intermediate
results in uniform formats, analysed test datasets with various baseline methods
for four benchmark tasks, and developed a software package to easily access these
results. NanoBaseLib is available at https://nanobaselib.github.io.

1

Introduction

Biological background. Nanopore sequencing represents the third-generation sequencing technology
characterized by its ability to produce ultra-long reads (>104 bp). In contrast, second-generation
sequencing, commonly known as next-generation sequencing (NGS) exemplified by Illumina sequencing, can only generate short reads (<300 bp) [1]. Oxford Nanopore Technologies (ONT) is
the main provider of Nanopore sequencing products. Due to its unique technological advantages,
Nanopore sequencing has been used in various biological applications. The well-known applications
include Telomere-to-Telomere (T2T) human genome project [2], rapid sequencing of SARS-CoV-2
genomes [3], Ebola virus surveillance [4], and direct RNA sequencing [5] that facilitates COVID-19
mRNA vaccine developments [6].
Nanopore sequencing technology measures the current signal by translocating a DNA/RNA molecule
through a nanoscale pore anchored on a lipid membrane, as illustrated in Figure 1. The shape, size,
and chemical properties of nucleotides in the pore jointly determine the current signals, which are
collected and utilized to infer the nucleotide sequence using computational methods (e.g., seq2seq
deep learning models). There are multiple nucleotides (usually 5) in the pore, which we term as kmer
(e.g., 5mer). The inferred kmers are assembled into a DNA/RNA sequence computationally, which
completes the sequencing process. Compared to Illumina sequencing, Nanopore sequencing not only
∗

Correspondence to: lu.cheng.ac@gmail.com.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

