MECD: Unlocking Multi-Event Causal Discovery in
Video Reasoning

Tieyuan Chen1∗ , Huabin Liu1∗ , Tianyao He1 , Yihang Chen1 , Chaofan Gan1 ,
Xiao Ma2 , Cheng Zhong2 , Yang Zhang2 , Yingxue Wang3 , Hui Lin3 , Weiyao Lin1†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Lenovo Research, AI Lab,
3
China Academic of Electronics and Information Technology
{tieyuanchen, huabinliu, wylin}@sjtu.edu.cn
https://github.com/tychen-SJTU/MECD-Benchmark

Abstract
Video causal reasoning aims to achieve a high-level understanding of video content
from a causal perspective. However, current video reasoning tasks are limited
in scope, primarily executed in a question-answering paradigm and focusing on
short videos containing only a single event and simple causal relationships, lacking
comprehensive and structured causality analysis for videos with multiple events.
To fill this gap, we introduce a new task and dataset, Multi-Event Causal Discovery
(MECD). It aims to uncover the causal relationships between events distributed
chronologically across long videos. Given visual segments and textual descriptions
of events, MECD requires identifying the causal associations between these events
to derive a comprehensive, structured event-level video causal diagram explaining
why and how the final result event occurred. To address MECD, we devise a novel
framework inspired by the Granger Causality method, using an efficient maskbased event prediction model to perform an Event Granger Test, which estimates
causality by comparing the predicted result event when premise events are masked
versus unmasked. Furthermore, we integrate causal inference techniques such
as front-door adjustment and counterfactual inference to address challenges in
MECD like causality confounding and illusory causality. Experiments validate the
effectiveness of our framework in providing causal relationships in multi-event
videos, outperforming GPT-4o and VideoLLaVA by 5.7% and 4.1%, respectively.

1

Introduction

Video causal reasoning aims to achieve a high-level understanding and analysis of video content from
a causal perspective. Video Question Answering (VQA) [1–5] represents one of the most prominent
tasks in causal reasoning, where models are tested on their causal ability to understand video content
through causal questions such as explanations, predictions, and counterfactual assumptions. Recently,
some studies have sought to move beyond the single QA task, attempting to construct more complex
and challenging video reasoning tasks and methodologies. For example, CLEVRER [5], V-CDN [6]
and CATER [7] explored more difficult causal reasoning tasks in virtual scenes by constructing
object-aware features or using graph neural networks. Neural-symbolic paradigm AAR [8] and
LMLN [9] extended to derive inference rules by symbolizing data. VAR [10] and BiGED [11]
extended to daily video causal reasoning by introducing causality during prediction.
However, current video causal reasoning tasks are still limited in scope (primarily QA-based) and
mainly focus on short videos containing only a single event or a few events. Most importantly, they
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

