Disentangled Style Domain for Implicit z-Watermark
Towards Copyright Protection

Junqiang Huang
Department of Computer Science
Fudan University
23210240188@m.fudan.edu.cn

Zhaojun Guo
Department of Computer Science
Fudan University
22110240087@m.fudan.edu.cn

Ge Luo
Department of Computer Science
Fudan University
gluo18@fudan.edu.cn

Zhenxing Qian∗
Department of Computer Science
Fudan University
zxqian@fudan.edu.cn

Sheng Li
Department of Computer Science
Fudan University
lisheng@fudan.edu.cn

Xinpeng Zhang∗
Department of Computer Science
Fudan University
zhangxinpeng@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Text-to-image models have shown surprising performance in high-quality image
generation, while also raising intensified concerns about the unauthorized usage
of personal dataset in training and personalized fine-tuning. Recent approaches,
embedding watermarks, introducing perturbations, and inserting backdoors into
datasets, rely on adding minor information vulnerable to adversarial training, limiting their ability to detect unauthorized data usage. In this paper, we introduce a
novel implicit Zero-Watermarking scheme that first utilizes the disentangled style
domain to detect unauthorized dataset usage in text-to-image models. Specifically,
our approach generates the watermark from the disentangled style domain, enabling
self-generalization and mutual exclusivity within the style domain anchored by
protected units. The domain achieves the maximum concealed offset of probability
distribution through both the injection of identifier z and dynamic contrastive
learning, facilitating the structured delineation of dataset copyright boundaries for
multiple sources of styles and contents. Additionally, we introduce the concept of
watermark distribution to establish a verification mechanism for copyright ownership of hybrid or partial infringements, addressing deficiencies in the traditional
mechanism of dataset copyright ownership for AI mimicry. Notably, our method
achieves one-sample verification for copyright ownership in AI mimic generations.
The code is available at: https://github.com/Hlufies/ZWatermarking

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in text-to-image generation technologies [1, 2, 3] have revolutionized art
creation by enabling users to replicate the unique styles of artists and art images through simple
prompts. Simultaneously, text-to-image personalization technologies [4, 5, 6, 7] make it easy to
fine-tune generative models with minimal online personal portfolios, which may not be authorized.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

