A Geometric View of Data Complexity: Efficient Local
Intrinsic Dimension Estimation with Diffusion Models
Hamidreza Kamkari Brendan Leigh Ross Rasa Hosseinzadeh
Jesse C. Cresswell Gabriel Loaiza-Ganem
{hamid, brendan, rasa, jesse, gabriel}@layer6.ai
Layer 6 AI, Toronto, Canada

Abstract
High-dimensional data commonly lies on low-dimensional submanifolds, and
estimating the local intrinsic dimension (LID) of a datum – i.e. the dimension of the
submanifold it belongs to – is a longstanding problem. LID can be understood as the
number of local factors of variation: the more factors of variation a datum has, the
more complex it tends to be. Estimating this quantity has proven useful in contexts
ranging from generalization in neural networks to detection of out-of-distribution
data, adversarial examples, and AI-generated text. The recent successes of deep
generative models present an opportunity to leverage them for LID estimation, but
current methods based on generative models produce inaccurate estimates, require
more than a single pre-trained model, are computationally intensive, or do not
exploit the best available deep generative models: diffusion models (DMs). In
this work, we show that the Fokker-Planck equation associated with a DM can
provide an LID estimator which addresses the aforementioned deficiencies. Our
estimator, called FLIPD, is easy to implement and compatible with all popular
DMs. Applying FLIPD to synthetic LID estimation benchmarks, we find that DMs
implemented as fully-connected networks are highly effective LID estimators that
outperform existing baselines. We also apply FLIPD to natural images where the
true LID is unknown. Despite being sensitive to the choice of network architecture,
FLIPD estimates remain a useful measure of relative complexity; compared to
competing estimators, FLIPD exhibits a consistently higher correlation with image
PNG compression rate and better aligns with qualitative assessments of complexity.
Notably, FLIPD is orders of magnitude faster than other LID estimators, and the
first to be tractable at the scale of Stable Diffusion.

1

Introduction

The manifold hypothesis [7], which has been empirically verified in contexts ranging from natural
images [49, 10] to calorimeter showers in physics [15], states that high-dimensional data of interest in
RD often lies on low-dimensional submanifolds of RD . For a given datum x ∈ RD , this hypothesis
motivates using its local intrinsic dimension (LID), denoted LID(x), as a natural measure of its
complexity. LID(x) corresponds to the dimension of the data manifold that x belongs to, and can
be intuitively understood as the minimal number of variables needed to describe x. More complex
data needs more variables to be adequately described, as illustrated in Figure 1. Data manifolds are
typically not known explicitly, meaning that LID must be estimated. Here we tackle the following
problem: given a dataset along with a query datum x, how can we tractably estimate LID(x)?
This is a longstanding problem, with LID estimates being highly useful due to their innate interpretation as a measure of complexity. For example, these estimates can be used to detect outliers
[27, 2, 32], AI-generated text [64], and adversarial examples [42]. Connections between the generalization achieved by a neural network and the LID estimates of its internal representations have also
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

