AP-Adapter: Improving Generalization of Automatic
Prompts on Unseen Text-to-Image Diffusion Models

Yuchen Fu Zhiwei Jiang∗ Yuliang Liu Cong Wang
Zexuan Deng Zhaoling Chen Qing Gu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
yuchenfu@smail.nju.edu.cn, jzw@nju.edu.cn
{yuliangliu,cw,dengzx,zhaolingchen}@smail.nju.edu.cn
guq@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent advancements in Automatic Prompt Optimization (APO) for text-to-image
generation have streamlined user input while ensuring high-quality image output.
However, most APO methods are trained assuming a fixed text-to-image model,
which is impractical given the emergence of new models. To address this, we
propose a novel task, model-generalized automatic prompt optimization (MGAPO),
which trains APO methods on a set of known models to enable generalization
to unseen models during testing. MGAPO presents significant challenges. First,
we experimentally confirm the suboptimal performance of existing APO methods
on unseen models. We then introduce a two-stage prompt optimization method,
AP-Adapter. In the first stage, a large language model is used to rewrite the prompts.
In the second stage, we propose a novel method to construct an enhanced representation space by leveraging inter-model differences. This space captures the
characteristics of multiple domain models, storing them as domain prototypes.
These prototypes serve as anchors to adjust prompt representations, enabling generalization to unseen models. The optimized prompt representations are subsequently
used to generate conditional representations for controllable image generation. We
curate a multi-modal, multi-model dataset that includes multiple diffusion models
and their corresponding text-image data, and conduct experiments under a model
generalization setting. The experimental results demonstrate the AP-Adapter’s
ability to enable the automatic prompts to generalize well to previously unseen
diffusion models, generating high-quality images.

1

Introduction

Automatic Prompt Optimization (APO) in text-to-image generation aims to simplify the user input
process while ensuring that the generated images exhibit both semantic consistency and aesthetic
quality [9, 22, 24]. APO addresses the limitation of current text-to-image models, which often heavily
rely on manually crafted prompts for generating high-quality images. The direct use of natural
language descriptions as inputs often results in suboptimal outcomes.
APO methods offer effective ways to directly utilize natural language descriptions for text-to-image
diffusion models, which can be categorized into two paradigms: Text Optimization and Representation
Optimization. Text Optimization entails generating refined prompts directly by fine-tuning the
language model [8, 26]. On the other hand, Representation Optimization involves refining prompts
within the feature space of the text encoder of the diffusion model [37].
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

