Enhancing Diversity in Bayesian Deep Learning via
Hyperspherical Energy Minimization of CKA

David Smerkous
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR, USA
smerkoud@oregonstate.edu

Qinxun Bai
Horizon Robotics
Sunnyvale, CA, USA
qinxun.bai@gmail.com

Li Fuxin
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR, USA
lif@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
Particle-based Bayesian deep learning often requires a similarity metric to compare
two networks. However, naive similarity metrics lack permutation invariance and
are inappropriate for comparing networks. Centered Kernel Alignment (CKA) on
feature kernels has been proposed to compare deep networks but has not been used
as an optimization objective in Bayesian deep learning. In this paper, we explore
the use of CKA in Bayesian deep learning to generate diverse ensembles and
hypernetworks that output a network posterior. Noting that CKA projects kernels
onto a unit hypersphere and that directly optimizing the CKA objective leads to
diminishing gradients when two networks are very similar. We propose adopting
the approach of hyperspherical energy (HE) on top of CKA kernels to address this
drawback and improve training stability. Additionally, by leveraging CKA-based
feature kernels, we derive feature repulsive terms applied to synthetically generated
outlier examples. Experiments on both diverse ensembles and hypernetworks
show that our approach significantly outperforms baselines in terms of uncertainty
quantification in both synthetic and realistic outlier detection tasks.

1

Introduction

Bayesian deep learning has always garnered substantial interest in the machine learning community.
Instead of a point estimate which most deep learning algorithms obtain, a posterior distribution of
trained models could significantly improve our understanding about prediction uncertainty and avoid
overconfident predictions. Bayesian deep learning has potential applications in transfer learning,
fairness, active learning, and even reinforcement learning, where reducing uncertainty can be used as
a powerful intrinsic reward function (Yang & Loog, 2016; Ratzlaff et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2023).
One line of approach to Bayesian deep learning is to add noise to a single trained model. Such
noises can either be injected during the training process, e.g. as in the stochastic gradient Langevin
dynamics (Welling & Teh, 2011), or after the training process (Maddox et al., 2019). However, many
such approaches often underperform the simple ensemble method (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017b)
which merely trains several deep networks with different random seeds. Intuitively, an ensemble,
because it starts from different random initializations, might be able to “explore" a larger portion of
the parameter space than those that are always nearby one specific model or training path. Because of
this, ensembles may capture different modes and therefore better represent the posterior distribution
of “well-trained" network functions (Fort et al., 2019; Wilson & Izmailov, 2020).
However, a critical question is, how different are the networks in an ensemble from one another? And
can we utilize the idea of diversification to further improve these networks by making them even more
diverse? In order to answer these questions, we first need a metric to compare those networks, which is
in itself a significant problem; regular L1/L2 distances, either in the space of the network parameters,
or in the space of the network activations, are not likely to work well. First, they suffer from the curse
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

