FedLPA: One-shot Federated Learning with
Layer-Wise Posterior Aggregation

Xiang Liu1,† , Liangxi Liu2,† , Feiyang Ye3 , Yunheng Shen4 , Xia Li5 , Linshan Jiang1,‡ , Jialin Li1,‡
1
National University of Singapore, 2 Northeastern University,
3
University of Technology Sydney, 4 Tsinghua University, 5 ETH Zurich
{liuxiang,lijl}@comp.nus.edu.sg
liu.liangx@northeastern.edu
feiyang.ye.uts@gmail.com
shenyh19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
ethlixia@gmail.com
linshan@nus.edu.sg
†

Equal Contribution ‡ Correspondence Author

Abstract
Efficiently aggregating trained neural networks from local clients into a global
model on a server is a widely researched topic in federated learning. Recently, motivated by diminishing privacy concerns, mitigating potential attacks, and reducing
communication overhead, one-shot federated learning (i.e., limiting client-server
communication into a single round) has gained popularity among researchers.
However, the one-shot aggregation performances are sensitively affected by the
non-identical training data distribution, which exhibits high statistical heterogeneity
in some real-world scenarios. To address this issue, we propose a novel one-shot aggregation method with layer-wise posterior aggregation, named FedLPA. FedLPA
aggregates local models to obtain a more accurate global model without requiring
extra auxiliary datasets or exposing any private label information, e.g., label distributions. To effectively capture the statistics maintained in the biased local datasets
in the practical non-IID scenario, we efficiently infer the posteriors of each layer
in each local model using layer-wise Laplace approximation and aggregate them
to train the global parameters. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that
FedLPA significantly improves learning performance over state-of-the-art methods
across several metrics.

1

Introduction

Data privacy issues in Deep Learning [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] have grown to be a major global concern [8].
To safeguard data privacy, the conventional federated learning algorithm will use the aggregation
methods and follow the data management rules of different institutions, which implies that the
distribution of data exhibits variations among clients [8]. In the domain of machine learning,
federated learning (FL) [9, 10, 11] has emerged as a prominent paradigm. The fundamental tenet
of federated learning revolves around sharing machine learning models derived from decentralized
data repositories, as opposed to divulging user raw data. This approach effectively preserves the
confidentiality of individual data.
The standard federated learning framework, FedAvg [9, 12], applies local model training. These
local models are then aggregated into a global model through parameter averaging. Existing FL
algorithms, however, require many communication rounds to effectively train a global model, leading
to substantial communication overhead, increased privacy concerns, and higher demand for fault
tolerance throughout the rounds. One-shot FL, which reduces client-server communication into a
single round as explored by prior work [13, 14, 15], is a promising yet challenging scheme to address
these issues. One-shot FL proves particularly practical in scenarios where iterative communication is
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

