USCILab3D: A Large-scale, Long-term, Semantically
Annotated Outdoor Dataset
Kiran Lekkala∗, Henghui Bao* , Peixu Cai, Wei Zer Lim, Chen Liu, Laurent Itti
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA
klekkala@usc.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce the USCILab3D dataset, a large-scale, annotated outdoor dataset designed for versatile applications across multiple domains, including
computer vision, robotics, and machine learning. The dataset was acquired using a
mobile robot equipped with 5 cameras and a 32-beam, 360◦ scanning LIDAR. The
robot was teleoperated, over the course of a year and under a variety of weather
and lighting conditions, through a rich variety of paths within the USC campus
(229 acres = ∼ 92.7 hectares). The raw data was annotated using state-of-theart large foundation models, and processed to provide multi-view imagery, 3D
reconstructions, semantically-annotated images and point clouds (267 semantic
categories), and text descriptions of images and objects within. The dataset also
offers a diverse array of complex analyses using pose-stamping and trajectory
data. In sum, the dataset offers 1.4M point clouds and 10M images (∼ 6TB of
data). Despite covering a narrower geographical scope compared to a whole-city
dataset, our dataset prioritizes intricate intersections along with denser multi-view
scene images and semantic point clouds, enabling more precise 3D labelling and
facilitating a broader spectrum of 3D vision tasks. For data, code and more details,
please visit our website.

1

Introduction

With the recent advancements in 3D vision techniques, the integration of three-dimensional perception
has become integral to many interdisciplinary domains. Unlike the abundant resources available
for 2D vision, the lack of comprehensive datasets for 3D vision poses a significant challenge to
researchers. The progress in this field can be significantly propelled by leveraging large-scale datasets,
which offer adaptability across a spectrum of downstream tasks.
In this paper, we present USCILab3D — a large-scale, long-term, semantically annotated outdoor
dataset. USCILab3D comprises over 10 million images and 1.4 million semantic point clouds,
rendering it suitable for a wide range of vision tasks.
Differing from smaller-scale semantic datasets or larger-scale undetailed ones, our dataset not only
encompasses a wide array of outdoor multi-view scene images but also provides detailed semantic
annotations, facilitating enhanced understanding and utilization of 3D perception techniques. Given
the massive scale of our new dataset, as detailed below, we have thus far focused on leveraging
the latest foundation models to compute detailed annotations. Our workflow using these models is
detailed below.
∗

Equal Contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

