Stylus:
Automatic Adapter Selection for Diffusion Models

Michael Luo1 Justin Wong1 Brandon Trabucco2 Yanping Huang3
Joseph E. Gonzalez1 Zhifeng Chen3 Ruslan Salakhutdinov2 Ion Stoica1
1
UC Berkeley 2 CMU MLD 3 Google Deepmind
{michael.luo,wong.justin,jegonzal,istoica}@berkeley.edu
{btrabucc,rsalakhu}@cs.cmu.edu
{huangyp,zhifengc}@google.com

Stylus

SD
v1.5

Wooden dish rack on a counter
holding plates, saucers, a bowl,
mugs and glasses.

A boy holding an umbrella on
the edge of a cliff.

A open field with large
elephants standing in it.

A computer room with monitors
on and a keyboard and a reading
lamp.

Figure 1: Adapter Selection. Given a user-provided prompt, our method identifies highly relevant adapters
(e.g. Low-Rank Adaptation, LoRA) that are closely aligned with the prompt’s context and at least one of the
prompt’s keywords. Composing relevant adapters into Stable Diffusion improves visual fidelity, image diversity,
and textual alignment. Note that these prompts are sampled from MS-COCO [22].

Abstract
Beyond scaling base models with more data or parameters, fine-tuned adapters
provide an alternative way to generate high fidelity, custom images at reduced
costs. As such, adapters have been widely adopted by open-source communities,
accumulating a database of over 100K adapters—most of which are highly
customized with insufficient descriptions. To generate high quality images,
This paper explores the problem of matching the prompt to a set of relevant
adapters, built on recent work that highlight the performance gains of composing
adapters. We introduce Stylus, which efficiently selects and automatically
composes task-specific adapters based on a prompt’s keywords. Stylus outlines
a three-stage approach that first summarizes adapters with improved descriptions
and embeddings, retrieves relevant adapters, and then further assembles adapters
based on prompts’ keywords by checking how well they fit the prompt. To evaluate
Stylus, we developed StylusDocs, a curated dataset featuring 75K adapters with
pre-computed adapter embeddings. In our evaluation on popular Stable Diffusion
checkpoints, Stylus achieves greater CLIP/FID Pareto efficiency and is twice as
preferred, with humans and multimodal models as evaluators, over the base model.
See stylus-diffusion.github.io for more.

1

Introduction

In the evolving field of generative image models, finetuned adapters [7, 11] have become the standard,
enabling custom image creation with reduced storage requirements. This shift has spurred the
growth of extensive open-source platforms that encourage communities to develop and share different
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

