Towards Universal Mesh Movement Networks
Mingrui Zhang1 Chunyang Wang1 Stephan Kramer1 Joseph G. Wallwork2
Siyi Li1 Jiancheng Liu Xiang Chen3 Matthew D. Piggott1
1
Imperial College London 2 University of Cambridge 3 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
{mingrui.zhang18,chunyang.wang22,s.kramer}@imperial.ac.uk
{siyi.li20,m.d.piggott}@imperial.ac.uk
jw2423@cam.ac.uk xiangchen.ai@outlook.com ljcc0930@gmail.com

Abstract
Solving complex Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) accurately and efficiently is
an essential and challenging problem in all scientific and engineering disciplines.
Mesh movement methods provide the capability to improve the accuracy of the
numerical solution without increasing the overall mesh degree of freedom count.
Conventional sophisticated mesh movement methods are extremely expensive and
struggle to handle scenarios with complex boundary geometries. However, existing
learning-based methods require re-training from scratch given a different PDE type
or boundary geometry, which limits their applicability, and also often suffer from
robustness issues in the form of inverted elements. In this paper, we introduce
the Universal Mesh Movement Network (UM2N), which – once trained – can
be applied in a non-intrusive, zero-shot manner to move meshes with different
size distributions and structures, for solvers applicable to different PDE types and
boundary geometries. UM2N consists of a Graph Transformer (GT) encoder for
extracting features and a Graph Attention Network (GAT) based decoder for moving
the mesh. We evaluate our method on advection and Navier-Stokes based examples,
as well as a real-world tsunami simulation case. Our method out-performs existing
learning-based mesh movement methods in terms of the benchmarks described
above. In comparison to the conventional sophisticated Monge-Ampère PDE-solver
based method, our approach not only significantly accelerates mesh movement, but
also proves effective in scenarios where the conventional method fails. Our project
page can be found at https://erizmr.github.io/UM2N/.

1

Introduction

Various natural phenomena are modeled by Partial Differential Equations (PDE). The accurate and
efficient approximation of the solutions to these complex and often nonlinear equations represents a
fundamental challenge across all scientific and engineering disciplines. To solve real-world PDEs,
many numerical methods require a computational mesh or grid to discretize the spatial domain. The
quality of this mesh significantly impacts the balance between a numerical solution’s accuracy and
the computational cost required to obtain it. To maintain high-resolution everywhere in the domain
is computationally expensive. Many systems modeled by PDEs however are multi-resolution in
nature. For example, a small part of the system may be highly dynamic, while other regions are
quasi-stationary; alternatively, some locations may be more important while others less important to
the question being considered by the calculation [1–4]. While a uniform, high-resolution mesh can
be utilized to capture the dynamics or what is most important accurately, this is often wasteful of
finite, precious computational resources and comes with sustainability implications [5].
An active body of research is focused on developing deep learning based methods to accelerate the
PDE-solving process by learning surrogate neural solvers [6–8]. A learned solver can output PDE
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

