Unraveling the Gradient Descent Dynamics of
Transformers
Bingqing Song∗
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
song0409@umn.edu
Shuai Zhang
Amazon Web Services
shuaizs@amazon.com

Boran Han
Amazon Web Services
boranhan@amazon.com
Jie Ding
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
dingj@umn.edu

Mingyi Hong
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
mhong@umn.edu

Abstract
While the Transformer architecture has achieved remarkable success across various
domains, a thorough theoretical foundation explaining its optimization dynamics is
yet to be fully developed. In this study, we aim to bridge this understanding gap
by answering the following two core questions: (1) Which types of Transformer
architectures allow Gradient Descent (GD) to achieve guaranteed convergence? and
(2) Under what initial conditions and architectural specifics does the Transformer
achieve rapid convergence during training? By analyzing the loss landscape of
a single Transformer layer using Softmax and Gaussian attention kernels, our
work provides concrete answers to these questions. Our findings demonstrate
that, with appropriate weight initialization, GD can train a Transformer model
(with either kernel type) to achieve a global optimal solution, especially when
the input embedding dimension is large. Nonetheless, certain scenarios highlight
potential pitfalls: training a Transformer using the Softmax attention kernel may
sometimes lead to suboptimal local solutions. In contrast, the Gaussian attention
kernel exhibits a much favorable behavior. Our empirical study further validate the
theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Transformer model architectures have become popular in machine learning, delivering remarkable
performance across a wide array of tasks. From natural language processing [Vaswani et al., 2017,
Beltagy et al., 2020] to computer vision [Dosovitskiy et al., 2020], these models have set new standards
in performance and efficiency. Popular models include BERT [Devlin et al., 2018], RoBERTa [Liu
et al., 2019], DeBERTa [He et al., 2020], GPT models [Radford et al., 2019, Brown et al., 2020] and
ViT [Dosovitskiy et al., 2020]. Despite their empirical success, a comprehensive understanding of
their optimization process remains elusive. As highlighted in Liu et al. [2020], the training of large
Transformers can sometimes result in deteriorated performance. It is therefore critical to develop
theoretical insights for researchers and practitioners to better understand the practical performance of
Transformers. However, the complexity of their architectures, coupled with the non-convex nature
∗

The work of B. Song was partially done while interning at Amazon Web Services.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

