GC-Bench: An Open and Unified Benchmark for
Graph Condensation

Qingyun Sun1∗, Ziying Chen1∗, Beining Yang2 , Cheng Ji1 , Xingcheng Fu3
Sheng Zhou4 , Hao Peng1 , Jianxin Li1 , Philip S. Yu5
1
Beihang University, 2 University of Edinburgh, 3 Guangxi Normal University
4
Zhejiang University, 5 University of Illinois, Chicago
{sunqy,chanztuying}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph condensation (GC) has recently garnered considerable attention due to its
ability to reduce large-scale graph datasets while preserving their essential properties. The core concept of GC is to create a smaller, more manageable graph
that retains the characteristics of the original graph. Despite the proliferation of
graph condensation methods developed in recent years, there is no comprehensive
evaluation and in-depth analysis, which creates a great obstacle to understanding the progress in this field. To fill this gap, we develop a comprehensive Graph
Condensation Benchmark (GC-Bench) to analyze the performance of graph condensation in different scenarios systematically. Specifically, GC-Bench systematically
investigates the characteristics of graph condensation in terms of the following
dimensions: effectiveness, transferability, and complexity. We comprehensively
evaluate 12 state-of-the-art graph condensation algorithms in node-level and graphlevel tasks and analyze their performance in 12 diverse graph datasets. Further,
we have developed an easy-to-use library for training and evaluating different GC
methods to facilitate reproducible research. The GC-Bench library is available at
https://github.com/RingBDStack/GC-Bench.

1

Introduction

Data are the driving force behind advancements in machine learning, especially with the advancement
of large models. However, the rapidly increasing size of datasets presents challenges in management,
storage, and transmission. It also makes model training more costly and time-consuming. This
issue is particularly pronounced in the graph domain, where larger datasets mean more large-scale
structures, making it challenging to train models in environments with limited resources. Compared
to graph coarsening, which groups nodes into super nodes, and sparsification, which selects a subset
of edges, graph condensation [39, 10] synthesizes a smaller, informative graph that retains enough
data for models to perform comparably to using the full dataset.
Graph condensation. Graph condensation aims to learn a new small but informative graph. A general
framework of GC are shown in Figure 1. Given a graph dataset G, the goal of Graph condensation is
to achieve comparable results on synthetic condensed graph dataset G′ as training on the original
G. For Node-level condensation, the original dataset G = {G} = {X ∈ RN ×d , A ∈ RN ×N }
′
′
′
′
and the condensed dataset G′ = {G ′ } = {X ∈ RN ×d , A ∈ RN ×N }, where N ′ ≪ N . For
Graph-level condensation, the original dataset G = {G1 , G2 , · · · , Gn } and the condensed dataset
G′ = {G1′ , G2′ , · · · , Gn′ ′ }, where n′ ≪ n. The condensation ratio r can be calculated by condensed
dataset size / whole dataset size.
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

