Learning Place Cell Representations and
Context-Dependent Remapping

Markus Pettersen
Department of Numerical Analysis and Scientific Computing
Simula Research Laboratory
Oslo, Kristian Augusts Gate 23
markusb@simula.no
Frederik Rogge
Department of Biosciences
University of Oslo
Oslo, Blinderveien 31
frederik.rogge@ibv.uio.no
Mikkel Elle Lepperød
Department of Numerical Analysis and Scientific Computing
Simula Research Laboratory
Oslo, Kristian Augusts Gate 23
mikkel@simula.no

Abstract
Hippocampal place cells are known for their spatially selective firing patterns,
which has led to the suggestion that they encode an animal’s location. However,
place cells also respond to contextual cues, such as smell. Furthermore, they
have the ability to remap, wherein the firing fields and rates of cells change in
response to changes in the environment. How place cell responses emerge, and how
these representations remap is not fully understood. In this work, we propose a
similarity-based objective function that translates proximity in space, to proximity
in representation. We show that a neural network trained to minimize the proposed
objective learns place-like representations. We also show that the proposed objective is easily extended to include other sources of information, such as context
information, in the same way. When trained to encode multiple contexts, networks
learn distinct representations, exhibiting remapping behaviors between contexts.
The proposed objective is invariant to orthogonal transformations. Such transformations of the original trained representation (e.g. rotations), therefore yield
new representations distinct from the original, without explicit relearning, akin to
remapping. Our findings shed new light on the formation and encoding properties
of place cells, and also demonstrate an interesting case of representational reuse.

1

Introduction

Animals and humans are capable of extraordinary feats of navigation, from birds migrating by
following magnetic fields [Packmor et al., 2021], to rodents navigating mazes [O’Keefe, 1976, Small,
1901] and cab drivers memorizing and traversing nearly 26000 busy London streets [FernandezVelasco and Spiers, 2023]. In the brain, navigation ability is believed to be supported by Hippocampal
place cells [O’Keefe and Dostrovsky, 1971, O’Keefe and Nadel, 1978]. Place cells are known for
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

