You Don’t Need Domain-Specific Data Augmentations
When Scaling Self-Supervised Learning

Théo Moutakanni
FAIR at Meta
MICS, Université Paris-Saclay
theomoutakanni@meta.com
Marc Szafraniec
FAIR at Meta

Maxime Oquab
FAIR at Meta

Maria Vakalopoulou
MICS, CentraleSupélec,
Université Paris-Saclay

Piotr Bojanowski
FAIR at Meta

Abstract
Self-Supervised learning (SSL) with Joint-Embedding Architectures (JEA) has led
to outstanding performances. All instantiations of this paradigm were trained using
strong and well-established hand-crafted data augmentations, leading to the general
belief that they are required for the proper training and performance of such models.
On the other hand, generative reconstruction-based models such as BEIT and MAE
or Joint-Embedding Predictive Architectures such as I-JEPA have shown strong
performance without using data augmentations except masking. In this work, we
challenge the importance of invariance and data-augmentation in JEAs at scale. By
running a case-study on a recent SSL foundation model – DINOv2 – we show that
strong image representations can be obtained with JEAs and only cropping without
resizing provided the training data is large enough, reaching state-of-the-art results
and using the least amount of augmentation in the literature. Through this study,
we also discuss the impact of compute constraints on the outcomes of experimental
deep learning research, showing that they can lead to very different conclusions.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning (SSL) has significantly improved performance across various tasks. Despite
not requiring supervision, SSL heavily depends on carefully selected data augmentations [9, 11–13,
35]. Previous experimental literature has shown that removing even one augmentation such as random
rescaling or color jittering reduces linear evaluation performance on ImageNet1k [15, 41] by at least
10 points [1, 11, 39]. But reliance on image-specific data augmentations limits the generalizability of
self-supervised approaches. How can this be applied to graph, time-series or, for example, medical
imaging with totally different channels and characteristics? According to multiple studies [1, 5, 21,
37], the best data augmentations are dependent on the target tasks, and no set of hand-crafted data
augmentations can solve them all. But is this the case?
The problem is the following: SSL methods that do not build on such augmentations are based
on image reconstruction, and are able to achieve competitive results, though only through finetuning ([4, 25]). On the other hand, joint-embedding architecture (JEA) methods, delivering strong
results without fine-tuning and producing linearly separable features, seem largely reliant on data
augmentations in light of the seminal SimCLR [11, 12] study. I-JEPA [2] was the first method to
challenge this assumption, but the authors still show a significant performance gap when compared to
their augmentation-based alternatives. Therefore, one can reasonably believe that the core principles
driving JEA methods towards great performance are inherently dependent on data augmentation,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

