Learning-Augmented Algorithms
for the Bahncard Problem
Hailiang Zhao1 Xueyan Tang2 Peng Chen1 Shuiguang Deng1
1
Zhejiang University 2 Nanyang Technological University
{hliangzhao,pgchen,dengsg}@zju.edu.cn
asxytang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
In this paper, we study learning-augmented algorithms for the Bahncard problem.
The Bahncard problem is a generalization of the ski-rental problem, where a traveler
needs to irrevocably and repeatedly decide between a cheap short-term solution and
an expensive long-term one with an unknown future. Even though the problem is
canonical, only a primal-dual-based learning-augmented algorithm was explicitly
designed for it. We develop a new learning-augmented algorithm, named PFSUM,
that incorporates both history and short-term future to improve online decision
making. We derive the competitive ratio of PFSUM as a function of the prediction
error and conduct extensive experiments to show that PFSUM outperforms the
primal-dual-based algorithm.

1

Introduction

The Bahncard is a railway pass of the German railway company, which provides a discount on all
train tickets for a fixed time period of pass validity. When a travel request arises, a traveler can buy
the train ticket with the regular price, or purchase a Bahncard first and get entitled to a discount on all
train tickets within its valid time. The Bahncard problem is an online cost minimization problem,
whose objective is to minimize the overall cost of pass and ticket purchases, without knowledge of
future travel requests [1]. It reveals a recurring renting-or-buying phenomenon, where an online
algorithm needs to irrevocably and repeatedly decide between a cheap short-term solution and an
expensive long-term one with an unknown future. The performance of an online algorithm is typically
measured by the competitive ratio, which is the worst-case ratio across all inputs between the costs of
the online algorithm and an optimal offline one [2].
Recently, there has been growing interest in using machine-learned predictions to improve online
algorithms. One seminal work was done by Lykouris and Vassilvtiskii [3] for the caching problem, in
which the online algorithms are allowed to leverage predictions of future inputs to make decisions,
but they are not given any guarantee on the prediction accuracy. Since then, the framework of online
algorithms with predictions has been extensively studied for a wide range of problems including
ski-rental [4–8], scheduling [9, 10], graph optimization [11], covering [12, 13], data structures [14–
16], etc. In this framework, the measurements for the online algorithms include consistency and
robustness, where the former refers to the competitive ratio under perfect predictions while the latter
refers to the upper bound of the competitive ratio when the predictions can be arbitrarily bad.
The Bahncard problem with machine-learned predictions was recently studied by Bamas et al. [12].
They designed a primal-dual-based algorithm assuming given a prediction of the optimal solution,
i.e., an optimal collection of times to purchase Bahncards such that the total cost is minimized. While
Bamas et al. [12] presented an elegant framework for seamlessly integrating the primal-dual method
with a predicted solution, their approach faces three critical issues. First, their considered scenario is
limited, involving slotted time and a fixed ticket price of 1 for any travel request. The discretization is
necessary for them to formulate an integer program and enable the application of the primal-dual
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

