QuadMamba: Learning Quadtree-based Selective
Scan for Visual State Space Model

1

Fei Xie1 Weijia Zhang1 Zhongdao Wang2 Chao Ma1∗
MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{jaffe031, weijia.zhang, chaoma}@sjtu.edu.cn
wangzhongdao@huawei.com

Abstract
Recent advancements in State Space Models, notably Mamba, have demonstrated
superior performance over the dominant Transformer models, particularly in reducing the computational complexity from quadratic to linear. Yet, difﬁculties in
adapting Mamba from language to vision tasks arise due to the distinct characteristics of visual data, such as the spatial locality and adjacency within images
and large variations in information granularity across visual tokens. Existing
vision Mamba approaches either ﬂatten tokens into sequences in a raster scan
fashion, which breaks the local adjacency of images, or manually partition tokens into windows, which limits their long-range modeling and generalization
capabilities. To address these limitations, we present a new vision Mamba model,
coined QuadMamba, that effectively captures local dependencies of varying granularities via quadtree-based image partition and scan. Concretely, our lightweight
quadtree-based scan module learns to preserve the 2D locality of spatial regions
within learned window quadrants. The module estimates the locality score of
each token from their features, before adaptively partitioning tokens into window quadrants. An omnidirectional window shifting scheme is also introduced
to capture more intact and informative features across different local regions. To
make the discretized quadtree partition end-to-end trainable, we further devise
a sequence masking strategy based on Gumbel-Softmax and its straight-through
gradient estimator. Extensive experiments demonstrate that QuadMamba achieves
state-of-the-art performance in various vision tasks, including image classiﬁcation,
object detection, instance segmentation, and semantic segmentation. The code is in
https://github.com/VISION-SJTU/QuadMamba.

1

Introduction

The architecture of Structured State Space Models (SSMs) has gained signiﬁcant popularity in recent
times. SSMs offer a versatile approach to sequence modeling that balances computational efﬁciency
with model ﬂexibility. Inspired by the success of Mamba [13] in language tasks, there has been a rise
in using SSMs for various vision tasks. These applications range from designing generic backbone
models [80, 41, 26, 66, 49] to advancing ﬁelds such as image segmentation [51, 39, 65, 46] and
synthesis [17]. These advancements highlight the adaptability and potential of Mamba in the visual
domain.
Despite their appealing linear complexity in long sequence modeling, applying SSMs directly to
vision tasks results in only marginal improvements over prevalent CNNs and vision Transformer
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

