SpaceByte: Towards Deleting Tokenization
from Large Language Modeling

Kevin Slagle
Rice University
kevin.slagle@rice.edu

Abstract
Tokenization is widely used in large language models because it significantly
improves performance. However, tokenization imposes several disadvantages, such
as performance biases, increased adversarial vulnerability, decreased characterlevel modeling performance, and increased modeling complexity. To address these
disadvantages without sacrificing performance, we propose SpaceByte, a novel
byte-level decoder architecture that closes the performance gap between byte-level
and subword autoregressive language modeling. SpaceByte consists of a byte-level
Transformer model, but with extra larger transformer blocks inserted in the middle
of the layers. We find that performance is significantly improved by applying these
larger blocks only after certain bytes, such as space characters, which typically
denote word boundaries. Our experiments show that for a fixed training and
inference compute budget, SpaceByte outperforms other byte-level architectures
and roughly matches the performance of tokenized Transformer architectures.

1

Introduction

Most language models are trained using tokenization, which partitions text into tokens that typically
consist of words or subwords. Tokenization is useful because it significantly decreases the inference
and training computational costs of large language models. However, tokenization also imposes
several disadvantages, including performance penalties for languages that are priortizes less by the
tokenizer [1–3]; increased vulnerability to adversarial attacks [4]; and worse character-level modeling
performance [5, 6], and additional model complexity.1
Recently, MegaByte [7], MambaByte [6], and more [8–12] have been proposed as new byte-level
autoregressive language models that model bytes instead of tokens. (See [13–21] for encoder and
encoder-decoder byte-level modeling.) To address the longer context size resulting from modeling
bytes instead of tokens, MegaByte uses multiscale modeling [22–24], while MambaByte uses Mamba
blocks [25] instead of Transformer blocks. But although MegaByte and MambaByte have been
shown to perform better than a standard byte-level Transformer, to our knowledge, no byte-level
autoregressive large language model architecture has been shown to match the performance of
tokenized models when controlling for compute costs.
In this work, we study the performance of byte-level and subword-level autoregressive models
when trained using a fixed compute budget. We measure the performance in terms of the cross
entropy (measured in bits-per-byte), which has been shown to be a strong predictor of down-stream
performance [26]. In addition to controlling for training compute, we also control for inference
compute costs (measured in FLOPs). We find that byte-level Transformer and MegaByte models
can require roughly 10 times more training FLOPs to achieve the same performance as a subword1
See also Andrej Karpathy’s tweet twitter.com/karpathy/status/1657949234535211009 and video
youtube.com/watch?v=zduSFxRajkE&t=6725s on the disadvantages of tokenization.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

