Training an Open-Vocabulary Monocular
3D Object Detection Model without 3D Data

Rui Huang1

Henry Zheng1 Yan Wang2 Zhuofan Xia1 Marco Pavone2,3 Gao Huang1,4∗
1
Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China
2
NVIDIA Research, USA 3 Stanford University, USA
4
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, China
{hr20, jh-zheng22, xzf23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
yanwan@nvidia.com, pavone@stanford.edu, gaohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Open-vocabulary 3D object detection has recently attracted considerable attention
due to its broad applications in autonomous driving and robotics, which aims
to effectively recognize novel classes in previously unseen domains. However,
existing point cloud-based open-vocabulary 3D detection models are limited by
their high deployment costs. In this work, we propose a novel open-vocabulary
monocular 3D object detection framework, dubbed OVM3D-Det, which trains
detectors using only RGB images, making it both cost-effective and scalable
to publicly available data. Unlike traditional methods, OVM3D-Det does not
require high-precision LiDAR or 3D sensor data for either input or generating
3D bounding boxes. Instead, it employs open-vocabulary 2D models and pseudoLiDAR to automatically label 3D objects in RGB images, fostering the learning
of open-vocabulary monocular 3D detectors. However, training 3D models with
labels directly derived from pseudo-LiDAR is inadequate due to imprecise boxes
estimated from noisy point clouds and severely occluded objects. To address these
issues, we introduce two innovative designs: adaptive pseudo-LiDAR erosion and
bounding box refinement with prior knowledge from large language models. These
techniques effectively calibrate the 3D labels and enable RGB-only training for 3D
detectors. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of OVM3D-Det over
baselines in both indoor and outdoor scenarios. The code will be released.

1

Introduction

3D object detection has attracted substantial attention in recent years due to its broad applications in
fields such as autonomous driving [13, 25, 26, 64, 55, 31], augmented reality [17, 15, 22], embodied
AI [41, 7, 73, 61], etc. Although many 3D detectors [42, 62, 51, 35, 32, 48, 50] have marked their
impressive performance in the course of 3D perception development and consistently renew the stateof-the-art records on the popular benchmarks [14, 10, 52], they often struggle to generalize to other
object categories beyond their training data, severely limiting their applications in diverse real-world
scenarios. To address this challenge, many previous works [30, 6, 59, 76, 71, 75] have taken steps
forward to detect open-vocabulary objects in broader scenarios, i.e., focusing on identifying and
localizing the objects that do not belong to the known categories during training.
However, these open-vocabulary 3D detectors rely heavily on point clouds captured from highprecision LiDARs or 3D sensors, which are expensive to deploy. On the contrary, in another line of
research, monocular 3D object detectors directly take in single-view images to localize and recognize
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

