FERERO: A Flexible Framework for
Preference-Guided Multi-Objective Learning

1

Lisha Chen1 , AFM Saif1 , Yanning Shen2 , Tianyi Chen1
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 2 University of California, Irvine

Abstract
Finding specific preference-guided Pareto solutions that represent different tradeoffs among multiple objectives is critical yet challenging in multi-objective problems. Existing methods are restrictive in preference definitions and/or their theoretical guarantees. In this work, we introduce a Flexible framEwork for pREfeRenceguided multi-Objective learning (FERERO) by casting it as a constrained vector
optimization problem. Specifically, two types of preferences are incorporated into
this formulation – the relative preference defined by the partial ordering induced
by a polyhedral cone, and the absolute preference defined by constraints that are
linear functions of the objectives. To solve this problem, convergent algorithms
are developed with both single-loop and stochastic variants. Notably, this is the
first single-loop primal algorithm for constrained optimization to our knowledge.
The proposed algorithms adaptively adjust to both constraint and objective values,
eliminating the need to solve different subproblems at different stages of constraint satisfaction. Experiments on multiple benchmarks demonstrate the proposed
method is very competitive in finding preference-guided optimal solutions. Code is
available at https://github.com/lisha-chen/FERERO/.

1

Introduction

Many machine learning tasks inherently involve multiple objectives, which can be different performance metrics such as accuracy, fairness, and privacy; or, the same metrics defined on different
data [52, 42]. To tackle such multi-objective problems, it is common to learn a shared model that
simultaneously performs well on all the objectives. Compared to learning one model for each objective, learning a shared model has the benefit of reducing both the model size and the inference time.
This can be achieved through multi-objective optimization [52, 59, 35], which is to learn a model that
minimizes the vector-valued objective. In practical applications, it is of interest to learn solutions
with controlled trade-offs or preferences. To further illustrate, we give two examples below.
In fairness-aware machine learning, a trade-off exists between the fairness ffair (θ) and accuracy
facc (θ) [42, 37], see also Figure 1a. With θ denoting the model parameter, and C denoting the partial
order cone, to find the optimal models that consider different trade-offs, one can solve the following
problem with different thresholds ϵ [9]
maximizeC (facc (θ), ffair (θ))⊤ s.t. ffair (θ) ≥ ϵ.

(1.1)

Another example is in drug or molecule design, where the goal is to design drugs or molecules with
multiple desired properties f1 (θ), f2 (θ), . . . , fM (θ). Aiming to align the values of the properties F (θ)
with a predefined preference vector v as in Figure 1b, one can solve the following problem [40, 1, 61]
⊤
maximizeC F (θ) := f1 (θ), . . . , fM (θ)
s.t. BF (θ) = Bv, Bv = 0
(1.2)
where B ∈ R(M −1)×M is full row rank.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

