GAIA: Rethinking Action Quality Assessment for
AI-Generated Videos
Zijian Chen1 , Wei Sun1∗ , Yuan Tian1 , Jun Jia1 , Zicheng Zhang1 ,
Jiarui Wang1 , Ru Huang2 , Xiongkuo Min1∗ , Guangtao Zhai1∗ , Wenjun Zhang1
1
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
East China University of Science and Technology
*
Corresponding authors
https://github.com/zijianchen98/GAIA

Abstract
Assessing action quality is both imperative and challenging due to its significant
impact on the quality of AI-generated videos, further complicated by the inherently
ambiguous nature of actions within AI-generated video (AIGV). Current action
quality assessment (AQA) algorithms predominantly focus on actions from real
specific scenarios and are pre-trained with normative action features, thus rendering
them inapplicable in AIGVs. To address these problems, we construct GAIA,
a Generic AI-generated Action dataset, by conducting a large-scale subjective
evaluation from a novel causal reasoning-based perspective, resulting in 971,244
ratings among 9,180 video-action pairs. Based on GAIA, we evaluate a suite of
popular text-to-video (T2V) models on their ability to generate visually rational
actions, revealing their pros and cons on different categories of actions. We also
extend GAIA as a testbed to benchmark the AQA capacity of existing automatic
evaluation methods. Results show that traditional AQA methods, action-related
metrics in recent T2V benchmarks, and mainstream video quality methods perform
poorly with an average SRCC of 0.454, 0.191, and 0.519, respectively, indicating
a sizable gap between current models and human action perception patterns in
AIGVs. Our findings underscore the significance of action quality as a unique
perspective for studying AIGVs and can catalyze progress towards methods with
enhanced capacities for AQA in AIGVs.

1

Introduction

Action quality assessment (AQA), which aims to quantify how well actions are performed, is a
growing area of research across various domains (e.g., [77, 58, 76, 27, 96, 100]). It is becoming
especially challenging since generative models like Sora [68, 73] have revolutionized the creation of
visually realistic videos. Assessing how well an action is presented can be difficult because of the
inherent difference between real videos and generated videos [21, 67]. At minimum, a well-performed
action should correctly contain all relevant objects as well as the action subject with recognizable
motion presentation while conforming to the physical world dynamics [39, 117]. Moreover, the
exponential growth of text-to-video (T2V) models has also given rise to formidable challenges in the
evaluation of video action quality, underscoring the increasing need for reliable solutions.
However, there is a significant gap in the existing AQA research. First, prior work has contributed
multiple AQA datasets, which predominantly focus on domain-specific actions from real videos and
collect coarse-grained expert-only human ratings [77, 119, 76] on limited dimensions. Meanwhile,
the content discrepancies in those AQA videos are often subtle, as the action subjects typically
perform similar actions within a consistent environment. Examples include swimming and diving
in a natatorium or gymnastics in a gym, which lacks consideration for scene diversity. Second, the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

