FastDrag: Manipulate Anything in One Step

Xuanjia Zhao1 , Jian Guan1,∗, Congyi Fan1 , Dongli Xu4 ,
Youtian Lin2 , Haiwei Pan1 , Pengming Feng3
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering University
2
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University
3
State Key Laboratory of Space-Ground Integrated Information Technology
4
Independent Researcher

Abstract
Drag-based image editing using generative models provides precise control over
image contents, enabling users to manipulate anything in an image with a few clicks.
However, prevailing methods typically adopt n-step iterations for latent semantic
optimization to achieve drag-based image editing, which is time-consuming and
limits practical applications. In this paper, we introduce a novel one-step dragbased image editing method, i.e., FastDrag, to accelerate the editing process.
Central to our approach is a latent warpage function (LWF), which simulates the
behavior of a stretched material to adjust the location of individual pixels within the
latent space. This innovation achieves one-step latent semantic optimization and
hence significantly promotes editing speeds. Meanwhile, null regions emerging
after applying LWF are addressed by our proposed bilateral nearest neighbor
interpolation (BNNI) strategy. This strategy interpolates these regions using similar
features from neighboring areas, thus enhancing semantic integrity. Additionally, a
consistency-preserving strategy is introduced to maintain the consistency between
the edited and original images by adopting semantic information from the original
image, saved as key and value pairs in self-attention module during diffusion
inversion, to guide the diffusion sampling. Our FastDrag is validated on the
DragBench dataset, demonstrating substantial improvements in processing time
over existing methods, while achieving enhanced editing performance. Project
page: https://fastdrag-site.github.io/.

1

Introduction

The drag editing paradigm [28, 15, 20] leverages the unique properties of generative models to
implement a point-interaction mode of image editing, referred to as drag-based image editing.
Compared with text-based image editing methods [18, 10, 3, 30], drag-based editing enables more
precise spatial control over specific regions of the image while maintaining semantic logic coherence,
drawing considerable attention from researchers.
However, existing methods typically involve n-step iterative semantic optimization in latent space to
obtain optimized latent with desired semantic based on the user-provided drag instructions. They
focus on optimizing a small region of the image at each step, requiring n small-scale and shortdistance adjustments to achieve overall latent optimization, leading to a significant amount of time.
These optimization approaches can be categorized primarily into motion-based [23, 28, 15, 16, 32, 4]
and gradient-based [20, 19] n-step iterative optimizations, as shown in Fig. 1(a). n-step iterations in
motion-based methods are necessary to avoid abrupt changes in the latent space, preventing image
∗

Corresponding author: j.guan@hrbeu.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

