FUSU: A Multi-temporal-source Land Use Change
Segmentation Dataset for Fine-grained Urban
Semantic Understanding
Shuai Yuan1 Guancong Lin2 Lixian Zhang3 Runmin Dong4 Jinxiao Zhang4
Shuang Chen1 Juepeng Zheng2∗ Jie Wang5 Haohuan Fu6∗
1

Department of Geography, The University of Hong Kong 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, Sun
Yat-sen University 3 National Supercomputing Center in Shenzhen 4 Department of Earth
System Science, Tsinghua University 5 Pengcheng Laboratory 6 Tsinghua Shenzhen
International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
{shuai914, schen17}@connect.hku.hk; lingc8@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
zhanglx18@tsinghua.org.cn; drm@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
zhang-jx22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; zhengjp8@mail.sysu.edu.cn
wangj10@pcl.ac.cn; haohuan@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Fine urban change segmentation using multi-temporal remote sensing images
is essential for understanding human-environment interactions in urban areas.
Although there have been advances in high-quality land cover datasets that reveal
the physical features of urban landscapes, the lack of fine-grained land use datasets
hinders a deeper understanding of how human activities are distributed across the
landscape and the impact of these activities on the environment, thus constraining
proper technique development. To address this, we introduce FUSU, the first finegrained land use change segmentation dataset for Fine-grained Urban Semantic
Understanding. FUSU features the most detailed land use classification system to
date, with 17 classes and 30 billion pixels of annotations. It includes bi-temporal
high-resolution satellite images with 0.2-0.5 m ground sample distance and monthly
optical and radar satellite time series, covering 847 km2 across five urban areas
in the southern and northern of China with different geographical features. The
fine-grained land use pixel-wise annotations and high spatial-temporal resolution
data provide a robust foundation for developing proper deep learning models to
provide contextual insights on human activities and urbanization. To fully leverage
FUSU, we propose a unified time-series architecture for both change detection and
segmentation. We benchmark FUSU on various methods for several tasks. Dataset
and code are available at: https://github.com/yuanshuai0914/FUSU.

1

Introduction

Urban areas, housing 57% of the world’s population on just 3% of global land, are dynamic hubs of
human activity [1]. The scale and rapid pace of current urbanization, encompassing both internal
dynamics and population growth, position urban areas as a crucial catalyst of global climate change
and vice versa [2]. Therefore, proper observation and monitoring of urban changes are crucial for
modeling human-nature interactions.
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

