II-Bench: An Image Implication Understanding
Benchmark for Multimodal Large Language Models

Ziqiang Liu1,2∗ Feiteng Fang1,3∗ Xi Feng1,3∗ Xinrun Du4,14∗ Chenhao Zhang1,6∗
Zekun Wang12,14 Yuelin Bai1,2 Qixuan Zhao1,3 Liyang Fan1 Chengguang Gan7
Hongquan Lin1,3 Jiaming Li1,2 Yuansheng Ni9 Haihong Wu1,3 Yaswanth Narsupalli5
Zhigang Zheng1 Chengming Li10 Xiping Hu10 Ruifeng Xu11 Xiaojun Chen8 Min Yang1
Jiaheng Liu12 Ruibo Liu13 Wenhao Huang14 Ge Zhang4,14,15† Shiwen Ni1†
1
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Science and Technology of China 4 M-A-P 5 IIT Kharagpur
6
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 7 Yokohama National University
8
Shenzhen University 9 Zhejiang University 10 Shenzhen MSU-BIT University
11
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen) 12 Beihang University
13
Dartmouth College 14 01.ai 15 University of Waterloo

Abstract
The rapid advancements in the development of multimodal large language models
(MLLMs) have consistently led to new breakthroughs on various benchmarks.
In response, numerous challenging and comprehensive benchmarks have been
proposed to more accurately assess the capabilities of MLLMs. However, there
is a dearth of exploration of the higher-order perceptual capabilities of MLLMs.
To fill this gap, we propose the Image Implication understanding Benchmark,
II-Bench, which aims to evaluate the model’s higher-order perception of images.
Through extensive experiments on II-Bench across multiple MLLMs, we have made
significant findings. Initially, a substantial gap is observed between the performance
of MLLMs and humans on II-Bench. The pinnacle accuracy of MLLMs attains
74.8%, whereas human accuracy averages 90%, peaking at an impressive 98%.
Subsequently, MLLMs perform worse on abstract and complex images, suggesting
limitations in their ability to understand high-level semantics and capture image
details. Finally, it is observed that most models exhibit enhanced accuracy when
image sentiment polarity hints are incorporated into the prompts. This observation
underscores a notable deficiency in their inherent understanding of image sentiment.
We believe that II-Bench will inspire the community to develop the next generation
of MLLMs, advancing the journey towards expert artificial general intelligence
(AGI). II-Bench is publicly available at https://huggingface.co/datasets/
m-a-p/II-Bench.

Figure 1: Implication: a significant gap exists between humans and MLLMs on II-Bench.
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

