Ordering-Based Causal Discovery for Linear and
Nonlinear Relations
Zhuopeng Xu Yujie Li Cheng Liu Ning Gui∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Central South University
{xuzhuopeng, yujieli}@csu.edu.cn, {liuchengstudy, ninggui}@gmail.com

Abstract
Identifying causal relations from purely observational data typically requires additional assumptions on relations and/or noise. Most current methods restrict their
analysis to datasets that are assumed to have pure linear or nonlinear relations,
which is often not reflective of real-world datasets that contain a combination of
both. This paper presents CaPS, an ordering-based causal discovery algorithm
that effectively handles linear and nonlinear relations. CaPS introduces a novel
identification criterion for topological ordering and incorporates the concept of
"parent score" during the post-processing optimization stage. These scores quantify
the strength of the average causal effect, helping to accelerate the pruning process
and correct inaccurate predictions in the pruning step. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed solutions outperform state-of-the-art baselines on synthetic
data with varying ratios of linear and nonlinear relations. The results obtained from
real-world data also support the competitiveness of CaPS. Code and datasets are
available at https://github.com/E2real/CaPS.

1

Introduction

Causal discovery uncovers latent causal relationships within data by modeling a Directed Acyclic
Graph (DAG) connecting various variables. This field is of significant importance in domains such
as biology [1], epidemiology [2], and finance [3]. Due to the considerable expense associated with
conducting interventional experiments, the recent emphasis on causal discovery has gradually shifted
from discovery with interventional data [4, 5, 6] to discovery solely based on observational data.
In general, the problem of causal discovery from observational data faces the identifiability issue.
Different generative models with different causal relations might produce the same data distribution.
Many recent works try to have uniquely identified DAG by placing different types of assumptions on
the noise and/or relations, e.g., Shimizu et al. [7] prove that linear causal relations with non-Gaussian
additive noise can be identifiable; Peters and Bühlmann [8] prove that Gaussian linear structural
equation models (SEMs) with equal variances are identifiable. For nonlinear causal relations, Peters
et al. [9] relax the assumption of noise and proves the identifiability of DAG. From the discussion
mentioned above, existing approaches normally limit their discussions to distributions with either
pure linear or pure nonlinear relations.
However, real-world data often contain both types of causal relations and run against their basic
assumptions. These approaches work well when the observational data match their prespecified (non)linear or nonlinear relations while suffering significant performance loss when their assumptions
mismatch. Fig. 1 illustrates the performance of three solutions: GOLEM [10] for linear relations,
SCORE [11] for nonlinear relations, and our proposed CaPS, on synthetic data with varying proportions of linear relations. The performance of SCORE decreases as the linear ratio increases, while
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

