Federated Natural Policy Gradient and Actor Critic
Methods for Multi-task Reinforcement Learning

Tong Yang∗
CMU

Shicong Cen†
CMU

Yuting Wei‡
UPenn

Yuxin Chen§
UPenn

Yuejie Chi¶
CMU

Abstract
Federated reinforcement learning (RL) enables collaborative decision making of
multiple distributed agents without sharing local data trajectories. In this work,
we consider a multi-task setting, in which each agent has its own private reward
function corresponding to different tasks, while sharing the same transition kernel
of the environment. Focusing on infinite-horizon Markov decision processes, the
goal is to learn a globally optimal policy that maximizes the sum of the discounted
total rewards of all the agents in a decentralized manner, where each agent only
communicates with its neighbors over some prescribed graph topology. We develop
federated vanilla and entropy-regularized natural policy gradient (NPG) methods
in the tabular setting under softmax parameterization, where gradient tracking
is applied to estimate the global Q-function to mitigate the impact of imperfect
information sharing. We establish non-asymptotic global convergence guarantees
under exact policy evaluation, where the rates are nearly independent of the size of
the state-action space and illuminate the impacts of network size and connectivity,
and further establish its robustness against inexact policy evaluation. We further
propose a federated natural actor critic (NAC) method for multi-task RL with
function approximation and stochastic policy evaluation, and establish its finitetime sample complexity taking the errors of function approximation into account.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that near dimension-free global
convergence is established for federated multi-task RL using policy optimization.

1

Introduction

Federated reinforcement learning (FRL) is an emerging paradigm that combines the advantages of
federated learning (FL) and reinforcement learning (RL) [QZLZ21, ZFL+ 19], allowing multiple
agents to learn a shared policy from local experiences, without exposing their private data to a central
server nor other agents. FRL is poised to enable collaborative and efficient decision making in scenarios where data is distributed, heterogeneous, and sensitive, which arise frequently in applications such
as edge computing, smart cities, and healthcare [WHM+ 23, WKNL20, ZFL+ 19], to name just a
few. As has been observed [LZZ+ 17], decentralized training can lead to performance improvements
in FL by avoiding communication congestions at busy nodes such as the server, especially under
high-latency scenarios. This motivates us to design algorithms for the fully decentralized setting, a
∗

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University; email:
tongyang@andrew.cmu.edu.
†
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University; email:
shicongc@andrew.cmu.edu.
‡
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania; email:
ytwei@wharton.upenn.edu.
§
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania; email:
yuxinc@wharton.upenn.edu.
¶
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University; email:
yuejiechi@cmu.edu.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

