Sample Complexity Reduction via Policy Difference
Estimation in Tabular Reinforcement Learning

Adhyyan Narang
University of Washington
adhyyan@uw.edu

Andrew Wagenmaker
University of California, Berkeley
ajwagen@berkeley.edu

Lillian J. Ratliff
University of Washington
ratliffl@uw.edu

Kevin Jamieson
University of Washington
jamieson@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the non-asymptotic sample complexity for the pure exploration problem in contextual bandits and tabular reinforcement learning (RL):
identifying an ϵ-optimal policy from a set of policies Π with high probability.
Existing work in bandits has shown that it is possible to identify the best policy by
estimating only the difference between the behaviors of individual policies– which
can be substantially cheaper than estimating the behavior of each policy directly
—yet the best-known complexities in RL fail to take advantage of this, and instead
estimate the behavior of each policy directly. Does it suffice to estimate only the
differences in the behaviors of policies in RL? We answer this question positively
for contextual bandits, but in the negative for tabular RL, showing a separation
between contextual bandits and RL. However, inspired by this, we show that it
almost suffices to estimate only the differences in RL: if we can estimate the behavior of a single reference policy, it suffices to only estimate how any other policy
deviates from this reference policy. We develop an algorithm which instantiates
this principle and obtains, to the best of our knowledge, the tightest known bound
on the sample complexity of tabular RL.

1

Introduction

Online platforms, such as AirBnB, often try to improve their services by A/B testing different
marketing strategies. Based on the inventory, their strategy could include emphasizing local listings
versus tourist destinations, providing discounts for longer stays, or de-prioritizing homes that have
low ratings. In order to choose the best strategy, the standard approach would be to apply each strategy
sequentially and measure outcomes. However, recognize that the choice of strategy (policy) affects
the future inventory (state) of the platform. This complex interaction between different strategies
makes it difficult to estimate the impact of any strategy, if it were to be applied independently. To
address this, we can model the platform as an Markov Decision Process (MDP) with an observed
state [17, 15] and a finite set of policies Π corresponding to possible strategies. We wish to collect
data by playing exploratory actions which will enable us to estimate the true value of each policy
π ∈ Π, and identify the best policy from Π as quickly as possible.
In addition to A/B testing, similar challenges arise in complex medical trials, learning robot policies
to pack totes, and autonomous navigation in unfamiliar environments. All of these problems can be
formally modeled as the PAC (Probably Approximately Correct) policy identification problem in
reinforcement learning (RL). An algorithm is said to be (ϵ, δ)-PAC if, given a set of policies Π, it
returns a policy π ∈ Π that performs within ϵ of the optimal policy in Π, with probability 1 − δ. The
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

