CoMat: Aligning Text-to-Image Diffusion Model with
Image-to-Text Concept Matching

Dongzhi Jiang1 , Guanglu Song2 , Xiaoshi Wu1 , Renrui Zhang1,3 , Dazhong Shen3 ,
Zhuofan Zong1,2 , Yu Liu2B , Hongsheng Li1,3,4B
1
CUHK MMLab, 2 SenseTime Research, 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory, 4 CPII under InnoHK
{dzjiang, wuxiaoshi, zhangrenrui}@link.cuhk.edu.hk songguanglu@sensetime.com
{dazh.shen, zongzhuofan, liuyuisanai}@gmail.com hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
SDXL

CoMat-SDXL

SDXL

CoMat-SDXL

A wise owl with feathers
made of lace and eyes that
sparkle like stars, is
standing on a branch of a tall
tree, surrounded by glowing
fireflies.

A dragon made of ice, resting
beside a frozen waterfall in a
winter wonderland, with a
group of dwarfs peeking.

A golden retriever dressed
as a Victorian gentleman,
riding a hot air balloon made
of silk, overlooking a
countryside at sunset.

An intricate patchwork
quilt made of satin gently
floats down a lazy river,
surrounded by willow trees.

A 1920s black and white
silent film scene of a flapper
penguin dancing the
Charleston.

A surfboard with a living
coral reef ecosystem on its
surface.

Figure 1: Current text-to-image diffusion model still struggles to produce images well-aligned with
text prompts, as shown in the generated images of SDXL [49]. Our proposed method, CoMat, significantly enhances the baseline model on text condition following, demonstrating superior capability in
text-image alignment. All the pairs are generated with the same random seed.

Abstract
Diffusion models have demonstrated great success in the field of text-to-image
generation. However, alleviating the misalignment between the text prompts
and images is still challenging. We break down the problem into two causes:
concept ignorance and concept mismapping. To tackle the two challenges, we
propose CoMat, an end-to-end diffusion model fine-tuning strategy with the imageto-text concept matching mechanism. Firstly, we introduce a novel image-totext concept activation module to guide the diffusion model in revisiting ignored
concepts. Additionally, an attribute concentration module is proposed to map the
text conditions of each entity to its corresponding image area correctly. Extensive
experimental evaluations, conducted across three distinct text-to-image alignment
benchmarks, demonstrate the superior efficacy of our proposed method, CoMatSDXL, over the baseline model, SDXL [49]. We also show that our method
enhances general condition utilization capability and generalizes to the long and
complex prompt despite not specifically training on it. The code is available at
https://github.com/CaraJ7/CoMat.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

