Multidimensional Fractional Programming for
Normalized Cuts

1

Yannan Chen1∗
Beichen Huang2∗ Licheng Zhao3
Kaiming Shen1†
School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen), China
2
McMaster University, Canada
3
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, China
E-mail: yannanchen@link.cuhk.edu.cn, huangb21@mcmaster.ca,
zhaolicheng@sribd.cn, shenkaiming@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
The Normalized cut (NCut) problem is a fundamental and yet notoriously difficult
one in the unsupervised clustering field. Because the NCut problem is fractionally
structured, the fractional programming (FP) based approach has worked its way
into a new frontier. However, the conventional FP techniques are insufficient:
the classic Dinkelbach’s transform can only deal with a single ratio and hence is
limited to the two-class clustering, while the state-of-the-art quadratic transform
accounts for multiple ratios but fails to convert the NCut problem to a tractable
form. This work advocates a novel extension of the quadratic transform to the
multidimensional ratio case, thereby recasting the fractional 0-1 NCut problem into
a bipartite matching problem—which can be readily solved in an iterative manner.
Furthermore, we explore the connection between the proposed multidimensional
FP method and the minorization-maximization theory to verify the convergence.

1

Introduction

Fractional programming (FP) is a powerful optimization tool for solving diverse problems involving
ratio terms, e.g., in the areas of physics, economics, management science, signal processing, computer
science, and information theory [1, 2, 3]. This paper explores a novel application of FP to the normalized cut (NCut)—which is a fundamental and yet notoriously difficult problem for unsupervised data
clustering [4]. A new FP technique called the multidimensional quadratic transform [5] forms the
building block of this work. Differing from the classic Dinkelbach’s transform [6] that is typically
limited to the single-ratio problem with a pair of scalar-valued numerator and denominator, the
multidimensional quadratic transform is capable of handling multiple ratios simultaneously in the
same problem, and further accounts for the multidimensional-ratio case wherein the numerators and
denominators take a matrix/vector form. It turns out that the NCut problem solving can be made
much easier from a multidimensional FP point of view. Two main results have been achieved under
the umbrella of FP. First, we show that one most recent advance [7] in the NCut field can be interpreted as a special scalar-ratio version of the multidimensional quadratic transform, which already
outperforms the classic methods significantly. Second, by fully exploiting the multidimensional
quadratic transform [5], we develop a superior FP-based algorithm tailored to the NCut problem.
Clustering has been considered extensively in the literature from a variety of perspectives, e.g., Kmeans [8], hierarchical clustering [9], spectral clustering (SC) [10], graph cuts [11], and high-density
clustering [12]. The graph cuts approach is of particular interest for its flexibility to cope with a
wide range of cluster types, e.g., not requiring the desired clusters to be center-based as many other
∗
†

Equal contribution. Codes available at https://github.com/zhanchendao/FPC.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

