Changing the Training Data Distribution to
Reduce Simplicity Bias Improves
In-distribution Generalization
Tuan Hai Dang Nguyen Paymon Haddad Eric Gan Baharan Mirzasoleiman
Department of Computer Science, UCLA

Abstract
Can we modify the training data distribution to encourage the underlying optimization method toward finding solutions with superior generalization performance on
in-distribution data? In this work, we approach this question for the first time by
comparing the inductive bias of gradient descent (GD) with that of sharpness-aware
minimization (SAM). By studying a two-layer CNN, we rigorously prove that SAM
learns different features more uniformly, particularly in early epochs. That is, SAM
is less susceptible to simplicity bias compared to GD. We also show that examples
containing features that are learned early are separable from the rest based on the
model’s output. Based on this observation, we propose a method that (i) clusters
examples based on the network output early in training, (ii) identifies a cluster of
examples with similar network output, and (iii) upsamples the rest of examples only
once to alleviate the simplicity bias. We show empirically that USEFUL effectively
improves the generalization performance on the original data distribution when
training with various gradient methods, including (S)GD and SAM. Notably, we
demonstrate that our method can be combined with SAM variants and existing data
augmentation strategies to achieve, to the best of our knowledge, state-of-the-art performance for training ResNet18 on CIFAR10, STL10, CINIC10, Tiny-ImageNet;
ResNet34 on CIFAR100; and VGG19 and DenseNet121 on CIFAR10.

1

Introduction

Training data is a key component of machine learning pipelines and directly impacts its performance.
Over the last decade, there has been a large body of efforts concerned with improving learning
from a given training dataset by designing more effective optimization methods [22, 38, 76] or
neural networks with improved structures [47, 56, 82] or higher-capacity [49, 51]. More recently,
improving the quality of the training data has emerged as a popular avenue to improve generalization
performance. Interestingly, higher-quality data can further improve the performance when larger
models and better optimization methods are unable to do so [23, 27]. Recent efforts to improve the
data quality have mainly focused on filtering irrelevant, noisy, or harmful examples [23, 45, 66].
Nevertheless, it remains an open question if one can change the distribution of a clean training data
to further improve the in-distribution generalization performance of models trained on it.
At first glance, the above question may seem unnatural, as it disputes a fundamental assumption
that training and test data should come from the same distribution [29]. Under this assumption,
minimizing the training loss generalizes well on the test data [7]. Nevertheless, for overparameterized
neural networks with more parameters than training data, there are many zero training error solutions,
all global minima of the training objective, with different generalization performance [25]. Thus, one
may still hope to carefully change the data distribution to drive the optimization algorithms towards
finding more generalizable solutions on the original data distribution.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

