Pure Message Passing Can Estimate
Common Neighbor for Link Prediction

Kaiwen Dong1,2 Zhichun Guo1,2 Nitesh V. Chawla1,2
Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame
2
Lucy Family Institute for Data and Society, University of Notre Dame
{kdong2, zguo5, nchawla}@nd.edu
1

Abstract
Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) have emerged as the de facto standard
in graph representation learning. However, when it comes to link prediction, they
are not always superior to simple heuristics such as Common Neighbor (CN).
This discrepancy stems from a fundamental limitation: while MPNNs excel in
node-level representation, they stumble with encoding the joint structural features
essential to link prediction, like CN. To bridge this gap, we posit that, by harnessing
the orthogonality of input vectors, pure message-passing can indeed capture joint
structural features. Specifically, we study the proficiency of MPNNs in approximating CN heuristics. Based on our findings, we introduce the Message Passing
Link Predictor (MPLP), a novel link prediction model. MPLP taps into quasiorthogonal vectors to estimate link-level structural features, all while preserving
the node-level complexities. We conduct experiments on benchmark datasets from
various domains, where our method consistently outperforms the baseline methods,
establishing new state-of-the-arts.

1

Introduction

Link prediction is a cornerstone task in the field of graph machine learning, with broad-ranging
implications across numerous industrial applications. From identifying potential new acquaintances
on social networks [1] to predicting protein interactions [2], from enhancing recommendation
systems [3] to completing knowledge graphs [4], the impact of link prediction is felt across diverse
domains. Recently, with the advent of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [5] and more specifically,
Message-Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) [6], these models have become the primary tools for
tackling link prediction tasks. Despite the resounding success of MPNNs in the realm of node and
graph classification tasks [5, 7–9], it is intriguing to note that their performance in link prediction
does not always surpass that of simpler heuristic methods [10].
Zhang et al. [11] highlights the limitations of GNNs/MPNNs for link prediction tasks arising from its
intrinsic property of permutation invariance. Owing to this property, isomorphic nodes invariably
receive identical representations. This poses a challenge when attempting to distinguish links whose
endpoints are isomorphic nodes. As illustrated in Figure 1a, nodes v1 and v3 share a Common
Neighbor v2 , while nodes v1 and v5 do not. Ideally, due to their disparate local structures, these two
links (v1 , v3 ) and (v1 , v5 ) should receive distinct predictions. However, the permutation invariance
of MPNNs results in identical representations for nodes v3 and v5 , leading to identical predictions
for the two links. As Zhang et al. [11] asserts, such node-level representation, even with the most
expressive MPNNs, cannot capture structural link representation such as Common Neighbors (CN),
a critical aspect of link prediction.
In this work, we posit that the pure Message Passing paradigm [6] can indeed capture structural
link representation by exploiting orthogonality within the vector space. We begin by presenting a
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

