Can Simple Averaging Defeat Modern Watermarks?

Pei Yang∗ Hai Ci∗ Yiren Song Mike Zheng Shou†
Show Lab, National University of Singapore
yangpei@u.nus.edu, cihai03@gmail.com
yiren@nus.edu.sg, mike.zheng.shou@gmail.com

Abstract
Digital watermarking techniques are crucial for copyright protection and source
identification of images, especially in the era of generative AI models. However,
many existing watermarking methods, particularly content-agnostic approaches
that embed fixed patterns regardless of image content, are vulnerable to steganalysis
attacks that can extract and remove the watermark with minimal perceptual distortion. In this work, we categorise watermarking algorithms into content-adaptive
and content-agnostic ones, and demonstrate how averaging a collection of watermarked images could reveal the underlying watermark pattern. We then leverage
this extracted pattern for effective watermark removal under both greybox and
blackbox settings, even when the collection of images contains multiple watermark
patterns. For some algorithms like Tree-Ring watermarks, the extracted pattern
can also forge convincing watermarks on clean images. Our quantitative and
qualitative evaluations across twelve watermarking methods highlight the threat
posed by steganalysis to content-agnostic watermarks and the importance of designing watermarking techniques resilient to such analytical attacks. We propose
security guidelines calling for using content-adaptive watermarking strategies and
performing security evaluation against steganalysis. We also suggest multi-key
assignments as potential mitigations against steganalysis vulnerabilities. Github
page: https://github.com/showlab/watermark-steganalysis.

1

Introduction

Digital watermarking hides information within digital media, facilitating copyright protection and
source authentication [1–3]. With the advances in AI-based image generation and editing [4–7],
robust and secure digital watermarking is crucial for preventing deepfake misuse or manipulations of
created contents [8, 9].
We categorise digital watermarking methods into two types: content-adaptive and content-agnostic.
Content-adaptive methods take images into the watermarking process, dynamically adjusting the
watermark’s placement and strength based on the image content, as seen in technologies like HiDDeN [10] and RivaGAN [11]. Content-agnostic methods, however, use fixed, predefined watermark
patterns independent of or weakly dependent on image content. Apart from traditional methods like
DwtDctSvd [12], this also includes RoSteALS [13] that adds image-independent additive perturbations, and Tree-Ring [14] that places a ring pattern to the initial noise of a diffusion generation process.
Content-adaptive methods typically offer better robustness against image processing distortions, while
content-agnostic methods are computationally lighter and easier to implement.
A fundamental requirement for digital watermarks is robustness, ensuring watermarks cannot be
easily removed or tampered with [2]. To meet the requirement, existing methods have been improving
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

