Explanations that reveal all through the
definition of encoding

Aahlad Puli∗, Nhi Nguyen∗ , Rajesh Ranganath
New York University

Abstract
Feature attributions attempt to highlight what inputs drive predictive power. Good
attributions or explanations are thus those that produce inputs that retain this predictive power; accordingly, evaluations of explanations score their quality of prediction. However, evaluations produce scores better than what appears possible
from the values in the explanation for a class of explanations, called encoding explanations. Probing for encoding remains a challenge because there is no general
characterization of what gives the extra predictive power. We develop a definition
of encoding that identifies this extra predictive power via conditional dependence
and show that the definition fits existing examples of encoding. This definition implies, in contrast to encoding explanations, that non-encoding explanations contain
all the informative inputs used to produce the explanation, giving them a "what
you see is what you get" property, which makes them transparent and simple to
use. Next, we prove that existing scores (ROAR , FRESH, EVAL - X) do not rank nonencoding explanations above encoding ones, and develop STRIPE - X which ranks
them correctly. After empirically demonstrating the theoretical insights, we use
STRIPE - X to show that despite prompting an LLM to produce non-encoding explanations for a sentiment analysis task, the LLM-generated explanations encode.

1

Introduction

Artificial intelligence can unlock information in data that was previously unknown. In medicine, for
example, using AI, researchers have shown that electrocardiograms are predictive of structural heart
conditions [1] or new-onset diabetes [2]. Good predictions often lead one to ask what in the input
is important for a prediction; this question is a driving factor behind research in interpretability
and explainability [3, 4]. One primary direction in interpretability seeks to produce explanations
that are subsets of the input that retain the predictability of the label. These types of explanations
and interpretations are called feature attributions and have been used to find factors associated with
debt defaults [5], to demonstrate that detecting COVID-19 from chest radiographs can rely on nonphysiological signals [6], and to discover a new class of antibiotics [7].
Several methods exist for producing feature attributions or explanations. While some methods compute functions of model gradients [8] or look at predictability after removing features [9], other
methods attribute scores to different inputs by treating them as players in a game [4, 10] or amortize their explanations by learning a single model to select subsets for each instance [11]. Choosing one from the many feature attribution methods requires an evaluation. There are, however,
many approaches to evaluation itself: qualitative ones [12, 13, 14], which are limited to cases
where humans have precise knowledge about the inputs relevant to prediction, and quantitative
ones [2, 4, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20], which do not require human knowledge.
Intuitively, a good evaluation method for feature attributions should assign higher scores to
explanations that select inputs that are more predictive of the label. However, evaluations that
score explanations based on the predictability of the label from the explanation face one major
challenge: encoding. Informally, an encoding explanation is one where the explanation predicts
the label beyond what seems plausible from the values of the inputs themselves. The top left panel
of Figure 1 shows an explanation that predicts the label of dog or cat depending on whether the
∗
Equal contribution
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

