Most Influential Subset Selection: Challenges,
Promises, and Beyond

1

Yuzheng Hu1 Pingbang Hu2 Han Zhao1 Jiaqi W. Ma2
Department of Computer Science 2 School of Information Sciences
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{yh46,pbb,hanzhao,jiaqima}@illinois.edu

Abstract
How can we attribute the behaviors of machine learning models to their training
data? While the classic influence function sheds light on the impact of individual
samples, it often fails to capture the more complex and pronounced collective
influence of a set of samples. To tackle this challenge, we study the Most Influential
Subset Selection (MISS) problem, which aims to identify a subset of training
samples with the greatest collective influence. We conduct a comprehensive
analysis of the prevailing approaches in MISS, elucidating their strengths and
weaknesses. Our findings reveal that influence-based greedy heuristics, a dominant
class of algorithms in MISS, can provably fail even in linear regression. We
delineate the failure modes, including the errors of influence function and the
non-additive structure of the collective influence. Conversely, we demonstrate
that an adaptive version of these heuristics which applies them iteratively, can
effectively capture the interactions among samples and thus partially address the
issues. Experiments on real-world datasets corroborate these theoretical findings
and further demonstrate that the merit of adaptivity can extend to more complex
scenarios such as classification tasks and non-linear neural networks. We conclude
our analysis by emphasizing the inherent trade-off between performance and
computational efficiency, questioning the use of additive metrics such as the Linear
Datamodeling Score, and offering a range of discussions.

1

Introduction

Unraveling the intricate connections between data and model predictions is critical in machine
learning, particularly in high-stakes decision-making contexts such as healthcare, economics, and
public policy [Bracke et al., 2019, Rudin, 2019, Amarasinghe et al., 2023]. A better understanding of
these connections allows tackling tasks like data cleaning [Teso et al., 2021], model debugging [Guo
et al., 2021], and assessing the robustness of inferential results [Broderick et al., 2020], all key to
enhancing model interpretability and fostering trust between machine learning practitioners and
domain experts. Among the various methodologies, the influence function adopted by Koh and
Liang [2017] stands out as a particularly effective tool, sparking extensive research into identifying
influential individual samples [Barshan et al., 2020, Schioppa et al., 2022, Grosse et al., 2023].
Nevertheless, focusing solely on the influence of individual samples is often insufficient. In many
scenarios, it is necessary to understand how sets of samples jointly affect model predictions. These
include uncovering biases associated with specific demographic groups [Chen et al., 2018], fairly
allocating credits among crowdworkers [Arrieta-Ibarra et al., 2018], and detecting trends and signals
that emerge collectively within the data [Yang et al., 2020]. Gaining such insights is crucial for a
more comprehensive understanding of model behaviors.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

