TimeXer: Empowering Transformers for Time Series
Forecasting with Exogenous Variables

Yuxuan Wang∗, Haixu Wu∗, Jiaxiang Dong, Guo Qin, Haoran Zhang,
Yong Liu, Yunzhong Qiu, Jianmin Wang, Mingsheng Long
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
{wangyuxu22,whx20,djx20,qinguo24,zhang-hr24,liuyong21,qiuyz24}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{jimwang,mingsheng}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep models have demonstrated remarkable performance in time series forecasting.
However, due to the partially-observed nature of real-world applications, solely
focusing on the target of interest, so-called endogenous variables, is usually insufficient to guarantee accurate forecasting. Notably, a system is often recorded into
multiple variables, where the exogenous variables can provide valuable external
information for endogenous variables. Thus, unlike well-established multivariate or
univariate forecasting paradigms that either treat all the variables equally or ignore
exogenous information, this paper focuses on a more practical setting: time series
forecasting with exogenous variables. We propose a novel approach, TimeXer,
to ingest external information to enhance the forecasting of endogenous variables.
With deftly designed embedding layers, TimeXer empowers the canonical Transformer with the ability to reconcile endogenous and exogenous information, where
patch-wise self-attention and variate-wise cross-attention are used simultaneously.
Moreover, global endogenous tokens are learned to effectively bridge the causal
information underlying exogenous series into endogenous temporal patches. Experimentally, TimeXer achieves consistent state-of-the-art performance on twelve
real-world forecasting benchmarks and exhibits notable generality and scalability.
Code is available at this repository: https://github.com/thuml/TimeXer.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting is of pressing demand in real-world scenarios and have been widely used in
various application domains, such as meteorology [38, 42], electricity [34], and transportation [27].
Thereof, forecasting with exogenous variables is a prevalent and indispensable forecasting paradigm
since the variations within time series data are often influenced by external factors, such as economic
indicators, demographic changes, and societal events. For example, electricity prices are highly
dependent on the supply and demand of the market, and it is intrinsically impossible to predict future
prices solely based on historical data. Incorporating external factors in terms of exogenous variables,
as illustrated in Figure 1 (Left), allows for a more comprehensive understanding of the correlations
and causalities among various variables, leading to better performance and interpretability.
From the perspective of time series modeling, exogenous variables are introduced to the forecaster
for informative purposes and do not need to be predicted. The distinction between endogenous and
exogenous variables poses unique challenges compared to existing multivariate forecasting methods.
First, there are always multiple external factors that are illuminating to the prediction of the target
series, which requires models to reconcile the discrepancy and dependency among endogenous
∗

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

