The Minimax Rate of HSIC Estimation for
Translation-Invariant Kernels
Florian Kalinke
Institute for Program Structures and Data Organization
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Karlsruhe, Germany
florian.kalinke@kit.edu

Zoltán Szabó
Department of Statistics
London School of Economics
London, UK
z.szabo@lse.ac.uk

Abstract
Kernel techniques are among the most influential approaches in data science and
statistics. Under mild conditions, the reproducing kernel Hilbert space associated
to a kernel is capable of encoding the independence of M ≥ 2 random variables.
Probably the most widespread independence measure relying on kernels is the socalled Hilbert-Schmidt independence criterion (HSIC; also referred to as distance
covariance in the statistics literature). Despite various existing HSIC estimators
designed since its introduction close to two decades ago, the fundamental question
of the rate at which HSIC can be estimated is still open. In this work, we prove that
the minimax optimal rate of HSIC estimation on Rd for Borel measures containing
the Gaussians
 with continuous bounded translation-invariant characteristic kernels
is O n−1/2 . Specifically, our result implies the optimality in the minimax sense
of many of the most-frequently used estimators (including the U-statistic, the
V-statistic, and the Nyström-based one) on Rd .

1

Introduction

Kernel methods [Steinwart and Christmann, 2008, Berlinet and Thomas-Agnan, 2004, Saitoh and
Sawano, 2016] allow embedding probability measures into reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHS;
[Aronszajn, 1950]) by use of a positive definite function, the kernel function. This approach has
gained considerable attention over the last 20 years. Such embeddings induce the so-called maximum
mean discrepancy (MMD; [Smola et al., 2007, Gretton et al., 2012]), which quantifies the discrepancy
of two probability measures by considering the RKHS norm of the distance of their respective
embeddings. MMD is a metric on the space of probability distributions if the kernel is characteristic
[Fukumizu et al., 2008, Sriperumbudur et al., 2010]. MMD is also an integral probability metric
[Zolotarev, 1983, Müller, 1997] where the underlying function class is chosen to be the unit ball in
the corresponding RKHS.
MMD allows for the quantification of dependence by considering the distance between the embedding
of a joint distribution and that of the product of its marginals. This construction gives rise to the
so-called Hilbert-Schmidt independence criterion (HSIC; [Gretton et al., 2005]), which is also equal
to the RKHS norm of the centered cross-covariance operator. In fact, one of the most widely-used
independence measures in statistics, distance covariance [Székely et al., 2007, Székely and Rizzo,
2009, Lyons, 2013], was shown to be equivalent to HSIC [Sejdinovic et al., 2013b] when the latter is
specialized to M = 2 components; Sheng and Sriperumbudur [2023] proved a similar result for the
conditional case. For M > 2 components [Quadrianto et al., 2009, Sejdinovic et al., 2013a, Pfister
et al., 2018], universality [Steinwart, 2001, Micchelli et al., 2006, Carmeli et al., 2010, Sriperumbudur
et al., 2011] of the kernels (km )M
m=1 (on the respective domains) underlying HSIC guarantees that
this measure captures independence [Szabó and Sriperumbudur, 2018]. In the case of M = 2,
characteristic (km )2m=1 suffice [Lyons, 2013].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

