Mixture of Adversarial LoRAs: Boosting Robust
Generalization in Meta-Tuning

Xu Yang1 Chen Liu† 1 Ying Wei† 2
City University of Hong Kong 2 Zhejiang University
xyang337-c@my.cityu.edu.hk chen.liu@cityu.edu.hk ying.wei@zju.edu.cn
1

Abstract
This paper introduces AMT, an Adversarial Meta-Tuning methodology, to boost the
robust generalization of pre-trained models in the out-of-domain (OOD) few-shot
learning. To address the challenge of transferring knowledge from source domains
to unseen target domains, we construct the robust LoRAPool by meta-tuning LoRAs with dual perturbations applied to not only the inputs but also singular values
and vectors of the weight matrices at various robustness levels. On top of that,
we introduce a simple yet effective test-time merging mechanism to dynamically
merge discriminative LoRAs for test-time task customization. Extensive evaluations demonstrate that AMT yields significant improvements, up to 12.92% in
clean generalization and up to 49.72% in adversarial generalization, over previous
state-of-the-art methods across a diverse range of OOD few-shot image classification tasks on three benchmarks, confirming the effectiveness of our approach
to boost the robust generalization of pre-trained models. Our code is available at
https://github.com/xyang583/AMT.

1

Introduction

Few-shot learning (FSL) has recently been revolutionized by large-scale pre-trained vision transformer
models [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Their generalization capability can be further enhanced with a few annotated
examples, achieving impressive performance across a broad spectrum of downstream tasks [6, 7,
8, 9, 10]. Building on this foundation, meta-tuning emerges as a powerful strategy that integrates
the broad generalization capabilities of pre-trained prior knowledge with the adaptive flexibility of
meta-learning, allowing models to quickly adapt to new tasks in few-shot scenarios [11, 12].
Despite its success, the robust generalization of meta-tuning to defend against adversarial attacks [13, 14, 15] and adapt to out-of-distribution (OOD) downstream tasks [16, 17, 18] remains an
ongoing challenge. However, it is crucial for various real-world applications such as medical imaging
diagnostics and autonomous driving to simultaneously achieve competitive performance on adversarial examples or out-of-distribution data. Deployed models often encounter novel environments
with distribution shifts between training and test data, including variations in hospital equipment
and protocols [19] or diverse urban road scenarios [20]. Moreover, these models are vulnerable to
adversarial attacks leading to harmful diagnoses or unsafe driving decisions. For instance, adversaries
can perturb sensor signals to deceive 2D or 3D medical imaging models [21], manipulate traffic signs
with malicious stickers [22], or fool the autopilot into following unsafe trajectories [23].
In this paper, we delve into leveraging adversarial training and meta-tuning to enhance robust
generalization of pre-trained vision transformers across different domains. Compared with previous
meta-tuning approaches, this involves two unique aspects. Firstly, when incorporating adversarial
†

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

