The Group Robustness is in the Details: Revisiting
Finetuning under Spurious Correlations

Tyler LaBonte1∗ John C. Hill2 Xinchen Zhang2
Vidya Muthukumar2,1 Abhishek Kumar†
1

H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology
2
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology

Abstract
Modern machine learning models are prone to over-reliance on spurious correlations, which can often lead to poor performance on minority groups. In this
paper, we identify surprising and nuanced behavior of finetuned models on worstgroup accuracy via comprehensive experiments on four well-established benchmarks across vision and language tasks. We first show that the commonly used
class-balancing techniques of mini-batch upsampling and loss upweighting can
induce a decrease in worst-group accuracy (WGA) with training epochs, leading
to performance no better than without class-balancing. While in some scenarios, removing data to create a class-balanced subset is more effective, we show
this depends on group structure and propose a mixture method which can outperform both techniques. Next, we show that scaling pretrained models is generally
beneficial for worst-group accuracy, but only in conjunction with appropriate
class-balancing. Finally, we identify spectral imbalance in finetuning features
as a potential source of group disparities — minority group covariance matrices incur a larger spectral norm than majority groups once conditioned on the
classes. Our results show more nuanced interactions of modern finetuned models with group robustness than was previously known. Our code is available at
https://github.com/tmlabonte/revisiting-finetuning.

1

Introduction

Classification performance in machine learning is sensitive to spurious correlations: patterns which
are predictive of the target class in the training dataset but not at test time. For example, in computer
vision tasks, neural networks are known to utilize the backgrounds of images as proxies for their
content [1, 50, 68]. Beyond simple settings, spurious correlations have been identified in highconsequence applications such as criminal justice [8], medicine [70], and facial recognition [33].
In particular, a model’s reliance on spurious correlations disproportionately affects its accuracy on
minority groups which are under-represented in the training dataset; we therefore desire maximizing
the model’s group robustness, quantified by its minimum accuracy on any group [50].
The standard workflow in modern machine learning involves initializing from a pretrained model and
finetuning on the downstream dataset using empirical risk minimization (ERM) [62], which minimizes
the average training loss. When group annotations are available in the training dataset, practitioners
utilize a rich literature of techniques to improve worst-group accuracy (WGA) [50, 39, 26]. However,
group annotations are often unknown or problematic to obtain (e.g., due to financial, privacy, or
fairness concerns). While group robustness methods have been adapted to work without group
annotations [31, 72, 47, 29], they remain complex variants on the standard finetuning procedure.
∗
†

Corresponding author. Email: tlabonte@gatech.edu.
Work done at Google DeepMind.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

