Adaptive Depth Networks with Skippable Sub-Paths

Woochul Kang∗
Department of Embedded Systems
Incheon National University
Yeonsu-gu, Incheon, South Korea, 22012
wchkang@inu.ac.kr

Hyungseop Lee
Department of Embedded Systems
Incheon National University
Yeonsu-gu, Incheon, South Korea, 22012
hhss0927@inu.ac.kr

Abstract
Predictable adaptation of network depths can be an effective way to control inference latency and meet the resource condition of various devices. However, previous
adaptive depth networks do not provide general principles and a formal explanation
on why and which layers can be skipped, and, hence, their approaches are hard
to be generalized and require long and complex training steps. In this paper, we
present a practical approach to adaptive depth networks that is applicable to both
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and transformers with minimal training effort. In our approach, every hierarchical residual stage is divided into two sub-paths,
and they are trained to acquire different properties through a simple self-distillation
strategy. While the first sub-path is essential for hierarchical feature learning, the
second one is trained to refine the learned features and minimize performance
degradation even if it is skipped. Unlike prior adaptive networks, our approach
does not train every target sub-network exhaustively. At test time, however, we
can connect these sub-paths in a combinatorial manner to select sub-networks of
various accuracy-efficiency trade-offs from a single network. We provide a formal
rationale for why the proposed training method can reduce overall prediction errors
while minimizing the impact of skipping sub-paths. We demonstrate the generality
and effectiveness of our approach with both CNNs and transformers. Source codes
are available at https://github.com/wchkang/depth

1

Introduction

Modern deep neural networks such as CNNs and transformers [1] provide state-of-the-art performance
at high computational costs, and, hence, lots of efforts have been made to leverage those inference
capabilities in various resource-constrained devices. Those efforts include compact architectures
[2, 3], network pruning [4, 5], weight/activation quantization [6], knowledge distillation [7], to name
a few. However, those approaches provide static accuracy-efficiency trade-offs, and, hence, it is
infeasible to deploy one single model to meet devices with all kinds of resource-constraints.
There have been some attempts to provide predictable adaptability to neural networks by exploiting
the redundancy in either network depths [8, 9], widths [10, 11], or both [12, 13]. However, one major
difficulty with prior adaptive networks is that they are hard to train and require significantly longer
training time than non-adaptive networks. For example, most adaptive networks select a fixed number
of sub-networks of varying depths or width, and train them iteratively, mostly through self-distilling
knowledge from the largest sub-network (also referred to as the super-net) [10, 11, 13, 14]. However,
this exhaustive self-distillation takes long time and can generate conflicting training objectives
for different parameter-sharing sub-networks, potentially resulting in worse performance [15, 16].
Moreover, unlike width-adaptation networks, there is no established principle for adapting depths
since the impact of skipping individual layers has not been formally investigated.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

