SustainDC: Benchmarking for Sustainable Data
Center Control
Avisek Naug† , Antonio Guillen† , Ricardo Luna† , Vineet Gundecha† , Cullen Bash,
Sahand Ghorbanpour, Sajad Mousavi, Ashwin Ramesh Babu, Dejan Markovikj,
Lekhapriya D Kashyap, Desik Rengarajan, Soumyendu Sarkar†∗
Hewlett Packard Enterprise (Hewlett Packard Labs)
{avisek.naug, antonio.guillen, rluna, vineet.gundecha, cullen.bash, sahand.ghorbanpour,
sajad.mousavi, ashwin.ramesh-babu, dejan.markovikj, lekhapriya.dheeraj-kashyap, desik.rengarajan,
soumyendu.sarkar}@hpe.com

Abstract
Machine learning has driven an exponential increase in computational demand,
leading to massive data centers that consume significant energy and contribute to
climate change. This makes sustainable data center control a priority. In this paper,
we introduce SustainDC, a set of Python environments for benchmarking multiagent reinforcement learning (MARL) algorithms for data centers (DC). SustainDC
supports custom DC configurations and tasks such as workload scheduling, cooling
optimization, and auxiliary battery management, with multiple agents managing
these operations while accounting for the effects of each other. We evaluate
various MARL algorithms on SustainDC, showing their performance across diverse
DC designs, locations, weather conditions, grid carbon intensity, and workload
requirements. Our results highlight significant opportunities to improve data center
operations using MARL algorithms. Given the increasing use of DC due to AI,
SustainDC provides a crucial platform for developing and benchmarking advanced
algorithms essential for achieving sustainable computing and addressing other
heterogeneous real-world challenges.

1

Introduction

One of the growing areas of energy and carbon footprint (CF P ) can be traced to cloud data centers
(DCs). The increased use of cloud resources for batch workloads related to AI model training,
multimodal data storage and processing, or interactive workloads like streaming services, hosting
websites have prompted enterprise clients to construct numerous data centers. Governments and
regulatory bodies are increasingly focusing on environmental sustainability and imposing stricter
regulations to reduce carbon emissions. This has prompted industry-wide initiatives to adopt more
intelligent DC control approaches. This paper presents SustainDC, a sustainable DC Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning (MARL) set of environments. SustainDC helps promote and prioritize
sustainability, and it serves as a platform that facilitates collaboration among AI researchers, enabling
them to contribute to a more environmentally responsible DC.
The main contributions of this paper are the following:
• A highly customizable suite of environments focused on Data Center (DC) operations,
designed to benchmark energy consumption and carbon footprint across various DC config∗

Corresponding author. †These authors contributed equally.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

