Star-Agents: Automatic Data Optimization with
LLM Agents for Instruction Tuning

Hang Zhou1,2 , Yehui Tang2 , Haochen Qin2 , Yujie Yang2 , Renren Jin1 ,
Deyi Xiong1∗ , Kai Han2∗ , Yunhe Wang2∗
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China.
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
{zhouhang25, yehui.tang, qinhaochen1, yangyujie26}@huawei.com,
{rrjin, dyxiong}@tju.edu.cn, {kai.han, yunhe.wang}@huawei.com.

Abstract
The efficacy of large language models (LLMs) on downstream tasks usually hinges
on instruction tuning, which relies critically on the quality of training data. Unfortunately, collecting high-quality and diverse data is both expensive and timeconsuming. To mitigate this issue, we propose a novel Star-Agents framework,
which automates the enhancement of data quality across datasets through multiagent collaboration and assessment. The framework adopts a three-pronged strategy.
It initially generates diverse instruction data with multiple LLM agents through a
bespoke sampling method. Subsequently, the generated data undergo a rigorous
evaluation using a dual-model method that assesses both difficulty and quality.
Finaly, the above process evolves in a dynamic refinement phase, where more
effective LLMs are prioritized, enhancing the overall data quality. Our empirical
studies, including instruction tuning experiments with models such as Pythia and
LLaMA, demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework. Optimized
datasets have achieved substantial improvements, with an average increase of 12%
and notable gains in specific metrics, such as a 40% improvement in Fermi, as
evidenced by benchmarks like MT-bench, Vicuna bench, and WizardLM testset.
Codes will be released soon1 .

1

Introduction

The research and development of natural language understanding and generation have been dramatically accelerated with the emergence and prevalence of LLMs [39, 31, 30]. These models have
been extensively applied in a wide range of scenarios, e.g., question answering and text generation,
significantly enhancing downstream task performance due to their exceptional ability to follow
instructions [3, 53, 49, 10, 28]. Such an instruction-following capability is primarily acquired through
a process known as instruction tuning [40, 23, 5], where LLMs are fine-tuned on instruction data. It
is hence widely acknowledged that the quality of instructions plays a pivotal role [5, 20, 48, 29].
Historically, the creation of instruction data for training LLMs has heavily relied on the expertise
of human annotators, as evidenced by substantial scholarly contributions [14, 50, 41, 38, 9, 27, 21].
While expert-driven data generation assures the production of high-quality instructions, the enormous
volume of data necessary for effective training renders this method economically untenable. In
response, recent efforts have shifted towards the utilization of LLMs to automatically generate
instructions, thereby mitigating the reliance on costly human annotation [37, 32, 44, 18]. Concurrently,
∗
1

Corresponding authors.
https://github.com/CANGLETIAN/Star-Agents

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

