CoMix: A Comprehensive Benchmark for Multi-Task
Comic Understanding

1

Emanuele Vivoli1,2 Marco Bertini2 Dimosthenis Karatzas1
Computer Vision Center, UAB, Spain 2 MICC, University of Florence, Italy
{evivoli,dimos}@cvc.uab.cat
{emanuele.vivoli, marco.bertini}@unifi.it

Figure 1: Composition of the CoMix benchmark. The top part of the figure provides a qualitative
representation of the datasets included in CoMix. The accompanying bar charts depict the differences
between the original annotations and those extended in CoMix. The left chart shows the increased
number of annotations per dataset, whereas the right chart details the increase per task.

Abstract
The comic domain is rapidly advancing with the development of single-page analysis and synthesis models. However, evaluation metrics and datasets lag behind,
often limited to small-scale or single-style test sets. We introduce a novel benchmark, CoMix, designed to evaluate the multi-task capabilities of models in comic
analysis. Unlike existing benchmarks that focus on isolated tasks such as object
detection or text recognition, CoMix addresses a broader range of tasks including
object detection, speaker identification, character re-identification, reading order,
and multi-modal reasoning tasks like character naming and dialogue generation.
Our benchmark comprises three existing datasets with expanded annotations to
support multi-task evaluation. To mitigate the over-representation of manga-style
data, we have incorporated a new dataset of carefully selected American comicstyle books, thereby enriching the diversity of comic styles. CoMix is designed
to assess pre-trained models in zero-shot and limited fine-tuning settings, probing
their transfer capabilities across different comic styles and tasks. The validation
split of the benchmark is publicly available for research purposes, and an evaluation
server for the held-out test split is also provided. Comparative results between
human performance and state-of-the-art models reveal a significant performance
gap, highlighting substantial opportunities for advancements in comic understanding. The dataset, baseline models, and code are accessible at the repository link.
This initiative sets a new standard for comprehensive comic analysis, providing the
community with a common benchmark for evaluation on a large and varied set.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

