GLinSAT: The General Linear Satisfiability Neural
Network Layer By Accelerated Gradient Descent

Hongtai Zeng1

Chao Yang2 Yanzhen Zhou1 Cheng Yang2 Qinglai Guo1∗
State Key Laboratory of Power Systems, Department of
Electrical Engineering, Tsinghua University
2
Decision Intelligence Lab, Alibaba DAMO Academy
zenght20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xiuxin.yc@alibaba-inc.com, zhouyzh@126.com,
charis.yangc@alibaba-inc.com, guoqinglai@tsinghua.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Ensuring that the outputs of neural networks satisfy specific constraints is crucial
for applying neural networks to real-life decision-making problems. In this paper,
we consider making a batch of neural network outputs satisfy bounded and general
linear constraints. We first reformulate the neural network output projection problem as an entropy-regularized linear programming problem. We show that such a
problem can be equivalently transformed into an unconstrained convex optimization
problem with Lipschitz continuous gradient according to the duality theorem. Then,
based on an accelerated gradient descent algorithm with numerical performance
enhancement, we present our architecture, GLinSAT, to solve the problem. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first general linear satisfiability layer in which
all the operations are differentiable and matrix-factorization-free. Despite the fact
that we can explicitly perform backpropagation based on automatic differentiation
mechanism, we also provide an alternative approach in GLinSAT to calculate the
derivatives based on implicit differentiation of the optimality condition. Experimental results on constrained traveling salesman problems, partial graph matching
with outliers, predictive portfolio allocation and power system unit commitment
demonstrate the advantages of GLinSAT over existing satisfiability layers. Our
implementation is available at https://github.com/HunterTracer/GLinSAT.

1

Introduction

Constrained decision-making problems are pervasive across various disciplines. For example, logistics companies need to arrange delivery routes to minimize transportation costs while ensuring that all
orders are delivered on time. Power system operators need to decide how to allocate electricity production between different power plants to meet ever-changing electricity demand while maintaining
system stability. Unfortunately, directly solving these complex constrained decision-making problems
via commercial optimization solvers requires a large amount of time. As a result, in scenarios that
require rapid response, traditional solvers may not be suitable due to their long computation time.
With the development of deep learning, it is hopeful that neural networks can capture the domain
characteristics and complex relationships involved in constrained decision-making problems through
their powerful expressive capability and the solution time can be thus reduced. In recent years,
research on how to use neural networks to solve constrained decision-making problems has become a
topic of general interest. Despite the great success of neural networks on classification and regression
tasks, making the outputs of neural networks satisfy specific constraints is not straightforward, which
still needs to be further investigated.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

