SubjECTive-QA: Measuring Subjectivity in Earnings
Call Transcripts’ QA Through Six-Dimensional
Feature Analysis

Huzaifa Pardawala*B , Siddhant Sukhani*B , Agam Shah*B , Veer Kejriwal, Abhishek Pillai,
Rohan Bhasin, Andrew DiBiasio, Tarun Mandapati, Dhruv Adha, Sudheer Chava
Georgia Institute of Technology
B Corresponding Authors: {hpardawala3, ssukhani3, ashah482}@gatech.edu
* Indicates equal contribution

Abstract
Fact-checking is extensively studied in the context of misinformation and disinformation, addressing objective inaccuracies. However, a softer form of misinformation involves responses that are factually correct but lack certain features such
as clarity and relevance. This challenge is prevalent in formal Question-Answer
(QA) settings such as press conferences in ﬁnance, politics, sports, and other domains, where subjective answers can obscure transparency. Despite this, there is
a lack of manually annotated datasets for subjective features across multiple dimensions. To address this gap, we introduce SubjECTive-QA, a human annotated
dataset on Earnings Call Transcripts’ (ECTs) QA sessions as the answers given by
company representatives are often open to subjective interpretations and scrutiny.
The dataset includes 49, 446 annotations for long-form QA pairs across six features: Assertive, Cautious, Optimistic, Specific, Clear, and Relevant.
These features are carefully selected to encompass the key attributes that reﬂect
the tone of the answers provided during QA sessions across different domains.
Our ﬁndings are that the best-performing Pre-trained Language Model (PLM),
RoBERTa-base, has similar weighted F1 scores to Llama-3-70b-Chat on features
with lower subjectivity, such as Relevant and Clear, with a mean difference
of 2.17% in their weighted F1 scores. The models perform signiﬁcantly better
on features with higher subjectivity, such as Specific and Assertive, with
a mean difference of 10.01% in their weighted F1 scores. Furthermore, testing
SubjECTive-QA’s generalizability using QAs from White House Press Brieﬁngs
and Gaggles yields an average weighted F1 score of 65.97% using our best models
for each feature, demonstrating broader applicability beyond the ﬁnancial domain.
SubjECTive-QA is publicly available under the CC BY 4.0 license1 .

1

Introduction

Earnings Calls (ECs) and their linguistic nuances serve as a vital communication channel between
company executives and investors, offering insights into a company’s performance and future outlook [Sawhney et al., 2021]. The long-form Question and Answer (QA) sessions of these calls
are particularly signiﬁcant as they provide unscripted interactions that reveal executives’ conﬁdence
and strategic clarity. Unlike the scripted presentations in the beginning of ECs, the dynamic nature
1

https://github.com/gtfintechlab/SubjECTive-QA

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

