Neural Embeddings Rank: Aligning 3D latent
dynamics with movements

Chenggang Chen, Zhiyu Yang, Xiaoqin Wang
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University
cheng-gang.chen@jhu.edu

Abstract
Aligning neural dynamics with movements is a fundamental goal in neuroscience
and brain-machine interfaces. However, there is still a lack of dimensionality
reduction methods that can effectively align low-dimensional latent dynamics with
movements. To address this gap, we propose Neural Embeddings Rank (NER), a
technique that embeds neural dynamics into a 3D latent space and contrasts the
embeddings based on movement ranks. NER learns to regress continuous representations of neural dynamics (i.e., embeddings) on continuous movements. We apply
NER and six other dimensionality reduction techniques to neurons in the primary
motor cortex (M1), dorsal premotor cortex (PMd), and primary somatosensory
cortex (S1) as monkeys perform reaching tasks. Only NER aligns latent dynamics
with both hand position and direction, visualizable in 3D. NER reveals consistent
latent dynamics in M1 and PMd across sixteen sessions over a year. Using a linear
regression decoder, NER explains 86% and 97% of the variance in velocity and
position, respectively. Linear models trained on data from one session successfully
decode velocity, position, and direction in held-out test data from different dates
and cortical areas (64%, 88%, and 90%). NER also reveals distinct latent dynamics
in S1 during consistent movements and in M1 during curved reaching tasks. The
code is available at https://github.com/NeuroscienceAI/NER.

1

Introduction

It has long been thought that individual neurons in the motor and premotor cortex, similar to those
in the sensory cortex, are tuned to specific movement parameters such as direction. However, this
static and receptive field-based neural representation fails to explain movement trajectories during
simple tasks like reaching. Recent studies have found that the activities of multiple simultaneously
recorded neurons, which fire spikes in a time-dependent manner, encode reaching movements [10].
Unlike the one-dimensional dynamics from a single neuron, understanding how movements are
represented by these high-dimensional neural dynamics is challenging. In systems neuroscience and
brain-machine interfaces, there is significant motivation to reduce these high-dimensional neural
dynamics to low-dimensional latent dynamics for at least three reasons:
First, visualizing neural dynamics. This involves a trade-off between dimensionality and explained
variance. To explain a complex reaching task, at least six dimensions are typically required. For
example, in an eight-direction center-out reaching task, [11][9][12] selects fifteen dimensions for the
PMd, ten for the M1, and eight for the S1. Therefore, we need to further reduce the dimensionality of
these “low-dimensional” latent dynamics. Currently, we still lack a method that can directly explain
enough variance within three dimensions. Second, comparing movements-related latent dynamics.
After dimensionality reduction, we can visualize the trajectories of latent dynamics over time. For
instance, [5] reveals rotational latent dynamics during reaching tasks using principal component
analysis (PCA). [25] found that animals performing similar tasks exhibit similar latent dynamics.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

