A Framework for Bilevel Optimization
on Riemannian Manifolds
Andi Han1 Bamdev Mishra2 Pratik Jawanpuria2 Akiko Takeda1
1
RIKEN AIP 2 Microsoft, India 3 University of Tokyo
andi.han@riken.jp
{bamdevm, pratik.jawanpuria}@microsoft.com.
takeda@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Bilevel optimization has gained prominence in various applications. In this study,
we introduce a framework for solving bilevel optimization problems, where the
variables in both the lower and upper levels are constrained on Riemannian manifolds. We present several hypergradient estimation strategies on manifolds and
analyze their estimation errors. Furthermore, we provide comprehensive convergence and complexity analyses for the proposed hypergradient descent algorithm
on manifolds. We also extend our framework to encompass stochastic bilevel
optimization and incorporate the use of general retraction. The efficacy of the
proposed framework is demonstrated through several applications.

1

Introduction

Bilevel optimization is a hierarchical optimization problem where the upper-level problem depends
on the solution of the lower-level, i.e.,
min F (x) = f (x, y ∗ (x)),

x∈Rdx

s.t. y ∗ (x) = arg min g(x, y).
y∈Rdy

Applications involving bilevel optimization include meta learning [16], hyperparameter optimization
[18], and neural architecture search (NAS) [53], to name a few. The lower-level problem is usually
assumed to be strongly convex.
Common strategies for solving such problem can be classified into two categories: single-level reformulation [29, 60] and approximate hypergradient descent [19, 40]. The former aims to reformulate the
bilevel optimization problem into a single-level one using the optimality conditions of the lower-level
problem as constraints. However, this may impose a large number of constraints for machine learning
applications. The latter scheme directly solves the bilevel problem through iteratively updating the
lower and upper-level parameters and, hence, is usually more efficient. Nevertheless, existing works
have mostly focused on unconstrained bilevel optimization [19, 32, 40, 11, 52, 45, 14].
In this work, we study bilevel optimization problems where x and y are on Riemannian manifolds
Mx and My , respectively. We focus on the setup where the lower-level function g(x, y) is geodesic
strongly convex (a generalized notion of convexity on manifolds, defined in Section 2) in y. This
ensures the lower-level problem has a unique solution y ∗ (x) given x. The upper-level function
f can be nonconvex on Mx × My . Because the unconstrained bilevel optimization is a special
case of our formulation on manifolds, such a formulation includes a wider class of applications.
Examples of Riemannian bilevel optimization include Riemannian meta learning [64] and NAS over
SPD networks [62]. Moreover, there has been a surge of interest of min-max optimization over
Riemannian manifolds [37, 41, 73, 27, 25, 67, 35], which also gets subsumed in the framework of
bilevel optimization with g = −f .
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

