Is Behavior Cloning All You Need?
Understanding Horizon in Imitation Learning

Dylan J. Foster
Microsoft Research
dylanfoster@microsoft.com

Adam Block
Department of Mathematics
MIT
ablock@mit.edu

Dipendra Misra
Microsoft Research
dipendrakumar.misra@databricks.com

Abstract
Imitation learning (IL) aims to mimic the behavior of an expert in a sequential
decision making task by learning from demonstrations, and has been widely applied
to robotics, autonomous driving, and autoregressive text generation. The simplest
approach to IL, behavior cloning (BC), is thought to incur sample complexity with
unfavorable quadratic dependence on the problem horizon, motivating a variety of
different online algorithms that attain improved linear horizon dependence under
stronger assumptions on the data and the learner’s access to the expert.
We revisit the apparent gap between offline and online IL from a learning-theoretic
perspective, with a focus on the realizable/well-specified setting with general
policy classes up to and including deep neural networks. Through a new analysis
of behavior cloning with the logarithmic loss, we show that it is possible to achieve
horizon-independent sample complexity in offline IL whenever (i) the range of
the cumulative payoffs is controlled, and (ii) an appropriate notion of supervised
learning complexity for the policy class is controlled. Specializing our results to
deterministic, stationary policies, we show that the gap between offline and online
IL is smaller than previously thought: (i) it is possible to achieve linear dependence
on horizon in offline IL under dense rewards (matching what was previously only
known to be achievable in online IL); and (ii) without further assumptions on the
policy class, online IL cannot improve over offline IL with the logarithmic loss,
even in benign MDPs. We complement our theoretical results with experiments on
standard RL tasks and autoregressive language generation to validate the practical
relevance of our findings.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning (IL) is the problem of emulating an expert policy for sequential decision making by
learning from demonstrations. Compared to reinforcement learning (RL), the learner in IL does not
observe reward-based feedback, and must imitate the expert’s behavior based on demonstrations alone;
their objective is to achieve performance close to that of the expert on an unobserved reward function.
Imitation learning is motivated by the observation that in many domains, demonstrating the desired
behavior for a task (e.g., robotic grasping) is simple, while designing a reward function to elicit the
desired behavior can be challenging. IL is also often preferable to RL because it removes the need for
exploration, leading to empirically reduced sample complexity and often much more stable training.
Indeed, the relative ease of applying IL (over RL methods) has led to extensive adoption, ranging from
classical applications in autonomous driving [63] and helicopter flight [1] to contemporary works that
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

