Learning Image Priors through Patch-based Diffusion
Models for Solving Inverse Problems

Jason Hu

Bowen Song

Xiaojian Xu

Liyue Shen

Jeffrey A. Fessler

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
{jashu, bowenbw, xjxu, liyues, fessler}@umich.edu

Abstract
Diffusion models can learn strong image priors from underlying data distributions
and use them to solve inverse problems, but the training process is computationally
expensive and requires lots of data. Such bottlenecks prevent most existing works
from being feasible for high-dimensional and high-resolution data such as 3D
images. This paper proposes a method to learn an efficient data prior for the entire
image by training diffusion models only on patches of images. Specifically, we
propose a patch-based position-aware diffusion inverse solver, called PaDIS, where
we obtain the score function of the whole image through scores of patches and their
positional encoding and use this as the prior for solving inverse problems. We show
that this diffusion model achieves improved memory efficiency and data efficiency
while still maintaining the ability to generate entire images via positional encoding.
Additionally, the proposed PaDIS model is highly flexible and can be paired with
different diffusion inverse solvers (DIS). We demonstrate that the proposed PaDIS
approach enables solving various inverse problems in both natural and medical
image domains, including CT reconstruction, deblurring, and superresolution,
given only patch-based priors. Notably, PaDIS outperforms previous DIS methods
trained on entire image priors in the case of limited training data, demonstrating
the data efficiency of our proposed approach by learning patch-based prior. Code:
https://github.com/sundeco/PaDIS

1

Introduction

Diffusion models learn the prior of an underlying data distribution and can use the prior to generate
new images [1–3]. By starting with a clean training images and gradually adding higher levels of
noise, eventually obtaining images that are indistinguishable from pure noise, the score function of
the image distribution, denoted s(x) = ∇ log p(x), can be learned by a neural network. The reverse
process (sampling or generation) then starts with pure noise and uses the learned score function to
iteratively remove noise, ending with a clean image sampled from the underlying distribution p(x).
Inverse problems are ubiquitous in image processing, and aim to reconstruct an image x from a
measurement y, where y = A(x) + ϵ, A represents a forward operator, and ϵ represents random
unknown noise. By Bayes rule, p(x|y) is proportional to p(x) · p(y|x). Hence, to recover x, it is
important to have a good estimate of the prior p(x), particularly when y contains far less information
than x. Diffusion models are known for their ability to learn a strong prior, so there is a growing
literature on using them to solve inverse problems [4–8].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

