Token Merging for Training-Free Semantic Binding
in Text-to-Image Synthesis

Taihang Hu1 , Linxuan Li1 , Joost van de Weijer3 , Hongcheng Gao4
Fahad Shahbaz Khan5,6 , Jian Yang1 , Ming-Ming Cheng1,2 , Kai Wang3∗ , Yaxing Wang1,2∗
1
VCIP, College of Computer Science, Nankai University, 2 NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian
3
Computer Vision Center, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI, 6 Linkoping University
{hutaihang00, linxuanli520, gaohongcheng2000}@gmail.com
{joost, kwang}@cvc.uab.es, fahad.khan@liu.se
{csjyang,cmm,yaxing}@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Although text-to-image (T2I) models exhibit remarkable generation capabilities,
they frequently fail to accurately bind semantically related objects or attributes
in the input prompts; a challenge termed semantic binding. Previous approaches
either involve intensive fine-tuning of the entire T2I model or require users or
large language models to specify generation layouts, adding complexity. In this
paper, we define semantic binding as the task of associating a given object with its
attribute, termed attribute binding, or linking it to other related sub-objects, referred
to as object binding. We introduce a novel method called Token Merging (ToMe),
which enhances semantic binding by aggregating relevant tokens into a single
composite token. This ensures that the object, its attributes and sub-objects all share
the same cross-attention map. Additionally, to address potential confusion among
main objects with complex textual prompts, we propose end token substitution as
a complementary strategy. To further refine our approach in the initial stages of
T2I generation, where layouts are determined, we incorporate two auxiliary losses,
an entropy loss and a semantic binding loss, to iteratively update the composite
token to improve the generation integrity. We conducted extensive experiments to
validate the effectiveness of ToMe, comparing it against various existing methods
on the T2I-CompBench and our proposed GPT-4o object binding benchmark. Our
method is particularly effective in complex scenarios that involve multiple objects
and attributes, which previous methods often fail to address. The code will be
publicly available at https://github.com/hutaihang/ToMe.

1

Introduction

Text-to-image generation has seen significant advancements with the recent introduction of diffusion
models [57, 59, 62], with their capabilities of generating high-fidelity images from text prompts.
Despite these achievements, aligning the generated images with the text prompts, which is referred to
as semantic alignment [30, 43], remains a notable challenge. One of the most common issues observed
in existing text-to-image (T2I) generation models is the lack of proper semantic binding, where a
given object is not properly binding to its attributes or related objects. For example, as illustrated in
Fig. 1, even a state-of-the-art T2I model such as SDXL [53] can struggle to generate content that
accurately reflects the intended nuances of text prompts. To address the persistent challenges of
aligning T2I diffusion models with the intricate semantics of text prompts, a variety of enhancement
∗

: Co-corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

