Enabling Adaptive Agent Training
in Open-Ended Simulators
by Targeting Diversity

Robby Costales∗

Stefanos Nikolaidis

Department of Computer Science
University of Southern California

Abstract
The wider application of end-to-end learning methods to embodied decisionmaking domains remains bottlenecked by their reliance on a superabundance
of training data representative of the target domain. Meta-reinforcement learning (meta-RL) approaches abandon the aim of zero-shot generalization—the goal
of standard reinforcement learning (RL)—in favor of few-shot adaptation, and
thus hold promise for bridging larger generalization gaps. While learning this
meta-level adaptive behavior still requires substantial data, efficient environment
simulators approaching real-world complexity are growing in prevalence. Even
so, hand-designing sufficiently diverse and numerous simulated training tasks for
these complex domains is prohibitively labor-intensive. Domain randomization
(DR) and procedural generation (PG), offered as solutions to this problem, require simulators to possess carefully-defined parameters which directly translate
to meaningful task diversity—a similarly prohibitive assumption. In this work,
we present DIVA, an evolutionary approach for generating diverse training tasks
in such complex, open-ended simulators. Like unsupervised environment design
(UED) methods, DIVA can be applied to arbitrary parameterizations, but can additionally incorporate realistically-available domain knowledge—thus inheriting
the flexibility and generality of UED, and the supervised structure embedded in
well-designed simulators exploited by DR and PG. Our empirical results showcase
DIVA’s unique ability to overcome complex parameterizations and successfully
train adaptive agent behavior, far outperforming competitive baselines from prior
literature. These findings highlight the potential of such semi-supervised environment design (SSED) approaches, of which DIVA is the first humble constituent, to
enable training in realistic simulated domains, and produce more robust and capable
adaptive agents. Our code is available at https://github.com/robbycostales/diva.

1

Introduction

Despite the broadening application of reinforcement learning (RL) methods to real-world problems
[1, 2], generalization to new scenarios—ones not explicitly supported by the training set—remains a
fundamental challenge [3]. Meta-reinforcement learning (meta-RL), an extension of the RL framework, is formulated specifically for training adaptive agents, and is thus well-suited for overcoming
these generalization gaps [4]. One recent work has demonstrated that meta-RL agents can be trained
at scale to achieve adaptation capabilities on par with human subjects [5]. However, learning this
human-like adaptive behavior naturally requires a large amount of data representative of the downstream (or target) distribution. For task distributions approaching real-world complexity—precisely
the ones of interest—designing each scenario by hand is prohibitively expensive.
∗

Correspondence to rscostal@usc.edu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

