Generalization Error Bounds for Two-stage
Recommender Systems with Tree Structure

1

Jin Zhang1 , Ze Liu2 , Defu Lian∗ 1, 2, 3 , Enhong Chen1, 2, 3
School of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
3
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, Hefei, Anhui, China
{jinzhang21, lz123}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {liandefu, cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Two-stage recommender systems play a crucial role in efficiently identifying
relevant items and personalizing recommendations from a vast array of options.
This paper, based on an error decomposition framework, analyzes the generalization
error for two-stage recommender systems with a tree structure, which consist of an
efficient tree-based retriever and a more precise yet time-consuming ranker. We use
the Rademacher complexity to establish the generalization upper bound for various
tree-based retrievers using beam search, as well as for different ranker models under
a shifted training distribution. Both theoretical insights and practical experiments on
real-world datasets indicate that increasing the branches in tree-based retrievers and
harmonizing distributions across stages can enhance the generalization performance
of two-stage recommender systems.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems play a crucial role in many online services, such as e-commerce [29], digital
streaming [4], and social media [2], influencing consumer behavior, media consumption, and social
interaction. It needs to quickly identify a few relevant items from millions or billions of options,
and personalize to the dynamic needs of large numbers of users with low response latency. A
widely adopted solution to this problem is the two-stage recommender system. In the first stage, a
computationally efficient retriever preselects a small number of candidates from a large pool. In the
second stage, a slower but more accurate ranker narrows down and reorders these candidates before
presenting them to the user. In this way, a well-balanced trade-off between efficiency and accuracy is
achieved that meets the demands of real-world scenarios.
The retrievers are often heterogeneous, popular choices like matrix factorization [15, 19], two-tower
[23], recurrent neural networks [3], and so on. In recent years, the tree-structured retriever model
[8, 29, 28, 7], which takes advantage of the tree structure, usually combined with a greedy algorithm
to identify relevant items quickly, has demonstrated commendable performance and efficiency.
The ranker typically uses enriched features as input, combined with a complex model, to enhance
prediction accuracy. The computational costs are generally linear relative to the number of items at
deployment [4, 18].
Despite the practical success of two-stage models, particularly those based on tree structures, theoretical research in this area remains limited. To fill in the gap, we start from the perspective of
generalization error to investigate the upper bounds of generalization error for these models to
promote understanding of their generalization capabilities.
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

