Splatter a Video: Video Gaussian Representation
for Versatile Processing

Yang-Tian Sun1∗

Yi-Hua Huang1∗
1

Lin Ma

Xiaoyang Lyu1

The University of Hong Kong

2

Yan-Pei Cao2

Xiaojuan Qi1†

VAST

Abstract
Video representation is a long-standing problem that is crucial for various downstream tasks, such as tracking, depth prediction, segmentation, view synthesis,
and editing. However, current methods either struggle to model complex motions
due to the absence of 3D structure or rely on implicit 3D representations that
are ill-suited for manipulation tasks. To address these challenges, we introduce a
novel explicit 3D representation—video Gaussian representation—that embeds a
video into 3D Gaussians. Our proposed representation models video appearance
in a 3D canonical space using explicit Gaussians as proxies and associates each
Gaussian with 3D motions for video motion. This approach offers a more intrinsic
and explicit representation than layered atlas or volumetric pixel matrices. To
obtain such a representation, we distill 2D priors, such as optical flow and depth,
from foundation models to regularize learning in this ill-posed setting. Extensive
applications demonstrate the versatility of our new video representation. It has
been proven effective in numerous video processing tasks, including tracking,
consistent video depth and feature refinement, motion and appearance editing, and
stereoscopic video generation.

1

Introduction

Video processing, which encompasses a variety of tasks such as video editing, can enable numerous
applications in fields like social media, filmmaking, and advertising [2, 50]. A video can be viewed
as a collection of spatiotemporal pixels. However, processing a video directly in its pixel space,
while maintaining temporal consistency, poses challenges due to the inherent complexities associated
with appearance, motion, occlusions, and noise in the video data [14, 27]. Consequently, a robust
video representation capable of abstracting and disentangling appearance and motion is crucial for
facilitating various applications and overcoming these challenges.
Existing research on video representation for processing has primarily focused on 2D/2.5D techniques,
employing methods such as optical flow and tracking to associate pixels across frames [47, 14, 58].
These approaches often involve learning a canonical image [12, 33, 49, 30] or a layered atlas with
persistent motion patterns [14, 24, 4, 9] to facilitate editing and then use optical flow or tracks to
propagate edits throughout a video. The most recent work [33] utilizes hash grids combined with
implicit functions to embed a video into a learned canonical image for appearance and a deformation
field for motion. Despite achieving promising results in appearance editing tasks, these methods
struggle to handle occlusions of objects (see Fig. 3), leading to erroneous propagation. Although
layered 2.5D representation [14, 24, 4, 9] can mitigate this issue, they still face challenges with
complex self-occlusions within a layer. Moreover, these techniques have limited or no capability in
*Equal Contribution †Corresponding Author
Project page: https://sunyangtian.github.io/spatter_a_video_web/.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

