The Importance of Being Scalable:
Improving the Speed and Accuracy of Neural Network
Interatomic Potentials Across Chemical Domains
Eric Qu
UC Berkeley
ericqu@berkeley.edu

Aditi S. Krishnapriyan
UC Berkeley, LBNL
aditik1@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Scaling has been a critical factor in improving model performance and generalization
across various fields of machine learning. It involves how a model’s performance
changes with increases in model size or input data, as well as how efficiently computational resources are utilized to support this growth. Despite successes in scaling other
types of machine learning models, the study of scaling in Neural Network Interatomic
Potentials (NNIPs) remains limited. NNIPs act as surrogate models for ab initio
quantum mechanical calculations, predicting the energy and forces between atoms
in molecules and materials based on atomic configurations. The dominant paradigm
in this field is to incorporate numerous physical domain constraints into the model,
such as symmetry constraints like rotational equivariance. We contend that these increasingly complex domain constraints inhibit the scaling ability of NNIPs, and such
strategies are likely to cause model performance to plateau in the long run. In this
work, we take an alternative approach and start by systematically studying NNIP scaling properties and strategies. Our findings indicate that scaling the model through attention mechanisms is both efficient and improves model expressivity. These insights
motivate us to develop an NNIP architecture designed for scalability: the Efficiently
Scaled Attention Interatomic Potential (EScAIP). EScAIP leverages a novel multihead self-attention formulation within graph neural networks, applying attention at
the neighbor-level representations. Implemented with highly-optimized attention
GPU kernels, EScAIP achieves substantial gains in efficiency—at least 10x speed up
in inference time, 5x less in memory usage—compared to existing NNIP models. EScAIP also achieves state-of-the-art performance on a wide range of datasets including
catalysts (OC20 and OC22), molecules (SPICE), and materials (MPTrj). After training EScAIP, we test its ability to learn rotational equivariance by predicting forces on
new, unseen atomistic systems before and after rotation. The model’s force predictions exactly match the rotated forces, suggesting that it has precisely learned rotational equivariance. Finally, we emphasize that our approach should be thought of as
a philosophy rather than a specific model, representing a proof-of-concept towards developing general-purpose NNIPs that achieve better expressivity through scaling, and
continue to scale efficiently with increased computational resources and training data.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the principle of scaling model size, data, and compute has become a key factor for
improving performance and generalization in machine learning (ML), across fields from natural
language processing (NLP) [Kaplan et al., 2020] to computer vision (CV) [Dosovitskiy et al., 2021,
Zhai et al., 2022]. Scaling in ML is, in a large part, defined by the ability to best exploit GPU computing
capabilities. This typically involves efficiently increasing model sizes to large parameter counts, as
well as optimizing model training and inference to be optimally compute-efficient.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

