Pearls from Pebbles: Improved Confidence Functions
for Auto-labeling

Harit Vishwakarma
hvishwakarma@cs.wisc.edu

Yi Chen
yi.chen@wisc.edu

Sui Jiet Tay ∗
st5494@nyu.edu

University of Wisconsin-Madison

University of Wisconsin-Madison

NYU Courant Institute

Satya Sai Srinath Namburi ∗
satya.namburi@gehealthcare.com

Frederic Sala
fredsala@cs.wisc.edu

GE HealthCare

University of Wisconsin-Madison

Ramya Korlakai Vinayak
ramya@ece.wisc.edu
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Abstract
Auto-labeling is an important family of techniques that produce labeled training
sets with minimum manual annotation. A prominent variant, threshold-based
auto-labeling (TBAL), works by finding thresholds on a model’s confidence scores
above which it can accurately automatically label unlabeled data. However, many
models are known to produce overconfident scores, leading to poor TBAL performance. While a natural idea is to apply off-the-shelf calibration methods to
alleviate the overconfidence issue, we show that such methods fall short. Rather
than experimenting with ad-hoc choices of confidence functions, we propose a
framework for studying the optimal TBAL confidence function. We develop a
tractable version of the framework to obtain Colander (Confidence functions for
Efficient and Reliable Auto-labeling), a new post-hoc method specifically designed
to maximize performance in TBAL systems. We perform an extensive empirical
evaluation of Colander and compare it against methods designed for calibration.
Colander achieves up to 60% improvement on coverage over the baselines while
maintaining error level below 5% and using the same amount of labeled data.

1

Introduction

The demand for labeled data in machine learning (ML) is perpetual. Obtaining it is expensive and
time-consuming, creating a bottleneck in ML workflows. Threshold-based auto-labeling (TBAL) is a
promising solution to obtain high-quality labeled data at low cost [47, 42, 56]. A TBAL system (Fig.
1) takes unlabeled data as input and outputs a labeled dataset. It works iteratively: in each iteration,
it acquires human labels for a small chunk of data to train a model, then auto-labels points using
the model’s predictions where its confidence scores are above a certain threshold. The threshold is
determined using validation data so that the auto-labeled points meet a desired accuracy criteria. The
goal is to maximize coverage—the fraction of points automatically labeled (out of the total)—while
maintaining accuracy. TBAL powers industry products like Amazon SageMaker Ground Truth [47].
The confidence function is critical to the TBAL workflow (Figure 1). Existing TBAL systems rely on
common choices like softmax outputs from neural networks [42, 56]. These functions are not well
aligned with the objective of the auto-labeling system. Using them results in substantially suboptimal
coverage (Figure 2(a)). For this reason, we ask:
∗

Work done while at University of Wisconsin-Madison.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

