Sourcerer: Sample-based Maximum Entropy Source
Distribution Estimation
Julius Vetter†,1,2,∗

Guy Moss†,1,2,∗

Cornelius Schröder1,2

Richard Gao1,2

Jakob H. Macke1,2,3,∗
1

Machine Learning in Science, Excellence Cluster Machine Learning, University of Tübingen
2
Tübingen AI Center
3
Department Empirical Inference, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
†
Equal contribution.

Abstract
Scientific modeling applications often require estimating a distribution of parameters consistent with a dataset of observations—an inference task also known as
source distribution estimation. This problem can be ill-posed, however, since
many different source distributions might produce the same distribution of dataconsistent simulations. To make a principled choice among many equally valid
sources, we propose an approach which targets the maximum entropy distribution, i.e., prioritizes retaining as much uncertainty as possible. Our method is
purely sample-based—leveraging the Sliced-Wasserstein distance to measure the
discrepancy between the dataset and simulations—and thus suitable for simulators
with intractable likelihoods. We benchmark our method on several tasks, and
show that it can recover source distributions with substantially higher entropy than
recent source estimation methods, without sacrificing the fidelity of the simulations.
Finally, to demonstrate the utility of our approach, we infer source distributions
for parameters of the Hodgkin-Huxley model from experimental datasets with
hundreds of single-neuron measurements. In summary, we propose a principled
method for inferring source distributions of scientific simulator parameters while
retaining as much uncertainty as possible.

1

Introduction

In many scientific and engineering disciplines, mathematical and computational simulators are used
to gain mechanistic insights. A common challenge is to identify parameter settings of such simulators
that make their outputs compatible with a set of empirical observations. For example, by finding a
distribution of parameters that, when passed through the simulator, produces a distribution of outputs
that matches that of the empirical dataset of observations.
Suppose we have a stochastic simulator with input parameters θ and output x, which allows us to
generate samples from the forward model p(x|θ) (which is usually intractable). We have acquired
a dataset D = {x1 , ..., xn } of observations with empirical distribution po (x), and want to identify
∗

{firstname.secondname}@uni-tuebingen.de
Code available at https://github.com/mackelab/sourcerer

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

