Prior-itizing Privacy: A Bayesian Approach to Setting
the Privacy Budget in Differential Privacy

Zeki Kazan
Department of Statistical Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
zekican.kazan@duke.edu

Jerome P. Reiter
Department of Statistical Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
jreiter@duke.edu

Abstract
When releasing outputs from confidential data, agencies need to balance the analytical usefulness of the released data with the obligation to protect data subjects’
confidentiality. For releases satisfying differential privacy, this balance is reflected
by the privacy budget, ε. We provide a framework for setting ε based on its relationship with Bayesian posterior probabilities of disclosure. The agency responsible for
the data release decides how much posterior risk it is willing to accept at various
levels of prior risk, which implies a unique ε. Agencies can evaluate different risk
profiles to determine one that leads to an acceptable trade-off in risk and utility.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy (DP) [11] is a gold standard definition of what it means for data curators,
henceforth referred to as agencies, to protect individuals’ confidentiality when releasing sensitive data.
The confidentiality guarantee of DP is determined principally by a parameter typically referred to as
the privacy budget ε. Smaller values of ε generally imply greater confidentiality protection at the cost
of injecting more noise into the released data. Thus, agencies must choose ε to balance confidentiality
protection with analytical usefulness. This balancing act has resulted in a wide range of values of ε in
practice. For example, early advice in the field recommends ε of “0.01, 0.1, or in some cases, log(2)
or log(3)” [10], whereas recent large-scale implementations use ε = 8.6 in OnTheMap [31], ε = 14
in Apple’s use of local DP for iOS 10.1.1 [44], and an equivalent of ε = 17.14 in the 2020 decennial
census redistricting data release [1].
Some decision makers may find interpreting and selecting ε difficult [20, 24, 29, 36, 43]. For example,
a recent study of practitioners using DP Creator [43] found that users wished for more explanation
about how to select privacy parameters and better understanding of the effects of this choice. One
potential path for providing guidance is to convert the task of selecting ε to setting bounds on the
allowable probabilities of adversaries learning sensitive information from the released data, as in the
classical disclosure limitation literature [8, 14, 41]. There is precedent for this approach: prior work in
the literature suggests that “privacy semantics in terms of Bayesian inference can shed more light on a
privacy definition than privacy semantics in terms of indistinguishable pairs of neighboring databases”
[28] and prevailing advice for setting δ in (ε, δ)-DP originates from such Bayesian semantics [25].
We propose that agencies utilize relationships between DP and Bayesian semantics [2, 11, 25, 26, 27,
28, 29, 33] to select values of ε that accord with their desired confidentiality guarantees. The basic
idea is as follows. First, the agency constructs a function that summarizes the maximum posterior
probability of disclosure permitted for any prior probability of disclosure. For example, for a prior risk
of 0.001, the agency may be comfortable with a ten-fold (or more) increase in the ratio of posterior
risk to prior risk, whereas for a prior risk of 0.4, the agency may require the increase not exceed, say,
1.2. Second, for each prior risk value, the agency converts the posterior-to-prior ratio into the largest
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

