A Neural Network Approach for Efficiently Answering
Most Probable Explanation Queries
in Probabilistic Models
Shivvrat Arya
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Dallas
shivvrat.arya@utdallas.edu

Tahrima Rahman
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Dallas
tahrima.rahman@utdallas.edu

Vibhav Gogate
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Dallas
vibhav.gogate@utdallas.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel neural networks based approach to efficiently answer arbitrary
Most Probable Explanation (MPE) queries—a well-known NP-hard task—in large
probabilistic models such as Bayesian and Markov networks, probabilistic circuits,
and neural auto-regressive models. By arbitrary MPE queries, we mean that there
is no predefined partition of variables into evidence and non-evidence variables.
The key idea is to distill all MPE queries over a given probabilistic model into a
neural network and then use the latter for answering queries, eliminating the need
for time-consuming inference algorithms that operate directly on the probabilistic
model. We improve upon this idea by incorporating inference-time optimization
with self-supervised loss to iteratively improve the solutions and employ a teacherstudent framework that provides a better initial network, which in turn, helps reduce
the number of inference-time optimization steps. The teacher network utilizes
a self-supervised loss function optimized for getting the exact MPE solution,
while the student network learns from the teacher’s near-optimal outputs through
supervised loss. We demonstrate the efficacy and scalability of our approach on
various datasets and a broad class of probabilistic models, showcasing its practical
effectiveness.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic representations such as Probabilistic Circuits (PCs) [8], graphical models [26] such as
Bayesian Networks (BNs) and Markov Networks (MNs), and Neural Autoregressive Models (NAMs)
[50] are widely used to model large, multi-dimensional probability distributions. However, they face
a significant challenge: as the complexity of these distributions increases, solving practically relevant
NP-hard inference tasks such as finding the Most Probable Explanation (MPE) via exact inference
techniques [39, 40] becomes increasingly difficult and time-consuming. In particular, although
various exact and approximate solvers exist for the MPE task in PCs, BNs and MNs, exact solvers
are often too slow for practical use, and approximate solvers tend to lack the necessary accuracy,
particularly in autoregressive models that currently rely on slow hill-climbing/beam search methods.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

