The Secretary Problem with Predicted Additive Gap

Alexander Braun ∗

Sherry Sarkar †

Abstract
The secretary problem is one of the fundamental problems in online decision
making; a tight competitive ratio for this problem of 1/e ≈ 0.368 has been known
since the 1960s. Much more recently, the study of algorithms with predictions was
introduced: The algorithm is equipped with a (possibly erroneous) additional piece
of information upfront which can be used to improve the algorithm’s performance.
Complementing previous work on secretary problems with prior knowledge, we
tackle the following question:
What is the weakest piece of information that allows us to break the 1/e barrier?
To this end, we introduce the secretary problem with predicted additive gap. As
in the classical problem, weights are fixed by an adversary and elements appear
in random order. In contrast to previous variants of predictions, our algorithm
only has access to a much weaker piece of information: an additive gap c. This
gap is the difference between the highest and k-th highest weight in the sequence.
Unlike previous pieces of advice, knowing an exact additive gap does not make the
problem trivial. Our contribution is twofold. First, we show that for any index k
and any gap c, we can obtain a competitive ratio of 0.4 when knowing the exact
gap (even if we do not know k), hence beating the prevalent bound for the classical
problem by a constant. Second, a slightly modified version of our algorithm allows
to prove standard robustness-consistency properties as well as improved guarantees
when knowing a range for the error of the prediction.
The full version with proofs can be found at https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.
20460 [Braun and Sarkar, 2024].

1

Introduction

The secretary problem is a fundamental problem in online decision making: An adversary fixes
non-negative, real-valued weights w1 ≥ w2 ≥ · · · ≥ wn which are revealed online in random order.
The decision maker is allowed to accept (at most) one element. At the time of arrival of an element,
the decision maker is required to make an immediate and irrevocable acceptance decision. The goal is
to maximize the weight of the selected element. A tight guarantee3 of 1/e is known since the seminal
work of Lindley [1961] and Dynkin [1963] (also see Ferguson [1989] or Freeman [1983]) and can be
achieved with a very simple threshold policy.
In the modern era, the assumption of having no prior information on the weights is highly pessimistic.
To go beyond a worst case analysis, researchers have recently considered the setting where we have
some sort of learned prediction that our algorithm may use up front. This setting spawned the recent
and very successful field of algorithms with predictions. Antoniadis et al. [2020] and Dütting et al.
[2021] studied the secretary problem with a prediction of the largest weight in the sequence, and
∗

Institute of Computer Science, University of Bonn. Email: alexander.braun@uni-bonn.de
Carnegie Mellon University. Email: sherrys@andrew.cmu.edu
3
In the literature, there are two variants of the secretary problem: probability-maximization (maximize the
probability of selecting w1 ) and value-maximization (maximize selected weight). Throughout the paper, we
consider the latter of the two variants.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

