Universal Neural Functionals
Allan Zhou
Stanford University
ayz@cs.stanford.edu

Chelsea Finn
Stanford University

James Harrison
Google DeepMind
jamesharrison@google.com

Abstract
A challenging problem in many modern machine learning tasks is to process
weight-space features, i.e., to transform or extract information from the weights
and gradients of a neural network. Recent works have developed promising
weight-space models that are equivariant to the permutation symmetries of simple feedforward networks. However, they are not applicable to general architectures, since the permutation symmetries of a weight space can be complicated
by recurrence or residual connections. This work proposes an algorithm that
automatically constructs permutation equivariant models, which we refer to as
universal neural functionals (UNFs), for any weight space. Among other applications, we demonstrate how UNFs can be substituted into existing learned
optimizer designs, and find promising improvements over prior methods when
optimizing small image classifiers and language models. Our results suggest that
learned optimizers can benefit from considering the (symmetry) structure of the
weight space they optimize. We open-source our library for constructing UNFs at
https://github.com/AllanYangZhou/universal_neural_functional.

1

Introduction

Many problems in machine learning require handling weight-space features, such as the weights,
gradients, or sparsity masks of neural networks. For example, optimizers iteratively map the current
weights and gradient history to updated weights. Taking this perspective, researchers have proposed
a variety of data-driven methods that train a neural network to process these weight-space features.
Examples applications of these neural functionals [Zhou et al., 2023a] include training neural
networks to predict classifier generalization from weights [Eilertsen et al., 2020], to optimize other
networks [Metz et al., 2022], and to classify or edit implicit neural representations (INRs) [De Luigi
et al., 2023].
Until recently, researchers lacked a unifying and principled framework for designing neural functionals, and would implement a custom model for their particular weight-space task. A significant recent
advance was the development of weight-space models that are permutation equivariant [Navon et al.,
2023, Zhou et al., 2023a]. Neuron permutation symmetries arise in a neural network’s weight space
because re-ordering hidden neurons has no effect on the network’s function [Hecht-Nielsen, 1990]. A
permutation equivariant neural functional can guarantee that under a neuron permutation of its input,
its output permutes accordingly.
Navon et al. [2023] showed that permutation equivariance significantly improves performance on
weight-space tasks, but their models only apply to the weight spaces of simple feedforward multilayer
perceptrons (MLPs). Permutation equivariant neural functionals [Zhou et al., 2023a] added the ability
to process weights from simple feedforward convolutional networks (CNNs). However, in practice
we may deal with the weight spaces of complex networks that have residual connections, recurrence,
normalization layers, and so on. Extending existing approaches to each possible weight space would
be tedious and challenging.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

