Pre-training Differentially Private Models with
Limited Public Data
Zhiqi Bu∗
Amazon

Xinwei Zhang∗†
University of Southern California

Sheng Zha
Amazon

Mingyi Hong
University of Minnesota

George Karypis
Amazon

Abstract
The superior performance of large foundation models relies on the use of massive amounts of high-quality data, which often contain sensitive, private and
copyrighted material that requires formal protection. While differential privacy (DP) is a prominent method to gauge the degree of security provided
to the models, its application is commonly limited to the model fine-tuning
stage, due to the performance degradation when DP is applied during the pretraining stage. Consequently, DP is yet not capable of protecting a substantial
portion of the data used during the initial pre-training process. In this work,
we provide a theoretical understanding of the efficacy of DP training by analyzing the per-iteration loss improvement, through the lens of Hessian matrix
for large neural networks. We make a key observation that DP optimizers’
performance degradation can be significantly mitigated by the use of limited
public data, which leads to a novel DP continual pre-training strategy. Empirically, using only 10% of public data and 90% of private data, our strategy can achieve DP accuracy of 41.5% on ImageNet-21k (with ϵ = 8), as
well as non-DP accuracy of 55.7% and 60.0% on downstream tasks Places365
and iNaturalist-2021, respectively, on par with state-of-the-art standard pretraining and substantially outperforming existing DP pre-trained models. Our
DP pre-trained models are released in fastDP library (https://github.com/
awslabs/fast-differential-privacy/releases/tag/v2.1).

1

Introduction

Large pre-trained models have been the backbone of computer vision and natural language processing. Finetuning or zero/few-shots learning (including in-context learning) based on these models
can achieve superior performance. In particular, differentially private (DP) fine-tuning, such as fullparameter training, LoRA, Adapter, BiTFiT, and linear probing [89, 49, 14, 12, 58, 24], has shown
to be almost as accurate as the standard non-DP fine-tuning on GPT [68, 6], ViT [27], and ResNet
[39] models, while protecting the privacy of fine-tuning data. To be more specific, DP language
and vision models are highly effective in defending against canary insertion attacks [66, 40, 42]
and membership inference attacks [20, 69, 32, 16]; DP fine-tuned GPT2 also reduces the personally
identifiable information leakage by 5 ∼ 10 times compared with its non-DP counterpart [53].
These DP fine-tuned models all follow a two-stage training procedure, in which the first stage trains
a model on large public datasets (e.g. ImageNet) from scratch without privacy protection, and the
second stage fine-tunes on relatively small private datasets (e.g. CIFAR10). However, a growing
concern has been raised against the pre-training on the vast amount of web-collected data [18, 17, 79,
41, 62, 67]. The pre-trained models could memorize and re-generate the sensitive information in the
∗
Equal contribution. Email: zhiqibu@amazon.com. † Done at Amazon.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

