Reconstruct and Match: Out-of-Distribution
Robustness via Topological Homogeneity
∗

Chaoqi Chen1 Luyao Tang2 Hui Huang1
1
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
School of Informatics, Xiamen University
cqchen1994@gmail.com, lytang@stu.xmu.edu.cn, hhzhiyan@gmail.com

Abstract
Since deep learning models are usually deployed in non-stationary environments, it
is imperative to improve their robustness to out-of-distribution (OOD) data. A common approach to mitigate distribution shift is to regularize internal representations
or predictors learned from in-distribution (ID) data to be domain invariant. Past
studies have primarily learned pairwise invariances, ignoring the intrinsic structure
and high-order dependencies of the data. Unlike machines, humans recognize
objects by first dividing them into major components and then identifying the
topological relation of these components. Motivated by this, we propose Reconstruct and Match (REMA), a general learning framework for object recognition
tasks to endow deep models with the capability of capturing the topological homogeneity of objects without human prior knowledge or fine-grained annotations.
To identify major components from objects, REMA introduces a selective slotbased reconstruction module to dynamically map dense pixels into a sparse and
discrete set of slot vectors in an unsupervised manner. Then, to model high-order
dependencies among these components, we propose a hypergraph-based relational
reasoning module that models the intricate relations of nodes (slots) with structural
constraints. Experiments on standard benchmarks show that REMA outperforms
state-of-the-art methods in OOD generalization and test-time adaptation settings.

1

Introduction

Distribution shift has emerged as a major challenge for the success of machine learning systems [34,
25]. Although deep learning models are believed to generalize well to in-distribution (ID) data, a
well-trained model deployed in the open world often encounters out-of-distribution (OOD) data whose
contexts may differ from the training distribution, resulting in dramatic performance degeneration
and raising concerns about model safety in many high-staking applications, such as autonomous
driving and medical diagnosis. This gives rise to the importance of OOD generalization [92, 76],
which aims to build a robust learning machine that can perform well in unseen test environments.
Regarding OOD generalization, a central theme is how to learn general features from training data
that can be extrapolated to test distributions. Following this idea, a plethora of OOD generalization
methods have been proposed over the past few years, including domain alignment [42], latent feature
disentanglement [61, 48, 85], meta-learning [40, 41], invariant risk minimization [2, 1, 96], and
augmentation-guided invariant predictor [74, 83, 95], to name a few. On the other hand, given the
natural adaptivity gap between training and test distributions [15], recent works [29, 30, 81, 11, 8]
attempt to further enhance the source-trained model through test-time adaptation [46], which leverages
unlabeled target samples to update the model in an online manner. These two series of studies address
distribution shifts during training and inference and have been proven to work synergistically [8].
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

