AdaNovo: Towards Robust De Novo Peptide
Sequencing in Proteomics against Data Biases

Jun Xia1∗, Shaorong Chen1∗ , Jingbo Zhou1∗ , Xiaojun Shan2 ,
Wenjie Du , Zhangyang Gao 1 , Cheng Tan1 , Bozhen Hu1 , Jiangbin Zheng1 , Stan Z. Li1†
1
School of Engineering, Westlake University
2
University of California San Diego 3 University of Science and Technology of China
{xiajun, stan.zq.li}@westlake.edu.cn
3

Abstract
Tandem mass spectrometry has played a pivotal role in advancing proteomics,
enabling the high-throughput analysis of protein composition in biological tissues.
Despite the development of several deep learning methods for predicting amino
acid sequences (peptides) responsible for generating the observed mass spectra,
training data biases hinder further advancements of de novo peptide sequencing.
Firstly, prior methods struggle to identify amino acids with Post-Translational
Modifications (PTMs) due to their lower frequency in training data compared
to canonical amino acids, further resulting in unsatisfactory peptide sequencing
performance. Secondly, various noise and missing peaks in mass spectra reduce
the reliability of training data (Peptide-Spectrum Matches, PSMs). To address
these challenges, we propose AdaNovo, a novel and domain knowledge-inspired
framework that calculates Conditional Mutual Information (CMI) between the
mass spectra and amino acids or peptides, using CMI for robust training against
above biases. Extensive experiments indicate that AdaNovo outperforms previous
competitors on the widely-used 9-species benchmark, meanwhile yielding 3.6% 9.4% improvements in PTMs identification. The code for reproducing the results
is available at: https://github.com/Westlake-OmicsAI/adanovo_v1.

1

Introduction

Proteomics research focuses on large-scale studies to characterize the proteome, the entire set of
proteins in a living organism. Tandem mass spectrometry serves as the only high-throughput method
to analyze the protein composition in complex biological samples, playing an essential role in drug
target discovery [12], PTMs discovery [16] and precision medicine [28]. Peptide sequencing, i.e.,
predicting the peptide sequence for each observed mass spectrum, is at core of proteomics [1].
Currently, two mainstream methods are employed in peptide sequencing: database search and de
novo peptide sequencing. The database search approaches [18] compare the observed spectrum
against the spectra in a pre-constructed PSMs database and pick the peptide sequence of the most
similar spectrum as the identification result. Obviously, database search cannot sequence the peptides
out of the database. In contrast, de novo peptide sequencing deduces peptide sequence without
prior knowledge of the database and thus it is essential in applications where the database is not
available, such as antibody sequencing[26], human leukocyte antigen neoantigen sequencing[25],
and identification of new proteins and peptides which are missing from the database[30].
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

