Binocular-Guided 3D Gaussian Splatting with View
Consistency for Sparse View Synthesis

Liang Han1 , Junsheng Zhou1 , Yu-Shen Liu1∗ , Zhizhong Han2
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China1
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA2
{hanl23,zhou-js24}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn
h312h@wayne.edu

Abstract
Novel view synthesis from sparse inputs is a vital yet challenging task in 3D
computer vision. Previous methods explore 3D Gaussian Splatting with neural
priors (e.g. depth priors) as an additional supervision, demonstrating promising
quality and efficiency compared to the NeRF based methods. However, the neural
priors from 2D pretrained models are often noisy and blurry, which struggle
to precisely guide the learning of radiance fields. In this paper, We propose
a novel method for synthesizing novel views from sparse views with Gaussian
Splatting that does not require external prior as supervision. Our key idea lies
in exploring the self-supervisions inherent in the binocular stereo consistency
between each pair of binocular images constructed with disparity-guided image
warping. To this end, we additionally introduce a Gaussian opacity constraint
which regularizes the Gaussian locations and avoids Gaussian redundancy for
improving the robustness and efficiency of inferring 3D Gaussians from sparse
views. Extensive experiments on the LLFF, DTU, and Blender datasets demonstrate
that our method significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. Project
page is available at: https://hanl2010.github.io/Binocular3DGS/.

1

Introduction

3D reconstruction technologies [28, 19] have demonstrated significant advances in synthesizing
realistic novel views given a set of dense input views. To explore the challenging task in harsh
real-world situations where only sparse inputs are available, some studies learn NeRF [28] with
specially designed constraints [17, 44, 43, 49] and regularizations [30, 54, 50] on the view scarcity.
However, NeRF-based methods often suffer from slow training and inference speeds, leading to high
computational costs that restrict their practical applications.
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [19] has achieved notable advantages in rendering quality and
efficiency. However, 3DGS is still facing severe challenges with inputting sparse views, where the
unstructured 3D Gaussians with limited constraints tend to overfit the given few views, resulting
in geometric inaccuracies for scene learning. Some recent studies [31, 71, 22, 51] on sparse view
synthesis based on 3DGS employ the commonly-used depth priors from pre-trained models as
additional constraints on the Gaussians geometries. However, the neural priors are often noisy and
blurry, which struggle to precisely guide the learning of radiance fields.
In this paper, we aim to design a method that does not require external prior as supervision, which
directly explores the self-supervisions from the few input views for improving the quality and
∗

The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

