VLM Agents Generate Their Own Memories:
Distilling Experience into Embodied Programs of Thought

Gabriel Sarch1

Lawrence Jang1

Michael J. Tarr1

William W. Cohen1,2

Kenneth Marino2

Katerina Fragkiadaki1

1

Carnegie Mellon University

2

Google DeepMind

https://ical-learning.github.io

Abstract
Large-scale generative language and vision-language models (LLMs and VLMs)
excel in few-shot in-context learning for decision making and instruction following.
However, they require high-quality exemplar demonstrations to be included in
their context window. In this work, we ask: Can LLMs and VLMs generate their
own examples from generic, sub-optimal demonstrations? We propose In-Context
Abstraction Learning (ICAL), a method that builds a memory of multimodal experience from sub-optimal demonstrations and human feedback. Given a task
demonstration that may contain inefficiencies or mistakes, a VLM abstracts the trajectory into a generalized program by correcting inefficient actions and annotating
cognitive abstractions: causal relationships, object state changes, temporal subgoals,
and task-relevant visual elements. These abstractions are iteratively improved and
adapted through human feedback while the agent attempts to execute the trajectory
in a similar environment. The resulting examples, when used as exemplars in
the prompt, significantly improve decision-making in retrieval-augmented LLM
and VLM agents. Moreover, as the agent’s library of examples grows, it becomes
more efficient, relying less on human feedback and requiring fewer environment
interactions per demonstration. Our ICAL agent surpasses the state-of-the-art in
dialogue-based instruction following in TEACh, multimodal web agents in VisualWebArena, and action anticipation in Ego4D. In TEACh, we achieve a 12.6%
improvement in goal-condition success. In VisualWebArena, our task success rate
improves over the SOTA from 14.3% to 22.7% using GPT4V. In Ego4D action
forecasting, we improve over few-shot GPT-4V and remain competitive with supervised models. We show finetuning our retrieval-augmented in-context agent yields
additional improvements. Our approach significantly reduces reliance on manual
prompt engineering and consistently outperforms in-context learning from action
plans that lack such abstractions.

1

Introduction

Humans exhibit remarkable few-shot learning capabilities, rapidly generalizing from a single task
demonstration to related conditions by integrating the observed behavior with their internal world
model. They discern what is relevant and irrelevant for success and anticipate potential failures.
Through repeated practice and feedback, they quickly find the right abstraction that helps to imitate
and adapt the task to various situations. This process facilitates continuous refinement and transfer of
knowledge across a diverse range of tasks and contexts.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

