InfiBench: Evaluating the Question-Answering
Capabilities of Code Large Language Models

Linyi Li
Simon Fraser University
linyi_li@sfu.ca

Shijie Geng
ByteDance Inc & Rutgers University
sg1309@rutgers.edu

Zhenwen Li∗ Yibo He∗ Hao Yu∗ Ziyue Hua∗
Peking University
Tao Xie
Key Lab of HCST (PKU), MOE
taoxie@pku.edu.cn

Guanghan Ning
ByteDance Inc

Siwei Wang
ByteDance Inc

Hongxia Yang
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University (PolyU)
hongxia.yang@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Large Language Models for code (code LLMs) have witnessed tremendous progress
in recent years. With the rapid development of code LLMs, many popular evaluation benchmarks, such as HumanEval, DS-1000, and MBPP, have emerged to
measure the performance of code LLMs with a particular focus on code generation tasks. However, they are insufficient to cover the full range of expected
capabilities of code LLMs, which span beyond code generation to answering
diverse coding-related questions. To fill this gap, we propose InfiBench, the
first large-scale freeform question-answering (QA) benchmark for code to
our knowledge, comprising 234 carefully selected high-quality Stack Overflow
questions that span across 15 programming languages. InfiBench uses four types
of model-free automatic metrics to evaluate response correctness where domain
experts carefully concretize the criterion for each question. We conduct a systematic evaluation for over 100 latest code LLMs on InfiBench, leading to a series
of novel and insightful findings. Our detailed analyses showcase potential directions for further advancement of code LLMs. InfiBench is fully open source at
https://infi-coder.github.io/infibench and continuously expanding to
foster more scientific and systematic practices for code LLM evaluation.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Large Language Models (LLMs) have been revolutionizing the software development
landscape [17, 12], demonstrating exceedingly strong and comprehensive capabilities in comprehending, generating, debugging, and summarizing code [9, 24]. For example, code LLM-powered
products like GitHub Copilot [14] reached millions of active users within just one year of their launch.
Alongside the huge success of proprietary LLMs such as GPT-3.5 / GPT-4 [36] and Gemini [13], the
development of open-source code LLMs2 [35, 43, 39, 30] has been advancing at an unprecedented
fast pace. As of June 2024, the Hugging Face Open LLM Leaderboard [4] has cataloged over 3,300
submissions of such models.
∗

Equal contribution.
We define code LLMs as LLMs that show decent capabilities in the code domain, no matter whether they
are exclusively trained or finetuned with code data or not.
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

