Learning Cortico-Muscular Dependence through
Orthonormal Decomposition of Density Ratios

Shihan Ma1†
Blanka Zicher1

Bo Hu2† Tianyu Jia1 Alexander Kenneth Clarke1
Arnault H. Caillet1 Dario Farina1 José C. Príncipe2
†
Equal Contribution
1
Department of Bioengineering, Imperial College London
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Florida

Abstract
The cortico-spinal neural pathway is fundamental for motor control and movement execution, and in humans it is typically studied using concurrent electroencephalography (EEG) and electromyography (EMG) recordings. However, current
approaches for capturing high-level and contextual connectivity between these
recordings have important limitations. Here, we present a novel application of
statistical dependence estimators based on orthonormal decomposition of density
ratios to model the relationship between cortical and muscle oscillations. Our
method extends from traditional scalar-valued measures by learning eigenvalues,
eigenfunctions, and projection spaces of density ratios from realizations of the
signal, addressing the interpretability, scalability, and local temporal dependence of
cortico-muscular connectivity. We experimentally demonstrate that eigenfunctions
learned from cortico-muscular connectivity can accurately classify movements and
subjects. Moreover, they reveal channel and temporal dependencies that confirm
the activation of specific EEG channels during movement. Our code is available at
https://github.com/bohu615/corticomuscular-eigen-encoder.

1

Introduction

The brain communicates with muscles by sending information to the spinal cord. Part of this information is directly
transmitted from the cortex to spinal motor neurons via
the cortico-spinal neural pathway, which is vital for motor
control and movement execution. Because motor neurons
are directly connected to muscles, cortical oscillations traveling through the cortico-spinal pathway are coherent with
oscillations in muscle electrical activities, both in humans
and non-human primates [1–3]. This relationship, known
as functional cortico-muscular connectivity, is critical in
neuroscience and is typically studied using concurrent
recordings of neural signals such as electroencephalography (EEG) and electromyography (EMG) [4, 5] (Fig. 1).
Practical applications include diagnosing and monitoring
of neuromuscular disorders, such as amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis [6], stroke [7], and Parkinson’s disease [8], as
well as developing brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) for
individuals with motor impairments [9].

Contextual information flow
visual, sensory,
cognition, …

motor
related

fiber membrane,
…

Cortical activities

Peripheral activities

Cortico-muscular neural pathway
Projection
space of the
density ratio

Concurrent recordings
Statistical dependence

EEG

EMG

Figure 1: The cortico-muscular pathway
allows brain-muscle communication with coherent cortical and peripheral oscillations.
This paper models this connectivity through
the statistical dependence between their concurrent recordings of EEG and EMG.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024). Correspondence to Bo Hu
(bohu@ufl.edu) and Shihan Ma (mmasss1205@gmail.com).

