Wasserstein Distance Rivals Kullback-Leibler
Divergence for Knowledge Distillation

Jiaming Lv∗ , Haoyuan Yang∗ , Peihua Li†
Dalian University of Technology
ljm_vlg@mail.dlut.edu.cn, yanghaoyuan@mail.dlut.edu.cn, peihuali@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Since pioneering work of Hinton et al., knowledge distillation based on KullbackLeibler Divergence (KL-Div) has been predominant, and recently its variants have
achieved compelling performance. However, KL-Div only compares probabilities
of the corresponding category between the teacher and student while lacking a
mechanism for cross-category comparison. Besides, KL-Div is problematic when
applied to intermediate layers, as it cannot handle non-overlapping distributions
and is unaware of geometry of the underlying manifold. To address these downsides, we propose a methodology of Wasserstein Distance (WD) based knowledge
distillation. Specifically, we propose a logit distillation method called WKD-L
based on discrete WD, which performs cross-category comparison of probabilities
and thus can explicitly leverage rich interrelations among categories. Moreover,
we introduce a feature distillation method called WKD-F, which uses a parametric
method for modeling feature distributions and adopts continuous WD for transferring knowledge from intermediate layers. Comprehensive evaluations on image
classification and object detection have shown (1) for logit distillation WKD-L
outperforms very strong KL-Div variants; (2) for feature distillation WKD-F is
superior to the KL-Div counterparts and state-of-the-art competitors. The source
code is available at http://peihuali.org/WKD.

1

Introduction

Knowledge distillation (KD) aims to transfer knowledge from a high-performance teacher model
with large capacity to a lightweight student model. In the past years, it has attracted ever increasing
interest and made great advance in deep learning, enjoying widespread applications in visual recognition and object detection, among others [1]. In their pioneering work, Hinton et al. [2] introduce
Kullback-Leibler divergence (KL-Div) for knowledge distillation, where the prediction of category
probabilities of the student is constrained to be similar to that of the teacher. Since then, KL-Div has
been predominant in logit distillation and recently its variants [3; 4; 5] have achieved compelling
performance. In addition, such logit distillation methods are complementary to many state-of-the-art
methods that transfer knowledge from intermediate layers [6; 7; 8].
Despite the great success, KL-Div has two downsides that hinder fully transferring of the teacher’s
knowledge. First, KL-Div only compares the probabilities of the corresponding category between
the teacher and student, lacking a mechanism to perform cross-category comparison. However,
real-world categories exhibit varying degrees of visual resemblance, e.g., mammal species like dog
and wolf look more similar to each other while visually very distinct from artifact such as car and
bicycle. Deep neural networks (DNNs) can distinguish thousands of categories [9] and thus are
∗
These authors contributed equally to this work and share first authorship. † Corresponding author. The
work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (62471083, 61971086).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

