Boosting Sample Efficiency and Generalization in
Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning via Equivariance

Joshua McClellan
JHU APL ∗
University of Maryland
joshmccl@umd.edu

Naveed Haghani
JHU APL
naveed.haghani@jhuapl.edu

Furong Huang
University of Maryland
furongh@umd.edu

John Winder
JHU APL
john.winder@jhuapl.edu

Pratap Tokekar
University of Maryland
tokekar@umd.edu

Abstract
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) struggles with sample inefficiency
and poor generalization [1]. These challenges are partially due to a lack of structure or inductive bias in the neural networks typically used in learning the policy.
One such form of structure that is commonly observed in multi-agent scenarios
is symmetry. The field of Geometric Deep Learning has developed Equivariant
Graph Neural Networks (EGNN) that are equivariant (or symmetric) to rotations,
translations, and reflections of nodes. Incorporating equivariance has been shown
to improve learning efficiency and decrease error [2]. In this paper, we demonstrate
that EGNNs improve the sample efficiency and generalization in MARL. However, we also show that a naive application of EGNNs to MARL results in poor
early exploration due to a bias in the EGNN structure. To mitigate this bias, we
present Exploration-enhanced Equivariant Graph Neural Networks or E2GN2. We
compare E2GN2 to other common function approximators using common MARL
benchmarks MPE and SMACv2. E2GN2 demonstrates a significant improvement
in sample efficiency, greater final reward convergence, and a 2x-5x gain in over
standard GNNs in our generalization tests. These results pave the way for more
reliable and effective solutions in complex multi-agent systems.

1

Introduction

Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL)
has found success in various applications such
as robotics [3, 4, 5], complex strategy games [6,
7, 8] and power grid management [9, 10]. However, MARL algorithms can be slow to train,
difficult to tune, and have poor generalization
guarantees [1, 11]. This is partially because
typical implementations of MARL techniques
use neural networks such as Multi-Layer Per- Figure 1: An example of how using an equivariant funcceptrons (MLP) that do not take the underlying tion approximator shrinks the total search space.
structure into account. The models learn simple input/output relationships with no constraints or
priors on the policies learned. These generic architectures lack a strong inductive bias making them
inefficient in terms of the training samples required.
∗

The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Lab

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

