NoisyGL: A Comprehensive Benchmark for Graph
Neural Networks under Label Noise
Zhonghao Wang1 , Danyu Sun1 , Sheng Zhou1∗, Haobo Wang1 ,
Jiapei Fan2 , Longtao Huang2 , Jiajun Bu1
1
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Accessible Perception and Intelligent Systems,
Collage of Computer Science, Zhejiang University 2 Alibaba Group
{wangzhonghao, zhousheng_zju, wanghaobo, bjj}@zju.edu.cn,
danyu.21@intl.zju.edu.cn,
{jiapei.fjp, kaiyang.hlt}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) exhibit strong potential in node classification
tasks through a message-passing mechanism. However, their performance often
hinges on high-quality node labels, which are challenging to obtain in real-world
scenarios due to unreliable sources or adversarial attacks. Consequently, label
noise is common in real-world graph data, negatively impacting GNNs by propagating incorrect information during training. To address this issue, the study of
Graph Neural Networks under Label Noise (GLN) has recently gained traction.
However, due to variations in dataset selection, data splitting, and preprocessing
techniques, the community currently lacks a comprehensive benchmark, which
impedes deeper understanding and further development of GLN. To fill this gap,
we introduce NoisyGL in this paper, the first comprehensive benchmark for graph
neural networks under label noise. NoisyGL enables fair comparisons and detailed
analyses of GLN methods on noisy labeled graph data across various datasets, with
unified experimental settings and interface. Our benchmark has uncovered several
important insights missed in previous research, and we believe these findings will
be highly beneficial for future studies. We hope our open-source benchmark library
will foster further advancements in this field. The code of the benchmark can be
found in https://github.com/eaglelab-zju/NoisyGL.

1

Introduction

Many complex real-world systems can be represented as graph-structured data, including the citation
network [19], biological networks [7], traffic networks [6], and social networks [9]. Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs) have demonstrated substantial effectiveness in modeling graph data through
a message-passing process that aggregates information from neighboring nodes [5]. Among the
numerous applications of GNNs, node classification is the most thoroughly studied task, where GNNs
are trained with the explicit assistance of semi-supervised node labels [1].
Although GNNs have achieved success, their performance in semi-supervised graph learning tasks
is highly dependent on precise node labels, which are difficult to obtain in real-world scenarios [1].
For instance, in online social networks, the process of manually labeling millions of users is costly,
and the labels often depend on unreliable user input [18]. Furthermore, graph data is vulnerable
to adversarial label-flipping attacks [31]. Consequently, label noise is widespread in graph data.
Research has demonstrated that label noise can significantly reduce the generalizability of machine
learning models on computer vision and natural language processing scenarios [21]. In GNNs, the
∗

Sheng Zhou is the Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

