Linear Causal Bandits: Unknown Graph and Soft Interventions

Zirui Yan
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
yanz11@rpi.edu

Ali Tajer
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
tajer@ecse.rpi.edu

Abstract
Designing causal bandit algorithms depends on two central categories of assumptions: (i) the extent of information about the underlying causal graphs and (ii)
the extent of information about interventional statistical models. There have
been extensive recent advances in dispensing with assumptions on either category.
These include assuming known graphs but unknown interventional distributions,
and the converse setting of assuming unknown graphs but access to restrictive
hard/do interventions, which removes the stochasticity and ancestral dependencies.
Nevertheless, the problem in its general form, i.e., unknown graph and unknown
stochastic intervention models, remains open. This paper addresses this problem
and establishes that in a graph with N nodes, maximum in-degree d and maximum
causal path √
length L, after T interaction rounds the regret upper bound scales as
1
Õ((cd)L− 2 T + d + RN ) where c > 1 is a constant and R is a measure of
intervention power.
√ A universal minimax lower bound is also established, which
L− 23
scales as Ω(d
T ). Importantly, the graph size N has a diminishing effect on
the regret as T grows. These bounds have matching behavior in T , exponential
dependence on L, and polynomial dependence on d (with the gap d ). On the
algorithmic aspect, the paper presents a novel way of designing a computationally
efficient CB algorithm, addressing a challenge that the existing CB algorithms
using soft interventions face.

1

Motivation & Overview

Causal bandits (CBs) provide a formal framework for the sequential design of experiments over a
network of agents with causal interactions. The objective of CBs is to identify an experiment that
maximizes a notion of utility over the causal network. CB settings are specified by three elements:
(i) a causal graphical model that defines the topological ordering of the causal variables and their
probabilistic relationships; (ii) a set of structural equation models (SEMs) that specify their causeeffect dependencies among the variables; and (iii) intervention models that specify the extent of
exogenous variations imposed on the causal interactions by an external force. By interpreting the set
of interventions as the set of arms and the decision quality (utility) as the rewards, CBs’ objective
is to maximize the cumulative reward by strategically selecting the sequence of interventions that
optimize a notion of cumulative utility [1, 2]. CBs have a broad range of applications [3–5].
The recent advances in CBs can be grouped based on three assumption dimensions: (i) the assumptions
on the extent of information available about the causal graph structure, (ii) the assumptions about preand post-intervention statistical models, and (iii) the nature of the SEMs. There have been significant
advances in understanding CBs when the causal graphs are known. The most relevant studies include
those that started with analyzing do interventions as the simplest form of interventions [1, 2, 6, 7]
and have progressed toward the more complex stochastic interventions (hard and soft). These studies
have investigated various linear and non-linear SEMs. Specifically, the studies in [8–13] assume that
the pre- and post-interventional statistical distributions are known. The study in [14] further advances
the results by assuming that these distributions are known only partially, and finally, the studies
in [15–18] entirely dispense with all the assumptions about the interventions’ statistical models.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

