Learning from Uncertain Data: From Possible Worlds
to Possible Models
Jiongli Zhu1
1

Su Feng2

University of California, San Diego

2

Boris Glavic3

Nanjing Tech University

Babak Salimi1
3

University of Illinois, Chicago

Abstract
We introduce an efficient method for learning linear models from uncertain data,
where uncertainty is represented as a set of possible variations in the data, leading
to predictive multiplicity. Our approach leverages abstract interpretation and zonotopes, a type of convex polytope, to compactly represent these dataset variations,
enabling the symbolic execution of gradient descent on all possible worlds simultaneously. We develop techniques to ensure that this process converges to a fixed
point and derive closed-form solutions for this fixed point. Our method provides
sound over-approximations of all possible optimal models and viable prediction
ranges. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach through theoretical and
empirical analysis, highlighting its potential to reason about model and prediction
uncertainty due to data quality issues in training data.

1

Introduction

This paper addresses the challenges of learning from uncertain datasets by employing the framework
of possible world semantics, a well-established concept in AI and database theory [59, 23, 41, 28].
In this approach, uncertainty in a dataset D is conceptualized through a collection of possible
datasets {D1 , D2 , . . .}, each representing a potential state of the real world, reflecting variations
due to missing entries, errors, inconsistencies, and biases. Given this framework and a learning
algorithm, our objective is to construct a set of models {f1 , f2 , . . .}, where each model fi is trained
on a corresponding potential dataset Di . This method, that we implement in a system called
Z ORRO (ZOnotope-based Robustness Analysis for Regression with Over-approximations), allows
for a thorough evaluation of how data uncertainties affect the robustness, reliability, and fairness of
models in predictive modeling and statistical inference, particularly in scenarios where the ground
truth is unidentifiable, necessitating consideration of all possible dataset variations.
While the framework of possible world semantics is essential for modeling dataset uncertainties, it
poses significant challenges due to the potentially infinite number of scenarios each dataset might
represent. Exploring every possibility and training a model for each is impractical. The concept
of model multiplicity, which highlights situations where models with similar accuracy differ in
individual predictions, has gained traction [7, 42], yet it primarily focuses on competing models
without addressing the full range of dataset variations. Similarly, dataset multiplicity introduced
in [47] recognizes data variations due to uncertainty but [47] only proposed a solution for linear
models with label errors. Our approach expands these ideas by using possible world semantics to
systematically manage uncertainty across all features and labels, thus creating a comprehensive
framework for evaluating model robustness amid data uncertainties.
To address the challenges of learning from uncertain datasets, we employ the method of abstract
interpretation [13]. Utilizing zonotopes—a type of convex polytope well-suited for compactly
representing high-dimensional data spaces [74, 4]—we over-approximate the set of all possible
dataset variations. This framework allows for the simultaneous symbolic execution of gradient descent
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

