Stochastic contextual bandits with graph feedback:
from independence number to MAS number

Yuxiao Wen† Yanjun Han† Zhengyuan Zhou†,*
New York University† Arena Technologies*
{yuxiaowen, yanjunhan}@nyu.edu zz26@stern.nyu.edu

Abstract
We consider contextual bandits with graph feedback, a class of interactive learning
problems with richer structures than vanilla contextual bandits, where taking an
action reveals the rewards for all neighboring actions in the feedback graph under
all contexts. Unlike the multi-armed bandits setting where a growing literature
has painted a near-complete understanding of graph feedback, much remains
unexplored in the contextual bandits counterpart. In thisppaper, we make inroads
into this inquiry by establishing a regret lower bound Ω( βM (G)T ), where M is
the number of contexts, G is the feedback graph, and βM (G) is our proposed graphtheoretic quantity that characterizes the fundamental learning limit for this class
of problems. Interestingly, βM (G) interpolates between α(G) (the independence
number of the graph) and m(G) (the maximum acyclic subgraph (MAS) number
of the graph) as the number of contexts M varies. We also provide algorithms
that achieve near-optimal regret for important classes of context sequences and/or
feedback graphs, such as transitively closed graphs that find applications in auctions
and inventory control. In particular, with many contexts, our results show that the
MAS number essentially characterizes the statistical complexity for contextual
bandits, as opposed to the independence number in multi-armed bandits.

1

Introduction

Contextual bandits encode a rich class of sequential decision making problems in reality, including
clinical trials, personalized healthcare, dynamic pricing, recommendation systems (Bouneffouf et al.,
2020). However, due to the exploration-exploitation trade-off and a potentially large context space,
the pace of learning for contextual bandits could be slow, and the statistical complexity of learning
could be costly for application scenarios with bandit feedback (Agarwal et al., 2012). There are two
common approaches to alleviate the burden of sample complexity, either by exploiting the function
class structure for the reward (Zhu and Mineiro, 2022), or by utilizing additional feedback available
during exploration.
In this paper we focus on the second approach, and aim to exploit the feedback structure efficiently
in contextual bandits. The framework of formulating the feedback structure as feedback graphs
in bandits has a long history (Mannor and Shamir, 2011; Alon et al., 2015, 2017; Lykouris et al.,
2020), where a direct edge between two actions indicates choosing one action provides the reward
information for the other. Such settings have also been generalized to contextual cases (Balseiro
et al., 2019; Dann et al., 2020; Han et al., 2024), where counterfactual rewards could be available
under different contexts. Typical results in these settings are that, the statistical complexity of bandits
with feedback graphs is characterized by some graph-theoretic quantities, such as the independence
number or the maximum acyclic subgraph (MAS) number of the feedback graph.
To understand the influence of the presence of contexts on the statistical complexity of learning and to
compare with multi-armed bandits, we focus on the tabular setting where the contexts are treated as
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

