Towards Heterogeneous Long-tailed Learning:
Benchmarking, Metrics, and Toolbox

Haohui Wang, Weijie Guan, Jianpeng Chen, Zi Wang, Dawei Zhou
Computer Science, Virginia Tech
{haohuiw,skjguan,jianpengc,ziwang,zhoud}@vt.edu

Abstract
Long-tailed data distributions pose challenges for a variety of domains like ecommerce, finance, biomedical science, and cyber security, where the performance
of machine learning models is often dominated by head categories while tail
categories are inadequately learned. This work aims to provide a systematic view
of long-tailed learning with regard to three pivotal angles: (A1) the characterization
of data long-tailedness, (A2) the data complexity of various domains, and (A3)
the heterogeneity of emerging tasks. We develop H ERO LT, a comprehensive longtailed learning benchmark integrating 18 state-of-the-art algorithms, 10 evaluation
metrics, and 17 real-world datasets across 6 tasks and 4 data modalities. H ERO LT
with novel angles and extensive experiments (315 in total) enables effective and fair
evaluation of newly proposed methods compared with existing baselines on varying
dataset types. Finally, we conclude by highlighting the significant applications
of long-tailed learning and identifying several promising future directions. For
accessibility and reproducibility, we open-source our benchmark H ERO LT and
corresponding results at https://github.com/SSSKJ/HeroLT.

1

Introduction

In the era of big data, many high-impact domains, such as e-commerce [1, 2], finance [3], biomedical
science [4, 5], and cyber security [6, 7], naturally exhibit long-tailed data distributions, where a few
head categories1 are well-studied with abundant data, while massive tail categories are under-explored
with scarce data. To name a few, in financial transaction networks, the majority of transactions fall into
a few head classes that are considered normal, like wire transfers and credit card payments. However,
a large number of tail classes correspond to various fraudulent transaction types, like synthetic identity
transactions and money laundering. Although fraudulent transactions rarely occur, detecting them
is essential for preventing unexpected financial loss [8, 9]. Another example is antibiotic resistance
genes, which can be classified based on the antibiotic class they confer to and their transferable ability.
Genes with mobility and strong human pathogenicity may not be detected frequently and are viewed
as tail classes, but these resistance genes have the potential to be transmitted from the environment to
bacteria in humans, thereby posing an increasing global threat to human health [10, 11].
Massive long-tailed learning studies have been conducted in recent years, proposing methods like the
cost-sensitive focal loss to effectively address the data imbalance by reshaping the standard crossentropy loss [12], and graph augmentation by interpolating tail node embeddings and generating
new edges [13]. The advancements in tackling long-tailed problems drove the publication of several
studies on the survey of long-tailed problems [14, 15, 16, 17, 18], which generally categorize existing
1

Long-tailed problems occur in labels or input data (like degrees of nodes), collectively named as category.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

