PACE: Pacing Operator Learning to Accurate Optical
Field Simulation for Complicated Photonic Devices

Hanqing Zhu♥ † , Wenyan Cong♥ , Guojin Chen♥∗, Shupeng Ning♥ ,
Ray T. Chen♥ , Jiaqi Gu♦ , David Z. Pan♥ ‡
♦
Arizona State University
♥
The University of Texas at Austin
†
hqzhu@utexas.edu, ‡ dpan@ece.utexas.edu

Abstract
Electromagnetic field simulation is central to designing, optimizing, and validating photonic devices and circuits. However, costly computation associated
with numerical simulation poses a significant bottleneck, hindering scalability and
turnaround time in the photonic circuit design process. Neural operators offer a
promising alternative, but existing SOTA approaches,NeurOLight, struggle with
predicting high-fidelity fields for real-world complicated photonic devices, with
the best reported 0.38 normalized mean absolute error in NeurOLight. The interplays of highly complex light-matter interaction, e.g., scattering and resonance,
sensitivity to local structure details, non-uniform learning complexity for fulldomain simulation, and rich frequency information, contribute to the failure of
existing neural PDE solvers. In this work, we boost the prediction fidelity to an
unprecedented level for simulating complex photonic devices with a novel operator design driven by the above challenges. We propose a novel cross-axis factorized PACE operator with a strong long-distance modeling capacity to connect
the full-domain complex field pattern with local device structures. Inspired by
human learning, we further divide and conquer the simulation task for extremely
hard cases into two progressively easy tasks, with a first-stage model learning an
initial solution refined by a second model. On various complicated photonic device benchmarks, we demonstrate one sole PACE model is capable of achieving
73% lower error with 50% fewer parameters compared with various recent ML
for PDE solvers. The two-stage setup further advances high-fidelity simulation
for even more intricate cases. In terms of runtime, PACE demonstrates 154-577×
and 11.8-12× simulation speedup over numerical solver using scipy or highlyoptimized pardiso solver, respectively. We open sourced the code and complicated optical device dataset at PACE-Light.

1

Introduction

With advances in integrated photonics, photonic structures capable of transmitting or processing information are gathering increasing interest, fueled by the optical communication [24] and the recent
resurgence of photonic analog computing [5, 20, 23, 36, 39, 40]. Light-empowered communication
and computing offer a promising pathway for reshaping future AI systems, prompting the optical
community to discover compact, customized devices [7, 32, 38] to overcome the limitations of bulky
optical components. In this optical design process, numerical simulators, e.g., the popular finite difference frequency domain (FDFD) algorithm [11], is heavily used to obtain accurate optical fields
for characterizing and optimizing device behavior. However, the significant time and computational
∗

This work was done when Guojin Chen was a visiting scholar at UT Austin.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

