Long-range Brain Graph Transformer

Shuo Yu1,2 , Shan Jin3 , Ming Li4,5 , Tabinda Sarwar6 , Feng Xia6B
School of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Key Laboratory of Social Computing and Cognitive Intelligence (Dalian University of Technology),
Ministry of Education, China
3
School of Software, Dalian University of Technology, China
4
Zhejiang Institute of Optoelectronics, China
5
Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Intelligent Education Technology and Application,
Zhejiang Normal University, China
6
School of Computing Technologies, RMIT University, Australia
{shuo.yu, f.xia}@ieee.org
jinshan0924@mail.dlut.edu.cn
mingli@zjnu.edu.cn
tabinda.sarwar@rmit.edu.au
1

Abstract
Understanding communication and information processing among brain regions
of interest (ROIs) is highly dependent on long-range connectivity, which plays a
crucial role in facilitating diverse functional neural integration across the entire
brain. However, previous studies generally focused on the short-range dependencies within brain networks while neglecting the long-range dependencies, limiting
an integrated understanding of brain-wide communication. To address this limitation, we propose Adaptive Long-range aware TransformER (ALTER), a brain
graph transformer to capture long-range dependencies between brain ROIs utilizing
biased random walk. Specifically, we present a novel long-range aware strategy
to explicitly capture long-range dependencies between brain ROIs. By guiding
the walker towards the next hop with higher correlation value, our strategy simulates the real-world brain-wide communication. Furthermore, by employing the
transformer framework, ALERT adaptively integrates both short- and long-range
dependencies between brain ROIs, enabling an integrated understanding of multilevel communication across the entire brain. Extensive experiments on ABIDE
and ADNI datasets demonstrate that ALTER consistently outperforms generalized
state-of-the-art graph learning methods (including SAN, Graphormer, GraphTrans,
and LRGNN) and other graph learning based brain network analysis methods
(including FBNETGEN, BrainNetGNN, BrainGNN, and BrainNETTF) in neurological disease diagnosis. Cases of long-range dependencies are also presented to
further illustrate the effectiveness of ALTER. The implementation is available at
https://github.com/yushuowiki/ALTER.

1

Introduction

Brain networks represent a blueprint of communication and information processing across different
regions of interest (ROIs) [1, 2]. The interaction between anatomically connected ROIs within brain
networks is the foundation of brain network analysis tasks [3]. As shown in Figure 1, numerous
studies have shown that brain networks exhibit not only short-range connectivity (i.e., short-range
dependencies) but also extensive long-range connectivity (i.e., long-range dependencies) [4, 5, 6, 7].
Short-range dependencies rely on the neighbourhood space, whereas long-range dependencies
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

