DenoiseRep: Denoising Model for
Representation Learning

Zhengrui Xu1 †

Guan’an Wang †‡

Xiaowen Huang 1,2,3 ∗

Jitao Sang 1,2,3

zrxu23@bjtu.edu.cn

guan.wang0706@gmail.com

xwhuang@bjtu.edu.cn

jtsang@bjtu.edu.cn

1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University
Beijing Key Lab of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing Jiaotong University
3
Key Laboratory of Big Data & Artificial Intelligence
in Transportation(Beijing Jiaotong University), Ministry of Education

Abstract
The denoising model has been proven a powerful generative model but has little
exploration of discriminative tasks. Representation learning is important in discriminative tasks, which is defined as "learning representations (or features) of
the data that make it easier to extract useful information when building classifiers
or other predictors" [4]. In this paper, we propose a novel Denoising Model for
Representation Learning (DenoiseRep) to improve feature discrimination with
joint feature extraction and denoising. DenoiseRep views each embedding layer
in a backbone as a denoising layer, processing the cascaded embedding layers as
if we are recursively denoise features step-by-step. This unifies the frameworks
of feature extraction and denoising, where the former progressively embeds features from low-level to high-level, and the latter recursively denoises features
step-by-step. After that, DenoiseRep fus es the parameters of feature extraction
and denoising layers, and theoretically demonstrates its equivalence before and
after the fusion, thus making feature denoising computation-free. DenoiseRep is a
label-free algorithm that incrementally improves features but also complementary
to the label if available. Experimental results on various discriminative vision
tasks, including re-identification (Market-1501, DukeMTMC-reID, MSMT17,
CUHK-03, vehicleID), image classification (ImageNet, UB200, Oxford-Pet, Flowers), object detection (COCO), image segmentation (ADE20K) show stability
and impressive improvements. We also validate its effectiveness on the CNN
(ResNet) and Transformer (ViT, Swin, Vmamda) architectures. Code is available
at https://github.com/wangguanan/DenoiseRep.

1

Introduction

Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) [21] or Diffusion Model for short have been
proven to be a powerful generative model [5]. Generative models can generate vivid samples (such
as images, audio and video) by modeling the joint distribution of the data P (X, Y ), where X is the
sample and Y is the condition. Diffusion models achieve this goal by adding Gaussian noise to the
data and training a denoising model of inversion to predict the noise. Diffusion models can generate
multi-formity and rich samples, such as Stable diffusion [50], DALL [47] series and Midjourney,
these powerful image generation models, which are essentially diffusion models.
†

Equal Contribution.
Project Lead.
∗
Corresponding Author.
‡

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

