Simplified and Generalized
Masked Diffusion for Discrete Data
Jiaxin Shi∗, Kehang Han∗, Zhe Wang, Arnaud Doucet, Michalis K. Titsias
Google DeepMind

Abstract
Masked (or absorbing) diffusion is actively explored as an alternative to autoregressive models for generative modeling of discrete data. However, existing work
in this area has been hindered by unnecessarily complex model formulations and
unclear relationships between different perspectives, leading to suboptimal parameterization, training objectives, and ad hoc adjustments to counteract these issues. In
this work, we aim to provide a simple and general framework that unlocks the full
potential of masked diffusion models. We show that the continuous-time variational
objective of masked diffusion models is a simple weighted integral of cross-entropy
losses. Our framework also enables training generalized masked diffusion models
with state-dependent masking schedules. When evaluated by perplexity, our models
trained on OpenWebText surpass prior diffusion language models at GPT-2 scale
and demonstrate superior performance on 4 out of 5 zero-shot language modeling
tasks. Furthermore, our models vastly outperform previous discrete diffusion models on pixel-level image modeling, achieving 2.75 (CIFAR-10) and 3.40 (ImageNet
64×64) bits per dimension that are better than autoregressive models of similar
sizes. Our code is available at https://github.com/google-deepmind/md4.

1

Introduction

Since their inception [1, 2, 3], diffusion models have emerged as the workhorse for generative
media, achieving state-of-the-art in tasks such as image synthesis [4, 5, 6], audio [7, 8] and video
generation [9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. The majority of existing successes are for continuous state space
diffusions. While diffusion models have been extended to discrete state spaces [1, 14, 15] and
have been successfully applied to applications ranging from graph generation [16], text-to-sound
generation [17] or protein design [18], they remain not as widely used as their continuous counterparts
as they are not competitive with autoregressive models in important domains such as text modeling.
This has motivated the development of continuous space diffusion models where the discrete data are
embedded in the Euclidean space [19, 20, 21, 22, 23] or the simplex [24, 25, 26, 27, 28]. We believe
that one of the reasons for the limited success of discrete diffusions is that they have been hindered
by fairly complex formulations and training objectives. This paper is a step towards closing this gap.
In this work, we focus on “masked” (or “absorbing”) diffusions, a discrete diffusion formulation
first presented by Austin et al. [14], and later explored by the literature from various perspectives
[29, 30, 31, 32]. We follow here a continuous-time framework which has proven very useful to
improve the training and understanding of continuous state space diffusions [see e.g., 3, 33, 34].
We make several technical contributions which simplify the training of these models and improve
significantly their performance. Our contributions are as follows:
• Using elementary arguments, we establish several properties for the forward process induced by
this model and its corresponding time reversal, improving our understanding of this model class.
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to: jiaxins@google.com.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

