Unified Gradient-Based Machine Unlearning with
Remain Geometry Enhancement

Zhehao Huang, Xinwen Cheng, JingHao Zheng, Haoran Wang, Zhengbao He, Tao Li, Xiaolin Huang

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
[kinght_H, xinwencheng, zjh20030406, haoran_whynot, lstefanie, li.tao, xiaolinhuang]@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Machine unlearning (MU) has emerged to enhance the privacy and trustworthiness
of deep neural networks. Approximate MU is a practical method for large-scale
models. Our investigation into approximate MU starts with identifying the steepest
descent direction, minimizing the output Kullback-Leibler divergence to exact MU
inside a parameters’ neighborhood. This probed direction decomposes into three
components: weighted forgetting gradient ascent, fine-tuning retaining gradient
descent, and a weight saliency matrix. Such decomposition derived from Euclidean
metric encompasses most existing gradient-based MU methods. Nevertheless,
adhering to Euclidean space may result in sub-optimal iterative trajectories due
to the overlooked geometric structure of the output probability space. We suggest
embedding the unlearning update into a manifold rendered by the remaining geometry, incorporating second-order Hessian from the remaining data. It helps prevent
effective unlearning from interfering with the retained performance. However, computing the second-order Hessian for large-scale models is intractable. To efficiently
leverage the benefits of Hessian modulation, we propose a fast-slow parameter update strategy to implicitly approximate the up-to-date salient unlearning direction.
Free from specific modal constraints, our approach is adaptable across computer
vision unlearning tasks, including classification and generation. Extensive experiments validate our efficacy and efficiency. Notably, our method successfully
performs class-forgetting on ImageNet using DiT and forgets a class on CIFAR-10
using DDPM in just 50 steps, compared to thousands of steps required by previous
methods. Code is available at Unified-Unlearning-w-Remain-Geometry.

1

Introduction

Machine Unlearning (MU) [1–3] aims to remove the influence of samples from a pre-trained model,
ensuring the model behaves as if it has never encountered those samples. The significance of
MU research has grown following data protection regulations [4, 5]. It has rapidly developed
in recent years, becoming an important means to help pre-trained large-scale models adapt to
various trustworthy challenges [6] in computer vision (CV). In general, MU aids in purging outdated
knowledge [7, 8], mitigating biases [9, 10], and preventing large text-to-image models from generating
not-safe-for-work (NSFW) images [11–14].
Existing MU methods are mainly divided into two categories: exact (or certified) MU [15] and
approximate MU [16]. For deep neural networks, achieving exact MU necessitates retraining on a
dataset excluding forgetting samples. However, retraining is computationally prohibitive for recent
large-scale deep networks. Thus, in MU for deep networks, this retrained model only serves as an
aspirational standard to be approached [17]. We primarily focus on more efficient approximate MU.
Approximate MU strives to align the output distribution of unlearned models with that of retrained
models. We initially explore the vanilla gradient descent of minimizing the output Kullback-Leibler
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

