From Transparent to Opaque: Rethinking Neural
Implicit Surfaces with α-NeuS

Haoran Zhang1,2∗, Junkai Deng3∗, Xuhui Chen1,2∗, Fei Hou1,2†, Wencheng Wang1,2 ,
Hong Qin4 , Chen Qian5 , Ying He3
1
Key Laboratory of System Software (CAS) and State Key Laboratory of Computer Science,
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University
4
5
Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University
SenseTime Research
zhanghr@ios.ac.cn junkai006@e.ntu.edu.sg {chenxh, houfei, whn}@ios.ac.cn
qin@cs.stonybrook.edu qianchen@sensetime.com yhe@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Traditional 3D shape reconstruction techniques from multi-view images, such as
structure from motion and multi-view stereo, face challenges in reconstructing
transparent objects. Recent advances in neural radiance fields and its variants
primarily address opaque or transparent objects, encountering difficulties to reconstruct both transparent and opaque objects simultaneously. This paper introduces
α-NeuS—an extension of NeuS—that proves NeuS is unbiased for materials from
fully transparent to fully opaque. We find that transparent and opaque surfaces
align with the non-negative local minima and the zero iso-surface, respectively,
in the learned distance field of NeuS. Traditional iso-surfacing extraction algorithms, such as marching cubes, which rely on fixed iso-values, are ill-suited
for such data. We develop a method to extract the transparent and opaque surface simultaneously based on DCUDF. To validate our approach, we construct
a benchmark that includes both real-world and synthetic scenes, demonstrating
its practical utility and effectiveness. Our data and code are publicly available at
https://github.com/728388808/alpha-NeuS.

1

Introduction

Surface reconstruction from multi-view images has been an important area of research for decades.
Traditional methods such as structure from motion (SfM) [1] and multi-view stereo (MVS) [2]
calibrate images and reconstruct 3D geometry based on color consistency. Recently, the emergence of
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [3] has revolutionized the field, producing impressive results in novel
view synthesis results via volume rendering. Its implicit surface-based variants, such as NeuS [4],
VolSDF [5], HF-NeuS [6], and NeuS2 [7], further advance this field by reconstructing high-quality
geometry and appearance through the learning of signed distance fields (SDFs). However, these
NeRF family methods are limited to reconstructing opaque surfaces. Reconstructing transparent
surfaces presents a greater challenge, with relatively few investigations to date.
Recently, some works dealt with the refraction and reflection effects in the transparent scenes. For
example, ReNeuS [8] effectively reconstructs opaque objects within transparent materials, such
as glass, by assuming known parameters for these materials. Similarly, NeuS-HSR [9] separates
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

