Eye-gaze Guided Multi-modal Alignment for Medical
Representation Learning

Chong Ma1 , Hanqi Jiang2 , Wenting Chen3 , Yiwei Li2 , Zihao Wu2
Xiaowei Yu4 , Zhengliang Liu2 , Lei Guo1 , Dajiang Zhu4 , Tuo Zhang1
Dinggang Shen5 , Tianming Liu2 , Xiang Li6∗
1
Northwest Polytechnical University 2 University of Georgia 3 City University of Hong Kong
4
University of Texas at Arlington 5 ShanghaiTech University & Shanghai United Imaging Intelligence Co.
6
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard University

Abstract
In the medical multi-modal frameworks, the alignment of cross-modality features
presents a significant challenge. However, existing works have learned features that
are implicitly aligned from the data, without considering the explicit relationships
in the medical context. This data-reliance may lead to low generalization of the
learned alignment relationships. In this work, we propose the Eye-gaze Guided
Multi-modal Alignment (EGMA) framework to harness eye-gaze data for better
alignment of medical visual and textual features. We explore the natural auxiliary role of radiologists’ eye-gaze data in aligning medical images and text, and
introduce a novel approach by using eye-gaze data, collected synchronously by
radiologists during diagnostic evaluations. We conduct downstream tasks of image
classification and image-text retrieval on four medical datasets, where EGMA
achieved state-of-the-art performance and stronger generalization across different
datasets. Additionally, we explore the impact of varying amounts of eye-gaze data
on model performance, highlighting the feasibility and utility of integrating this
auxiliary data into multi-modal alignment framework.

1

Introduction

With the development of multi-modal learning, pre-trained models can now utilize large amounts
of paired multi-modal data, such as image-text pairs, audio-text pairs, etc., to optimize the multimodal feature extraction and alignment capabilities. With the emergence of the CLIP [42] model,
contrastive learning has become the prominent framework of multi-modal learning. The advantage
of this framework lies in its simplicity of structure and it does not require sample-level annotations.
However, the main drawback is its heavy reliance on the scale of training data. Subsequent works
have optimized this framework by leveraging potential auxiliary information between image and text
data. For instance, GLIP [32] and RegionCLIP [61] utilized pre-predicted annotation information to
perform fine-grained region-level pre-training. They introduced detection networks firstly to predict
image regions relevant to the text prompt, and then trained the model to align these image regions
with their corresponding text descriptions. However, these models heavily rely on the performance of
the ROI detector and have high computational complexity. FILIP [57] proposed a refined multi-modal
alignment operation after the encoder, relying solely on image patches and text tokens. Although this
further explores the local feature relationships between multi-modal data, it still requires sufficient
data support. When training on small-scale datasets, especially in the medical field, accurately
learning alignment features between modalities becomes more challenging [6, 60].
∗

Corresponding author: xli60@mgh.harvard.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

