A Hitchhiker’s Guide to Fine-Grained Face Forgery
Detection Using Common Sense Reasoning

Niki Maria Foteinopoulou1 Enjie Ghorbel1,2 Djamila Aouada1
1
CVI2 , SnT, University of Luxembourg
2
Cristal Laboratory, National School of Computer Sciences, University of Manouba
{niki.foteinopoulou, enjie.ghorbel, djamila.aouada}@uni.lu

Abstract
Explainability in artiﬁcial intelligence is crucial for restoring trust, particularly in
areas like face forgery detection, where viewers often struggle to distinguish between real and fabricated content. Vision and Large Language Models (VLLM)
bridge computer vision and natural language, offering numerous applications
driven by strong common-sense reasoning. Despite their success in various tasks,
the potential of vision and language remains underexplored in face forgery detection, where they hold promise for enhancing explainability by leveraging the
intrinsic reasoning capabilities of language to analyse ﬁne-grained manipulation
areas. For that reason, few works have recently started to frame the problem
of deepfake detection as a Visual Question Answering (VQA) task, nevertheless omitting the realistic and informative multi-label setting. With the rapid
advances in the ﬁeld of VLLM, an exponential rise of investigations in that direction is expected. As such, there is a need for a clear experimental methodology that converts face forgery detection to a Visual Question Answering (VQA)
task to systematically and fairly evaluate different VLLM architectures. Previous evaluation studies in deepfake detection have mostly focused on the simpler
binary task, overlooking evaluation protocols for multi-label ﬁne-grained detection and text-generative models. We propose a multi-staged approach that diverges from the traditional binary evaluation protocol and conducts a comprehensive evaluation study to compare the capabilities of several VLLMs in this
context. In the ﬁrst stage, we assess the models’ performance on the binary task
and their sensitivity to given instructions using several prompts. In the second
stage, we delve deeper into ﬁne-grained detection by identifying areas of manipulation in a multiple-choice VQA setting. In the third stage, we convert the
ﬁne-grained detection to an open-ended question and compare several matching
strategies for the multi-label classiﬁcation task. Finally, we qualitatively evaluate
the ﬁne-grained responses of the VLLMs included in the benchmark. We apply
our benchmark to several popular models, providing a detailed comparison of
binary, multiple-choice, and open-ended VQA evaluation across seven datasets.
https://nickyfot.github.io/hitchhickersguide.github.io/

1

Introduction

Recent developments in deep generative modelling have resulted in hyper-realistic synthetic images/videos with no clear visible artefacts, making the viewers question whether they can still trust
their eyes. Unfortunately, despite its relevance in a wide range of applications, such technology
poses a threat to society as it can be used for malicious activities [16]. In a world where synthetic
images of a person, known as deepfakes, can easily be generated, it becomes crucial to ﬁght misin38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

