Cooperation, Competition, and Maliciousness:
LLM-Stakeholders Interactive Negotiation

Sahar Abdelnabi1
1

Amr Gomaa2

Microsoft

Sarath Sivaprasad3

Lea Schönherr3

Mario Fritz3

2

German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI)
3
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security

Abstract
There is a growing interest in using Large Language Models (LLMs) in multi-agent
systems to tackle interactive real-world tasks that require effective collaboration
and assessment of complex situations. Yet, we have a limited understanding
of LLMs’ communication and decision-making abilities in multi-agent setups.
The fundamental task of negotiation spans many key features of communication,
such as cooperation, competition, and manipulation potentials. Thus, we propose
using scorable negotiation to evaluate LLMs. We create a testbed of complex
multi-agent, multi-issue, and semantically rich negotiation games. To reach an
agreement, agents must have strong arithmetic, inference, exploration, and planning
capabilities while integrating them in a dynamic and multi-turn setup. We propose
metrics to rigorously quantify agents’ performance and alignment with the assigned
role. We provide procedures to create new games and increase the difficulty of
games to have an evolving benchmark. Importantly, we evaluate critical safety
aspects such as the interaction dynamics between agents influenced by greedy
and adversarial players. Our benchmark is highly challenging; GPT-3.5 and small
models mostly fail, and GPT-4 and SoTA large models (e.g., Llama-3 70b) still
underperform in reaching agreement in non-cooperative and more difficult games1 .

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) [6, 34] are used in tasks beyond traditional NLP, such as using
tools [40, 24, 53] or solving reasoning problems [43, 50]. They are adopted in many real-world
applications [32, 27, 28] that require multi-turn interactions and adaptation to external sources and
interfaces [32]. Multi-agent LLM frameworks are envisioned to be a key design pattern for future
autonomous systems [31]. However, LLMs are not explicitly trained for these tasks. Given this
contrast, we need new evaluation frameworks to assess models in complex communication settings.
Complex communication involved in, e.g., satisfying customers, agreeing on contracts, and high-stake
decisions, such as authorizing loans, requires prolonged deliberation. We use crucial skills such as
strategic planning, competition, cooperation, balancing between multiple objectives, and awareness
of cooperation barriers such as manipulation and deception. This should ideally apply to AI and LLM
agents, which are increasingly relied on as personal [30, 33] and negotiation assistants [14, 25, 35, 13].
A future where AI assistants communicate on behalf of different entities seems plausible. This raises
the concern of models being exploited by rogue parties to pursue unaltruistic or manipulative goals
and exploit other agents to agree with outcomes that were restricted by the developers [5, 10, 9].
As negotiation is integral to these scenarios [19] and thus for advancing AI agentic design, we propose
scorable negotiation games, with complex cooperation and competition between multiple parties, as
a multi-step dynamic benchmark for LLMs. In these games, agents ideally assess the value of deals
w.r.t. their own goals, have a representation of others’ goals, weigh different options, and finally find
1

The benchmark is available at: https://github.com/S-Abdelnabi/LLM-Deliberation/.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

