BehaviorGPT: Smart Agent Simulation for
Autonomous Driving with Next-Patch Prediction

Zikang Zhou1∗ Haibo Hu1∗ Xinhong Chen1 Jianping Wang1 Nan Guan1
Kui Wu2 Yung-Hui Li3 Yu-Kai Huang4 Chun Jason Xue5
1
City University of Hong Kong 2 University of Victoria 3 Hon Hai Research Institute
4
Carnegie Mellon University 5 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
{zikanzhou2-c, haibohu2-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk
{xinhong.chen, jianwang, nanguan}@cityu.edu.hk
wkui@uvic.ca yunghui.li@foxconn.com yukaih2@andrew.cmu.edu
jason.xue@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
Simulating realistic behaviors of traffic agents is pivotal for efficiently validating
the safety of autonomous driving systems. Existing data-driven simulators primarily use an encoder-decoder architecture to encode the historical trajectories
before decoding the future. However, the heterogeneity between encoders and
decoders complicates the models, and the manual separation of historical and
future trajectories leads to low data utilization. Given these limitations, we propose BehaviorGPT, a homogeneous and fully autoregressive Transformer designed
to simulate the sequential behavior of multiple agents. Crucially, our approach
discards the traditional separation between "history" and "future" by modeling
each time step as the "current" one for motion generation, leading to a simpler,
more parameter- and data-efficient agent simulator. We further introduce the NextPatch Prediction Paradigm (NP3) to mitigate the negative effects of autoregressive
modeling, in which models are trained to reason at the patch level of trajectories
and capture long-range spatial-temporal interactions. Despite having merely 3M
model parameters, BehaviorGPT won first place in the 2024 Waymo Open Sim
Agents Challenge with a realism score of 0.7473 and a minADE score of 1.4147,
demonstrating its exceptional performance in traffic agent simulation.
Keywords: Multi-Agent Systems, Transformers, Generative Models, Autonomous Driving

1

Introduction

Autonomous driving has emerged as an unstoppable trend, with its rapid development increasing
the demand for faithful evaluation of autonomy systems’ reliability [32]. While on-road testing can
measure driving performance by allowing autonomous vehicles (AVs) to interact with the physical
world directly, the high testing cost and the scarcity of safety-critical scenarios in the real world
have hindered large-scale and comprehensive evaluation. As an alternative, validating system safety
via simulation has become increasingly attractive [14, 48, 53, 44] as it enables rapid testing in
diverse driving scenarios simulated at a low cost. This work focuses on smart agent simulation, i.e.,
simulating the behavior of traffic participants such as vehicles, pedestrians, and cyclists in the digital
world, which is critical for efficiently validating and iterating behavioral policies for AVs.
A good simulator should be realistic, matching the real-world distribution of multi-agent behaviors to
support the assessment of AVs’ ability to coexist with humans safely. To this end, researchers started
*Equal contribution.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

