I NSTRUCT G2I: Synthesizing Images from Multimodal
Attributed Graphs

Bowen Jin, Ziqi Pang, Bingjun Guo, Yu-Xiong Wang, Jiaxuan You, Jiawei Han
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
bowenj4@illinois.edu
https://instructg2i.github.io/

Abstract
In this paper, we approach an overlooked yet critical task Graph2Image: generating images from multimodal attributed graphs (MMAGs). This task poses
significant challenges due to the explosion in graph size, dependencies among
graph entities, and the need for controllability in graph conditions. To address
these challenges, we propose a graph context-conditioned diffusion model called
I NSTRUCT G2I. I NSTRUCT G2I first exploits the graph structure and multimodal
information to conduct informative neighbor sampling by combining personalized
page rank and re-ranking based on vision-language features. Then, a GraphQFormer encoder adaptively encodes the graph nodes into an auxiliary set of
graph prompts to guide the denoising process of diffusion. Finally, we propose
graph classifier-free guidance, enabling controllable generation by varying the
strength of graph guidance and multiple connected edges to a node. Extensive
experiments conducted on three datasets from different domains demonstrate
the effectiveness and controllability of our approach. The code is available at
https://github.com/PeterGriffinJin/InstructG2I.

1

Introduction

This paper investigates an overlooked yet critical source of information for image generation: the
pervasive graph-structured relationships of real-world entities. In contrast to the commonly adopted
language conditioning in models represented by Stable Diffusion [32], graph connections have
combinatorial complexity and cannot be trivially captured as a sequence. Such graph-structured
relationships among the entities are expressed through “Multimodal Attributed Graphs” (MMAGs),
where nodes are enriched with image and text information. As a concrete example (Figure 1(a)),
the graph of artworks is constructed by nodes containing images (pictures) and texts (titles), as well
as edges corresponding to shared genre and authorship. Such a graph uniquely depicts a piece of
artwork by its thousands of peers in the graph, beyond the mere description of language.
To this end, we formulate and propose the Graph2Image challenge, requiring the generative models
to synthesize image conditioning on both text descriptions and graph connections of a node. This task
featuring the image generation on MMAGs is well-grounded in real-world applications. For instance,
generating an image for a virtual artwork node in the art MMAG is akin to creating virtual artwork
according to the nuanced styles of artists and genres [5] (as in Figure 1(a)). Similarly, generating an
image for a product node connected to other products through co-purchase links in an e-commerce
MMAG equates to recommending future products for users [24]. Without surprise, our exploiting
the graph-structured information indeed improves the consistency of generated images compared to
models only using texts or images as conditioning (Figure 1(b)).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

