Cross-modal Representation Flattening for
Multi-modal Domain Generalization
Yunfeng Fan1 , Wenchao Xu1,∗, Haohao Wang2 , Song Guo3
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
yunfeng.fan@connnect.polyu.hk, wenchao.xu@polyu.edu.hk,
hz_wang@hust.edu.cn, songguo@cse.ust.hk
1

Abstract
Multi-modal domain generalization (MMDG) requires that models trained on multimodal source domains can generalize to unseen target distributions with the same
modality set. Sharpness-aware minimization (SAM) is an effective technique for
traditional uni-modal domain generalization (DG), however, with limited improvement in MMDG. In this paper, we identify that modality competition and discrepant
uni-modal flatness are two main factors that restrict multi-modal generalization.
To overcome these challenges, we propose to construct consistent flat loss regions
and enhance knowledge exploitation for each modality via cross-modal knowledge
transfer. Firstly, we turn to the optimization on representation-space loss landscapes instead of traditional parameter space, which allows us to build connections
between modalities directly. Then, we introduce a novel method to flatten the
high-loss region between minima from different modalities by interpolating mixed
multi-modal representations. We implement this method by distilling and optimizing generalizable interpolated representations and assigning distinct weights for
each modality considering their divergent generalization capabilities. Extensive
experiments are performed on two benchmark datasets, EPIC-Kitchens and HumanAnimal-Cartoon (HAC), with various modality combinations, demonstrating the
effectiveness of our method under multi-source and single-source settings. Our
code is open-sourced 1 .

1

Introduction

Domain generalization (DG) aims to equip models with the ability to perform robustly across unseen
domains when trained only on several source domains, thereby enhancing their adaptability and
utility in real-world scenarios, such as autonomous driving [1, 2], medical health [3, 4], person
re-identification [5, 6] and brain-computer interface [7, 8]. Methods on how to deal with domain
shift have been extensively proposed in the literature, including domain alignment [9], meta-learning
[10, 11], data augmentation [12, 13] and ensemble learning [14]. Despite the remarkable achievements
of DG in recent years, most of research still focuses on uni-modal data. The emergence of various
multi-modal datasets and the requirement to complete a variety of multi-modal tasks highlight the
need to address multi-modal domain generalization (MMDG) problems.
Due to the complementary information that exists between modalities, MMDG aims to exploit
generalization capabilities from each modality simultaneously. According to [15], the generalization
capability of deep neural networks (DNNs) is closely related to their flatness of minima on loss
∗
1

Corresponding Author.
https://github.com/fanyunfeng-bit/Cross-modal-Representation-Flattening-for-MMDG

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

