Complete Graphical Criterion for Sequential
Covariate Adjustment in Causal Inference

Yonghan Jung1∗ Min Woo Park2 Sanghack Lee2∗
1
Purdue University 2 Seoul National University
jung222@purdue.edu {alsdn0110,sanghack}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Covariate adjustment, also known as back-door adjustment, is a fundamental tool in
causal inference. Although a sound and complete graphical identification criterion,
known as adjustment criterion (Shpitser et al., 2010), exists for static contexts,
sequential contexts present challenges. Current practices, such as the sequential
back-door adjustment (Pearl and Robins, 1995) or multi-outcome sequential backdoor adjustment (Jung et al., 2020), are sound but incomplete; i.e., there are
graphical scenarios where the causal effect is expressible via covariate adjustment,
yet these criteria do not cover. In this paper, we exemplify this incompleteness and
then present the sequential adjustment criterion, a sound and complete criterion for
sequential covariate adjustment. We provide a constructive sequential adjustment
criterion that identifies a set that satisfies the sequential adjustment criterion if
and only if the causal effect can be expressed as a sequential covariate adjustment.
Finally, we present an algorithm for identifying a minimal sequential covariate
adjustment set, which optimizes efficiency by ensuring that no unnecessary vertices
are included.

1

Introduction

P
Covariate adjustment (also known as the back-door adjustment (Pearl, 1995)) — z P (y | x, z)P (z)
where Z is a set of covariates, X is a treatment, and Y is an outcome—is one of the most prevalent
method for estimating causal effects from observational data. Sufficient conditions have been
established to determine whether causal effects can be expressed through covariate adjustment. For
example, back-door criterion (BD) (Pearl, 1995) is a sound graphical condition to determine if the
causal effect is expressible as a covariate adjustment. Shpitser et al. (2010) extended the BD and
developed a sound and complete graphical criterion, called adjustment criterion (AC). van der Zander
et al. (2014) and Maathuis and Colombo (2015) extended the adjustment criterion to general graph
classes including directed acyclic graphs, maximal ancestral graphs, or partial ancestral graphs. The
criterion from Maathuis and Colombo (2015) is sound but incomplete, which Perkovic et al. (2018)
addressed by developing a sound and complete adjustment criterion.
Beyond such static adjustment criterion, sequential covariate adjustment (also known as the g-formula
(Robins, 1986)) has been studied. For example, sequential back-door (SBD) criterion (Pearl and
Robins, 1995) extended the back-door criterion to the sequential setting. Since the SBD criterion
only considered a single outcome, Jung et al. (2020) extended it to accommodate multiple outcome
variables called multi-outcome sequential back-door (mSBD) criterion. However, as detailed in
Sec. 3, this criterion is not complete; i.e., there exists an example where the mSBD criterion is not
satisfied, but the causal effect is identified as a sequential covariate adjustment. While it is known
that the sequential ignorability condition (Richardson and Robins, 2013) is sound and complete for
∗

Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

