GenRec: Unifying Video Generation and Recognition
with Diffusion Models
Zejia Weng1,2 , Xitong Yang3 , Zhen Xing1,2 , Zuxuan Wu1,2† , Yu-Gang Jiang1,2
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland

Abstract
Video diffusion models are able to generate high-quality videos by learning strong
spatial-temporal priors on large-scale datasets. In this paper, we aim to investigate whether such priors derived from a generative process are suitable for video
recognition, and eventually joint optimization of generation and recognition. Building upon Stable Video Diffusion, we introduce GenRec, the first unified framework trained with a random-frame conditioning process so as to learn generalized
spatial-temporal representations. The resulting framework can naturally supports
generation and recognition, and more importantly is robust even when visual inputs contain limited information. Extensive experiments demonstrate the efficacy
of GenRec for both recognition and generation. In particular, GenRec achieves
competitive recognition performance, offering 75.8% and 87.2% accuracy on
SSV2 and K400, respectively. GenRec also performs the best on class-conditioned
image-to-video generation, achieving 46.5 and 49.3 FVD scores on SSV2 and
EK-100 datasets. Furthermore, GenRec demonstrates extraordinary robustness
in scenarios that only limited frames can be observed. Code will be available at
https://github.com/wengzejia1/GenRec.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have achieved significant success in the field of image and video generation over
the past few years. A variety of generative tasks have been revolutionized by using diffusion models
trained on Internet-scale data, such as text-to-image generation [33, 30], image editing [23], and more
recently, text-to-video generation [15, 2, 52] and text&image-to-video generation [56, 18, 21]. The
excellent generative capabilities of diffusion models suggest that informative representation is learned
during the generative training and strong visual priors are captured by the backbone models [9,
43, 6]. Therefore, recent work has explored leveraging the image diffusion models for image
understanding tasks, including image recognition [9, 8], object detection [7, 57], segmentation [55]
and correspondence mining [39]. However, the capability of video diffusion models to effectively
capture spatial-temporal information is not fully understood, and their potential for downstream video
understanding tasks remains under-explored.
In this paper, we study the potential of video diffusion models [28, 1, 27], particularly the unconditioned or image-conditioned models, for video understanding by addressing the three key problems:
(a) Does the backbone model trained for video generation extract effective spatial-temporal representations for semantic video recognition? (b) Can we retain the video generation capability by jointly
optimizing generation and recognition? (c) Will such a unified training framework further benefit
video understanding, especially in noisy scenarios where only limited frames are available [3, 25].
†

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

