Needle In A Multimodal Haystack

Weiyun Wang1,2 , Shuibo Zhang2 , Yiming Ren3,2 , Yuchen Duan4,2 , Tiantong Li3,2 ,
Shuo Liu2 , Mengkang Hu7,2 , Zhe Chen5,2 , Kaipeng Zhang2 , Lewei Lu6 , Xizhou Zhu3,2,6 ,
Ping Luo7,2 , Yu Qiao2 , Jifeng Dai3,2 , Wenqi Shao2B , Wenhai Wang4,2B
1

Fudan University, 2 OpenGVLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory, 3 Tsinghua University,
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 5 Nanjing University,
6
SenseTime Research, 7 The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
With the rapid advancement of multimodal large language models (MLLMs),
their evaluation has become increasingly comprehensive. However, understanding long multimodal content, as a foundational ability for real-world applications, remains underexplored. In this work, we present Needle In A Multimodal
Haystack (MM-NIAH), the first benchmark specifically designed to systematically evaluate the capability of existing MLLMs to comprehend long multimodal
documents. Our benchmark includes three types of evaluation tasks: multimodal
retrieval, counting, and reasoning. In each task, the model is required to answer
the questions according to different key information scattered throughout the given
multimodal document. Evaluating the leading MLLMs on MM-NIAH, we observe that existing models still have significant room for improvement on these
tasks, especially on vision-centric evaluation. We hope this work can provide a
platform for further research on long multimodal document comprehension and
contribute to the advancement of MLLMs. Code and benchmark are released at
https://github.com/OpenGVLab/MM-NIAH.

1

Introduction

With the advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7], significant strides have
also been made in Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17]
across various vision-language tasks. Recently, some MLLMs [18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24] have
begun to explore a wider range of applications, from basic dialogue to document-level long context
understanding, by leveraging interleaved image-text documents as training corpora. However, due to
the limitations of context window size, most existing MLLMs struggle to effectively comprehend
long-context multimodal documents. In addition, the lack of appropriate evaluation benchmarks is a
key factor that limits the further development of MLLMs for long-context multimodal understanding.
As shown in Fig. 1a, existing benchmarks for multi-image comprehensions, such as SEED-Bench2 [25] and BLINK [26], consist of short contexts, which fail to evaluate the capability for longcontext document comprehension. Additionally, benchmarks for video question answering, like
MVBench [27], concentrate on vision-dominant video understanding rather than text-dominant
multimodal document understanding (see Fig. 1b). Constructing benchmarks for multimodal longcontext comprehension poses several challenges. (1) The lack of high-quality multimodal long-context
datasets, which require substantial resources and effort to create; (2) The need for evaluation questions
that are sufficiently complex to require models to integrate information from the entire long context
B Corresponding Authors: wangwenhai@pjlab.org.cn; shaowenqi@pjlab.org.cn
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

