Grasp as You Say:
Language-guided Dexterous Grasp Generation

Yi-Lin Wei1 , Jian-Jian Jiang1 , Chengyi Xing2 , Xian-Tuo Tan1 ,
Xiao-Ming Wu1 , Hao Li2 , Mark Cutkosky2 , Wei-Shi Zheng1,3†
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Stanford University, USA
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
{weiylin5, jiangjj35, tanxt23, wuxm65}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
{chengyix, li2053, cutkosky}@stanford.edu
wszheng@ieee.org
https://isee-laboratory.github.io/DexGYS/

Abstract
This paper explores a novel task “Dexterous Grasp as You Say” (DexGYS), enabling robots to perform dexterous grasping based on human commands expressed
in natural language. However, the development of this field is hindered by the
lack of datasets with natural human guidance; thus, we propose a language-guided
dexterous grasp dataset, named DexGYSNet, offering high-quality dexterous grasp
annotations along with flexible and fine-grained human language guidance. Our
dataset construction is cost-efficient, with the carefully-design hand-object interaction retargeting strategy, and the LLM-assisted language guidance annotation
system. Equipped with this dataset, we introduce the DexGYSGrasp framework
for generating dexterous grasps based on human language instructions, with the
capability of producing grasps that are intent-aligned, high quality and diversity.
To achieve this capability, our framework decomposes the complex learning process into two manageable progressive objectives and introduce two components
to realize them. The first component learns the grasp distribution focusing on
intention alignment and generation diversity. And the second component refines
the grasp quality while maintaining intention consistency. Extensive experiments
are conducted on DexGYSNet and real world environments for validation.

1

Introduction

Enabling robots to perform dexterous grasping based on human language instructions is essential
within the robotics and deep learning communities, offering promising applications in industrial
production and domestic collaboration scenarios.
With the advancements in data-driven deep learning and the availability of large-scale datasets,
robot dexterous grasp methods achieve impressive performance [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. While previous
approaches focus on the grasp stability, they have not fully utilized the potential of dexterous hands for
intentional, human-like grasping. Recent studies, known as task-oriented [8] and functional dexterous
grasping [9, 10], aim to generate grasps based on specific tasks or functionality of objects. However,
these approaches often depend on predefined, fixed and limited tasks or functions, restricting their
flexibility and hindering natural human-robot interaction.
In this paper, we explore a novel task, “Dexterous Grasp as You Say” (DexGYS), as shown in
Figure 1. We can see that natural human guidance is provided in this task, and can be utilized to
†

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

