Navigating the Maze of Explainable AI: A Systematic
Approach to Evaluating Methods and Metrics

Lukas Klein 1,2,3
1

Carsten Lüth 1,3,4 Udo Schlegel 5 Till Bungert 1,3,4
Mennatallah El-Assady 2 Paul Jäger 1,3

German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Interactive Machine Learning Group, Germany
2
ETH Zürich, Department of Computer Science, Switzerland
3
Helmholtz Imaging, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Germany
4
Heidelberg University, Department of Computer Science, Germany
5
University of Konstanz, Department of Computer Science, Germany
lukas.klein@dkfz.de

Abstract
Explainable AI (XAI) is a rapidly growing domain with a myriad of proposed
methods as well as metrics aiming to evaluate their efficacy. However, current
studies are often of limited scope, examining only a handful of XAI methods and
ignoring underlying design parameters for performance, such as the model architecture or the nature of input data. Moreover, they often rely on one or a few metrics
and neglect thorough validation, increasing the risk of selection bias and ignoring
discrepancies among metrics. These shortcomings leave practitioners confused
about which method to choose for their problem. In response, we introduce LATEC,
a large-scale benchmark that critically evaluates 17 prominent XAI methods using
20 distinct metrics. We systematically incorporate vital design parameters like
varied architectures and diverse input modalities, resulting in 7,560 examined
combinations. Through LATEC, we showcase the high risk of conflicting metrics
leading to unreliable rankings and consequently propose a more robust evaluation
scheme. Further, we comprehensively evaluate various XAI methods to assist
practitioners in selecting appropriate methods aligning with their needs. Curiously,
the emerging top-performing method, Expected Gradients, is not examined in any
relevant related study. LATEC reinforces its role in future XAI research by publicly
releasing all 326k saliency maps and 378k metric scores as a (meta-)evaluation
dataset. The benchmark is hosted at: https://github.com/IML-DKFZ/latec.

1

Introduction

Explainable AI (XAI) methods have become essential tools in numerous domains, allowing for a
better understanding of complex machine learning decisions. The most prevalent XAI methods are
saliency maps [58]. As the diversity and abundance of proposed saliency XAI methods expand
alongside their growing popularity, ensuring their reliability becomes paramount [2]. Given that
there is no clear “ground truth” for individual explanations (e.g., discussed in Adebayo et al. [3]),
the trustworthiness of XAI methods is typically determined by examining three key criteria: their
accuracy in reflecting a model’s reasoning (“faithfulness”) [8, 55], their stability under small changes
(“robustness”) [71, 5], and the understandability of their explanations (“complexity”) [12, 10].
Beyond qualitative assessment of saliency maps such as in Doshi-Velez and Kim [21], Ribeiro et al.
[50], Shrikumar et al. [57], which can be influenced by human biases and does not scale to large-scale
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

