IDGen: Item Discrimination Induced
Prompt Generation for LLM Evaluation

Fan Lin1,2∗, Shuyi Xie2∗ , Yong Dai2∗ ,
Wenlin Yao2 , Tianjiao Lang2 , Yu Zhang1†.
1
SouthEast University, Nanjing, China, 2 Tencent, Shenzhen, China

Abstract
As Large Language Models (LLMs) grow increasingly adept at managing complex
tasks, the evaluation set must keep pace with these advancements to ensure it
remains sufficiently discriminative. Item Discrimination (ID) theory, which is
widely used in educational assessment, measures the ability of individual test
items to differentiate between high and low performers. Inspired by this theory,
we propose an ID-induced prompt synthesis framework for evaluating LLMs to
ensure the evaluation set can continually update and refine according to model
abilities. Our data synthesis framework prioritizes both breadth and specificity.
It can generate prompts that comprehensively evaluate the capabilities of LLMs
while revealing meaningful performance differences between models, allowing for
effective discrimination of their relative strengths and weaknesses across various
tasks and domains. To produce high-quality data, we incorporate a self-correct
mechanism into our generalization framework, and develop two models to predict
prompt discrimination and difficulty score to facilitate our data synthesis framework,
contributing valuable tools to evaluation data synthesis research. We apply our
generated data to evaluate five SOTA models. Our data achieves an average score
of 51.92, accompanied by a variance of 10.06. By contrast, previous works (i.e.,
SELF-INSTRUCT and WizardLM) obtain an average score exceeding 67, with
a variance below 3.2. The results demonstrate that the data generated by our
framework is more challenging and discriminative compared to previous works.
We will release a dataset of over 3,000 carefully crafted prompts to facilitate
evaluation research of LLMs. 3

1

Introduction

The rapid advancement of LLMs, such as OpenAI’s ChatGPT, Anthropic’s Claude [1], and Facebook’s
LLaMA series [2, 3], has revolutionized the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP) in recent
years. Model evaluation plays a crucial role in the development of LLMs, as it guides the iterative
improvements during training, enables the selection of the best model variations, and facilitates
their deployment in real-world applications [4, 5]. Recognizing the importance of model evaluation,
researchers have made great efforts to create comprehensive benchmarks. Many of these benchmarks
consist of multiple-choice questions in English [6, 7], as the results are easily obtainable through string
matching. Some researchers [8] have extended these datasets to non-English languages, adapting the
content to new linguistic and cultural contexts through translation. These datasets often result from
either extensive public data collection or through manual or model-assisted data synthesis processes.
∗

Equal contribution. Work done during the internship of Lin at Tencent.
Corresponding author.
3
Code and data are available at https://github.com/DUTlf/IDGen.git

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

