Conjugated Semantic Pool Improves OOD Detection
with Pre-trained Vision-Language Models

Mengyuan Chen
MAIS, Institute of Automation, CAS
School of Artificial Intelligence, UCAS
chenmengyuan2021@ia.ac.cn

Junyu Gao∗
MAIS, Institute of Automation, CAS
School of Artificial Intelligence, UCAS
junyu.gao@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Changsheng Xu∗
MAIS, Institute of Automation, CAS
School of Artificial Intelligence, UCAS
Pengcheng Laboratory
csxu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
A straightforward pipeline for zero-shot out-of-distribution (OOD) detection involves selecting potential OOD labels from an extensive semantic pool and then
leveraging a pre-trained vision-language model to perform classification on both
in-distribution (ID) and OOD labels. In this paper, we theorize that enhancing
performance requires expanding the semantic pool, while increasing the expected
probability of selected OOD labels being activated by OOD samples, and ensuring low mutual dependence among the activations of these OOD labels. A
natural expansion manner is to adopt a larger lexicon; however, the inevitable
introduction of numerous synonyms and uncommon words fails to meet the above
requirements, indicating that viable expansion manners move beyond merely selecting words from a lexicon. Since OOD detection aims to correctly classify
input images into ID/OOD class groups, we can "make up" OOD label candidates
which are not standard class names but beneficial for the process. Observing
that the original semantic pool is comprised of unmodified specific class names,
we correspondingly construct a conjugated semantic pool (CSP) consisting of
modified superclass names, each serving as a cluster center for samples sharing
similar properties across different categories. Consistent with our established
theory, expanding OOD label candidates with the CSP satisfies the requirements
and outperforms existing works by 7.89% in FPR95. Codes are available in
https://github.com/MengyuanChen21/NeurIPS2024-CSP.

1

Introduction

The efficacy of machine learning models typically diminishes on out-of-distribution (OOD) data,
thereby underscoring the significance of flagging OOD samples for caution. Traditional visual OOD
detection methods are typically driven by a single image modality, leaving the rich information in
textual labels untapped [21, 34, 63, 56, 11]. As pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) develop,
employing textual information in visual OOD detection has become a burgeoning paradigm [15, 12,
40, 58, 64, 43, 29]. A straightforward pipeline [29] is to select potential OOD labels from a semantic
pool and leverages the text-image alignment ability of a pre-trained VLM. Specifically, potential
OOD labels are selected from WordNet [39] based on their similarities to the In-distribution (ID)
label space, and then CLIP [47] is employed to classify input images into ID/OOD class groups.
∗

Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

