Deep Correlated Prompting for Visual Recognition
with Missing Modalities

Lianyu Hu,Tongkai Shi, Wei Feng, Fanhua Shang, Liang Wan∗
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
{hly2021,stk,wfeng,fhshang,lwan}@tju.edu.cn
https://github.com/hulianyuyy/Deep_Correlated_Prompting

Abstract
Large-scale multimodal models have shown excellent performance over a series of
tasks powered by the large corpus of paired multimodal training data. Generally,
they are always assumed to receive modality-complete inputs. However, this simple
assumption may not always hold in the real world due to privacy constraints or
collection difficulty, where models pretrained on modality-complete data easily
demonstrate degraded performance on missing-modality cases. To handle this issue,
we refer to prompt learning to adapt large pretrained multimodal models to handle
missing-modality scenarios by regarding different missing cases as different types
of input. Instead of only prepending independent prompts to the intermediate layers,
we present to leverage the correlations between prompts and input features and
excavate the relationships between different layers of prompts to carefully design
the instructions. We also incorporate the complementary semantics of different
modalities to guide the prompting design for each modality. Extensive experiments
on three commonly-used datasets consistently demonstrate the superiority of our
method compared to the previous approaches upon different missing scenarios.
Plentiful ablations are further given to show the generalizability and reliability of
our method upon different modality-missing ratios and types.

1

Introduction

Our human beings typically perceive information of multiple modalities such as visual, linguistic
and audio signals to understand the world, where different signals drawn from various perspectives
are inherently complementary. Thus, modeling and coordinating multimodal information is of
great value for large-scale models to reason about real-world scenarios. Recently, multimodal
models [34, 1, 22, 29] have developed fast powered by the large collection of multimodal data
pairs and evolution of model architectures (e.g., Transformer [31]), which demonstrate promising
performance across a series of downstream tasks, such as cross-model retrieval [8, 18, 29, 9], image
captioning [24, 1] and image/video generation [23, 22]. Supported by their large capacity and general
knowledge acquired by training upon web-scale data, these models have been more and more applied
to daily work in our life (e.g., GPT-4 is used by millions of people).
However, there exist two major concerns that may hinder these impressive models from broader
applications. First, a common assumption of previous methods is that the input data is modalitycomplete, which may not always hold in the real world due to privacy considerations, collection
difficulty and security issues [27, 19]. When an input modality is missing in general real-world
conditions, the performance of these models usually degrades a lot (regardless of training or testing
settings) [27], which is easily influenced by the input completeness. Second, these large models
are usually parameter-abundant [1, 6, 21] and require heavy computations [30, 45] to pretrain and
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

