The Limits of Transfer Reinforcement Learning with
Latent Low-rank Structure
Tyler Sam
Cornell University
tjs355@cornell.edu

Yudong Chen
University of Wisconsin-Madison
yudong.chen@wisc.edu

Christina Lee Yu
Cornell University
cleeyu@cornell.edu

Abstract
Many reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms are too costly to use in practice due
to the large sizes S, A of the problem’s state and action space. To resolve this issue,
we study transfer RL with latent low rank structure. We consider the problem of
transferring a latent low rank representation when the source and target MDPs
have transition kernels with Tucker rank (S, d, A), (S, S, d), (d, S, A), or (d, d, d).
In each setting, we introduce the transfer-ability coefficient α that measures the
difficulty of representational transfer. Our algorithm learns latent representations in
each source MDP and then exploits the linear structure to remove the dependence
on S, A, or SA in the target MDP regret bound. We complement our positive results
with information theoretic lower bounds that show our algorithms (excluding the
(d, d, d) setting) are minimax-optimal with respect to α.

1

Introduction

Recently, reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have exhibited great success on a variety of
problems, e.g., video games [31], robotics [21], etc, that require a series of decisions over time.
These algorithms can be used on any problem that can be modeled as a Markov decision process
(MDP) with state space cardinality S, action space cardinality A, and horizon H. However, RL
algorithms’ practical application is constrained due to the large amounts of data and computational
resources required to train models that outperform heuristic approaches. This limitation arises due to
the inefficient scaling of RL algorithms with respect to the size of the state and action spaces. In an
online setting where rewards are incurred during the process of learning, we may want to minimize
the regret, or the difference between the reward of an optimal policy and the reward collected by
the learner. In the finite-horizon
online episodic MDP setting with K episodes, any algorithm must
√
incur regret of at least Ω̃( SAH 3 K) [18]. This regret bound is often too large in practice as many
problems modeled as MDPs have large state and action spaces. For example, in the Atari games [25],
the state space is the set of all images as a vector of pixel values.
One way to remove the dependence on the state or action space in RL algorithms is to leverage
existing data or models from similar problems through transfer learning. In the transfer learning
setting for MDPs, the learner can interact with or query from multiple source MDPs, which the
learner can utilize at low-cost to improve their performance in the target MDP [27]. The efficacy
of the transfer learning approach depends both on the similarity between the source and the target
MDPs, and how information is utilized when transferring knowledge between the source and target.
As feature learning in MDPs is difficult and expensive, reusing learned low rank representations can
greatly improve the performance on new problems. Thus, in this work, we consider the setting when
the source and target MDPs exhibit latent low rank structure, and the transfer RL task is to learn
latent low rank representation of the state, action, or state-action pair from the source MDPs, and
subsequently use it to improve learning on the target MDP. If the learned representations were perfect,
then one could remove all dependence on the state space or action space in the learning task on the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

