MultiOrg: A Multi-rater Organoid-detection Dataset

Christina Bukas1 , Harshavardhan Subramanian1 , Fenja See2 , Carina Steinchen2
Ivan Ezhov3 , Gowtham Boosarpu4 , Sara Asgharpour2 , Gerald Burgstaller2
Mareike Lehmann2,4 , Florian Kofler1,5,6 , Marie Piraud1
1
Helmholtz AI, Computational Health Center (CHC), Helmholtz Munich, Neuherberg, Germany
2
Institute of Lung Health and Immunity (LHI), Comprehensive Pneumology Center (CPC),
Helmholtz Munich, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Neuherberg, Germany
3
Technical University of Munich, School of Computation, Information and Technology,
Department of Computer Science, Munich, Germany
4
Institute for Lung Research, Philipps-University Marburg, Universities of Giessen and
Marburg Lung Center, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Marburg, Germany
5
Department of Neuroradiology, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
6
Department of Quantitative Biomedicine, University of Zurich, Switzerland.
{christina.bukas,mareike.lehmann,marie.piraud}@helmholtz-munich.de

Abstract
High-throughput image analysis in the biomedical domain has gained significant
attention in recent years, driving advancements in drug discovery, disease prediction, and personalized medicine. Organoids, specifically, are an active area
of research, providing excellent models for human organs and their functions.
Automating the quantification of organoids in microscopy images would provide
an effective solution to overcome substantial manual quantification bottlenecks,
particularly in high-throughput image analysis. However, there is a notable lack of
open biomedical datasets, in contrast to other domains, such as autonomous driving,
and, notably, only few of them have attempted to quantify annotation uncertainty.
In this work, we present MultiOrg a comprehensive organoid dataset tailored for
object detection tasks with uncertainty quantification. This dataset comprises over
400 high-resolution 2d microscopy images and curated annotations of more than
60,000 organoids. Most importantly, it includes three label sets for the test data,
independently annotated by two experts at distinct time points. We additionally
provide a benchmark for organoid detection, and make the best model available
through an easily installable, interactive plugin for the popular image visualization
tool Napari, to perform organoid quantification.

1

Introduction

Accurate and efficient object detection methods in biomedical image analysis are crucial for research
and diagnostics. Designing such methods requires diverse, well-curated datasets of high-resolution
images reflecting real-world complexities. The annotation of biomedical datasets represents a laborintensive and subjective process relying on human experts. This work represents a multi-rater organoid
dataset designed for benchmarking object detection algorithms in a label-noise-aware setting that
embraces the subjectivity in labels.
Organoids are miniature three-dimensional (3d) models of organs grown in vitro from stem cells.
They mimic the complexity and functionality of real organs, making them extremely valuable for
medical research, disease modeling, and drug testing (Barkauskas et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2020;
Ingber, 2022). Organoid cultures, deriving from healthy and diseased or genetically engineered cells
and undergoing different conditions and treatments, can be grown for several months (Youk et al.,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

