Evidential Stochastic Differential Equations for
Time-Aware Sequential Recommendation

Krishna Prasad Neupane, Ervine Zheng, Qi Yu∗
Rochester Institute of Technology
{kpn3569,mxz5733,qi.yu}@rit.edu

Abstract
Sequential recommender systems are designed to capture users’ evolving interests
over time. Existing methods typically assume a uniform time interval among
consecutive user interactions and may not capture users’ continuously evolving
behavior in the short and long term. In reality, the actual time intervals of user interactions vary dramatically. Consequently, as the time interval between interactions
increases, so does the uncertainty in user behavior. Intuitively, it is beneficial to establish a correlation between the interaction time interval and the model uncertainty
to provide effective recommendations. To this end, we formulate a novel Evidential
Neural Stochastic Differential Equation (E-NSDE) to seamlessly integrate NSDE
and evidential learning for effective time-aware sequential recommendations. The
NSDE enables the model to learn users’ fine-grained time-evolving behavior by
capturing continuous user representation while evidential learning quantifies both
aleatoric and epistemic uncertainties considering interaction time interval to provide model confidence during prediction. Furthermore, we derive a mathematical
relationship between the interaction time interval and model uncertainty to guide
the learning process. Experiments on real-world data demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed method compared to the SOTA methods.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems have been used in various domains, such as e-commerce, entertainment,
education, health care, social media, and many more [32, 11, 2, 44]. In these domains, users’
interests and behaviors dynamically evolve over time. Therefore, capturing users’ evolving behavior
plays an essential role in effective recommendations. Various sequential recommendation models
[35, 38, 40, 43] have been proposed accordingly. They mainly leverage the user’s historical sequential
interactions and aim to predict the next item that a user likes to interact with. These methods
usually assume a uniform time interval of user interactions. However, in reality, the actual time
interval between two consecutive interactions may vary dramatically, and a large time interval may
be accompanied by a change in users’ preferences.
The unrealistic assumption of a uniform interaction interval could significantly impact the
model’s capability to capture users’ continuously evolving behavior and subsequently hurt
the recommendation performance. Table 1 provides an illustrative example of the issues as
outlined above. In this example, we follow the
standard sequential recommendation similar to
[19, 35] by predicting the next item considering
∗

Table 1: Impact of interaction interval
Interaction
6→7
13 → 14
116 → 117
150 → 151

Interval (Seconds)
44
623,591
62
896,291

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

Ranking ↓
BERT4Rec

E-NSDE

4
24
6
56

4
16
3
18

