ColJailBreak: Collaborative Generation and Editing
for Jailbreaking Text-to-Image Deep Generation

Yizhuo Ma1 , Shanmin Pang1,∗ , Qi Guo1 , Tianyu Wei1 , Qing Guo2,∗
1
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
IHPC and CFAR, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
{yizhuoma@stu., pangsm@, gq19990314@stu., Yangyy0318@stu.}xjtu.edu.cn, tsingqguo@ieee.org

Abstract
The commercial text-to-image deep generation models (e.g. DALL·E) can produce
high-quality images based on input language descriptions. These models incorporate a black-box safety filter to prevent the generation of unsafe or unethical content,
such as violent, criminal, or hateful imagery. Recent jailbreaking methods generate adversarial prompts capable of bypassing safety filters and producing unsafe
content, exposing vulnerabilities in influential commercial models. However, once
these adversarial prompts are identified, the safety filter can be updated to prevent
the generation of unsafe images. In this work, we propose an effective, simple,
and difficult-to-detect jailbreaking solution: generating safe content initially with
normal text prompts and then editing the generations to embed unsafe content.
The intuition behind this idea is that the deep generation model cannot reject safe
generation with normal text prompts, while the editing models focus on modifying
the local regions of images and do not involve a safety strategy. However, implementing such a solution is non-trivial, and we need to overcome several challenges:
how to automatically confirm the normal prompt to replace the unsafe prompts,
and how to effectively perform editable replacement and naturally generate unsafe
content. In this work, we propose the collaborative generation and editing for
jailbreaking text-to-image deep generation (ColJailBreak), which comprises three
key components: adaptive normal safe substitution, inpainting-driven injection
of unsafe content, and contrastive language-image-guided collaborative optimization. We validate our method on three datasets and compare it to two baseline
methods. Our method could generate unsafe content through two commercial deep
generation models including GPT-4 and DALL·E 2. 1
Warning: This paper contains model outputs that are offensive in nature.

1

Introduction

Text-to-image models (T2I models), such as DALL·E 2[29], Stable Diffusion[32], among others[17,
24, 35, 46], have demonstrated remarkable proficiency in generating high-quality images. These
models adeptly generate realistic and detailed images by learning from and capturing rich visual
information based on text descriptions, thereby playing a pivotal role in various fields, including
visual art creation, game design, and data enhancement. However, T2I models also open up new
avenues for potential abuse, particularly in generating inappropriate or Not-Safe-For-Work (NSFW)
content[31, 38]. For instance, malicious actors may employ T2I models to generate content that is
violent, pornographic, discriminatory, or otherwise sensitive and unsafe[10, 47].
∗
1

Corresponding authors
Our code is available at https://github.com/tsingqguo/coljailbreak

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

