Universal Sample Coding

Szymon Kobus
Dep. of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Imperial College London
szymon.kobus17@imperial.ac.uk

Tze-Yang Tung
Not Diamond
tze-yang@notdiamond.ai

Deniz Gündüz
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Imperial College London
d.gunduz@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
In this work, we study the problem of communicating multiple samples from an
unknown probability distribution using as few bits as possible. This is a generalization of the channel simulation problem, which has recently found applications
and achieved state of the art results in realistic image compression, neural network
compression, and communication-efficient federated learning. In this problem,
the transmitter wants the receiver to generate multiple independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) samples from a target distribution P , while the transmitter and
the receiver have access to independent samples from a reference distribution Q.
The core idea is to employ channel simulation in multiple rounds while updating
the reference distribution Q after each round in order to reduce the KL-divergence
between P and Q, thereby reducing the communication cost in subsequent rounds.
We derive a lower bound on the expected communication cost and construct a
practical algorithm that achieves the lower bound up to a multiplicative constant.
We then employ this algorithm in communication-efficient federated learning, in
which model updates correspond to samples from a distribution, and achieve a 37%
reduction in the communication load. To further highlight the potential of sample
communication for generative models, we show that the number of bits needed to
communicate samples from a large language model can be reduced by up to 16
times, compared to entropy-based data compression.

1

Introduction

Let P be a probability distribution known to an encoder, and we would like to obtain a sample X ∼ P
at a remote decoder - what is the minimal number of bits required to communicate from the encoder
to the decoder? The obvious procedure is to sample from P at the encoder, compress it, and transmit
over the network. The minimum number of bits necessary for lossless transmission of this sample is
bounded by the entropy of distribution P , H(P ) bits per sample. However, unlike in classical source
coding theory, in our problem, the decoder is interested only in drawing of ‘an arbitrary’ sample from
P , and not the particular sample generated at the encoder. If the encoder and decoder have access to
samples from another reference distribution Q, then it is possible for the encoder to communicate a
sample from P using approximately DKL (P ∥Q) bits instead. Thus, if we are able to sample from a
distribution Q that is close to P , the bandwidth required to communicate a sample from P can be
greatly reduced. This is known as ‘channel simulation’ or ‘reverse Shannon coding’ (Bennett et al.,
2002; Cuff, 2008; Harsha et al., 2010).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

