Cross-video Identity Correlating for Person
Re-identification Pre-training

Jialong Zuo 1
Haoyu Wang 2

Ying Nie 2
Hanyu Zhou 1
Huaxin Zhang 1
2
1
Tianyu Guo
Nong Sang
Changxin Gao 1∗

1

National Key Laboratory of Multispectral Information Intelligent Processing Technology,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
{jlongzuo, cgao}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent researches have proven that pre-training on large-scale person images
extracted from internet videos is an effective way in learning better representations
for person re-identification. However, these researches are mostly confined to
pre-training at the instance-level or single-video tracklet-level. They ignore the
identity-invariance in images of the same person across different videos, which
is a key focus in person re-identification. To address this issue, we propose a
Cross-video Identity-cOrrelating pre-traiNing (CION) framework. Defining a
noise concept that comprehensively considers both intra-identity consistency and
inter-identity discrimination, CION seeks the identity correlation from cross-video
images by modeling it as a progressive multi-level denoising problem. Furthermore,
an identity-guided self-distillation loss is proposed to implement better large-scale
pre-training by mining the identity-invariance within person images. We conduct
extensive experiments to verify the superiority of our CION in terms of efficiency
and performance. CION achieves significantly leading performance with even
fewer training samples. For example, compared with the previous state-of-theart [9], CION with the same ResNet50-IBN achieves higher mAP of 93.3% and
74.3% on Market1501 and MSMT17, while only utilizing 8% training samples.
Finally, with CION demonstrating superior model-agnostic ability, we contribute a
model zoo named ReIDZoo to meet diverse research and application needs in this
field. It contains a series of CION pre-trained models with spanning structures and
parameters, totaling 32 models with 10 different structures, including GhostNet,
ConvNext, RepViT, FastViT and so on.

1

Introduction

Person re-identification (ReID), which aims to identify and match a target person across different
camera views, is becoming increasingly influential in widespread applications, such as criminal
tracking and missing individual searching. Although current ReID methods [38, 2, 21, 22, 39]
have achieved significant progress for the past few years, it has become evident through recent
research advancements that the mere development of sophisticated specialist algorithms has already
encountered a performance bottleneck.
Meanwhile, pre-training on large-scale images [1, 5, 17, 29] has shown great success to further
improve model performance in the field of general vision. However, due to the significant domain
gap, these pre-trained models can only provide very limited improvement for person re-identification.
Therefore, with the vast amount of person-containing videos available on the internet, some researches [10, 11, 53, 9, 44, 27] turn to exploring the potential of pre-training on person images
extracted from such videos and demonstrate encouraging results. However, due to the unavailability
of identity labels for such extracted person images, these pre-training methods are confined to learning
representations at the instance-level or single-video tracklet-level, as shown in Fig. 1
∗

Corresponding Author. Project Link: https://github.com/Zplusdragon/CION_ReIDZoo

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

