RandNet-Parareal: a time-parallel PDE solver using
Random Neural Networks
Guglielmo Gattiglio
Department of Statistics
University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK
Guglielmo.Gattiglio@warwick.ac.uk
Lyudmila Grigoryeva∗
Faculty of Mathematics and Statistics
University of St. Gallen
Rosenbergstrasse 20, CH-9000 St. Gallen, Switzerland
Lyudmila.Grigoryeva@unisg.ch
Massimiliano Tamborrino
Department of Statistics
University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK
Massimiliano.Tamborrino@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
Parallel-in-time (PinT) techniques have been proposed to solve systems of timedependent differential equations by parallelizing the temporal domain. Among
them, Parareal computes the solution sequentially using an inaccurate (fast) solver,
and then “corrects” it using an accurate (slow) integrator that runs in parallel across
temporal subintervals. This work introduces RandNet-Parareal, a novel method to
learn the discrepancy between the coarse and fine solutions using random neural
networks (RandNets). RandNet-Parareal achieves speed gains up to x125 and x22
compared to the fine solver run serially and Parareal, respectively. Beyond theoretical guarantees of RandNets as universal approximators, these models are quick to
train, allowing the PinT solution of partial differential equations on a spatial mesh
of up to 105 points with minimal overhead, dramatically increasing the scalability
of existing PinT approaches. RandNet-Parareal’s numerical performance is illustrated on systems of real-world significance, such as the viscous Burgers’ equation,
the Diffusion-Reaction equation, the two- and three-dimensional Brusselator, and
the shallow water equation.

1

Introduction

Parallel-in-time (PinT) methods have been used to overcome the saturation of well-established spatial
parallelism approaches for solving (prohibitively expensive) initial value problems (IVPs) for ordinary
and partial differential equations (ODEs and PDEs), described by systems of d ∈ N ODEs (and
∗

Honorary Associate Professor, Department of Statistics, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK.
(Lyudmila.Grigoryeva@warwick.ac.uk)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

