Rethinking Optimal Transport in
Offline Reinforcement Learning

Arip Asadulaev1,2
1

AIRI

2

Rostislav Korst3 Alexander Korotin4,1 Vage Egiazarian5,6
Andrey Filchenkov2 Evgeny Burnaev4,1

ITMO

3

MIPT

4

Skoltech

5

Yandex

6

HSE University

asadulaev@airi.net

Abstract
We propose a novel algorithm for offline reinforcement learning using optimal
transport. Typically, in offline reinforcement learning, the data is provided by
various experts and some of them can be sub-optimal. To extract an efficient policy,
it is necessary to stitch the best behaviors from the dataset. To address this problem,
we rethink offline reinforcement learning as an optimal transport problem. And
based on this, we present an algorithm that aims to find a policy that maps states to
a partial distribution of the best expert actions for each given state. We evaluate
the performance of our algorithm on continuous control problems from the D4RL
suite and demonstrate improvements over existing methods.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has shown remarkable progress in complex tasks such as strategy
games [51], robotics [37], and dialogue systems [39]. In online RL, agents operate in the environment
and receive rewards that are used to update policies. However, in some domains, such as healthcare,
industrial control, and robotics interactions with the environment can be costly and risky. For these
reasons, offline RL algorithms that use historical data of expert interactions with the environment are
more applicable. Given only a dataset of experiences, offline RL algorithms learn a policy without
any online actions [33].
Due to the off-policy nature of offline RL, naive training of online RL algorithms in offline settings
does not provide effective solutions [33]. This is primarily due to a distribution shift between the
learned and the behavior policy [15], which causes the instability of the critic function during offpolicy evaluation. To solve this problem and make actions of the learned policy more similar to the
one on which critic function was trained, a Behavior Cloning (BC) objectives was proposed [52, 33].
As an example of BC loss, Optimal Transport (OT) [50] distance has been introduced for RL. This
application of OT is particularly relevant because by minimizing the OT distance between policies, we
can efficiently clone the behavior [52, 11, 40, 34, 20, 9, 35]. But there is another problem, in offline
RL, the dataset often consists of various experts demonstrations. Some of these demonstrations may
be incorrect, or efficient only for certain parts of the environment. Consequently, cloning the behavior
policy in such scenarios may limit policy improvement [30]. To solve these types of problems, RL
algorithms need to apply stitching, which means that the algorithm selects the best action for each
state and recombines different trajectories provided by multiple experts [30].
In our paper, we rethink OT as a framework for offline reinforcement learning that aims to stitch the
best trajectories, rather than clone the policy. Unlike previous OT-based approaches in RL, we do
not introduce a new OT-based regularization or a reward function [11, 40]. Instead, we propose a
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

