On the Limitations of Fractal Dimension
as a Measure of Generalization
Charlie B. Tan∗
University of Oxford

Inés García-Redondo∗
Imperial College London

Michael M. Bronstein
University of Oxford / Aithyra

Qiquan Wang∗
Imperial College London

Anthea Monod
Imperial College London

Abstract
Bounding and predicting the generalization gap of overparameterized neural networks remains a central open problem in theoretical machine learning. There is
a recent and growing body of literature that proposes the framework of fractals
to model optimization trajectories of neural networks, motivating generalization
bounds and measures based on the fractal dimension of the trajectory. Notably,
the persistent homology dimension has been proposed to correlate with the generalization gap. This paper performs an empirical evaluation of these persistent
homology-based generalization measures, with an in-depth statistical analysis. Our
study reveals confounding effects in the observed correlation between generalization and topological measures due to the variation of hyperparameters. We also
observe that fractal dimension fails to predict generalization of models trained from
poor initializations. We lastly reveal the intriguing manifestation of model-wise
double descent in these topological generalization measures. Our work forms a
basis for a deeper investigation of the causal relationships between fractal geometry,
topological data analysis, and neural network optimization.

1

Introduction

Deep learning enjoys widespread empirical success despite limited theoretical support. Measures
from statistical learning theory, such as Rademacher complexity [Bartlett and Mendelson, 2002] and
VC-Dimension [Hastie et al., 2009], indicate that without explicit regularization, over-parameterized
models will generalize poorly. In contrast, neural networks are able to generalize strongly despite
having sufficient capacity to simply memorize their training data [Liu et al., 2020, Zhang et al.,
2021]. Remarkably, neural networks often exhibit improved generalization for increases in capacity
[Nakkiran et al., 2021]. Describing the generalization behavior of neural networks therefore requires
the development of novel learning theory [Zhang et al., 2021]. Ultimately, deep learning theory seeks
to define generalization bounds for given experimental configurations [Valle-Pérez and Louis, 2020],
such that the generalization error of a given model can be bounded and predicted [Jiang et al., 2020].
Generalization is typically attributed to the implicit bias of gradient-based optimization. A number of
works have considered the geometry of generalizing solutions within parameter space [Dinh et al.,
2017, Garipov et al., 2018], and the bias of optimization methods towards such solutions [He et al.,
2019, Izmailov et al., 2018]. Şimşekli et al. [2020] propose random fractal structure for neural
network optimization trajectories and compute generalization bounds based on fractal dimensions.
However, this work requires rigid topological and statistical conditions on the optimization trajectory
as well as the learning algorithm. Subsequent work by Birdal et al. [2021] proposes the use of
∗
Equal contribution. Correspondence to: charlie.tan@cs.ox.ac.uk, i.garcia-redondo22@imperial.ac.uk,
qiquan.wang17@imperial.ac.uk, michael.bronstein@cs.ox.ac.uk, a.monod@imperial.ac.uk. Code provided for
all experiments at: https://github.com/charliebtan/fractal_dimensions

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

