The Tree Autoencoder Model,
with Application to Hierarchical Data Visualization

Miguel Á. Carreira-Perpiñán
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, Merced
mcarreira-perpinan@ucmerced.edu

Kuat Gazizov
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, Merced
kgazizov@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
We propose a new model for dimensionality reduction, the PCA tree, which works
like a regular autoencoder, having explicit projection and reconstruction mappings.
The projection is effected by a sparse oblique tree, having hard, hyperplane splits
using few features and linear leaves. The reconstruction mapping is a set of local linear mappings. Thus, rather than producing a global map as in t-SNE and
other methods, which often leads to distortions, it produces a hierarchical set of
local PCAs. The use of a sparse oblique tree and of PCA in its leaves makes
the overall model interpretable and very fast to project or reconstruct new points.
Joint optimization of all the parameters in the tree is a nonconvex nondifferentiable problem. We propose an algorithm that is guaranteed to decrease the error
monotonically and which scales to large datasets without any approximation. In
experiments, we show PCA trees are able to identify a wealth of low-dimensional
and cluster structure in image and document datasets.

1 Introduction
As a form of exploratory data analysis, dimensionality reduction (DR) for visualization seeks to provide a representation of a dataset in dimension at most 3 (we will focus on 2D) that, combined with
the human visual ability to pick patterns, is able to find structure of interest in a high-dimensional
dataset. Many DR methods have been proposed over the years. Currently, t-SNE [40] and PCA are
the most popular choices and have seen widespread application in many areas.
Here we advocate for a different approach, that of hierarchical local linear projections, which we
call the PCA tree. Hierarchical DR is not new, but what is new is our definition of the model as
a certain type of tree autoencoder and our algorithm to learn it by minimizing the reconstruction
error in a self-supervised way, which brings considerable advantages in interpretability and training
and inference time. From the outset, we acknowledge that DR is a hard, ill-defined problem that
no single technique can solve satisfactorily. In reducing a dataset to 2D we necessarily have to lose
information and produce artifacts. Indeed, the distortions of t-SNE and their impact on applications
have been well documented [6, 22]. However, the PCA tree provides significant, complementary
advantages over previous methods.
Firstly, PCA trees are practical and intuitive to use. They optimize the reconstruction error, which
has a clear meaning. They do not require a neighborhood graph (and perplexity parameter, etc.),
which is tricky to estimate so it captures manifold structure, and computationally very costly. The
model, a tree autoencoder (see later), directly defines nonlinear out-of-sample mappings (encoder
and decoder). Its hyperparameters are natural: the depth ∆ of the tree, which directly controls the
resolution (number of scatterplots and reconstruction error), and the sparsity λ, which helps to interpret the tree decision nodes. Inference on a tree (encoding or decoding) is extremely fast. Training
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

