Get Rid of Isolation: A Continuous Multi-task
Spatio-Temporal Learning Framework

Zhongchao Yi1 , Zhengyang Zhou1,2,3,∗, Qihe Huang1 , Yanjiang Chen1 ,
Liheng Yu1 , Xu Wang1,2 , Yang Wang1,2,∗
1
University of Science and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei, China
2
Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, USTC, Suzhou, China
3
State Key Laboratory of Resources and Environmental Information System, Beijing, China
{zhongchaoyi, hqh, yjchen, yuliheng}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
{wx309, zzy0929∗, angyan∗ }@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Spatiotemporal learning has become a pivotal technique to enable urban intelligence. Traditional spatiotemporal models mostly focus on a specific task by assuming a same distribution between training and testing sets. However, given that urban
systems are usually dynamic, multi-sourced with imbalanced data distributions,
current specific task-specific models fail to generalize to new urban conditions and
adapt to new domains without explicitly modeling interdependencies across various
dimensions and types of urban data. To this end, we argue that there is an essential
to propose a Continuous Multi-task Spatio-Temporal learning framework (CMuST)
to empower collective urban intelligence, which reforms the urban spatiotemporal
learning from single-domain to cooperatively multi-dimensional and multi-task
learning. Specifically, CMuST proposes a new multi-dimensional spatiotemporal interaction network (MSTI) to allow cross-interactions between context and
main observations as well as self-interactions within spatial and temporal aspects
to be exposed, which is also the core for capturing task-level commonality and
personalization. To ensure continuous task learning, a novel Rolling Adaptation
training scheme (RoAda) is devised, which not only preserves task uniqueness
by constructing data summarization-driven task prompts, but also harnesses correlated patterns among tasks by iterative model behavior modeling. We further
establish a benchmark of three cities for multi-task spatiotemporal learning, and
empirically demonstrate the superiority of CMuST via extensive evaluations on
these datasets. The impressive improvements on both few-shot streaming data and
new domain tasks against existing SOAT methods are achieved. Code is available
at https://github.com/DILab-USTCSZ/CMuST.

1

Introduction

Spatiotemporal learning has become a pivotal technique to enable smart and convenient urban lives,
benefiting diverse urban applications from intra-city travelling, environment controlling to locationbased POI recommendation, and injecting the vitality into urban economics. Existing spatiotemporal
learning solutions [19, 9, 38, 40, 51, 42, 37, 10, 8] focus on improving performances of a task-specific
model independently where these methods devise various spatial learning blocks [44, 8, 43] and
temporal dependency extraction modules [40, 34, 9] to model the spatiotemporal heterogeneity.
Actually, urban spatiotemporal systems are usually highly dynamic with emerging new data modality,
leading to serious generalization issue on both data pattern and task adaptation. As illustrated in
∗

Yang Wang and Zhengyang Zhou are corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

