Optimistic Critic Reconstruction and Constrained
Fine-Tuning for General Offline-to-Online RL

Qin-Wen Luo∗ 1 , Ming-Kun Xie∗ 1,2 , Ye-Wen Wang∗ 1 , Sheng-Jun Huang† 1
1
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
2
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Tokyo, Japan
{luoqw8,linuswangg,huangsj}@nuaa.edu.cn
ming-kun.xie@riken.jp

Abstract
Offline-to-online (O2O) reinforcement learning (RL) provides an effective means
of leveraging an offline pre-trained policy as initialization to improve performance
rapidly with limited online interactions. Recent studies often design fine-tuning
strategies for a specific offline RL method and cannot perform general O2O learning from any offline method. To deal with this problem, we disclose that there are
evaluation and improvement mismatches between the offline dataset and the online
environment, which hinders the direct application of pre-trained policies to online
fine-tuning. In this paper, we propose to handle these two mismatches simultaneously, which aims to achieve general O2O learning from any offline method to
any online method. Before online fine-tuning, we re-evaluate the pessimistic critic
trained on the offline dataset in an optimistic way and then calibrate the misaligned
critic with the reliable offline actor to avoid erroneous update. After obtaining an
optimistic and and aligned critic, we perform constrained fine-tuning to combat
distribution shift during online learning. We show empirically that the proposed
method can achieve stable and efficient performance improvement on multiple simulated tasks when compared to the state-of-the-art methods. The implementation is
available at https://github.com/QinwenLuo/OCR-CFT.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) aims to learn a policy from a fixed dataset without additional
interactions with the environment. This characteristic makes it particularly promising for critical
applications such as healthcare decision-making [39], human-AI coordination [14] and autonomous
driving [8]. Generally, the performance of the learned policy relies on the quality of the dataset.
Given that the offline data is limited, fine-tuning the policy through interactions with the environment
is still necessary to achieve favorable performance. Consequently, offline-to-online (O2O) RL tends
to achieve faster performance improvements based on better initializations.
To effectively fine-tune offline policies, O2O methods are typically designed based on specific offline
RL algorithms. Existing methods can be roughly divided into two groups according to the base offline
methods they use. The first group relies on policy constraint methods. These approaches aim to
improve online performance by either adaptively adjusting constraints [5, 52, 43] or directly applying
offline algorithms to online fine-tuning [32, 20]. Unfortunately, these methods often suffer from
inefficient performance improvement due to restricted action exploration caused by policy constraints.
The second group builds on value regularization methods. These methods aim to prevent excessively
∗
†

The authors contribute equally.
Correspondence to: Sheng-Jun Huang (huangsj@nuaa.edu.cn).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

