Slight Corruption in Pre-training Data
Makes Better Diffusion Models
Hao Chen1∗, Yujin Han2 , Diganta Misra1,3 , Xiang Li1 , Kai Hu1 ,
Difan Zou2 , Masashi Sugiyama4,5 , Jindong Wang6†, Bhiksha Raj1,7
1

Carnegie Mellon University, 2 The University of Hong Kong,3 Mila - Quebec AI Institute,
4
RIKEN AIP, 5 The University of Tokyo, 6 William & Mary, 7 MBZUAI

Abstract
Diffusion models (DMs) have shown remarkable capabilities in generating realistic
high-quality images, audios, and videos. They benefit significantly from extensive
pre-training on large-scale datasets, including web-crawled data with paired data
and conditions, such as image-text and image-class pairs. Despite rigorous filtering,
these pre-training datasets often inevitably contain corrupted pairs where conditions
do not accurately describe the data. This paper presents the first comprehensive
study on the impact of such condition corruption in pre-training data of DMs.
We synthetically corrupt ImageNet-1K and CC3M to pre-train and evaluate over
50 conditional DMs. Our empirical findings reveal that various types of slight
corruption in pre-training can significantly enhance the quality, diversity, and
fidelity of the generated images across different DMs, both during pre-training
and downstream adaptation stages. Theoretically, we consider a Gaussian mixture
model and prove that slight corruption in the condition leads to higher entropy and a
reduced 2-Wasserstein distance to the ground truth of the data distribution generated
by the corruptly trained DMs. Inspired by our analysis, we propose a simple method
to improve the training of DMs on practical datasets by adding condition embedding
perturbations (CEP). CEP significantly improves the performance of various DMs
in both pre-training and downstream tasks. We hope that our study provides new
insights into understanding the data and pre-training processes of DMs and all
models are released at https://huggingface.co/DiffusionNoise.

1

Introduction

Recently, diffusion models (DMs) have been demonstrating unprecedented capabilities in generating
high-quality, realistic, and faithful images [1–5], audios [6, 7], and videos [8]. In addition, they
exhibit impressive conditional generation results [9–11] when trained with classifier-free guidance
[12]. The successes of DMs are often attributed to the massive pre-training on large-scale datasets
consisting of paired data and conditions [13–17], which also empowered and facilitated numerous
downstream applications and personalization of pre-trained models, such as subject-driven generation
[18, 19], controllable conditional generation [20–22], and synthetic data training [23–25].
The large-scale pre-training datasets of paired data and conditions are usually web-crawled. For
example, Stable Diffusion [26] was pre-trained on LAION-2B [17], which contains billion-scale
image-text pairs collected from Common Crawl [27]. Despite the heavy filtering mechanisms used in
collecting pre-training datasets [17, 28], they still inevitably contain corrupted pairs where conditions
do not correctly describe or match the data, such as corrupted labels and texts [29–32]. While
large-scale datasets are necessary for DMs to perform well, the corruption may lead to unexpected
∗
†

haoc3@andrew.cmu.edu
Correspondence to: jwang80@wm.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

