DrivAerNet++: A Large-Scale Multimodal Car
Dataset with Computational Fluid Dynamics
Simulations and Deep Learning Benchmarks

Mohamed Elrefaie∗
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
mohamed.elrefaie@mit.edu
Angela Dai
Department of Computer Science
Technical University of Munich
Garching, 85748 Germany
angela.dai@tum.de

Florin Morar
Morphing and Optimization Solutions
BETA CAE SYSTEMS USA, Inc
Farmington Hills, MI 48334 USA
fmorar@beta-cae.us
Faez Ahmed
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
faez@mit.edu

Abstract
We present DrivAerNet++, the largest and most comprehensive multimodal dataset
for aerodynamic car design. DrivAerNet++ comprises 8,000 diverse car designs
modeled with high-fidelity computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations. The
dataset includes diverse car configurations such as fastback, notchback, and estateback, with different underbody and wheel designs to represent both internal
combustion engines and electric vehicles. Each entry in the dataset features detailed 3D meshes, parametric models, aerodynamic coefficients, and extensive flow
and surface field data, along with segmented parts for car classification and point
cloud data. This dataset supports a wide array of machine learning applications
including data-driven design optimization, generative modeling, surrogate model
training, CFD simulation acceleration, and geometric classification. With more
than 39 TB of publicly available engineering data, DrivAerNet++ fills a significant gap in available resources, providing high-quality, diverse data to enhance
model training, promote generalization, and accelerate automotive design processes. Along with rigorous dataset validation, we also provide ML benchmarking
results on the task of aerodynamic drag prediction, showcasing the breadth of
applications supported by our dataset. This dataset is set to significantly impact
automotive design and broader engineering disciplines by fostering innovation and
improving the fidelity of aerodynamic evaluations. Dataset and code available at:
https://github.com/Mohamedelrefaie/DrivAerNet

1

Introduction

Car design is a complex and iterative process requiring close collaboration between designers, who
focus on aesthetics, and engineers, who ensure the design meets performance constraints. One
of the key challenges is achieving a balance between aesthetic appeal and aerodynamic efficiency,
which directly impacts fuel consumption. With stricter fuel consumption regulations for internal
combustion engine (ICE) cars and increased range requirements for battery-powered electric vehicles
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

