Autoformalizing Mathematical Statements by
Symbolic Equivalence and Semantic Consistency

Zenan Li1∗ Yifan Wu2∗ Zhaoyu Li3 Xinming Wei2
Fan Yang4 Xian Zhang4 Xiaoxing Ma1
1
State Key Lab of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
Peking University, 3 University of Toronto
4
Microsoft Research Asia
lizn@smail.nju.edu.cn, yifan.wu@stu.pku.edu.cn,
zhxian@microsoft.com, xxm@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Autoformalization, the task of automatically translating natural language descriptions into a formal language, poses a significant challenge across various domains,
especially in mathematics. Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs)
have unveiled their promising capabilities to formalize even competition-level math
problems. However, we observe a considerable discrepancy between pass@1 and
pass@k accuracies in LLM-generated formalizations. To address this gap, we
introduce a novel framework that scores and selects the best result from k autoformalization candidates based on two complementary self-consistency methods:
symbolic equivalence and semantic consistency. Elaborately, symbolic equivalence
identifies the logical homogeneity among autoformalization candidates using automated theorem provers, and semantic consistency evaluates the preservation of
the original meaning by informalizing the candidates and computing the similarity
between the embeddings of the original and informalized texts. Our extensive
experiments on the MATH and miniF2F datasets demonstrate that our approach
significantly enhances autoformalization accuracy, achieving up to 0.22-1.35x relative improvements across various LLMs and baseline methods. The data and code
are available at https://github.com/Miracle-Messi/Isa-AutoFormal

1

Introduction

Autoformalization is the automated process of translating from natural language expressions into a
formal language [1–4]. Successful autoformalization can alleviate the demand for extensive human
expertise and reduce the substantial manual formalization efforts [5–8], as well as fundamentally
bridging the gap between natural (or so-called “informal”) and formal languages [9], which potentially
catalyzes breakthroughs in many fields such as mathematical theorem proving, software/hardware
verification, and autonomous planning [10–14]. Despite decades of research, the practical application
of autoformalization remains limited because traditional methods often necessitate either predefined
domain-specific languages or hard-coded translation rules [15–18].
Recently, large language models (LLMs) have shown promising performance in autoformalization,
especially in formalizing mathematical statements [19–21]. For instance, using Codex [22] with few
shot examples can achieve a 25.3% success rate in formalizing high-school level problems from
the MATH [23] dataset. Nevertheless, the autoformalization capability of LLMs has not been fully
exploited. As shown in Figure 1, even advanced LLMs like GPT-4 [24] struggle with translating a
∗

Equal contribution. This work was partially done during Zenan’s and Yifan’s internships at MSRA.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

