Hyperbolic Embeddings of Supervised Models

Richard Nock
Google Research
richardnock@google.com

Ehsan Amid
Google DeepMind
eamid@google.com

Alexander Soen
RIKEN AIP
Australian National University
alexander.soen@anu.edu.au

Frank Nielsen
Sony CS Labs, Inc.
frank.nielsen@acm.org
Manfred K. Warmuth
Google Research
manfred@google.com

Abstract
Models of hyperbolic geometry have been successfully used in ML for two main
tasks: embedding models in unsupervised learning (e.g. hierarchies) and embedding
data. To our knowledge, there are no approaches that provide embeddings for
supervised models; even when hyperbolic geometry provides convenient properties
for expressing popular hypothesis classes, such as decision trees (and ensembles).
In this paper, we propose a full-fledged solution to the problem in three independent
contributions. The first linking the theory of losses for class probability estimation
to hyperbolic embeddings in Poincaré disk model. The second resolving an issue for
an easily interpretable, unambiguous embedding of (ensembles of) decision trees
in this model. The third showing how to smoothly tweak the Poincaré hyperbolic
distance to improve its encoding and visualization properties near the border of the
disk, a crucial region for our application, while keeping hyperbolicity. This last
step has substantial independent interest as it is grounded in a generalization of
Leibniz-Newton’s fundamental Theorem of calculus.

1

Introduction

Models of hyperbolic geometry have been successfully used to embed hierarchies, i.e. tree-based
structures [14, 20, 38, 36]. Through the property of low-distortion hyperbolic embeddings [30],
symbolic (hierarchies) and numeric (quality metrics) properties of unsupervised learning models can
be represented in an accurate and interpretable manner [29]. When it comes to supervised learning,
the current trend involves embedding data in a hyperbolic space, with models trained on the now
hyperbolic data [9, 15, 8, 11]. It is important to note that none of these supervised methods embed
models. Indeed, the focus of the prior literature is to learn supervised models from hyperbolic data,
rather than representing supervised models in hyperbolic geometry. This is in stark contrast to the
unsupervised usage described, where the (tree-based) structural properties of unsupervised models
are directly exploited for good embeddings. This hints at benefits which can be used in the supervised
case, especially for popular supervised models which are (structurally) tree-based.
Our paper proposes a full-fledged solution for this problem, in three independent contributions.
The first focuses on the numerical part (quality metrics) of the embedding and its link with supervised
losses: to provide a natural way of embedding classification and the confidence of prediction, we
show a link between training with the log-loss (posterior estimation) or logistic loss (real-valued
classification) and hyperbolic distances computation in the Poincaré disk.
The second focuses on the symbolic part (hierarchies) of the embeddings for a popular kind of
supervised of models: decision trees (and ensembles). Unlike for unsupervised learning, we show
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

