Utilizing Image Transforms and Diffusion Models for
Generative Modeling of Short and Long Time Series

Ilan Naiman∗ Nimrod Berman∗ Itai Pemper Idan Arbiv Gal Fadlon Omri Azencot
Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of The Negev
{naimani, bermann, itaipem, arbivid, galfad}@post.bgu.ac.il
azencot@cs.bgu.ac.il

Abstract
Lately, there has been a surge in interest surrounding generative modeling of
time series data. Most existing approaches are designed either to process short
sequences or to handle long-range sequences. This dichotomy can be attributed
to gradient issues with recurrent networks, computational costs associated with
transformers, and limited expressiveness of state space models. Towards a unified generative model for varying-length time series, we propose in this work to
transform sequences into images. By employing invertible transforms such as
the delay embedding and the short-time Fourier transform, we unlock three main
advantages: i) We can exploit advanced diffusion vision models; ii) We can remarkably process short- and long-range inputs within the same framework; and iii)
We can harness recent and established tools proposed in the time series to image
literature. We validate the effectiveness of our method through a comprehensive
evaluation across multiple tasks, including unconditional generation, interpolation,
and extrapolation. We show that our approach achieves consistently state-of-the-art
results against strong baselines. In the unconditional generation tasks, we show
remarkable mean improvements of 58.17% over previous diffusion models in the
short discriminative score and 132.61% in the (ultra-)long classification scores.
Code is at https://github.com/azencot-group/ImagenTime.

1

Introduction

Generative modeling of real-world information such as images [72], texts [13], and other types of
data [99, 55, 8] has drawn increased attention recently. In this work, we focus on the setting of
generative modeling (GM) of general time series information. There are several factors that govern
the complexity required from sequential data generators including the sequence length, its number of
features, the appearance of transient vs. long-range effects, and more. Existing generative models for
time series are typically designed either for multivariate short-term sequences [44, 19] or univariate
long-range data [103], often resulting in separate and completely different neural network frameworks.
However, a natural question arises: Can one develop a unified framework equipped to handle both
high-dimensional short sequences and low-dimensional long time series?
Earlier approaches for processing time series based on recurrent neural networks (RNNs) handled
short sequences well [62, 3, 43, 76], however, modeling long-range dependencies turned out to
be significantly more challenging. Particularly, RNNs suffer from the well-known vanishing and
exploding gradient problem [9, 70] that prevents them from learning complex patterns and long-range
dependencies. To address long-context modeling and memory retention, extensive research is devoted
to approaches such as long short-term memory (LSTM) models [42], unitary evolution RNNs [5]
∗

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

