A robust inlier identification algorithm for point cloud
registration via ℓ0-minimization
Xiuchuan Tang2 ∗

Yinuo Jiang1∗

1

Cheng Cheng1

Ye Yuan1†

School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
{jiangyinuo,c_cheng,yye}@hust.edu.cn; tangxiuchuan@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
https://github.com/HAIRLAB/inlier-identification-via-l0

Abstract
Correspondences in point cloud registration are prone to outliers, significantly
reducing registration accuracy and highlighting the need for precise inlier identification. In this paper, we propose a robust inlier identification algorithm for
point cloud registration by reformulating the conventional registration problem
as an alignment error ℓ0 -minimization problem. The ℓ0 -minimization problem is
formulated for each local set, where those local sets are built on a compatibility
graph of input correspondences. To resolve the ℓ0 -minimization, we develop a
novel two-stage decoupling strategy, which first decouples the alignment error into
a rotation fitting error and a translation fitting error. Second, null-space matrices are
employed to decouple inlier identification from the estimation of rotation and translation respectively, thereby applying Bayes Theorem to ℓ0 -minimization problems
and solving for fitting errors. Correspondences with the smallest errors are identified as inliers to generate a transformation hypothesis for each local set. The best
hypothesis is selected to perform registration. We demonstrate that the proposed
inlier identification algorithm is robust under high outlier ratios and noise through
experiments. Extensive results on the KITTI, 3DMatch, and 3DLoMatch datasets
demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance compared to
both traditional and learning-based methods in various indoor and outdoor scenes.

1

Introduction

Point cloud registration is a fundamental task in vision and robotics, playing an important role in
many applications such as 3D perception and reconstruction, simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM), and autonomous driving [38, 45, 33]. It aims to align two partially overlapping point
clouds by estimating a rigid transformation between them. A common registration pipeline involves
extracting features through 3D local descriptors, establishing correspondences based on feature
matching, and estimating the rigid transformation [38, 41]. However, due to the less effectiveness of
3D local descriptors in feature extraction [39], correspondences established through feature matching
are prone to outliers, resulting in inaccurate registration.
Recent works in point could registration with outliers can generally be categorized into three groups:
learning-based, geometry-only, and optimization-based methods. Learning-based methods [1, 8, 19]
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

