Unlocking the Capabilities of Thought:
A Reasoning Boundary Framework to Quantify and
Optimize Chain-of-Thought

Qiguang Chen† Libo Qin‡∗ Jiaqi Wang♢ Jinxuan Zhou‡ Wanxiang Che†∗
†
Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval
†
Harbin Institute of Technology
‡
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University
♢
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{qgchen,car}@ir.hit.edu.cn, lbqin@csu.edu.cn

Abstract
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning has emerged as a promising approach for
enhancing the performance of large language models (LLMs) on complex reasoning
tasks. Recently, a series of studies attempt to explain the mechanisms underlying
CoT, aiming to deepen the understanding of its efficacy. Nevertheless, the existing
research faces two major challenges: (1) a lack of quantitative metrics to assess
CoT capabilities and (2) a dearth of guidance on optimizing CoT performance.
Motivated by this, in this work, we introduce a novel reasoning boundary framework
(RBF) to address these challenges. To solve the lack of quantification, we first define
a reasoning boundary (RB) to quantify the upper-bound of CoT and establish a
combination law for RB, enabling a practical quantitative approach applicable to
various real-world CoT tasks. To address the lack of optimization, we propose three
categories of RBs. We further optimize these categories with combination laws
focused on RB promotion and reasoning path optimization for CoT improvement.
Through extensive experiments on 27 models and 5 tasks, the study validates the
existence and rationality of the proposed framework. Furthermore, it explains the
effectiveness of 10 CoT strategies and guides optimization from two perspectives.
We hope this work can provide a comprehensive understanding of the boundaries
and optimization strategies for reasoning in LLMs. Our code and data are available
at https://github.com/LightChen233/reasoning-boundary.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated increasing capabilities and
applications across various tasks [Zhao et al., 2023, Chang et al., 2023, Pan et al., 2023, Qin
et al., 2024a]. Notably, advanced LLMs, such as GPT [Brown et al., 2020, OpenAI, 2022, 2023],
PaLM [Anil et al., 2023] and LlaMa [Touvron et al., 2023a,b, Meta, 2024] series have demonstrated
emergent capabilities, particularly like Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [Nye et al., 2022, Wei et al., 2022].
This methodology enables models to verbalize step-by-step reasoning, thereby enhancing prediction
accuracy by basing decisions on the logical rationale [Wei et al., 2022, Kojima et al., 2022, Hu et al.,
2024, Qin et al., 2023, Zhuang et al., 2023, Chen et al., 2024a].
Recently, some research in the literature has begun to investigate the mechanism of CoT to enhance
the understanding of its operational nature. To this end, Madaan et al. [2023] and Wang et al. [2023a]
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

