Voila-A: Aligning Vision-Language Models with User’s
Gaze Attention
Kun Yan1∗ ,

Zeyu Wang2∗, Lei Ji3 , Yuntao Wang2 , Nan Duan3 , Shuai Ma1†
1
SKLSDE Lab, Beihang University
2
Key Laboratory of Pervasive Computing, Tsinghua University
3
Microsoft Research
kunyan@buaa.edu.cn, wang-zy23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
mashuai@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
In recent years, the integration of vision and language understanding has led to
significant advancements in artificial intelligence, particularly through VisionLanguage Models (VLMs). However, existing VLMs face challenges in handling
real-world applications with complex scenes and multiple objects, as well as
aligning their focus with the diverse attention patterns of human users. In this
paper, we introduce gaze information, feasibly collected by AR or VR devices,
as a proxy for human attention to guide VLMs and propose a novel approach,
Voila-A, for gaze alignment to enhance the interpretability and effectiveness of
these models in real-world applications. First, we collect hundreds of minutes of
gaze data to demonstrate that we can mimic human gaze modalities using localized
narratives. We then design an automatic data annotation pipeline utilizing GPT4 to generate the VOILA-COCO dataset. Additionally, we innovate the Voila
Perceiver modules to integrate gaze information into VLMs while preserving their
pre-trained knowledge. We evaluate Voila-A using a hold-out validation set and a
newly collected VOILA-GAZE test set, which features real-life scenarios captured
with a gaze-tracking device. Our experimental results demonstrate that Voila-A
significantly outperforms several baseline models. By aligning model attention with
human gaze patterns, Voila-A paves the way for more intuitive, user-centric VLMs
and fosters engaging human-AI interaction across a wide range of applications.
Our code is available at https://github.com/naykun/Voila-A

1

Introduction

The integration of vision and language understanding has witnessed significant advancements in recent
years, particularly through the development of Vision-Language Models (VLMs). These models
have demonstrated remarkable performance in various tasks, such as visual question answering,
image captioning, and visual storytelling, among others. Although VLMs exhibit strong performance
in various tasks, their applicability in everyday scenarios is hindered by their limited alignment
with human users’ focus. This misalignment leads to suboptimal performance and decreased user
satisfaction. Current VLMs’ inability to process these intentional modalities results in imprecise
and unhelpful responses. As demonstrated in Figure 1, a user’s intent can be communicated through
∗
†

equal contribution
corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

