Semantic Feature Learning for Universal
Unsupervised Cross-Domain Retrieval

Lixu Wang
Northwestern University, IL, USA
lixuwang2025@u.northwestern.edu

Xinyu Du
General Motors Global R&D, MI,USA
xinyu.du@gm.com

Qi Zhu
Northwestern University, IL, USA
qzhu@northwestern.edu

Abstract
Cross-domain retrieval (CDR) is finding increasingly broad applications across
various domains. However, existing efforts have several major limitations, with the
most critical being their reliance on accurate supervision. Recent studies thus focus
on achieving unsupervised CDR, but they typically assume that the category spaces
across domains are identical, an assumption that is often unrealistic in real-world
scenarios. This is because only through dedicated and comprehensive analysis
can the category composition of a data domain be obtained, which contradicts
the premise of unsupervised scenarios. Therefore, in this work, we introduce the
problem of Universal Unsupervised Cross-Domain Retrieval (U2 CDR) for the first
time and design a two-stage semantic feature learning framework to address it. In
the first stage, a cross-domain unified prototypical structure is established under the
guidance of an instance-prototype-mixed contrastive loss and a semantic-enhanced
loss, to counteract category space differences. In the second stage, through a
modified adversarial training mechanism, we ensure minimal changes for the
established prototypical structure during domain alignment, enabling more accurate
nearest-neighbor searching. Extensive experiments across multiple datasets and
scenarios, including close-set, partial, and open-set CDR, demonstrate that our
approach significantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art CDR methods and
other related methods in solving U2 CDR challenges.

1

Introduction

In real-world applications, cross-domain retrieval (CDR) finds extensive utility across diverse domains,
such as image search [1], product recommendations [2], and artistic creation [3, 4]. However, the
efficacy of current CDR methods relies heavily on accurate and sufficient supervision [5, 6] to provide
categorical or cross-domain pairing labels. The acquisition of such information demands costly
efforts and resources. Hence, there is an urgent need to develop unsupervised CDR techniques.
For the regular Unsupervised CDR (UCDR) problem [7, 8], there are two data domains with semantic
similarity but distinct characteristics: the query domain and the retrieval domain. Despite the absence
of category labels, regular UCDR typically assumes that the label spaces of both domains are identical.
However, in real-world applications [5], the categorical composition of an unlabeled data domain is
usually uncertain, which is hard to acquire without detailed analysis and dedicated expertise. In
this work, we focus on extending UCDR to more universal scenarios, which allow for the possibility
of disparate category spaces across domains. The objective of this Universal UCDR (U2 CDR) problem
is to retrieve samples from the retrieval domain that share the same category label with a query sample
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

