Shaping the distribution of neural responses with
interneurons in a recurrent circuit model
David Lipshutz
Center for Computational Neuroscience, Flatiron Institute
dlipshutz@flatironinstitute.org
Eero P. Simoncelli
Center for Computational Neuroscience, Flatiron Institute
Center for Neural Science, New York University
eero.simoncelli@nyu.edu

Abstract
Efficient coding theory posits that sensory circuits transform natural signals into
neural representations that maximize information transmission subject to resource
constraints. Local interneurons are thought to play an important role in these
transformations, dynamically shaping patterns of local circuit activity to facilitate
and direct information flow. However, the relationship between these coordinated,
nonlinear, circuit-level transformations and the properties of interneurons (e.g.,
connectivity, activation functions, response dynamics) remains unknown. Here,
we propose a normative computational model that establishes such a relationship.
Our model is derived from an optimal transport objective that conceptualizes the
circuit’s input-response function as transforming the inputs to achieve an efficient
target response distribution. The circuit, which is comprised of primary neurons that
are recurrently connected to a set of local interneurons, continuously optimizes this
objective by dynamically adjusting both the synaptic connections between neurons
as well as the interneuron activation functions. In an example application motivated
by redundancy reduction, we construct a circuit that learns a dynamical nonlinear
transformation that maps natural image data to a spherical Gaussian, significantly
reducing statistical dependencies in neural responses. Overall, our results provide
a framework in which the distribution of circuit responses is systematically and
nonlinearly controlled by adjustment of interneuron connectivity and activation
functions.

1

Introduction

The problem of transforming a signal into a representation with a given target distribution (or within
a target set of distributions) is a classical problem whose origins can be traced back more than two
centuries [1]. Many methods in statistics, signal processing and machine learning can be interpreted
within this context. For example, data whitening is a common preprocessing step that linearly
transforms a signal to have identity covariance [2]. Independent component analysis [ICA; 3] is a
signal processing method that linearly transforms a signal so as to minimize higher-order statistical
dependencies in addition to removing second-order dependencies. Nonlinear transformations of
skewed or heavy-tailed data to approximately Gaussianize their distribution can facilitate statistical
analyses [4, 5]. Machine learning methods for density estimation such as Gaussianization [6–10] and
normalizing flows [11–13] nonlinearly transform high-dimensional signals with complex densities
into more tractable representations with approximately Gaussian densities.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

