Adversarially Robust Decision Transformer

Xiaohang Tang∗
University College London
xiaohang.tang.20@ucl.ac.uk

Afonso Marques∗
University College London
afonso.marques.22@ucl.ac.uk

Parameswaran Kamalaruban∗
Featurespace
kamal.parameswaran@featurespace.co.uk

Ilija Bogunovic
University College London
i.bogunovic@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Decision Transformer (DT), as one of the representative Reinforcement Learning
via Supervised Learning (RvS) methods, has achieved strong performance in offline
learning tasks by leveraging the powerful Transformer architecture for sequential
decision-making. However, in adversarial environments, these methods can be
non-robust, since the return is dependent on the strategies of both the decisionmaker and adversary. Training a probabilistic model conditioned on observed
return to predict action can fail to generalize, as the trajectories that achieve a
return in the dataset might have done so due to a suboptimal behavior adversary.
To address this, we propose a worst-case-aware RvS algorithm, the Adversarially
Robust Decision Transformer (ARDT), which learns and conditions the policy
on in-sample minimax returns-to-go. ARDT aligns the target return with the
worst-case return learned through minimax expectile regression, thereby enhancing
robustness against powerful test-time adversaries. In experiments conducted on
sequential games with full data coverage, ARDT can generate a maximin (Nash
Equilibrium) strategy, the solution with the largest adversarial robustness. In
large-scale sequential games and continuous adversarial RL environments with
partial data coverage, ARDT demonstrates significantly superior robustness to
powerful test-time adversaries and attains higher worst-case returns compared to
contemporary DT methods.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning via Supervised Learning (RvS) [8], has garnered attention within the
domain of offline Reinforcement Learning (RL). Framing RL as a problem of outcome-conditioned
sequence modeling, these methodologies have showcased strong performance in offline benchmark
tasks [50, 53, 13, 37, 17]. One of the representative RvS methods is Decision Transformer (DT) [2],
which simply trains a policy conditioned on target return via behavior cloning loss. Given the apparent
efficacy and simplicity of RvS, our attention is drawn to exploring its performance in adversarial
settings. In this paper, we aim to use RvS to achieve adversarial robustness, a critical capability for RL
agents to manage environmental variations and adversarial disturbances [34, 42, 14, 46, 5, 36]. Such
challenges are prevalent in real-world scenarios, e.g., changes in road conditions and decision-making
among multiple autonomous vehicles.
In offline RL with adversarial actions, the naive training of action-prediction models conditioned on
the history and observed returns such as DT, or expected returns such as ESPER and DoC [32, 54, 53],
which we refer to as Expected Return-Conditioned DT (ERC-DT), may result in a non-robust policy.
∗

Equal Contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

