Quantifying and Optimizing Global Faithfulness in
Persona-driven Role-playing

Letian Peng, Jingbo Shang∗
Department of Computer Science
University of California, San Diego
{lepeng, jshang}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Persona-driven role-playing (PRP) aims to build AI characters that can respond
to user queries by faithfully sticking with all (factual) statements in persona documents. Unfortunately, existing faithfulness criteria for PRP are limited to coarsegrained LLM-based scoring without a clear definition or formulation. This paper
presents a pioneering exploration to quantify PRP faithfulness evaluation as a
fine-grained and explainable criterion, which also serves as a reliable reference
for faithfulness optimization. Our criterion first discriminates persona statements
into active and passive constraints by identifying the query-statement relevance.
Then, we incorporate all constraints following the principle that the AI character’s response should be (a) entailed by active (relevant) constraints and (b) not
contradicted by passive (irrelevant) constraints. We translate this principle mathematically into a novel Active-Passive-Constraint (APC) score, a constraint-wise
sum of statement-to-response natural language inference (NLI) scores weighted by
constraint-query relevance scores. In practice, we build the APC scoring system
by symbolically distilling small NLI and relevance discriminators (∼300M parameters) from GPT-4 for efficiency, and both show high consistency with GPT-4’s
discrimination. We validate the quality of the APC score against human evaluation
based on example personas with tens of statements, and the results show a high
correlation. As the APC score could faithfully reflect the PRP quality, we further
leverage it as a reward system in direct preference optimization (DPO) for better
AI characters. Our experiments offer a fine-grained and explainable comparison
between existing PRP techniques, revealing their advantages and limitations. We
further find APC-based DPO to be one of the most competitive techniques for
sticking with all constraints and can be well incorporated with other techniques. We
then extend the scale of the experiments to real persons with hundreds of statements
and reach a consistent conclusion. Finally, we provide comprehensive analyses and
case studies to support the effectiveness of APC evaluation and APC-based DPO. 2

1

Introduction

Role-playing (Han et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023; Yan et al., 2023; Bianchi et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2024;
Tao et al., 2024) is a newborn and trending natural language processing field, emerging from the
proficiency of large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023; Touvron et al.,
2023a,b; Mesnard et al., 2024) in human interaction. Role-playing customized AI characters, which
are useful for providing emotional value (Zhang et al., 2024), developing video games (Hu et al.,
2024), or even realizing the metaverse (Zhou, 2023; Yue et al., 2024). Persona-driven role-playing
∗
2

Corresponding author.
Code, Dataset, Demo: https://github.com/KomeijiForce/Active_Passive_Constraint_Koishiday_2024

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

