Einsum Benchmark: Enabling the Development of
Next-Generation Tensor Execution Engines

Mark Blacher1∗, Christoph Staudt1 , Julien Klaus1 , Maurice Wenig1 , Niklas Merk1 ,
Alexander Breuer1 , Max Engel1 , Sören Laue2 , Joachim Giesen1
1
University of Jena, 2 University of Hamburg

Abstract
Modern artificial intelligence and machine learning workflows rely on efficient
tensor libraries. However, tuning tensor libraries without considering the actual
problems they are meant to execute can lead to a mismatch between expected
performance and the actual performance. Einsum libraries are tuned to efficiently
execute tensor expressions with only a few, relatively large, dense, floating-point
tensors. But, practical applications of einsum cover a much broader range of tensor
expressions than those that can currently be executed efficiently. For this reason,
we have created a benchmark dataset that encompasses this broad range of tensor
expressions, allowing future implementations of einsum to build upon and be
evaluated against. In addition, we also provide generators for einsum expressions
and converters to einsum expressions in our repository, so that additional data can
be generated as needed. The benchmark dataset, the generators and converters are
released openly and are publicly available at https://benchmark.einsum.org.

1

Introduction

Einsum is a powerful interface for describing tensor expressions in a clear and concise way. Although the underlying notation has existed for over a century, einsum itself only gained mainstream
recognition in 2011 with its implementation in NumPy [24]. Hence, the idea of using einsum as a
computational backend for tensor expressions is relatively new, and mapping computations to einsum
is a field with many applications yet to be found. As it turns out, einsum naturally allows serving
inference queries on Boolean, semantic, and probabilistic AI models [9]. Moreover, computations
involving tensor networks [14, 19, 27, 48, 74] can be easily ported to einsum, because a single
einsum expression can describe the contraction of an entire tensor network. The expressive power
of einsum led to its growing popularity. Einsum is now part of the most important frameworks
for machine learning and artificial intelligence [1, 12, 52] as well as numerous array computing
libraries [38, 47]. Einsum is heavily used in deep learning [62, 64], and its notation can serve to
describe or even enable new AI models [31, 53, 54]. Einsum backends are also a popular choice for
simulating quantum circuits [15], because an arbitrary quantum circuit can be mapped directly to a
tensor network contraction problem [36] and thus to einsum.
However, describing a tensor computation succinctly with einsum notation does not mean that it is
executed efficiently on the backend that performs the actual computation. For einsum expressions
involving more than two tensors, an evaluation order, that is the contraction path, must first be
computed so that the expression can be executed with low computational cost. Yet, even an efficient
contraction path does not ensure fast execution. The actual performance of an einsum expression
heavily relies also on efficiently executing the individual tensor operations using the full potential
of the available hardware. This dichotomy, first, finding an efficient contraction path, and second,
∗

Corresponding author: mark.blacher@uni-jena.de

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

