GITA: Graph to Visual and Textual Integration
for Vision-Language Graph Reasoning
∗

∗

†

Yanbin Wei1,2 , Shuai Fu1,3 , Weisen Jiang1,2 , Zejian Zhang4 , Zhixiong Zeng4 ,
†
Qi Wu3 , James T. Kwok2 , Yu Zhang1
1

2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Australia Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide 4 Tencent

{yanbin.ust, fus.jayce, zejianzhang33, yu.zhang.ust, waysonkong}@gmail.com
barretzeng@tencent.com, qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au, jamesk@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly used for various tasks with
graph structures. Though LLMs can process graph information in the textual
format, they overlook the rich vision modality, which is an intuitive way for
humans to comprehend structural information and conduct general graph reasoning.
The potential benefits and capabilities of representing graph structures as visual
images (i.e., visual graph) are still unexplored. To fill the gap, we innovatively
propose an end-to-end framework, called Graph to vIsual and Textual IntegrAtion
(GITA), which incorporates visual graphs into general graph reasoning. Besides,
we construct the Graph-based Vision-Language Question Answering (GVLQA)
dataset from existing graph data, which is the first vision-language dataset for
general graph reasoning. Extensive experiments on the GVLQA dataset and five
real-world datasets show that GITA outperforms mainstream LLMs on general
graph reasoning. Moreover, experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of
the layout augmentation on visual graphs and pretraining on the GVLQA dataset.

1

Introduction

Graph reasoning tasks are pivotal in domains such as recommendation systems [25, 60], social
network analysis [7, 29], and knowledge graph reasoning [72, 46, 62]. Various architectures have
been developed, from shallow embedding methods [6, 53] to advanced Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) [37, 64] and graph Transformers [71, 40, 8]. While these models excel in graph reasoning
tasks, they often lack generalizability, flexibility, and user-friendliness. Achieving good performance
with these models typically requires domain-specific tuning, which limits their abilities to generalize
across different domains. Additionally, these models struggle to handle diverse tasks with the same
architecture. Each task often requires a specialized design, including task-specific data processing
and decoder, leading to limited flexibility. Lastly, unlike the Large Language Models (LLMs) that
can engage in conversations with users, these models are less explainable and user-friendly.
In contrast, LLMs have shown great generalization capabilities across a wide variety of reasoning
tasks [61, 67, 74, 32, 33] by encapsulating task-specific demands within a cohesive and interpretable
mechanism - text prompts, under a unified architecture with minimal domain-specific adjustments.
These advantages have sparked investigations into the potential of LLMs for graph reasoning. Recent
developments lend credence to the notion that LLMs can indeed interpret and manipulate graph∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

