Rethinking Score Distillation as a
Bridge Between Image Distributions

David McAllister1∗ Songwei Ge2∗ Jia-Bin Huang2 David W. Jacobs2
Alexei A. Efros1 Aleksander Holynski1 Angjoo Kanazawa1
1
UC Berkeley 2 University of Maryland
https://sds-bridge.github.io/

Abstract
Score distillation sampling (SDS) has proven to be an important tool, enabling
the use of large-scale diffusion priors for tasks operating in data-poor domains.
Unfortunately, SDS has a number of characteristic artifacts that limit its usefulness in general-purpose applications. In this paper, we make progress toward
understanding the behavior of SDS and its variants by viewing them as solving
an optimal-cost transport path from a source distribution to a target distribution.
Under this new interpretation, these methods seek to transport corrupted images
(source) to the natural image distribution (target). We argue that current methods’
characteristic artifacts are caused by (1) linear approximation of the optimal path
and (2) poor estimates of the source distribution. We show that calibrating the text
conditioning of the source distribution can produce high-quality generation and
translation results with little extra overhead. Our method can be easily applied
across many domains, matching or beating the performance of specialized methods.
We demonstrate its utility in text-to-2D, text-based NeRF optimization, translating
paintings to real images, optical illusion generation, and 3D sketch-to-real. We
compare our method to existing approaches for score distillation sampling and
show that it can produce high-frequency details with realistic colors.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have shown tremendous success in modeling complex data distributions like
images [51, 54, 3, 22], videos [59, 4] and robot action policies [13]. In domains where data is
plentiful, they produce state-of-the-art results. Many data modalities, however, cannot enjoy the same
scaling benefits due to their lack of sufficiently large datasets. In these cases, it is useful to exploit
diffusion models trained on domains with rich data sources as a prior in an optimization framework.
Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) [48, 69] and its variants [70, 20, 76] are a widely adopted way to
optimize parametric images, i.e., images produced by a model like NeRF, with a pre-trained diffusion
model. Despite being applicable to a wide range of applications, SDS is also known to suffer from
several significant artifacts, such as oversaturation and oversmoothing. As such, several variants have
been proposed to alleviate these artifacts [70, 76, 32], often at the cost of efficiency, diversity, or other
artifacts.
In this paper, we investigate the core issues with SDS by casting the class of score distillation
optimization problems as a Schrödinger Bridge (SB) problem [55, 12, 11, 42], which finds the
optimal transport between two distributions. Specifically, given some images from the current
optimized distribution (e.g., renderings from a NeRF), applying the transport maps them to their pair
images in a target distribution (e.g., text-conditioned natural image distribution). The density flow
formed by these mappings is transport-optimal, as defined in the SB problem. In an optimization
framework, the difference between paired source and target samples, computed with an SB, can be
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

