TACT: Advancing Complex Aggregative Reasoning
with Information Extraction Tools
Avi Caciularuγ Alon Jacoviγ Eyal Ben-Davidγ Sasha Goldshteinγ
Tal Schusterδ Jonathan Herzigγ Gal Elidanγ,η Amir Globersonγ,τ
γ
Google Research δ Google DeepMind η The Hebrew University of Jerusalem τ Tel Aviv University
avica@google.com
tact-benchmark.github.io

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) often do not perform well on queries that require
the aggregation of information across texts. To better evaluate this setting and
facilitate modeling efforts, we introduce TACT—Text And Calculations through
Tables, a dataset crafted to evaluate LLMs’ reasoning and computational abilities
using complex instructions. TACT contains challenging instructions that demand
stitching information scattered across one or more texts, and performing complex
integration on this information to generate the answer. We construct this dataset by
leveraging an existing dataset of texts and their associated tables. For each such
tables, we formulate new queries, and gather their respective answers. We demonstrate that all contemporary LLMs perform poorly on this dataset, achieving an
accuracy below 38%. To pinpoint the difficulties and thoroughly dissect the problem, we analyze model performance across three components: table-generation,
Pandas command-generation, and execution. Unexpectedly, we discover that each
component presents substantial challenges for current LLMs. These insights lead
us to propose a focused modeling framework, which we refer to as IE as a tool.
Specifically, we propose to add “tools” for each of the above steps, and implement
each such tool with few-shot prompting. This approach shows an improvement
over existing prompting techniques, offering a promising direction for enhancing
model capabilities in these tasks.
The TACT Benchmark

📖 Text: The warehouse floor
was a Tetris puzzle of wooden
crates from the recent shipment.
Stacked against the far wall,
which was about 10 feet high,
twelve large crates towered over
the rest, each a hefty 25
kilograms. It took about 4 hours
to drop those. Closer to the
loading dock, a cluster of six
medium-sized crates, 15
kilograms apiece, awaited their
turn, which will roughly take 2
hours to unload. Tucked into a
corner, five small crates, light at 8
kilograms each...

Intermediate Artifacts

📝 TACT
Instruction:
Calculate the total
weight (in kg) of
the medium crates
in the shipment, as
if their quantity was
equal to the
number of small
crates.

👉 Answer:
75

⛏ Table:
Crate size Quantity

Weight
(kg)

Large

12

25

Medium

6

15

Small

5

8

🔍 Query Over the Table:
Given the following
table, write a
single-line pandas
command in python, to
calculate the product
of ‘Weight (kg)’ when
its 'Crate Size' is
equal to ‘Medium’, with
the ‘Quantity’ when its
'Crate Size' is equal
to ‘Small’.

🐼 Pandas Command:
df[df['Crate Size'] == 'Medium']['Weight
(kg)'].astype(int).item() * df[df['Crate Size'] ==
'Small']['Quantity'].astype(int).item()

Figure 1: Annotated components of the TACT dataset. The answer is concise but demands advanced
reasoning. Intermediate artifacts aid in analyzing LLM reasoning and designing the IE as a tool
method. Relevant spans are underlined.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

