Trace is the Next AutoDiff: Generative Optimization
with Rich Feedback, Execution Traces, and LLMs
Ching-An Cheng∗
Microsoft Research
chinganc@microsoft.com

Allen Nie∗
Stanford
anie@cs.stanford.edu

Adith Swaminathan∗
Netflix
aswaminathan@netflix.com

Abstract
We study a class of optimization problems motivated by automating the design
and update of AI systems like coding assistants, robots, and copilots. AutoDiff
frameworks, like PyTorch, enable efficient end-to-end optimization of differentiable
systems. However, general computational workflows can be non-differentiable
and involve rich feedback (e.g. console output or user’s responses), heterogeneous
parameters (e.g. prompts, codes), and intricate objectives (beyond maximizing
a score). We investigate end-to-end generative optimization – using generative
models such as LLMs within the optimizer for automatic updating of general
computational workflows. We discover that workflow execution traces are akin to
back-propagated gradients in AutoDiff and can provide key information to interpret
feedback for efficient optimization. Formally, we frame a new mathematical
setup, Optimization with Trace Oracle (OPTO). In OPTO, an optimizer receives an
execution trace along with feedback on the computed output and updates parameters
iteratively. We provide a Python library, Trace, that efficiently converts a workflow
optimization problem into an OPTO instance using PyTorch-like syntax. Using
Trace, we develop a general LLM-based generative optimizer called OptoPrime.
In empirical studies, we find that OptoPrime is capable of first-order numerical
optimization, prompt optimization, hyper-parameter tuning, robot controller design,
code debugging, etc., and is often competitive with specialized optimizers for
each domain. We envision Trace as an open research platform for devising novel
generative optimizers and developing the next generation of interactive learning
agents. Website: https://microsoft.github.io/Trace/.

1

Introduction

Computational workflows that integrate large language models (LLMs), machine learning (ML)
models, orchestration, retrievers, tools, etc., power many state-of-the-art AI applications [1]: from
chatbots [2], coding assistants [3], robots [4], to multi-agent systems [5]. However designing a
computational workflow requires laborious engineering because many heterogeneous parameters (e.g.
prompts, orchestration code, and ML hyper-parameters) are involved. Moreover, after deployment
any erroneous behaviors of the workflow persist unless a developer manually updates it.
We study a class of optimization problems motivated by automating the design and update of computational workflows. Computational workflows produce optimization problems with heterogeneous
parameters, rich feedback (e.g. console output and user’s verbal responses), and intricate objectives
(beyond maximizing a score). Moreover, a workflow can have interdependent steps (e.g. adaptive
orchestration, feedback control loops) and/or involve non-differentiable, semi-black-box, stochastic
operations (e.g. ML models, simulations) whose behavior cannot be succinctly captured. As a result,
the structure of the computation may change as the parameters and the inputs of the workflow vary.
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

