Approximating the Top Eigenvector in Random
Order Streams
Praneeth Kacham∗
Google Research
pkacham@google.com

David P. Woodruff
Carnegie Mellon University
dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
When rows of an n×d matrix A are given in a stream, we study algorithms for approximating the top eigenvector of the matrix AT A (equivalently, the top right singular vector of A). We consider worst case inputs A but assume that the rows are
presented to the streaming algorithm in a uniformly random order. We show that
when the gap parameter R = σ1 (A)2 /σ2 (A)2 = Ω(1), then there is a randomized
algorithm that uses O(h · d · polylog(d))
bits of space and outputs a unit vector v
√
that has a correlation 1 − O(1/ R) with the top eigenvector v1 . Here h denotes
the number of p
heavy rows in the matrix, defined as the rows with Euclidean norm
at least ∥A∥F / d · polylog(d). We also provide a lower bound showing that any
algorithm using O(hd/R) bits of space can obtain at most 1 − Ω(1/R2 ) correlation with the top eigenvector. Thus, parameterizing the space complexity in terms
of the number of heavy rows is necessary for high accuracy solutions.
Our results improve upon the R = Ω(log n·log d) requirement in a recent work of
Price and Xun (FOCS 2024). We note that the algorithm of Price and Xun works
for arbitrary order streams whereas our algorithm requires a stronger assumption
that the rows are presented in a uniformly random order. We additionally show
that the gap requirements in their analysis can be brought down to R = Ω(log2 d)
for arbitrary order streams and R = Ω(log d) for random order streams. The
requirement of R = Ω(log d) for random order streams is nearly tight for their
analysis as we obtain a simple instance with R = Ω(log d/ log log d) for which
their algorithm, with any fixed learning rate, cannot output a vector approximating
the top eigenvector v1 .

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of approximating the top eigenvector in the streaming setting. In this
problem, we are given vectors a1 , . . . , an ∈ Rd one at a time in a stream. Let A be an n × d matrix
with rows a1 , . . . , an . The task is to approximate the top eigenvector of the matrix AT A. Throughout
the paper, we use v1 ∈ Rd to denote the top eigenvector of AT A. We focus on obtaining streaming
algorithms that use a small amount of space and can output a unit vector v̂ such that ⟨v̂, v1 ⟩2 ≥ 1 −
f (R), where f (R) is a decreasing function in the gap R = λ1 (AT A)/λ2 (AT A). Here λ1 (·), λ2 (·)
denote the two largest eigenvalues. As the gap R becomes larger, the eigenvector approximation
problem becomes easier and we want more accurate approximations to the eigenvector v1 .
P
If one is allowed to use Õ(d2 )2 bits of space, we can maintain the matrix AT A = i ai aT
i as we
see the rows ai in the stream, and at the end of processing the stream, we can compute the exact
top eigenvector v1 . When the dimension d is large, the requirement of Ω(d2 ) bits of memory can be
∗
2

Work done while the author was a student at Carnegie Mellon University.
The notation Õ(f (n)) is used to denote the set of functions in O(f (n) · polylog(n)).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

