MaskFactory: Towards High-quality Synthetic Data
Generation for Dichotomous Image Segmentation

Haotian Qian1∗ YD Chen1∗ Shengtao Lou1 Fahad Shahbaz Khan3,4
Xiaogang Jin1† Deng-Ping Fan2,3
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University 2 VCIP&CS, Nankai University
3
MBZUAI 4 Linköping University

Abstract
Dichotomous Image Segmentation (DIS) tasks require highly precise annotations,
and traditional dataset creation methods are labor intensive, costly, and require
extensive domain expertise. Although using synthetic data for DIS is a promising
solution to these challenges, current generative models and techniques struggle with
the issues of scene deviations, noise-induced errors, and limited training sample
variability. To address these issues, we introduce a novel approach, MaskFactory,
which provides a scalable solution for generating diverse and precise datasets,
markedly reducing preparation time and costs. We first introduce a general mask
editing method that combines rigid and non-rigid editing techniques to generate
high-quality synthetic masks. Specially, rigid editing leverages geometric priors
from diffusion models to achieve precise viewpoint transformations under zeroshot conditions, while non-rigid editing employs adversarial training and selfattention mechanisms for complex, topologically consistent modifications. Then,
we generate pairs of high-resolution image and accurate segmentation mask using
a multi-conditional control generation method. Finally, our experiments on the
widely-used DIS5K dataset benchmark demonstrate superior performance in quality
and efficiency compared to existing methods. The code is available at https:
//qian-hao-tian.github.io/MaskFactory/.

1

Introduction

Dichotomous image segmentation (DIS) aims to accurately segment objects from natural images
[1, 2], a critical task in various computer vision applications, including medical imaging [3, 4, 5],
autonomous driving [6] and connectomics research [7, 8]. However, traditional methods for collecting
datasets for DIS tasks are labor-intensive, costly, and require extensive domain expertise. Recently,
synthetic data has emerged as a promising solution for generating diverse and precise datasets at scale,
offering a scalable and cost-effective means for model training. Given the importance of high-quality
synthetic data for training models, developing methods to generate such datasets for DIS tasks is
crucial. Although generative models have been employed to assist in synthetic dataset production,
they face significant limitations in terms of controllability, precision, and diversity.
Recent synthetic methods [9, 10, 11] utilize diffusion models [12] to synthesize image-mask pairs
from textual cues and attention maps. Despite progress, they still encounter three major challenges: (1)
Controllability: Text-guided generation scheme may deviate from real-world scenes, especially with
fine-grained labels, leading to uncontrollable generated images. (2) Precision: The use of attention
maps can introduce noise, which degrades mask fidelity and poses challenges for applications
∗
†

Equal contribution. Deng-Ping Fan served as the project leader for this work.
Corresponding author. Contact the author at jin@cad.zju.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

