LOVA3: Learning to Visual Question Answering,
Asking and Assessment

Henry Hengyuan Zhao1 , Pan Zhou2† , Difei Gao1 , Zechen Bai1 , Mike Zheng Shou1†
1
Show Lab, National University of Singapore,
2
Singapore Management University

Abstract
Question answering, asking, and assessment are three innate human traits crucial
for understanding the world and acquiring knowledge. By enhancing these capabilities, humans can more effectively utilize data, leading to better comprehension and
learning outcomes. Current Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) primarily focus on question answering, often neglecting the full potential of questioning
and assessment skills. Inspired by the human learning mechanism, we introduce
LOVA3 , an innovative framework named “Learning tO Visual question Answering, Asking and Assessment,” designed to equip MLLMs with these additional
capabilities. Our approach involves the creation of two supplementary training
tasks GenQA and EvalQA, aiming at fostering the skills of asking and assessing
questions in the context of images. To develop the questioning ability, we compile a
comprehensive set of multimodal foundational tasks. For assessment, we introduce
a new benchmark called EvalQABench, comprising 64,000 training samples (split
evenly between positive and negative samples) and 5,000 validation and testing
samples. We posit that enhancing MLLMs with the capabilities to answer, ask,
and assess questions will enhance their multimodal comprehension, ultimately improving overall performance. To validate this hypothesis, we train MLLMs using
the LOVA3 framework and evaluate them on a range of multimodal datasets and
benchmarks. Our results demonstrate consistent performance gains, underscoring
the critical role of these additional tasks in fostering comprehensive intelligence in
MLLMs. The code is available at https://github.com/showlab/LOVA3.

1

Introduction

To acquire knowledge, we humans often answer lots of questions and then improve ourselves by
comparing our answers with the ground-truth answers. As a result, this learning mechanism empowers
humans with the answering ability, which allows humans to handle well many real tasks, such as
visual question answering [26, 54, 30, 27, 43, 42]. However, as described in the following slogan,
“The art of proposing a question must be held in higher value than solving it.” Georg Cantor [6]
asking a question is very valuable and even more important than answering a question. Indeed,
humans also acquire knowledge from learning to ask questions since it encourages individuals to
engage more deeply with information, thereby enhancing problem-solving skills [69, 70, 21, 57]. In
addition to asking questions, humans also improve themselves through self-evaluation: humans try to
identify the correctness of the answer and thus are involved in a deep understanding of our diverse
world [86, 67].
†

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

