A Universal Growth Rate for
Learning with Smooth Surrogate Losses

Anqi Mao
Courant Institute
New York, NY 10012
aqmao@cims.nyu.edu

Mehryar Mohri
Google Research & CIMS
New York, NY 10011
mohri@google.com

Yutao Zhong
Courant Institute
New York, NY 10012
yutao@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a comprehensive analysis of the growth rate of H-consistency
bounds (and excess error bounds) for various surrogate losses used in classification.
We prove a square-root growth rate near zero for smooth margin-based surrogate
losses in binary classification, providing both upper and lower bounds under mild
assumptions. This result also translates to excess error bounds. Our lower bound
requires weaker conditions than those in previous work for excess error bounds,
and our upper bound is entirely novel. Moreover, we extend this analysis to
multi-class classification with a series of novel results, demonstrating a universal
square-root growth rate for smooth comp-sum and constrained losses, covering
common choices for training neural networks in multi-class classification. Given
this universal rate, we turn to the question of choosing among different surrogate
losses. We first examine how H-consistency bounds vary across surrogates based
on the number of classes. Next, ignoring constants and focusing on behavior near
zero, we identify minimizability gaps as the key differentiating factor in these
bounds. Thus, we thoroughly analyze these gaps, to guide surrogate loss selection,
covering: comparisons across different comp-sum losses, conditions where gaps
become zero, and general conditions leading to small gaps. Additionally, we
demonstrate the key role of minimizability gaps in comparing excess error bounds
and H-consistency bounds.

1

Introduction

Learning algorithms frequently optimize surrogate loss functions like the logistic loss, in lieu of
the task’s true objective, commonly the zero-one loss. This is necessary when the original loss
function is computationally intractable to optimize or lacks essential mathematical properties such as
differentiability. But, what guarantees can we rely on when minimizing a surrogate loss? This is a
fundamental question with significant implications for learning.
The related property of Bayes-consistency of surrogate losses has been extensively studied in the
context of binary classification. Zhang [2004a], Bartlett et al. [2006] and Steinwart [2007] established
Bayes-consistency for various convex loss functions, including margin-based surrogates. They also
introduced excess error bounds (or surrogate regret bounds) for margin-based surrogates. Reid and
Williamson [2009] extended these results to proper losses in binary classification.
The Bayes-consistency of several surrogate loss function families in the context of multi-class
classification has also been studied by Zhang [2004b] and Tewari and Bartlett [2007]. Zhang [2004b]
established a series of results for various multi-class classification formulations, including negative
results for multi-class hinge loss functions [Crammer and Singer, 2001], as well as positive results
for the sum exponential loss [Weston and Watkins, 1999, Awasthi et al., 2022a], the (multinomial)
logistic loss [Verhulst, 1838, 1845, Berkson, 1944, 1951], and the constrained losses [Lee et al., 2004].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

