Regularizing Hidden States Enables Learning
Generalizable Reward Model for LLMs
Rui Yang1 Ruomeng Ding2 Yong Lin3 4 Huan Zhang1 Tong Zhang1
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 2 Georgia Institute of Technology,
3
Princeton University, 4 Princeton Language and Intelligence
yangrui.thu2015@gmail.com, rmding@gatech.edu, yl7690@princeton.edu
huan@huan-zhang.com, tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org

Abstract
Reward models trained on human preference data have been proven to effectively
align Large Language Models (LLMs) with human intent within the framework of
reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). However, current reward
models have limited generalization capabilities to unseen prompts and responses,
which can lead to an unexpected phenomenon known as reward over-optimization,
resulting in a decline in actual performance due to excessive optimization of
rewards. While previous research has advocated for constraining policy optimization, our study introduces a novel approach to enhance the reward model’s
generalization ability against distribution shifts by regularizing the hidden states.
Specifically, we retain the base model’s language model head and incorporate a
suite of text-generation losses to preserve the hidden states’ text-generation capabilities, while concurrently learning a reward head behind the same hidden states.
Our experimental results demonstrate that the introduced regularization technique
markedly improves the accuracy of learned reward models across a variety of
out-of-distribution (OOD) tasks and effectively alleviates the over-optimization
issue in RLHF, offering a more reliable and robust preference learning paradigm 1 .

1

Introduction

Pretrained large models have showcased impressive capabilities across diverse fields [1, 2, 3, 4, 5].
A notable trend in recent research is ensuring that large models align with human values and
mitigate potentially harmful behaviors [6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. Alignment methods are crucial in achieving
this objective, with two primary approaches being supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and reinforcement
learning from human feedback (RLHF) [7, 8]. SFT directly finetunes the model using prompt
and response pairs, proving to be a straightforward and efficient alignment technique [11, 12, 13].
Differently, RLHF begins by learning a reward model from user preferences and then employs
reinforcement learning to optimize the language model to maximize rewards. A significant advantage
of RLHF is its potential to generalize the reward model to unseen prompt-response pairs, effectively
leveraging large volumes of unlabeled data [8, 14].
Despite the empirical success of RLHF, the challenge of training a reliable and generalizable reward
model for unseen data remains an open problem. A well-known failure mode of reward model
is known as "overoptimization" or "reward hacking" [15, 16, 17, 18], where policy optimization
seemingly improves the proxy reward model but actually degrades the true reward function. [17]
demonstrated in a synthetic setup that increasing the size of the reward model and the volume of
training data can mitigate this overoptimization issue. However, such scaling is not always feasible
1
Code and open-source reward models are available at https://github.com/YangRui2015/GeneralizableReward-Model

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

