Pandora’s Box: Towards Building Universal Attackers
against Real-World Large Vision-Language Models

Daizong Liu1 , Mingyu Yang2 , Xiaoye Qu2 , Pan Zhou2∗, Xiang Fang3 , Keke Tang4 ,
Yao Wan2 , Lichao Sun5
1
Peking University 2 Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
Nanyang Technological University 4 Guangzhou University 5 Lehigh University
dzliu@stu.pku.edu.cn, {mingyu_yang,xiaoye,panzhou,wanyao}@hust.edu.cn
xfang9508@gmail.com,tangbohutbh@gmail.com,lis221@lehigh.edu

Abstract
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across a wide range of multimodal understanding tasks. Nevertheless, these
models are susceptible to adversarial examples. In real-world applications, existing
LVLM attackers generally rely on the detailed prior knowledge of the model to
generate effective perturbations. Moreover, these attacks are task-specific, leading
to significant costs for designing perturbation. Motivated by the research gap and
practical demands, in this paper, we make the first attempt to build a universal
attacker against real-world LVLMs, focusing on two critical aspects: (i) restricting
access to only the LVLM inputs and outputs. (ii) devising a universal adversarial
patch, which is task-agnostic and can deceive any LVLM-driven task when applied
to various inputs. Specifically, we start by initializing the location and the pattern
of the adversarial patch through random sampling, guided by the semantic distance
between their output and the target label. Subsequently, we maintain a consistent
patch location while refining the pattern to enhance semantic resemblance to the
target. In particular, our approach incorporates a diverse set of LVLM task inputs
as query samples to approximate the patch gradient, capitalizing on the importance
of distinct inputs. In this way, the optimized patch is universally adversarial against
different tasks and prompts, leveraging solely gradient estimates queried from
the model. Extensive experiments are conducted to verify the strong universal
adversarial capabilities of our proposed attack with prevalent LVLMs including
LLaVA, MiniGPT-4, Flamingo, and BLIP-2, spanning a spectrum of tasks, all
achieved without delving into the details of the model structures.

1

Introduction

Recently, Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have achieved significant success and demonstrated promising capabilities in various multimodal downstream tasks, such as text-to-image generation [1–6], visual question-answering [7–10], and etc. Benefiting from the strong comprehension
of large language models (LLMs) [11–13], LVLMs [14–16] on top of LLMs show superior performances in solving complex vision-language tasks by utilizing appropriate human-instructed prompts.
However, with the exponential expansion of downstream applications in the real world, LVLMs can
be easily fooled by adversarial samples, posing crucial safety issues [17–23].
Existing LVLMs attackers [24–33] generally craft and add perturbations/triggers to benign image/text
inputs. By adversarially manipulating LVLMs to concentrate on specific perturbations or triggers,
∗
Corresponding author: Pan Zhou. This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
(NSFC) under grant No. 62476107.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

