Shadowheart SGD: Distributed Asynchronous SGD
with Optimal Time Complexity Under Arbitrary
Computation and Communication Heterogeneity

Alexander Tyurin
KAUST∗, AIRI†, Skoltech‡

Marta Pozzi
KAUST∗, University of Pavia§

Ivan Ilin
KAUST∗

Peter Richtárik
KAUST∗

Abstract
We consider nonconvex stochastic optimization problems in the asynchronous
centralized distributed setup where the communication times from workers to
a server can not be ignored, and the computation and communication times are
potentially different for all workers. Using an unbiassed compression technique,
we develop a new method—Shadowheart SGD—that provably improves the time
complexities of all previous centralized methods. Moreover, we show that the
time complexity of Shadowheart SGD is optimal in the family of centralized
methods with compressed communication. We also consider the bidirectional
setup, where broadcasting from the server to the workers is non-negligible, and
develop a corresponding method.

1

Introduction

We consider the nonconvex smooth optimization problem
n
o
min f (x) := Eξ∼Dξ [f (x; ξ)] ,
x∈Rd

(1)

where f (·; ·) : Rd × Sξ → R, and Dξ is a distribution on Sξ ̸= ∅. Given ε > 0, we seek to find
2
a possibility random point x̂ such that E[∥∇f (x̂)∥ ] ≤ ε. Such a point x̂ is called an ε–stationary
point. We focus on solving the problem in the following setup:
(a) n workers/nodes are able to compute stochastic gradients ∇f (x; ξ) of f, in parallel and asynchronously, and it takes (at most) hi seconds for worker i to compute a single stochastic gradient;
(b) the workers are connected to a server which acts as a communication hub;
(c) the workers can communicate with the server in parallel and asynchronously; it takes (at most)
τi seconds for worker i to send a compressed message to the server; compression is performed via
applying lossy communication compression to the communicated message (a vector from Rd ); see
Def. 2.1;
(d) the server can broadcast compressed vectors to the workers in (at most) τserv seconds; compression is performed via applying a lossy communication compression operator to the communicated
message (a vector from Rd ); see Def. A.1.
The main goal of this work is to find an optimal optimization strategy/method that would work
uniformly well in all scenarios characterized by the values of the computation times h1 , . . . , hn and
∗

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
AIRI, Moscow, Russia
‡
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia
§
University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

