On the Power of Small-size Graph Neural Networks
for Linear Programming

Qian Li1,2,* , Tian Ding1,2,* , Linxin Yang2,3,* , Minghui Ouyang4 , Qingjiang Shi5 , Ruoyu Sun1,2,3,†
1
Shenzhen International Center For Industrial And Applied Mathematics, Shenzhen, China
2
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen, China
3
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
4
Peking University, Beijing, China
5
Tongji University, Shanghai, China

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have recently emerged as powerful tools for addressing complex optimization problems. It has been theoretically demonstrated
that GNNs can universally approximate the solution mapping functions of linear
programming (LP) problems. However, these theoretical results typically require
GNNs to have large parameter sizes. Conversely, empirical experiments have
shown that relatively small GNNs can solve LPs effectively, revealing a significant
discrepancy between theoretical predictions and practical observations. In this
work, we aim to bridge this gap by providing a theoretical foundation for the effectiveness of smaller GNNs. We prove that polylogarithmic-depth, constant-width
GNNs are sufficient to solve packing and covering LPs, two widely used classes
of LPs. Our proof leverages the capability of GNNs to simulate a variant of the
gradient descent algorithm on a carefully selected potential function. Additionally, we introduce a new GNN architecture, termed GD-Net. Experimental results
demonstrate that GD-Net significantly outperforms conventional GNN structures
while using fewer parameters.

1

Introduction

Learning to Optimize (L2O) has emerged as a compelling research area, leveraging machine learning
techniques to enhance the efficiency of optimization processes. Unlike traditional theory-driven
optimization methods, L2O approaches are primarily data-driven, learning optimization strategies
from existing problem instances. This new paradigm has yielded notable advancements in both
continuous optimization [22] and combinatorial optimization [4, 21].
Recently, graph neural networks (GNN) have become increasingly popular in the field of L2O [6, 27].
GNNs are a class of neural networks specifically designed to process and analyze data structured
as graphs, leveraging the relationships between nodes to perform tasks such as node classification,
link prediction, and graph classification [35]. Due to their properties of permutation equivariance and
natural adaptation to varying input dimensions, GNNs are well-suited for graph-related optimization
problems such as minimum vertex covering [30] and traveling salesman [13]. Recent research has
demonstrated that GNNs can effectively accelerate the solving process for both linear programming
(LP) and mixed integer linear programming (MILP) problems, which are among the most important
and widely applied types of optimization problems. For instance, Li et al. [17] proposed a GNN-based
reformulation method for LP to enhance the solver performance. Furthermore, Chen et al. [8] and
*
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding Author. Email:sunruoyu@cuhk.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

