Automatic Outlier Rectification via Optimal Transport

Jose Blanchet
Dept. of Management Science & Engineering
Stanford University
jose.blanchet@stanford.edu

Jiajin Li
Sauder School of Business
University of British Columbia
jiajin.li@sauder.ubc.ca

Markus Pelger
Dept. of Management Science & Engineering
Stanford University
mpelger@stanford.edu

Greg Zanotti
Dept. of Management Science & Engineering
Stanford University
gzanotti@stanford.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel conceptual framework to detect outliers using
optimal transport with a concave cost function. Conventional outlier detection
approaches typically use a two-stage procedure: first, outliers are detected and
removed, and then estimation is performed on the cleaned data. However, this
approach does not inform outlier removal with the estimation task, leaving room
for improvement. To address this limitation, we propose an automatic outlier
rectification mechanism that integrates rectification and estimation within a joint
optimization framework. We take the first step to utilize the optimal transport
distance with a concave cost function to construct a rectification set in the space
of probability distributions. Then, we select the best distribution within the rectification set to perform the estimation task. Notably, the concave cost function
we introduced in this paper is the key to making our estimator effectively identify
the outlier during the optimization process. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
our approach over conventional approaches in simulations and empirical analyses
for mean estimation, least absolute regression, and the fitting of option implied
volatility surfaces.

1

Introduction

Outlier removal has a long tradition in statistics, both in theory and practice. This is because it is
common to have (for example, due to collection errors) data contamination or corruption. Directly
applying a learning algorithm to corrupted data can, naturally, lead to undesirable out-of-sample
performance. Our goal in this paper is to provide a single-step optimization mechanism based on
optimal transport for automatically removing outliers.
The challenge of outlier removal has been documented for centuries: early work is introduced in
e.g. Gergonne [1821] and Peirce [1852]. Yet the outlier removal problem continues to interest
practitioners and researchers alike due to the danger of distorted model estimation. A natural family
of approaches followed in the literature takes the form of “two-stage” methods, which involve an
outlier removal step followed by an estimation step. Methods within this family range from rules
of thumb, such as removing outliers beyond a particular threshold based on a robust measure of
scale like the interquartile range [Tukey, 1977], to various model-based or parametric distributional
assumption-based tests [Thompson, 1985]. While the two-stage approach can be useful by separating
the estimation task from the outlier removal objective, it is not without potential pitfalls. For example,
outlier detection which relies on a specific fitted model may tend to overfit to a particular type of
outlier, which can mask the effect of other types [Rousseeuw and Leroy, 1987]. Conversely, the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

