Many-Shot In-Context Learning

Rishabh Agarwal∗, Avi Singh∗ , Lei Zhang† , Bernd Bohnet† , Luis Rosias† , Stephanie Chan† ,
Biao Zhang†, Ankesh Anand, Zaheer Abbas, Azade Nova, John D. Co-Reyes, Eric Chu,
Feryal Behbahani, Aleksandra Faust, Hugo Larochelle
Google DeepMind

Abstract
LLMs excel at few-shot in-context learning (ICL) – learning from a few inputoutput examples (“shots”) provided in context at inference, without any weight
updates. Newly expanded context windows allow us to investigate ICL with
hundreds or thousands of examples – the many-shot regime. Going from few-shot
to many-shot, we observe significant performance gains across a wide variety
of generative and discriminative tasks. While promising, many-shot ICL can be
bottlenecked by the available amount of human-generated outputs. To mitigate this
limitation, we explore two settings: (1) “Reinforced ICL” that uses model-generated
chain-of-thought rationales in place of human rationales, and (2) “Unsupervised
ICL” where we remove rationales altogether, and prompt the model only with
domain-specific inputs. We find that both Reinforced and Unsupervised ICL can
be effective in the many-shot regime, particularly on complex reasoning tasks.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that, unlike few-shot learning, many-shot learning
is effective at overriding pretraining biases, can learn high-dimensional functions
with numerical inputs, and performs comparably to fine-tuning. Finally, we reveal
the limitations of next-token prediction loss as an indicator of ICL performance.

1

Introduction

A limiting factor for in-context learning (ICL) in LLMs is the context window, restricting prior
research to the few-shot ICL regime. Many-shot learning – ICL with a large number of shots, for
example, hundreds or thousands – allows for better task specification, can reduce the need for finetuning, and potentially make LLMs more versatile and adaptable. Exploring many-shot ICL is now
feasible, given the recent increase in context windows of publicly available LLMs by at least 100×:
from only a few thousand tokens in GPT-3 [8] and Llama 2 [56] to 1M tokens in Gemini 1.5 Pro [15].
In this paper, we investigate how scaling the number of shots affects ICL performance on a wide variety of tasks (§2): problem solving using MATH [22] and GSM8K [10], question-answering [GPQA,
51], summarization using XSum [42] and XLSum [19], algorithmic reasoning [BBH, 55], reward
modeling [Code verification, §A.5], low-resource machine translation [FLORES, 17], planning [Logistics, 53], and sentiment analysis [FP, 39]. Compared to few-shot ICL, many-shot learning performs
significant better across these tasks, using several hundreds or thousands of shots (Figure 1). Furthermore, maximum performance is often achieved only once the number of shots reaches up to hundreds
of thousands of tokens (Figure A.1). Concurrent to our work, recent works explore many-shot ICL to
jailbreak LLMs [2] (up to 256 shots) and tackle NLP classification tasks [6] (up to 80K tokens). In
our work, we focus on a much wider range of tasks, and use a lot more examples (up to 8192 shots),
much longer context lengths (up to 1M tokens). See §A.3 for a detailed discussion of related work.
While many-shot ICL holds significant promise, it can be constrained by the need for high-quality,
human-generated outputs. To overcome this, we introduce reinforced ICL and unsupervised ICL (§3).
∗

Equal contribution, † Core contribution. Correspondence to {rishabhagarwal, singhavi}@google.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

