IncomeSCM: From tabular data set to time-series
simulator and causal estimation benchmark
Fredrik D. Johansson
Chalmers University of Technology
and University of Gothenburg
fredrik.johansson@chalmers.se

Abstract
Evaluating observational estimators of causal effects demands information that is
rarely available: unconfounded interventions and outcomes from the population of
interest, created either by randomization or adjustment. As a result, it is customary
to fall back on simulators when creating benchmark tasks. Simulators offer great
control but are often too simplistic to make challenging tasks, either because they
are hand-designed and lack the nuances of real-world data, or because they are fit
to observational data without structural constraints. In this work, we propose a
general, repeatable strategy for turning observational data into sequential structural
causal models and challenging estimation tasks by following two simple principles:
1) fitting real-world data where possible, and 2) creating complexity by composing
simple, hand-designed mechanisms. We implement these ideas in a highly configurable software package and apply it to the well-known Adult income data set
to construct the IncomeSCM simulator. From this, we devise multiple estimation
tasks and sample data sets to compare established estimators of causal effects. The
tasks present a suitable challenge, with effect estimates varying greatly in quality
between methods, despite similar performance in the modeling of factual outcomes,
highlighting the need for dedicated causal estimators and model selection criteria.

1

Introduction

Estimating causal effects of interventions is fundamental to improving decision-making by data-driven
means. As a result, an ever-growing body of research develops machine learning algorithms for this
task (Hernán and Robins, 2006; Shalit et al., 2017; Wager and Athey, 2018; Yoon et al., 2018; Künzel
et al., 2019; Kennedy, 2023). However, identification of causal effects—and, therefore, evaluation
of these algorithms—rely either on interventions (e.g., randomized experiments) or unverifiable
assumptions (e.g., exchangeability) (Pearl, 2009). As experimentation is costly or prohibited in many
domains, simulated environments are uniquely suited as benchmarks for causal effects estimation
from observational data. They can be constructed to satisfy conditions for identifiability and to answer
interventional queries, providing ground truth labels for estimates. But this strategy begs the question:
How can we build simulators that reveal which causal estimators work best in the real world?
Primarily, two kinds of data sets are used for offline evaluation of causal effect estimates: experimental
data and (semi-) synthetic data. Experimental data (e.g., the LaLonde (Jobs) data set (LaLonde,
1986)) supports unbiased estimation by removing confounding by construction (Imbens and Rubin,
2015). But learning from unconfounded data is rarely the goal of the methods we seek to evaluate.
To overcome this, researchers can introduce selection bias synthetically by subsampling observations
depending on the intervention, as in Twins (Louizos et al., 2017). A drawback of this approach is
that experimental data tends to be small, both in sample size and dimensionality, and subsampling
decreases its size even further. In other semi-synthetic data, e.g., IHDP (Hill, 2011), the analyst
simulates one or more of the variables in the system of interest, typically the outcome variable.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

