Simple and Effective
Masked Diffusion Language Models

Subham Sekhar Sahoo
Cornell Tech, NYC, USA.
ssahoo@cs.cornell.edu

Marianne Arriola
Cornell Tech, NYC, USA.
ma2238@cornell.edu

Yair Schiff
Cornell Tech, NYC, USA.
yzs2@cornell.edu

Aaron Gokaslan
Cornell Tech, NYC, USA.
akg87@cs.cornell.edu

Edgar Marroquin
Cornell Tech, NYC, USA.
emm392@cornell.edu

Justin T Chiu
Cornell Tech, NYC, USA.
jtc257@cornell.edu

Alexander Rush
Cornell Tech, NYC, USA.
ar459@cornell.edu

Volodymyr Kuleshov
Cornell Tech, NYC, USA.
kuleshov@cornell.edu

Abstract
While diffusion models excel at generating high-quality images, prior work reports
a significant performance gap between diffusion and autoregressive (AR) methods
in language modeling. In this work, we show that simple masked discrete diffusion
is more performant than previously thought. We apply an effective training recipe
that improves the performance of masked diffusion models and derive a simplified,
Rao-Blackwellized objective that results in additional improvements. Our objective
has a simple form—it is a mixture of classical masked language modeling losses—
and can be used to train encoder-only language models that admit efficient samplers,
including ones that can generate arbitrary lengths of text semi-autoregressively
like a traditional language model. On language modeling benchmarks, a range of
masked diffusion models trained with modern engineering practices achieves a new
state-of-the-art among diffusion models, and approaches AR perplexity. We provide
the code1 , along with a blog post and video tutorial2 on the project page:
https://s-sahoo.com/mdlm

1

Introduction

Diffusion models excel at producing realistic, high-quality images and have received significant
attention as potential tools for generating discrete data, such as text [1, 31, 33], biological sequences
[2, 47], and graphs [60, 63]. Unlike autoregressive (AR) approaches, diffusion-based methods are
not constrained to generate data sequentially, and therefore have the potential to improve long-term
planning, controllable generation, and sampling speed. However, discrete diffusion methods exhibit a
performance gap relative to AR models [1, 23, 26, 33], especially in language modeling. The standard
measure of language modeling performance is log-likelihood: when controlling for parameter count,
prior work reports a sizable log-likelihood gap between AR and diffusion models.
In this work, we show that simple masked diffusion language modeling (MDLM) combined with
effective training recipes is more performant than previously thought [1, 26]. We develop a wellengineered MDLM implementation that significantly improves discrete diffusion log-likelihood; we
1
2

code: https://github.com/kuleshov-group/mdlm
tutorial: http://youtu.be/WjAUX23vgfg

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

