Contracting with a Learning Agent

Guru Guruganesh∗

Yoav Kolumbus†

Jon Schneider∗

Inbal Talgam-Cohen‡

Emmanouil-Vasileios Vlatakis-Gkaragkounis§ Joshua R. Wang∗ S. Matthew Weinberg¶

Abstract
Real-life contractual relations typically involve repeated interactions between the
principal and agent, where, despite theoretical appeal, players rarely use complex
dynamic strategies and instead manage uncertainty through learning algorithms.
In this paper, we initiate the study of repeated contracts with learning agents,
focusing on those achieving no-regret outcomes. For the canonical setting where
the agent’s actions result in success or failure, we present a simple, optimal solution
for the principal: Initially provide a linear contract with scalar α > 0, then switch
to a zero-scalar contract. This shift causes the agent to “free-fall” through their
action space, yielding non-zero rewards for the principal at zero cost. Interestingly,
despite the apparent exploitation, there are instances where our dynamic contract
can make both players better off compared to the best static contract.
We then broaden the scope of our results to general linearly-scaled contracts, and,
finally, to the best of our knowledge, we provide the first analysis of optimization
against learning agents with uncertainty about the time horizon.

1

Introduction

In the classic contract setting, a principal (she) incentivizes an agent (he) to invest effort in a
project. The project’s success depends stochastically on the effort invested. The incentive scheme,
a.k.a. contract, is performance-based — it determines the agent’s payment based on the project’s
outcome, rather than directly on the agent’s effort. This gap between the agent’s costly effort and the
stochastic outcome creates moral hazard, and makes contract design a challenging problem.
Due to their immense importance in practice, the design of contracts has long been studied in
Economics, forming a rich body of literature that was recognized by a Nobel prize in 2016. Recently,
there has been a surge of interest in computational aspects of contract design, leading to the ongoing
development of a new algorithmic theory of contracts (see, e.g., [1, 7, 8, 20, 21, 28, 29, 33, 30, 42,
43, 34, 51, 57, 62, 67]). Much of the computational research has focused on the classic, one-shot
contract setting – the principal and agent share a single interaction, in which the principal offers a
contract and the agent chooses a best-response action.1 Yet, this overlooks the fact that in reality,
“most principal-agent relationships are repeated or long-term,” i.e., the same agent exerts effort for
the principal repeatedly over time [14]. The goal of this paper is to extend algorithmic contract
∗

Google Research, gurug@google.com, jschnei@google.com, joshuawang@google.com
Cornell University, yoav.kolumbus@cornell.edu
‡
Tel Aviv University, inbaltalgam@gmail.com
§
Berkeley University, emvlatakis@berkeley.edu
¶
Princeton University, smweinberg@princeton.edu
1
Another setting that has been considered is a series of one-shot interactions with multiple agents, enabling
the principal to learn the best contract for the agent population (see, e.g., [32, 23, 47, 69]). An exception is the
work of [56], which studies a novel long-term principal-agent model tailored to afforestation. Their principal
pays whenever a tree’s state – a Markov chain – progresses; their agent responds based on state (not on learning).
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

