Pre-trained Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Are Versatile Representation Learners for Control

Gunshi Gupta∗1
1

Karmesh Yadav∗2 Yarin Gal1 Zsolt Kira2
Cong Lu1 Tim G. J. Rudner3

University of Oxford

2

Georgia Institute of Technology

3

Dhruv Batra2

New York University

Abstract
Embodied AI agents require a fine-grained understanding of the physical world
mediated through visual and language inputs. Such capabilities are difficult to
learn solely from task-specific data. This has led to the emergence of pre-trained
vision-language models as a tool for transferring representations learned from
internet-scale data to downstream tasks and new domains. However, commonly
used contrastively trained representations such as in CLIP have been shown to fail at
enabling embodied agents to gain a sufficiently fine-grained scene understanding—
a capability vital for control. To address this shortcoming, we consider representations from pre-trained text-to-image diffusion models, which are explicitly optimized to generate images from text prompts and as such, contain text-conditioned
representations that reflect highly fine-grained visuo-spatial information. Using
pre-trained text-to-image diffusion models, we construct Stable Control Representations which allow learning downstream control policies that generalize to
complex, open-ended environments. We show that policies learned using Stable
Control Representations are competitive with state-of-the-art representation learning approaches across a broad range of simulated control settings, encompassing
challenging manipulation and navigation tasks. Most notably, we show that Stable Control Representations enable learning policies that exhibit state-of-the-art
performance on OVMM, a difficult open-vocabulary navigation benchmark.
Code: github.com/ykarmesh/stable-control-representations

1

Introduction

As general-purpose, pre-trained “foundation” models [2, 5, 6, 24, 31, 34, 47] are becoming widely
available, a central question in the field of embodied AI has emerged: How can foundation models be
used to construct model representations that improve generalization in challenging robotic control
tasks [4, 40, 64]?
Robotic control tasks often employ pixel-based visual inputs paired with a language-based goal
specification, making vision-language model representations particularly well-suited for this setting. However, while vision-language representations obtained via Contrastive Language-Image
Pre-training [CLIP; 33]—a state-of-the-art method—have been successfully applied to a broad
range of computer vision tasks, the use of CLIP representations has been shown to lead to poor
downstream performance for robotic control. This shortcoming has prompted the development
of alternative, control-specific representations for embodied AI [25, 30] but has left other sources
of general-purpose pre-trained vision-language representations—such as text-to-image diffusion
models—largely unexplored for control applications.
∗

Equal Contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

