Exploiting Descriptive Completeness Prior
for Cross Modal Hashing with Incomplete Labels

Haoyang Luo
School of Computer Science and Technology
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
Shenzhen, China
luohaoyang.lalutte@gmail.com

Zheng Zhang∗
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
Peng Cheng Laboratory
Shenzhen, China
darrenzz219@gmail.com

Yadan Luo
UQMM Lab, School of EECS
University of Queensland
Brisbane, Australia
y.luo@uq.edu.au

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the challenge of generating high-quality hash codes for
cross-modal retrieval in the presence of incomplete labels, which creates uncertainty
in distinguishing between positive and negative pairs. Vision-language models
such as CLIP offer a potential solution by providing generic knowledge for missing
label recovery, yet their zero-shot performance remains insufficient. To address
this, we propose a novel Prompt Contrastive Recovery approach, PCRIL, which
progressively identifies promising positive classes from unknown label sets and
recursively searches for other relevant labels. Identifying unknowns is nontrivial
due to the fixed and long-tailed patterns of positive label sets in training data, which
hampers the discovery of new label combinations. Therefore, we consider each
subset of positive labels and construct three types of negative prompts through deletion, addition, and replacement for prompt learning. The augmented supervision
guides the model to measure the completeness of label sets, thus facilitating the
subsequent greedy tree search for label completion. We also address extreme cases
of significant unknown labels and lack of negative pairwise supervision by deriving
two augmentation strategies: seeking unknown-complementary samples for mixup
and random flipping for negative labels. Extensive experiments reveal the vulnerability of current methods and demonstrate the effectiveness of PCRIL, achieving
an average 12% mAP improvement to the current SOTA across all datasets. Our
code is available at github.com/E-Galois/PCRIL.

1

Introduction

Cross-modal hashing (CMH) [2, 14, 17, 11, 23, 25] addresses the highly demanding cross-modal similarity search in both web search systems and academic domains [10, 13]. By efficiently transforming
multi-modal data (images, text, etc.) into a collection of compact binary codes, CMH maintains
high-dimensional cross-modal semantic similarity while significantly minimizing computational
and storage costs. Deep cross-modal hashing has achieved remarkable development by leveraging
dual-stream networks or semantic encoding branches based on semantic labels [14, 17]. However,
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

