MomentumSMoE: Integrating Momentum into
Sparse Mixture of Experts

Rachel S.Y. Teo
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
rachel.tsy@u.nus.edu

Tan M. Nguyen
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
tanmn@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Sparse Mixture of Experts (SMoE) has become the key to unlocking unparalleled
scalability in deep learning. SMoE has the potential to exponentially increase in
parameter count while maintaining the efficiency of the model by only activating
a small subset of these parameters for a given sample. However, it has been observed that SMoE suffers from unstable training and has difficulty adapting to new
distributions, leading to the model’s lack of robustness to data contamination. To
overcome these limitations, we first establish a connection between the dynamics
of the expert representations in SMoEs and gradient descent on a multi-objective
optimization problem. Leveraging our framework, we then integrate momentum
into SMoE and propose a new family of SMoEs, named MomentumSMoE. We theoretically prove and numerically demonstrate that MomentumSMoE is more stable
and robust than SMoE. In particular, we verify the advantages of MomentumSMoE
over SMoE on a variety of practical tasks including ImageNet-1K object recognition and WikiText-103 language modeling. We demonstrate the applicability of
MomentumSMoE to many types of SMoE models, including those in the Sparse
MoE model for vision (V-MoE) and the Generalist Language Model (GLaM). We
also show that other advanced momentum-based optimization methods, such as
Adam, can be easily incorporated into the MomentumSMoE framework for designing new SMoE models with even better performance, almost negligible additional
computation cost, and simple implementations. The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/rachtsy/MomentumSMoE.

1

Introduction

Scaling up deep models has demonstrated significant potential for enhancing the model’s performance
on a wide range of cognitive and machine learning tasks, ranging from large language model pretraining [13, 58, 59, 30, 5, 51, 70] and vision understanding [15, 2, 3, 39, 1, 40] to reinforcement
learning [6, 28] and scientific applications [66, 74]. However, increasing the model’s size requires a
higher computational budget, which can be often challenging to meet. As a result, Sparse Mixture
of Experts (SMoE) has been recently studied as an efficient approach to effectively scale up deep
models. By modularizing the network and activating only subsets of experts for each input, SMoE
maintains constant computational costs while increasing model complexity. This approach enables
the development of billion-parameter models and achieves significant success in various applications,
including machine translation [35], image classification [61], and speech recognition [34].
1.1

Sparse Mixture of Experts

A MoE replaces a component in the layer of the model, for example, a feed-forward or convolutional
layer, by a set of networks termed experts. This approach largely scales up the model but increases
Please correspond to: rachel.tsy@u.nus.edu
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

