Contextual Decision-Making with Knapsacks
Beyond the Worst Case

Zhaohua Chen
School of Computer Science
Peking University
Haidian, Beijing, China
chenzhaohua@pku.edu.cn

Rui Ai
IDSS & LIDS
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
ruiai@mit.edu

Mingwei Yang
Dept. of Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305, USA
mwyang@stanford.edu
Chang Wang
Dept. of Computer Science
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208, USA
wc@u.northwestern.edu

Yuqi Pan
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
yuqipan@g.harvard.edu
Xiaotie Deng
School of Computer Science
Institute for Artificial Intelligence
Peking University
Haidian, Beijing, China
xiaotie@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
We study the framework of a dynamic decision-making scenario with resource
constraints. In this framework, an agent, whose target is to maximize the total
reward under the initial inventory, selects an action in each round upon observing
a random request, leading to a reward and resource consumptions that are further
associated with an unknown
√ random external factor. While previous research has
e
already established an O( T ) worst-case regret for this problem, this work offers
two results that go beyond the worst-case perspective: one for the worst-case gap
between
√ benchmarks and another for logarithmic regret rates. We first show that
an Ω( T ) distance between the commonly used fluid benchmark and the online
optimum is unavoidable when the former has a degenerate optimal solution. On
the algorithmic side, we merge the re-solving heuristic with distribution estimation
e
skills and propose an algorithm that achieves an O(1)
regret as long as the fluid LP
has a unique and non-degenerate solution.
Furthermore,
we prove that our algo√
e
rithm maintains a near-optimal O( T ) regret even in the worst cases and extend
these results to the setting where the request and external factor are continuous.
Regarding information structure, our regret results are obtained under two feedback
models, respectively, where the algorithm accesses the external factor at the end of
each round and at the end of a round only when a non-null action is executed.

1

Introduction

In online contextual decision-making problems with knapsack constraints (CDMK for short), an
agent is required to make sequential decisions over a finite time horizon to maximize the accumulated
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

