Improving the Training of Rectified Flows

arXiv:2405.20320v2 [cs.CV] 8 Oct 2024

Sangyun Lee
Carnegie Mellon University
sangyunl@andrew.cmu.edu

Zinan Lin
Microsoft Research
zinanlin@microsoft.com

Giulia Fanti
Carnegie Mellon University
gfanti@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Diffusion models have shown great promise for image and video generation, but
sampling from state-of-the-art models requires expensive numerical integration
of a generative ODE. One approach for tackling this problem is rectified flows,
which iteratively learn smooth ODE paths that are less susceptible to truncation
error. However, rectified flows still require a relatively large number of function
evaluations (NFEs). In this work, we propose improved techniques for training
rectified flows, allowing them to compete with knowledge distillation methods
even in the low NFE setting. Our main insight is that under realistic settings, a
single iteration of the Reflow algorithm for training rectified flows is sufficient
to learn nearly straight trajectories; hence, the current practice of using multiple
Reflow iterations is unnecessary. We thus propose techniques to improve one-round
training of rectified flows, including a U-shaped timestep distribution and LPIPSHuber premetric. With these techniques, we improve the FID of the previous
2-rectified flow by up to 75% in the 1 NFE setting on CIFAR-10. On ImageNet
64×64, our improved rectified flow outperforms the state-of-the-art distillation
methods such as consistency distillation and progressive distillation in both one-step
and two-step settings and rivals the performance of improved consistency training
(iCT) in FID. Code is available at https://github.com/sangyun884/rfpp.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015, Ho et al., 2020, Song and Ermon, 2019, Song et al.,
2020b] have shown great promise in image [Ramesh et al., 2022] and video [Ho et al., 2022]
generation. They generate data by simulating a stochastic denoising process where noise is gradually
transformed into data. To sample efficiently from diffusion models, the denoising process is typically
converted into a counterpart of Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs) [Song et al., 2020b] called
probability flow ODEs (PF-ODEs).
Despite the success of diffusion models using PF-ODEs, drawing high-quality samples requires
numerical integration of the PF-ODE with small step sizes, which is computationally expensive.
Today, two prominent classes of approaches for tackling this issue are: (1) knowledge distillation
(e.g., consistency distillation [Song et al., 2023], progressive distillation [Salimans and Ho, 2022])
and (2) simulation-free flow models (e.g., rectified flows [Liu et al., 2022], flow matching [Lipman
et al., 2022]).
In knowledge distllation-based methods [Luhman and Luhman, 2021, Salimans and Ho, 2022, Song
et al., 2023, Zheng et al., 2022] a student model is trained to directly predict the solution of the
PF-ODE. These models are currently state-of-the-art in the low number of function evaluations
(NFEs) regime (e.g. 1-4).
Another promising direction is simulation-free flow models such as rectified flows [Liu et al., 2022,
Liu, 2022], a generative model that learns a transport map between two distributions defined via
neural ODEs. Diffusion models with PF-ODEs are a special case. Rectified flows can learn smooth
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

