N-Agent Ad Hoc Teamwork

Caroline Wang
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
caroline.l.wang@utexas.edu
Ishan Durugkar
Sony AI
ishan.durugkar@sony.com

Arrasy Rahman
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
arrasy@cs.utexas.edu
Elad Liebman∗
Amazon
liebelad@amazon.com

Peter Stone
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin and Sony AI
pstone@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Current approaches to learning cooperative multi-agent behaviors assume relatively restrictive settings. In standard fully cooperative multi-agent reinforcement
learning, the learning algorithm controls all agents in the scenario, while in ad
hoc teamwork, the learning algorithm usually assumes control over only a single
agent in the scenario. However, many cooperative settings in the real world are
much less restrictive. For example, in an autonomous driving scenario, a company
might train its cars with the same learning algorithm, yet once on the road, these
cars must cooperate with cars from another company. Towards expanding the
class of scenarios that cooperative learning methods may optimally address, we
introduce N -agent ad hoc teamwork (NAHT), where a set of autonomous agents
must interact and cooperate with dynamically varying numbers and types of teammates. This paper formalizes the problem, and proposes the Policy Optimization
with Agent Modelling (POAM) algorithm. POAM is a policy gradient, multi-agent
reinforcement learning approach to the NAHT problem that enables adaptation to
diverse teammate behaviors by learning representations of teammate behaviors.
Empirical evaluation on tasks from the multi-agent particle environment and StarCraft II shows that POAM improves cooperative task returns compared to baseline
approaches, and enables out-of-distribution generalization to unseen teammates.

1

Introduction

Advances in multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) [3] have enabled agents to learn solutions
to various problems in zero-sum games, social dilemmas, adversarial team games, and cooperative
tasks [37, 8, 19, 21, 33]. Within MARL, cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (CMARL)
is a paradigm for learning agent teams that solve a common task via interaction with each other and
the environment [22, 28, 46]. Recent CMARL methods have been able to learn impressive examples
of cooperative behavior from scratch in controlled settings, where all agents are controlled by the
same learning algorithm [33, 38, 4]. A related paradigm for learning cooperative behavior is ad hoc
∗

Work was done while at SparkCognition.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

