Prism: A Framework for Decoupling and Assessing
the Capabilities of VLMs

Yuxuan Qiao2∗ , Haodong Duan1† , Xinyu Fang4 , Junming Yang5 , Lin Chen6 ,
Songyang Zhang1 , Jiaqi Wang1 , Dahua Lin1,3,7 , Kai Chen1†
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 Nanjing University 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Tongji University 5 Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications
6
University of Science and Technology of China 7 CPII under InnoHK
yuxuanqiao@smail.nju.edu.cn
duanhaodong@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
Vision Language Models (VLMs) demonstrate remarkable proficiency in addressing a wide array of visual questions, which requires strong perception and reasoning
faculties. Assessing these two competencies independently is crucial for model refinement, despite the inherent difficulty due to the intertwined nature of seeing and
reasoning in existing VLMs. To tackle this issue, we present Prism, an innovative
framework designed to disentangle the perception and reasoning processes involved
in visual question solving. Prism comprises two distinct stages: a perception stage
that utilizes a VLM to extract and articulate visual information in textual form, and
a reasoning stage that formulates responses based on the extracted visual information using a Large Language Model (LLM). This modular design enables the
systematic comparison and assessment of both proprietary and open-source VLM
for their perception and reasoning strengths. Our analytical framework provides
several valuable insights, underscoring Prism’s potential as a cost-effective solution
for vision-language tasks. By combining a streamlined VLM focused on perception
with a powerful LLM tailored for reasoning, Prism achieves superior results in
general vision-language tasks while substantially cutting down on training and
operational expenses. Quantitative evaluations show that Prism, when configured
with a vanilla 2B LLaVA and freely accessible GPT-3.5, delivers performance on
par with VLMs 10× larger on the rigorous multimodal benchmark MMStar.

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of Large Language Models (LLMs) [45, 59, 60, 56, 5, 19, 4], Vision
Language Models (VLMs) [46, 55, 6, 36, 16, 18] have also experienced significant advancements. As
an end-to-end approach, VLMs trained on large-scale multimodal data [36, 11, 51, 8] exhibit superior
performance on a variety of tasks. These tasks range from basic ones such as object localization [31]
and optical character recognition [44, 38] to more complex challenges like document or diagram
comprehension [26, 43, 42] and solving geometric problems [40]. For VLMs to solve a general visual
question, two essential capabilities are required: 1) Perception: extracting necessary information
from the image; 2) Reasoning: generating answers based on the extracted information and contextual
understanding. Limitations in either capability can impede the overall performance of a VLM.
A systematic evaluation of the perception and reasoning capabilities is crucial to provide valuable
insights for future model optimization. However, seeing and reasoning are mostly entangled in
∗
†

The work was done during an internship at Shanghai AI Laboratory.
Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

