Generative Adversarial Model-Based Optimization via
Source Critic Regularization

Michael S. Yao∗
Department of Bioengineering
Perelman School of Medicine
University of Pennsylvania

Yimeng Zeng
Department of Computer
and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania

Hamsa Bastani
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania

Jacob Gardner
Department of Computer
and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania

James C. Gee
Department of Radiology
University of Pennsylvania

Osbert Bastani∗
Department of Computer
and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania

Abstract
Offline model-based optimization seeks to optimize against a learned surrogate
model without querying the true oracle objective function during optimization.
Such tasks are commonly encountered in protein design, robotics, and clinical
medicine where evaluating the oracle function is prohibitively expensive. However,
inaccurate surrogate model predictions are frequently encountered along offline
optimization trajectories. To address this limitation, we propose generative adversarial model-based optimization using adaptive source critic regularization
(aSCR)—a task- and optimizer- agnostic framework for constraining the optimization trajectory to regions of the design space where the surrogate function
is reliable. We propose a computationally tractable algorithm to dynamically adjust the strength of this constraint, and show how leveraging aSCR with standard
Bayesian optimization outperforms existing methods on a suite of offline generative
design tasks. Our code is available at https://github.com/michael-s-yao/gabo.

1

Introduction

In many real-world tasks, we often seek to optimize the value of an objective function over some
search space of inputs. Such optimization problems span across a wide variety of domains, including
molecule and protein design (Guimaraes et al., 2017; Brown et al., 2019; Maus et al., 2022), patient
treatment effect estimation (Kim & Bastani, 2021; Berrevoets et al., 2022; Xu & Bastani, 2023),
and resource allocation in public policy (Bastani et al., 2021; Ramchandani et al., 2021). A number
of algorithms have been explored for online optimization in these domains, including first-order
methods, quasi-Newton methods, and Bayesian optimization (Sun et al., 2020).
However, in many situations it may prove difficult or costly to estimate the objective function for any
arbitrary input configuration. Evaluating newly proposed molecules requires expensive experimental
laboratory setups, and testing multiple drug doses for a single patient can potentially be dangerous.
In these scenarios, the allowable budget for objective function queries is prohibitive, thereby limiting
the utility of out-of-the-box online policy optimization methods.
To overcome this limitation, recent work has investigated the utility of optimization methods in
the offline setting, where we are unable to query the objective function during the optimization
∗

Correspondence to: michael.yao@pennmedicine.upenn.edu, obastani@seas.upenn.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

