Wild-GS: Real-Time Novel View Synthesis from
Unconstrained Photo Collections
Jiacong Xu
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore MD 21218, USA
jxu155@jhu.edu

Yiqun Mei
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore MD 21218, USA
ymei7@jhu.edu

Vishal M. Patel
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore MD 21218, USA
vpatel36@jhu.edu

Abstract
Photographs captured in unstructured tourist environments frequently exhibit variable appearances and transient occlusions, challenging accurate scene reconstruction and inducing artifacts in novel view synthesis. Although prior approaches have
integrated the Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) with additional learnable modules
to handle the dynamic appearances and eliminate transient objects, their extensive
training demands and slow rendering speeds limit practical deployments. Recently,
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has emerged as a promising alternative to NeRF,
offering superior training and inference efficiency along with better rendering quality. This paper presents Wild-GS, an innovative adaptation of 3DGS optimized for
unconstrained photo collections while preserving its efficiency benefits. Wild-GS
determines the appearance of each 3D Gaussian by their inherent material attributes,
global illumination and camera properties per image, and point-level local variance
of reflectance. Unlike previous methods that model reference features in image
space, Wild-GS explicitly aligns the pixel appearance features to the corresponding
local Gaussians by sampling the triplane extracted from the reference image. This
novel design effectively transfers the high-frequency detailed appearance of the
reference view to 3D space and significantly expedites the training process. Furthermore, 2D visibility maps and depth regularization are leveraged to mitigate the
transient effects and constrain the geometry, respectively. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that Wild-GS achieves state-of-the-art rendering performance and the
highest efficiency in both training and inference among all the existing techniques.
The code can be accessed via https://github.com/XuJiacong/Wild-GS

1

Introduction

With the development of 3D scene representation technologies, novel view synthesis aiming to
create photo-realistic images from arbitrary viewpoints is becoming increasingly popular in computer
vision. Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al., 2021), as a physically inspired approach,
representing the scene by radiance field and density for volume rendering, has accomplished groundbreaking synthesis quality on a range of complex scenes. Many subsequent works extend the
applications of NeRF (Haque et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2022; Poole et al., 2022; Yuan et al., 2022)
and further improve its robustness (Verbin et al., 2022; Mildenhall et al., 2022; Ma et al., 2022). One
central assumption of NeRF and other traditional novel view synthesis methods is that the geometry,
material, and lighting conditions in the collected images should remain constant. However, the large
number of tourist photos on the internet is usually captured at different times and weathers, or with
various camera settings, containing variable appearance and transient occluders. Training NeRF with
these in-the-wild image collections will result in ghosting and over-smoothing artifacts.
To tackle the aforementioned problem, NeRF-W (Martin-Brualla et al., 2021) introduces imagedependent appearance and transient embeddings to model the appearance variation and transient
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

