Goal Reduction with Loop-Removal Accelerates RL
and Models Human Brain Activity in Goal-Directed
Learning

Huzi Cheng
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences
Indiana University Bloomington
hzcheng15@gmail.com
Joshua W. Brown
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences
Indiana University Bloomington
jwmbrown@iu.edu

Abstract
Goal-directed planning presents a challenge for classical RL algorithms due to the
vastness of the combinatorial state and goal spaces, while humans and animals
adapt to complex environments, especially with diverse, non-stationary objectives,
often employing intermediate goals for long-horizon tasks. Here, we propose a
goal reduction mechanism for effectively deriving subgoals from arbitrary and
distant original goals, using a novel loop-removal technique.1 The product of the
method, called goal-reducer, distills high-quality subgoals from a replay buffer, all
without the need for prior global environmental knowledge. Simulations show that
the goal-reducer can be integrated into RL frameworks like Deep Q-learning and
Soft Actor-Critic. It accelerates performance in both discrete and continuous action
space tasks, such as grid world navigation and robotic arm manipulation, relative
to the corresponding standard RL models. Moreover, the goal-reducer, when
combined with a local policy, without iterative training, outperforms its integrated
deep RL counterparts in solving a navigation task. This goal reduction mechanism
also models human problem-solving. Comparing the model’s performance and
activation with human behavior and fMRI data in a treasure hunting task, we found
matching representational patterns between a goal-reducer agent’s components
and corresponding human brain areas, particularly the vmPFC and basal ganglia.
The results suggest that humans may use a similar computational framework for
goal-directed behaviors.

1

Introduction

Humans and animals must develop capabilities to pursue time-varying goals in continuously changing
environments. The pressure for survival prohibits slow, linear adaptation to different goals, i.e.,
learning value functions from scratch for each new objective. A quick and versatile paradigm is
necessary for such goal-directed learning scenarios. However, traditional Reinforcement Learning
(RL) algorithms are not specifically designed for this, encountering challenges in the goal-directed
learning context. They are highly optimized for scenarios with relatively fixed goals, e.g., winning
in Go, or reducing building energy consumption [51]. In these situations, iterative methods like the
1

Our code is available at github.com/chenghuzi/goal-reducer.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

