Structured Learning of
Compositional Sequential Interventions

Jialin Yu1
1

Andreas Koukorinis1

Nicolò Colombo2
2

University College London

Yuchen Zhu1

Ricardo Silva1

Royal Holloway, University of London

Abstract
We consider sequential treatment regimes where each unit is exposed to combinations of interventions over time. When interventions are described by qualitative
labels, such as “close schools for a month due to a pandemic” or “promote this
podcast to this user during this week”, it is unclear which appropriate structural
assumptions allow us to generalize behavioral predictions to previously unseen
combinations of interventions. Standard black-box approaches mapping sequences
of categorical variables to outputs are applicable, but they rely on poorly understood
assumptions on how reliable generalization can be obtained, and may underperform
under sparse sequences, temporal variability, and large action spaces. To approach
that, we pose an explicit model for composition, that is, how the effect of sequential
interventions can be isolated into modules, clarifying which data conditions allow
for the identification of their combined effect at different units and time steps. We
show the identification properties of our compositional model, inspired by advances
in causal matrix factorization methods. Our focus is on predictive models for novel
compositions of interventions instead of matrix completion tasks and causal effect
estimation. We compare our approach to flexible but generic black-box models to
illustrate how structure aids prediction in sparse data conditions.

1

Contribution

Many causal inference questions involve a treatment sequence that varies over time. In the
(discrete) time-varying scenario, an unit n is
exposed to a sequence Dn1 , Dn2 , Dn3 , . . . of actions, or treatments, potentially controllable by
an external agent [22, Ch. 19] intervening on
them. Each Dnt can be interpreted as a cause of
the subsequent behavior Xnt , Xnt+1 , . . . , and its
modeling amenable to the tools of causal inference [e.g., 35, 36, 31, 17, 11, 49]. For instance,
each Dnt can take values in the space of particular drug dosages which can be given to an
in-patient, or combinations of items to be promoted to a user of a recommender system. Here,
patients and users are the units, and Xnt denotes
a measure of their state or behavior under time
t. Dependencies can result in a dense causal
graph, as in Fig. 1. Further background on this
classical problem is provided in Appendix A.

βn

Dn1

Dn2

Dn3

Dn4

Xn1

Xn2

Xn3

Xn4

Figure 1: Within unit n, actions Dnt interact with
(latent) random effect parameters βn to produce
behavior Xnt represented as a dense graphical
model with square vertices denoting interventions
do(d1:t
n ) [33, 16]. Further assumptions will be
required for the identifiability of the impact of interventions and their combination, including how
temporal impact takes shape and the number of
independent units of observation.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

