SpeedLoader: An I/O efficient scheme for
heterogeneous and distributed LLM operation

Yiqi Zhang
Institute of Data Science
yiqi.zhang@u.nus.edu

Yang You
School of Computing
youy@comp.nus.edu.sg

National University of Singapore
Singapore, 119077

Abstract
With the surging growth of model parameters, foundation models pose unprecedented challenges to traditional computational infrastructures. These large models
inherently require substantial accelerator memory to accommodate massive tensors
during pre-training, fine-tuning, and even inference stages, making it even more
challenging to deploy a model with restricted computational resources. Given
this challenge, distribution and offloading the model states are two major solutions. Partitioning the required states to participating workers, and storing them
in lower speed media, such as host DRAM and block devices, largely alleviate
the accelerator memory pressure. However, the prohibitive costs of tensor communication render it a theoretically plausible yet practically inefficient solution.
Previous efforts to improve efficiency include maximizing rematerialization and
employing chunk-based tensor management to reduce host-device communication.
Despite these efforts, the reported training throughput only achieves 36.54% of
model FLOPs utilization (MFUs), still not comparable to full on-device training.
In this work, we redesign the data flow of heterogeneous hardware and sharded
model training to minimize the excessive communication overhead. Our proposed
scheme significantly enhances training and inference throughput of large language
models under restrictive computational resources. We confirmed a large leap in
effective compute time by looking into the kernel-level runtime behavior of our
trials, where the MFUs can achieve up to 51%. Compared to the state-of-the-art
approach, our framework robustly achieves remarkable speedups from 3x to 30x in
multiple distributed heterogeneous training setups and inference speedups of 1.5x
to 2.35x without compromising arithmetic precision.

1

Introduction

The trend of increasing transformer-based model sizes marks a paradigm shift in natural language
processing deep neural networks. Research on model scales suggests that expanding transformer
sizes significantly benefits aspects such as performance, universality, and transferability [1, 2]. In
accordance with scaling laws[1], large language models (LLMs) have surged in recent years. For
instance, models have grown from the 175 billion parameters in GPT-3 to over 400 billion parameters
in LLaMA-3 [3, 4], the size of LLMs underwent a substantial leap. However, the continually growing
size of these models places mounting pressure on computational infrastructures. For example, training
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

