Dynamic Rescaling for Training GNNs

Rebekka Burkholz
CISPA
66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
burkholz@cispa.de

Nimrah Mustafa
CISPA
66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
nimrah.mustafa@cispa.de

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) with a rescale invariance, such as GATs, can
be re-parameterized during optimization through dynamic rescaling of network
parameters and gradients while keeping the loss invariant. In this work, we explore
dynamic rescaling as a tool to influence GNN training dynamics in two key ways: i)
balancing the network with respect to various criteria, and ii) controlling the relative
learning speeds of different layers. We gain novel insights, unique to GNNs, that
reveal distinct training modes for different tasks. For heterophilic graphs, achieving
balance based on relative gradients leads to faster training and better generalization.
In contrast, homophilic graphs benefit from delaying the learning of later layers.
Additionally, we show that training in balance supports larger learning rates, which
can improve generalization. Moreover, controlling layer-wise training speeds is
linked to grokking-like phenomena, which may be of independent interest.
Deep neural networks (DNNs) with positively homogeneous non-linear activation functions such as
ReLU exhibit the rescale invariance property [31], i.e. scaling down incoming weights to a neuron
and scaling up the outgoing weights from the neuron by the same factor does not alter the function
represented by the network.
Under gradient flow that assumes an infinitesimally small learning rate, this rescale symmetry induces
the conservation of a relationship between network parameters and gradients, determined by the initial
state [8]. More specifically, it is known that for traditional DNNs and convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) with homogenous activation functions such as ReLUs, the difference between the squared
L2-norms of incoming and outgoing parameters to a neuron stays constant (and is thus conserved).
When this conserved quantity is (nearly) zero, the network is said to be in a balanced state. Training
DNNs is generally considered well-conditioned by a balanced state of this conservation law.
In the context of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), the first work presenting insights regarding norm
balance derives the conservation law for GATs [2] and demonstrates how a balanced initialization
enhances the trainability of GATs, particularly deeper networks [28]. This balanced state that would
hold under gradient flow could potentially be beneficial throughout training. However, in practice,
factors that drive optimization such as finite learning rates, momentum, weight decay, and batch
stochasticity break the rescale (and other) symmetries [15] and consequent conserved quantities,
causing the network to topple out of balance due to which training conditions may deteriorate.
Motivated by the positive outcomes of training a model balanced at initialization, we utilize the
identified rescale invariance of GATs [28] to further investigate the effects of maintaining this balance
throughout training rather than only at initialization, by dynamic rescaling, i.e. scaling network
parameters at the neuron level during training in a loss-invariant manner. To this end, we derive a
general procedure to balance a GAT network, not necessarily only w.r.t. parameter weight norms, but
any criterion that is a function of network parameters and gradients. More specifically, we propose a
novel criterion based on relative gradients of network parameters and demonstrate that this criterion,
or a combination of both criteria, often offers practical gains in terms of training speedup or better
generalization.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

