OPUS: Occupancy Prediction Using a Sparse Set

Jiabao Wang1∗, Zhaojiang Liu2∗ , Qiang Meng3 , Liujiang Yan3 , Ke Wang3 , Jie Yang2 ,
Wei Liu2 , Qibin Hou1,4† , Ming-Ming Cheng1,4
1
VCIP, College of Computer Science, Nankai University
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 KargoBot Inc. 4 NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian
https://github.com/jbwang1997/OPUS

Abstract
Occupancy prediction, aiming at predicting the occupancy status within voxelized
3D environment, is quickly gaining momentum within the autonomous driving
community. Mainstream occupancy prediction works first discretize the 3D environment into voxels, then perform classification on such dense grids. However,
inspection on sample data reveals that the vast majority of voxels is unoccupied.
Performing classification on these empty voxels demands suboptimal computation resource allocation, and reducing such empty voxels necessitates complex
algorithm designs. To this end, we present a novel perspective on the occupancy
prediction task: formulating it as a streamlined set prediction paradigm without
the need for explicit space modeling or complex sparsification procedures. Our
proposed framework, called OPUS, utilizes a transformer encoder-decoder architecture to simultaneously predict occupied locations and classes using a set of
learnable queries. Firstly, we employ the Chamfer distance loss to scale the setto-set comparison problem to unprecedented magnitudes, making training such
model end-to-end a reality. Subsequently, semantic classes are adaptively assigned
using nearest neighbor search based on the learned locations. In addition, OPUS
incorporates a suite of non-trivial strategies to enhance model performance, including coarse-to-fine learning, consistent point sampling, and adaptive re-weighting,
etc. Finally, compared with current state-of-the-art methods, our lightest model
achieves superior RayIoU on the Occ3D-nuScenes dataset at near 2× FPS, while
our heaviest model surpasses previous best results by 6.1 RayIoU.

1

Introduction

Compared with well-established box representations [8, 23, 20, 39, 29, 48, 32], voxel based occupancy [16, 37, 10, 38, 33] can provide finer geometry and semantic information for the surrounding
scene. For example, it is not straightforward to use bounding boxes to describe vehicles with doors
open or cranes with outriggers deployed. While occupancy can naturally describe such uncommon
shapes. Thus occupancy prediction is quickly gaining traction in the autonomous driving community.
Recent approaches [3, 46, 9, 27, 16, 34] to the task predominantly rely on dense data representation,
with a direct one-to-one correspondence between feature points and physical voxels. It has come to
our attention that the vast majority of physical voxels is empty. For instance, in SemanticKITTI [1],
approximately 67% of all voxels are empty, while in Occ3D-nuScenes [38], this proportion exceeds
90%. Such sparse nature of occupancy data renders the direct dense representation undeniably
inefficient, as majority of the computation is allocated towards empty voxels. Alternative sparse latent
representations have been explored to alleviate such inefficiency, such as the Tri-Perspective View
representation [37, 9] or reduced solution spaces [21, 10], leading to notably reduced computational
costs. However, these approaches still treat occupancy prediction as a classification problem at
specific locations, necessitating complex intermediate designs and explicit modeling of 3D spaces.
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

