MMDU: A Multi-Turn Multi-Image Dialog
Understanding Benchmark and Instruction-Tuning
Dataset for LVLMs
Ziyu Liu1,2 , Tao Chu2 , Yuhang Zang†2 , Xilin Wei2 , Xiaoyi Dong2 , Pan Zhang2 ,
Zijian Liang1 , Yuanjun Xiong5 , Yu Qiao2 , Dahua Lin2,3,4 , Jiaqi Wang†2
1
SJTU, 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory, 3 CUHK, 4 CPII under InnoHK, 5 MThreads, Inc.
liuziyu77@sjtu.edu.cn, {zangyuhang, wangjiaqi}@pjlab.org.cn
Github: https://github.com/Liuziyu77/MMDU

Abstract
Generating natural and meaningful responses to communicate with multi-modal human inputs is a fundamental capability of Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs).
While current open-source LVLMs demonstrate promising performance in simplified scenarios such as single-turn single-image input, they fall short in real-world
conversation scenarios such as following instructions in a long context history
with multi-turn and multi-images. Existing LVLM benchmarks primarily focus
on single-choice questions or short-form responses, which do not adequately assess the capabilities of LVLMs in real-world human-AI interaction applications.
Therefore, we introduce MMDU, a comprehensive benchmark, and MMDU-45k,
a large-scale instruction tuning dataset, designed to evaluate and improve LVLMs’
abilities in multi-turn and multi-image conversations. We employ the clustering
algorithm to find the relevant images and textual descriptions from the open-source
Wikipedia and construct the question-answer pairs by human annotators with the
assistance of the GPT-4o model. MMDU has a maximum of 18k image+text tokens,
20 images, and 27 turns, which is at least 5× longer than previous benchmarks
and poses challenges to current LVLMs. Our in-depth analysis of 15 representative
LVLMs using MMDU reveals that open-source LVLMs lag behind closed-source
counterparts due to limited conversational instruction tuning data. We demonstrate
that fine-tuning open-source LVLMs on MMDU-45k significantly addresses this
gap, generating longer and more accurate conversations, and improving scores on
MMDU and existing benchmarks (MMStar: +1.1%, MathVista: +1.5%, ChartQA:
+1.2%). Our contributions pave the way for bridging the gap between current
LVLM models and real-world application demands. This project is available at
https://github.com/Liuziyu77/MMDU.

1

Introduction

Human-AI interaction is a fundamental task to ensure that AI can be deployed in the real world for
everyone, enabling inclusive and effective communication between humans and AI in various aspects
of daily life. Current Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) [1] have made significant strides in
understanding and generating text conditioned on visual inputs, showing promising directions in AI
assistant applications.
Current open-source LVLMs primarily focus on single-turn, single-image inputs, which are far
from the complexities of real-world scenarios. In contrast, effective human-AI interaction in daily
life demands a range of essential skills, including the ability to engage in multi-turn conversations
that involve multiple image inputs and comprehend long-context histories to facilitate coherent
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

