Mixture of Scales: Memory-Efficient Token-Adaptive
Binarization for Large Language Models
∗

∗

Dongwon Jo 1 Taesu Kim 2 Yulhwa Kim 3 Jae-Joon Kim 1
1
Seoul National University 2 SqueezeBits Inc. 3 Sungkyunkwan University
{dongwonjo, kimjaejoon}@snu.ac.kr
{taesu.kim}@squeezebits.com
{yulhwakim}@skku.edu

Abstract
Binarization, which converts weight parameters to binary values, has emerged as
an effective strategy to reduce the size of large language models (LLMs). However,
typical binarization techniques significantly diminish linguistic effectiveness of
LLMs. To address this issue, we introduce a novel binarization technique called
Mixture of Scales (BinaryMoS). Unlike conventional methods, BinaryMoS employs multiple scaling experts for binary weights, dynamically merging these
experts for each token to adaptively generate scaling factors. This token-adaptive
approach boosts the representational power of binarized LLMs by enabling contextual adjustments to the values of binary weights. Moreover, because this adaptive
process only involves the scaling factors rather than the entire weight matrix, BinaryMoS maintains compression efficiency similar to traditional static binarization
methods. Our experimental results reveal that BinaryMoS surpasses conventional
binarization techniques in various natural language processing tasks and even outperforms 2-bit quantization methods, all while maintaining similar model size to
static binarization techniques.

1

Introduction

Though large language models (LLMs) have delivered impressive results in a variety of natural
language processing (NLP) tasks, their massive size often complicates deployment. One common
method to compress LLMs is through the quantization of weight parameters, which reduces model
sizes by lowering the precision of weight values [1, 8, 2, 30, 31, 32, 33, 3, 4]. Existing quantization
approaches such as GPTQ [2], AWQ [3], and OWQ [4] have successfully managed to reduce model
sizes by converting 16-bit floating point weights to 4-bit representations, achieving a fourfold decrease
in size. Binarization pushes this concept even further by reducing weight values to 1-bit, resulting in
a 16-fold size reduction.
However, such aggressive compression through binarization drastically limits the representational
capacity of weights, leading to a significant degradation in the linguistic capabilities of LLMs. To
address this limitation and improve the accuracy of binarized LLMs, recent research has actively
explored binarization techniques tailored for LLMs [29, 5, 6, 7]. Nonetheless, previous efforts often
compromise the inherent advantages of binarization by introducing high memory overhead, and they
continue to struggle to achieve sufficient accuracy with binarized LLMs.
In this paper, we propose a novel binarization technique named as Mixture of Scales (BinaryMoS).
Typical binarization methods use scaling factors to control the effective values of binarized weights.
Although these scaling factors occupy a tiny fraction of the overall model size, they are crucial
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

