Spherical Frustum Sparse Convolution Network for
LiDAR Point Cloud Semantic Segmentation

Yu Zheng1∗, Guangming Wang2∗, Jiuming Liu1 , Marc Pollefeys3 , Hesheng Wang1†
1
Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
University of Cambridge 3 ETH Zürich
{zhengyu0730,liujiuming,wanghesheng}@sjtu.edu.cn
gw462@cam.ac.uk marc.pollefeys@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
LiDAR point cloud semantic segmentation enables the robots to obtain fine-grained
semantic information of the surrounding environment. Recently, many works
project the point cloud onto the 2D image and adopt the 2D Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) or vision transformer for LiDAR point cloud semantic segmentation. However, since more than one point can be projected onto the same 2D
position but only one point can be preserved, the previous 2D projection-based segmentation methods suffer from inevitable quantized information loss, which results
in incomplete geometric structure, especially for small objects. To avoid quantized
information loss, in this paper, we propose a novel spherical frustum structure,
which preserves all points projected onto the same 2D position. Additionally,
a hash-based representation is proposed for memory-efficient spherical frustum
storage. Based on the spherical frustum structure, the Spherical Frustum sparse
Convolution (SFC) and Frustum Farthest Point Sampling (F2PS) are proposed to
convolve and sample the points stored in spherical frustums respectively. Finally,
we present the Spherical Frustum sparse Convolution Network (SFCNet) to adopt
2D CNNs for LiDAR point cloud semantic segmentation without quantized information loss. Extensive experiments on the SemanticKITTI and nuScenes datasets
demonstrate that our SFCNet outperforms previous 2D projection-based semantic
segmentation methods based on conventional spherical projection and shows better performance on small object segmentation by preserving complete geometric
structure. Codes will be available at https://github.com/IRMVLab/SFCNet.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, 3D LiDAR point clouds are widely used sensor data in autonomous robot systems. Many
recent works focus on resolving perception [1, 2] and localization [3, 4, 5] tasks on autonomous
robot systems using LiDAR point clouds. Among them, semantic segmentation on the LiDAR
point cloud enables the robot a fine-grained understanding of the surrounding environment. In
addition, the semantic segmentation results can be adopted for the reconstruction of the semantic
map [6, 7, 8, 9, 10] of the environments.
Inspired by the achievements of deep learning in image semantic segmentation, researchers focus on
searching for effective approaches to transfer the achievements to the field of point cloud semantic
segmentation. Most previous works convert the raw point cloud to regular grids, like 2D images [11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21] and 3D voxels [22, 23, 24, 25], to exploit Convolutional Neural
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

