Model-GLUE: Democratized LLM Scaling for A Large
Model Zoo in the Wild
Xinyu Zhao∗1 , Guoheng Sun∗2 , Ruisi Cai∗3 , Yukun Zhou∗4 , Pingzhi Li∗1 , Peihao Wang∗3
Bowen Tan5 , Yexiao He2 , Li Chen6 , Yi Liang6 , Beidi Chen5 , Binhang Yuan4
Hongyi Wang†7 , Ang Li†2 , Zhangyang Wang†3 , Tianlong Chen†1
1

UNC CH

2

UMD

3

UT Austin

4

HKUST

5

CMU

6

Google 7 Rutgers University

{xinyu,pingzhi,tianlong}@cs.unc.edu, {ghsun,yexiaohe,angliece}@umd.edu
{ruisi.cai,peihaowang,atlaswang}@utexas.edu
yzhoufw@connect.ust.hk, {btan2,beidic}@andrew.cmu.edu
li.lizliz.chen@gmail.com, yiliang@google.com
biyuan@ust.hk, hongyi.wang.001@rutgers.edu
∗
Equal Contribution † Equal Supervision

Abstract
As Large Language Models (LLMs) excel across tasks and specialized domains,
scaling LLMs based on existing models has gained significant attention, which
is challenged by potential performance drop when combining disparate models.
Various techniques have been proposed to aggregate pre-trained LLMs, including
model merging, Mixture-of-Experts, and stacking. Despite their merits, a comprehensive comparison and synergistic application of them to a diverse model zoo
is yet to be adequately addressed. In light of this research gap, this paper introduces Model-GLUE, a holistic LLM scaling guideline. First, our work starts with a
benchmarking of existing LLM scaling techniques, especially selective merging,
and variants of mixture. Utilizing the insights from the benchmark results, we
formulate a strategy for the selection and aggregation of a heterogeneous model zoo
characterizing different architectures and initialization. Our methodology involves
clustering mergeable models, selecting a merging strategy, and integrating model
clusters through model-level mixture. Finally, evidenced by our experiments on
a diverse Llama-2-based model zoo, Model-GLUE shows an average performance
enhancement of 5.61%, achieved without additional training. Codes are available
at https://github.com/Model-GLUE/Model-GLUE.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated unparalleled capability in a diverse array of
natural language tasks, encompassing commonsense reasoning, question answering, and specialized
domains such as mathematics and programming [39, 43, 52]. The effectiveness of LLMs is based
on the scaling law, which posits that proportionally increasing model and training data size leads to
enhanced model performance [27]. Nevertheless, the computation overhead and data requirement
surge as LLM continues to scale. With the widespread of open-sourced general or specialized LLMs,
aggregating existing models to construct a more versatile LLM emerges as an economical alternative
to training a larger LLM from scratch [13, 16, 54]. This not only mitigates the computation cost but
also leverages the collective advancements of previous efforts in building LLMs.
Within different methods to combine existing LLMs, a major class is merging [2, 4, 22, 24, 35,
59, 63, 64]. Model merging combines multiple models into a single one of the same size through
weight-space transformation. Wortsman et al. [59] first propose to merge a few fine-tuned models as a
training trick for the flat loss-landscape, and Ilharco et al. [22] extends it to multi-task scenario, both
of which employ the simple averaging. Other works propose more complicated merging methods,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

