Dense Associative Memory Through the Lens of
Random Features
Benjamin Hoover
IBM Research & Georgia Tech
benjamin.hoover@ibm.com

Duen Horng Chau
Georgia Tech
polo@gatech.edu

Parikshit Ram
IBM Research
parikshit.ram@ibm.com

Hendrik Strobelt
IBM Research & MIT-IBM
hendrik.strobelt@ibm.com
Dmitry Krotov
IBM Research
krotov@ibm.com

Abstract
Dense Associative Memories are high storage capacity variants of the Hopfield
networks that are capable of storing a large number of memory patterns in the
weights of the network of a given size. Their common formulations typically
require storing each pattern in a separate set of synaptic weights, which leads to
the increase of the number of synaptic weights when new patterns are introduced.
In this work we propose an alternative formulation of this class of models using
random features, commonly used in kernel methods. In this formulation the number
of network’s parameters remains fixed. At the same time, new memories can be
added to the network by modifying existing weights. We show that this novel
network closely approximates the energy function and dynamics of conventional
Dense Associative Memories and shares their desirable computational properties.

1

Introduction

Hopfield network of associative memory is an elegant mathematical model that makes it possible to
store a set of memory patterns in the synaptic weights of the neural network [1]. For a given prompt
σi (t = 0), which serves as the initial state of that network, the neural update equations drive the
dynamical flow towards one of the stored memories. For a system of K memory patterns in the Ddimensional binary space the network’s dynamics can be described by the temporal trajectory σi (t),
which descends the energy function
E=−

K X
D
2
X
ξiµ σi
µ=1

(1)

i=1

Here ξiµ (index µ = 1...K, and index i = 1...D) represent memory vectors. The neural dynamical
equations describe the energy descent on this landscape. In this formulation, which we call the
memory representation, the geometry of the energy landscape is encoded in the weights of the
network ξiµ , which coincide with the memorised patterns. Thus, in situations when the set of the
memories needs to be expanded by introducing new patterns one must introduce additional weights.
Alternatively, one could rewrite the above energy in a different form, which is more commonly used
in the literature. Specifically, the sum over the memories can be computed upfront and the energy can
be written as
D
K
X
X
E=−
Tij σi σj , where Tij =
ξiµ ξjµ
(2)
i,j=1

µ=1

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

