WeiPer: OOD Detection using Weight Perturbations of
Class Projections

Maximilian Granz ∗
Institute for Computer Science
Free University of Berlin
Arnimallee 7 14195 Berlin
maximilian.granz@fu-berlin.de

Manuel Heurich ∗
Institute for Computer Science
Free University of Berlin
Arnimallee 7 14195 Berlin
manuel.heurich@fu-berlin.de

Tim Landgraf
Institute for Computer Science
Free University of Berlin
Arnimallee 7 14195 Berlin
tim.landgraf@fu-berlin.de

Abstract
Recent advances in out-of-distribution (OOD) detection on image data show that
pre-trained neural network classifiers can separate in-distribution (ID) from OOD
data well, leveraging the class-discriminative ability of the model itself. Methods
have been proposed that either use logit information directly or that process the
model’s penultimate layer activations. With "WeiPer", we introduce perturbations
of the class projections in the final fully connected layer which creates a richer
representation of the input. We show that this simple trick can improve the OOD
detection performance of a variety of methods and additionally propose a distancebased method that leverages the properties of the augmented WeiPer space. We
achieve state-of-the-art OOD detection results across multiple benchmarks of
the OpenOOD framework, especially pronounced in difficult settings in which
OOD samples are positioned close to the training set distribution. We support our
findings with theoretical motivations and empirical observations, and run extensive
ablations to provide insights into why WeiPer works. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/mgranz/weiper.

1

Introduction

Out-of-Distribution (OOD) detection has emerged as a pivotal area of machine learning research. It
addresses the challenge of recognizing input data that deviates significantly from the distribution
seen during training. This capability is critical because machine learning models, particularly deep
neural networks, are known to make overconfident and incorrect predictions on such unseen data
Hendrycks & Gimpel (2016). The need for OOD detection is driven by practical considerations. In
real-world applications, a model frequently encounters data that is not represented in its training
set. For instance, in autonomous driving, a system trained in one geographic location might face
drastically different road conditions in another. Without robust OOD detection, these models risk
making unsafe decisions Amodei et al. (2016).
Over the last few years, the field has made significant steps towards setting up benchmarks and open
baseline implementations. Thanks to the efforts of the OpenOOD team Zhang et al. (2023b); Yang
*

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

