Accelerating Blockwise Parallel Language Models
with Draft Refinement
Taehyeon Kim1∗ Ananda Theertha Suresh2 Kishore Papineni2
Sanjiv Kumar2 Adrian Benton2
1
KAIST AI 2 Google Research

Michael Riley2

Abstract
Autoregressive language models have achieved remarkable advancements, yet their
potential is often limited by the slow inference speeds associated with sequential
token generation. Blockwise parallel decoding (BPD) was proposed by Stern et
al. [42] as a method to improve inference speed of language models by simultaneously predicting multiple future tokens, termed block drafts, which are subsequently
verified by the autoregressive model. This paper advances the understanding and
improvement of block drafts in two ways. First, we analyze token distributions
generated across multiple prediction heads. Second, leveraging these insights,
we propose algorithms to improve BPD inference speed by refining the block
drafts using task-independent n-gram and neural language models as lightweight
rescorers. Experiments demonstrate that by refining block drafts of open-sourced
Vicuna and Medusa LLMs, the mean accepted token length are increased by 5-25%
relative. This results in over a 3x speedup in wall clock time compared to standard
autoregressive decoding in open-source 7B and 13B LLMs.

1

Introduction

The landscape of natural language processing has been profoundly reshaped by recent advances in
autoregressive language models [3, 48, 34, 37, 47]. These models have shown remarkable proficiency
across a range of text generation tasks, including applications like question answering [38] and
summarization [17]. However, a significant obstacle to their wider application is high inference
latency, particularly for extremely deep models with hundreds of billions of parameters [18, 35, 7].
This latency, intrinsic to decoding with autoregressive language models (LMs), imposes considerable
computational burdens and limits real-time deployment.
In response to these challenges, the field has seen a shift towards decoding methods aimed at reducing
the inference latency in large language models (LLMs). One promising development is the concept of
blockwise parallel decoding (BPD) [42, 31, 4]. Unlike autoregressive decoding, which generates one
token at a time, blockwise parallel LMs are outfitted with a set of prediction heads that propose and
verify a draft, a block of subsequent tokens, in parallel. While BPD offers one solution to accelerated
text generation, it also poses a challenge in ensuring that the proposed drafts are fluent and natural.
BPD inference speed depends both on the time it takes to generate a block draft and verification of
the draft’s agreement with the original LM’s output (referred to as base LM from here on) (Figure 1a).
Unlike standard autoregressive LMs that generate tokens sequentially — ensuring consistency with
all preceding tokens (e.g., ‘Messi’ following ‘Lionel’) — BPD employs a non-autoregressive drafting
strategy. Here, blockwise parallel LMs simultaneously predict multiple token drafts (e.g., ‘Lionel’
and ‘Ronaldo’), each position produced independently. The primary challenge in BPD drafting is
ensuring that these concurrently-generated tokens are consistent with each other. An effective block
drafter should prefer coherent sequences, such as ‘Lionel Messi’ over less coherent combinations like
∗

Work done while at Google Research as a student researcher.
hyeon610@gmail.com> and <adbenton@google.com>.

Corresponding authors: <kimtae-

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

