RGFN: Synthesizable Molecular Generation Using
GFlowNets
Michał Koziarski*,1,2 , Andrei Rekesh*,3 , Dmytro Shevchuk*,3 , Almer van der Sloot1,2 ,
Piotr Gaiński4,1,2 , Yoshua Bengio1,2 , Cheng-Hao Liu1,5 , Mike Tyers6,3 , Robert A. Batey3,7
1
Mila – Québec AI Institute, 2 Université de Montréal, 3 University of Toronto,
4
Jagiellonian University, 5 McGill University, 6 The Hospital for Sick Children Research Institute,
7
Acceleration Consortium, * Equal contribution
michal.koziarski@mila.quebec, {a.rekesh,dmytro.shevchuk}@mail.utoronto.ca

Abstract
Generative models hold great promise for small molecule discovery, significantly
increasing the size of search space compared to traditional in silico screening
libraries. However, most existing machine learning methods for small molecule
generation suffer from poor synthesizability of candidate compounds, making
experimental validation difficult. In this paper we propose Reaction-GFlowNet
(RGFN), an extension of the GFlowNet framework that operates directly in the
space of chemical reactions, thereby allowing out-of-the-box synthesizability while
maintaining comparable quality of generated candidates. We demonstrate that with
the proposed set of reactions and building blocks, it is possible to obtain a search
space of molecules orders of magnitude larger than existing screening libraries
coupled with low cost of synthesis. We also show that the approach scales to very
large fragment libraries, further increasing the number of potential molecules. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach across a range of oracle
models, including pretrained proxy models and GPU-accelerated docking.

1

Introduction

Traditionally, machine learning has been applied to drug discovery for screening existing libraries
of compounds, whether actual physical collections or pre-configured in silico collections of readily
synthesizable compounds, in a supervised fashion. However, supervised screening of the whole druglike space, often estimated to contain approximately 1060 [41] different compounds, is infeasible in
practice. Generative methods offer the potential to circumvent this issue by sampling directly from a
distribution over desirable chemical properties without the need to evaluate every possible molecular
structure. Despite these advances, existing generative approaches tend not to explicitly enforce
synthesizability [21], generating samples that might be either very costly or altogether impossible
to chemically synthesize. Ensuring that generative methods operate in the space of synthesizable
compounds, yet at a much larger and more diverse scale than existing chemical libraries, remains an
open challenge.
In this paper, we propose Reaction-GFlowNet (RGFN), an extension of the GFlowNet framework
[5] that generates molecules by combining basic chemical fragments using a chain of reactions. We
propose a relatively small collection of cheap and accessible chemical building blocks (reactants),
as well as established high-yield chemical transformations, that together can still produce a search
space orders of magnitude larger than existing chemical libraries. We additionally propose several
domain-specific extensions of the GFlowNet framework for action representation and scaling to a
larger space of possible actions.
Source code available at https://github.com/koziarskilab/RGFN.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

