CiteME: Can Language Models
Accurately Cite Scientific Claims?
Ori Press*1,4 , Andreas Hochlehnert*1,4 , Ameya Prabhu1,4 , Vishaal Udandarao1,3,4 , Ofir Press‡2 , and
Matthias Bethge‡1,4
1

2

Tübingen AI Center, University of Tübingen
Princeton Language and Intelligence, Princeton University
3
University of Cambridge
4
Open-Ψ (Open-Sci) Collective

Abstract
Thousands of new scientific papers are published each month. Such information
overload complicates researcher efforts to stay current with the state-of-the-art as
well as to verify and correctly attribute claims. We pose the following research
question: Given a text excerpt referencing a paper, could an LM act as a research
assistant to correctly identify the referenced paper? We advance efforts to answer
this question by building a benchmark that evaluates the abilities of LMs in citation
attribution. Our benchmark, CiteME, consists of text excerpts from recent machine
learning papers, each referencing a single other paper. CiteME use reveals a large
gap between frontier LMs and human performance, with LMs achieving only 4.218.5% accuracy and humans 69.7%. We close this gap by introducing CiteAgent,
an autonomous system built on the GPT-4o LM that can also search and read
papers, which achieves an accuracy of 35.3% on CiteME. Overall, CiteME serves
as a challenging testbed for open-ended claim attribution, driving the research
community towards a future where any claim made by an LM can be automatically
verified and discarded if found to be incorrect.

1

Introduction

Figure 1: Example of a CiteME instance. The input (left) is an excerpt from a published paper with
an anonymized citation; the target answer (right) is the title of the cited paper.
Scientific discoveries are advancing at an ever-growing rate, with tens of thousands of new papers
added just to arXiv every month [4]. This rapid progress has led to information overload within
communities, making it nearly impossible for scientists to read all relevant papers. However, it
*/‡ shared first/last authorship
Code: github.com/bethgelab/CiteME, Dataset: huggingface.co/datasets/bethgelab/CiteME
Correspondence to {ori.press,andreas.hochlehnert}@bethgelab.org
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

