Spectral Editing of Activations for
Large Language Model Alignment

1

Yifu Qiu, 1 Zheng Zhao, 3 Yftah Ziser,
Anna Korhonen, 1 Edoardo M. Ponti, 1 Shay B. Cohen
1
Institute for Language, Cognition and Computation, University of Edinburgh
2
Language Technology Lab, University of Cambridge
3
Nvidia Research
{yifu.qiu,zheng.zhao,eponti,scohen}@ed.ac.uk
2

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) often exhibit undesirable behaviours, such as
generating untruthful or biased content. Editing their internal representations has
been shown to be effective in mitigating such behaviours on top of the existing
alignment methods. We propose a novel inference-time editing method, namely
spectral editing of activations (SEA), to project the input representations into
directions with maximal covariance with the positive demonstrations (e.g., truthful)
while minimising covariance with the negative demonstrations (e.g., hallucinated).
We also extend our method to non-linear editing using feature functions. We run
extensive experiments on benchmarks concerning truthfulness and bias with six
open-source LLMs of different sizes and model families. The results demonstrate
the superiority of SEA in effectiveness, generalisation to similar tasks, as well as
computation and data efficiency. We also show that SEA editing only has a limited
negative impact on other model capabilities.1

1

Introduction

While large language models (LLMs) have taken a central place in the development of full-fledged natural language processing (NLP) applications, there is a fundamental problem that prevents them from
being fully trusted in real-world deployment: LLMs still generate inaccurate or biased information
that does not align with human preferences [25, 20, 22, 45, 33, 21, 7, 10, 29].

BBQ

HaluEval

#layer 1
#layer 17
#layer 32
Previous work suggests that LLMs “know” more than what
they “say” [21, 4]; their internal representations encode rich
state information [35]. In fact, examples of positive and negative LLM generations tend to define partly separate clusters
within the activation space, as shown in Figure 1. Furthermore,
Li et al. [21] trained a linear probe on the output representations from a subset of attention heads and achieved 65.1%
accuracy in predicting whether an LLM is hallucinating or
not. Inspired by these observations, we aim to steer LLMs’ bepositive
negative
haviour (e.g., to generate more truthful or less biased content)
Figure 1: t-SNE plot of LLaMAby editing their internal activations.
2-chat-7B’s activations for positive
The idea of editing LLM activations by training a target mod- (blue) and negative (red) demonstraule—e.g., a vector of shifts [21, 5] or an entire expert model tions from HaluEval and BBQ.
1

Our code and edited models are available on https://github.com/yfqiu-nlp/sea-llm .

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

