SlimGPT: Layer-wise Structured Pruning for Large
Language Models

Gui Ling, Ziyang Wang, Yuliang Yan∗, Qingwen Liu
Alibaba Group
{linggui.lg, shanyi.wzy, yuliang.yyl, xiangsheng.lqw}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have garnered significant attention for their remarkable capabilities across various domains, whose vast parameter scales present
challenges for practical deployment. Structured pruning is an effective method
to balance model performance with efficiency, but performance restoration under computational resource constraints is a principal challenge in pruning LLMs.
Therefore, we present a low-cost and fast structured pruning method for LLMs
named SlimGPT based on the Optimal Brain Surgeon framework. We propose
Batched Greedy Pruning for rapid and near-optimal pruning, which enhances
the accuracy of head-wise pruning error estimation through grouped Cholesky
decomposition and improves the pruning efficiency of FFN via Dynamic Group
Size, thereby achieving approximate local optimal pruning results within one hour.
Besides, we explore the limitations of layer-wise pruning from the perspective
of error accumulation and propose Incremental Pruning Ratio, a non-uniform
pruning strategy to reduce performance degradation. Experimental results on the
LLaMA benchmark show that SlimGPT outperforms other methods and achieves
state-of-the-art results.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) [1, 2, 3] have made significant strides in various natural language
processing tasks, leading to the emergence of novel applications such as AI agents [4]. One of
the factors contributing to the exceptional capabilities of LLMs is their massive parameter scales.
However, these extensive parameters also introduce increased inference costs and deployment
challenges, hindering the widespread application and adoption of LLMs. Accelerating inference
for LLMs has become a focal point of current research. Model compression [5], as one of the
strategies for inference acceleration, including techniques like pruning and quantization [6, 7], has
been extensively researched. Nevertheless, earlier model compression techniques, particularly model
pruning, typically rely on heavy post-training to recover the model’s capabilities, which typically
involves retraining with the entire training dataset. Given the constraints of current computational
resources, the above approaches are not feasible for LLMs.
In the domain of LLM pruning, recent studies have largely focused on unstructured (or semistructured) pruning [8], a method that shrinks models by selectively zeroing out weights considered
non-critical. Despite its advancements, unstructured pruning falls short in substantially reducing
parameter count, which is crucial for accelerating LLM inference as it is often bottlenecked on
memory bandwidth and communication [9]. To accelerate inference speed, unstructured pruning
models are often paired with specialized frameworks or hardware solutions. Conversely, structured
pruning [10, 11] effectively decreases the model’s parameter count by systematically eliminating
columns or rows from weight matrices, enabling significant improvements in inference speed, and
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

