RouterDC: Query-Based Router by Dual Contrastive
Learning for Assembling Large Language Models

Shuhao Chen1, ⋆ , Weisen Jiang1, 2, ⋆ , Baijiong Lin3 , James T. Kwok2 , Yu Zhang1, †
1
Southern University of Science and Technology
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
12232388@mail.sustech.edu.cn, jamesk@cse.ust.hk
{waysonkong, bj.lin.email, yu.zhang.ust}@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent works show that assembling multiple off-the-shelf large language models
(LLMs) can harness their complementary abilities. To achieve this, routing is a
promising method, which learns a router to select the most suitable LLM for each
query. However, existing routing models are ineffective when multiple LLMs
perform well for a query. To address this problem, in this paper, we propose a
method called query-based Router by Dual Contrastive learning (RouterDC). The
RouterDC model, which consists of an encoder and LLM embeddings, is trained
by two proposed contrastive losses (sample-LLM and sample-sample losses). Experimental results show that RouterDC is effective in assembling LLMs and largely
outperforms individual top-performing LLMs as well as existing routing methods on both in-distribution (+2.76%) and out-of-distribution (+1.90%) tasks. The
source code is available at https://github.com/shuhao02/RouterDC.

LLMs

Sim

ila

rity

RouterDC

In-Distribution
Out-of-Distribution

Figure 1: The inference pipeline of RouterDC.
The encoder E and the LLM embeddings k’s are
trainable parameters, while the LLMs are frozen.

1

Figure 2: Testing accuracy of candidate LLMs
and our RouterDC on in-distribution and out-ofdistribution tasks.

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated proficient capabilities across various tasks. Many
LLMs are publicly available online, such as Mistral [24], LLaMA-2 [46], and LLaMA-3 [45]. Those
LLMs have been further fine-tuned to be generalists or specialists. For example, MetaMath [54]
excels in solving mathematical reasoning problems. Since those LLMs are pre-trained or fine-tuned
with various data, they typically exhibit varying strengths and weaknesses across different tasks
⋆

Equal contribution

†

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

