Maximum Entropy Inverse Reinforcement Learning of
Diffusion Models with Energy-Based Models

Sangwoong Yoon1 , Himchan Hwang2 , Dohyun Kwon1,3† , Yung-Kyun Noh1,4† , Frank C. Park2,5†
1
Korea Institute for Advanced Study, 2 Seoul National University, 3 University of Seoul,
4
Hanyang University, 5 Saige Research, † Co-corresponding Authors
swyoon@kias.re.kr, himchan@robotics.snu.ac.kr,
dhkwon@uos.ac.kr, nohyung@hanyang.ac.kr, fcp@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We present a maximum entropy inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) approach for
improving the sample quality of diffusion generative models, especially when the
number of generation time steps is small. Similar to how IRL trains a policy based
on the reward function learned from expert demonstrations, we train (or fine-tune)
a diffusion model using the log probability density estimated from training data.
Since we employ an energy-based model (EBM) to represent the log density, our
approach boils down to the joint training of a diffusion model and an EBM. Our
IRL formulation, named Diffusion by Maximum Entropy IRL (DxMI), is a
minimax problem that reaches equilibrium when both models converge to the data
distribution. The entropy maximization plays a key role in DxMI, facilitating the
exploration of the diffusion model and ensuring the convergence of the EBM. We
also propose Diffusion by Dynamic Programming (DxDP), a novel reinforcement
learning algorithm for diffusion models, as a subroutine in DxMI. DxDP makes the
diffusion model update in DxMI efficient by transforming the original problem into
an optimal control formulation where value functions replace back-propagation
in time. Our empirical studies show that diffusion models fine-tuned using DxMI
can generate high-quality samples in as few as 4 and 10 steps. Additionally, DxMI
enables the training of an EBM without MCMC, stabilizing EBM training dynamics
and enhancing anomaly detection performance.

1

Introduction

Generative modeling is a form of imitation learning. Just as an imitation learner produces an action
that mimics a demonstration from an expert, a generative model synthesizes a sample resembling the
training data. In generative modeling, the expert to be imitated corresponds to the underlying data
generation process. The intimate connection between generative modeling and imitation learning is
already well appreciated in the literature [1, 2].
The connection to imitation learning plays a central role in diffusion models [3, 4], which generate
samples by transforming a Gaussian noise through iterative additive refinements. The training of
a diffusion model is essentially an instance of behavioral cloning [5], a widely adopted imitation
learning algorithm that mimics an expert’s action at each state. During training, a diffusion model is
optimized to follow a predefined diffusion trajectory that interpolates between noise and data. The
trajectory provides a step-by-step demonstration of how to transform Gaussian noise into a sample,
allowing diffusion models to achieve a new state-of-the-art in many generation tasks.
Behavioral cloning is also responsible for the diffusion model’s key limitation, the slow generation
speed. A behavior-cloned policy is not reliable when the state distribution deviates from the expert
demonstration [6, 7]. Likewise, the sample quality from a diffusion model degrades as the gap
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

