Towards an Information Theoretic Framework of
Context-Based Offline Meta-Reinforcement Learning

Lanqing Li1,2∗ , Hai Zhang3∗, Xinyu Zhang4 , Shatong Zhu3 , Yang Yu2 ,
Junqiao Zhao3†, Pheng-Ann Heng2
1
Zhejiang Lab, 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
3
Tongji University, 4 Stony Brook University
lanqingli1993@gmail.com, {zhanghai12138, zhushatong, zhaojunqiao}@tongji.edu.cn,
zhang146@cs.stonybrook.edu, {yangyu, pheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
As a marriage between offline RL and meta-RL, the advent of offline metareinforcement learning (OMRL) has shown great promise in enabling RL agents
to multi-task and quickly adapt while acquiring knowledge safely. Among which,
context-based OMRL (COMRL) as a popular paradigm, aims to learn a universal
policy conditioned on effective task representations. In this work, by examining
several key milestones in the field of COMRL, we propose to integrate these seemingly independent methodologies into a unified framework. Most importantly,
we show that the pre-existing COMRL algorithms are essentially optimizing the
same mutual information objective between the task variable M and its latent
representation Z by implementing various approximate bounds. Such theoretical
insight offers ample design freedom for novel algorithms. As demonstrations, we
propose a supervised and a self-supervised implementation of I(Z; M ), and empirically show that the corresponding optimization algorithms exhibit remarkable
generalization across a broad spectrum of RL benchmarks, context shift scenarios,
data qualities and deep learning architectures. This work lays the information
theoretic foundation for COMRL methods, leading to a better understanding of
task representation learning in the context of reinforcement learning. Given its
generality, we envision our framework as a promising offline pre-training paradigm
of foundation models for decision making.1

1

Introduction

The ability to swiftly learn and generalize to new tasks is a hallmark of human intelligence. In
pursuit of this high-level artificial intelligence (AI), the paradigm of meta-reinforcement learning
(RL) proposes to train AI agents in a trial-and-error manner by interacting with multiple external
environments. In order to quickly adapt to the unknown, the agents need to integrate prior knowledge
with minimal experience (namely the context) collected from the new tasks or environments, without
over-fitting to the new data. This meta-RL mechanism has been adopted in many applications such as
games [1, 2], robotics [3, 4] and drug discovery [5].
However, for data collection, classical meta-RL usually requires enormous online explorations of
the environments [6, 7], which is impractical in many safety-critical scenarios such as healthcare [8],
autonomous driving [9] and robotic manipulation [10]. As a remedy, offline RL [11] enables agents
∗

Equal contribution. This work was primarily done when Hai Zhang worked as an intern at Zhejiang Lab.
Corresponding Author
1
Source code: https://github.com/betray12138/UNICORN.git.

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

