Robust Gaussian Processes via Relevance Pursuit
Sebastian Ament
Meta
ament@meta.com
Ben Letham
Meta
bletham@meta.com

Elizabeth Santorella
Meta
santorella@meta.com

David Eriksson
Meta
deriksson@meta.com

Maximilian Balandat
Meta
balandat@meta.com

Eytan Bakshy
Meta
ebakshy@meta.com

Abstract
Gaussian processes (GPs) are non-parametric probabilistic regression models that
are popular due to their flexibility, data efficiency, and well-calibrated uncertainty
estimates. However, standard GP models assume homoskedastic Gaussian noise,
while many real-world applications are subject to non-Gaussian corruptions. Variants of GPs that are more robust to alternative noise models have been proposed,
and entail significant trade-offs between accuracy and robustness, and between
computational requirements and theoretical guarantees. In this work, we propose
and study a GP model that achieves robustness against sparse outliers by inferring
data-point-specific noise levels with a sequential selection procedure maximizing
the log marginal likelihood that we refer to as relevance pursuit. We show, surprisingly, that the model can be parameterized such that the associated log marginal
likelihood is strongly concave in the data-point-specific noise variances, a property
rarely found in either robust regression objectives or GP marginal likelihoods.
This in turn implies the weak submodularity of the corresponding subset selection
problem, and thereby proves approximation guarantees for the proposed algorithm.
We compare the model’s performance relative to other approaches on diverse regression and Bayesian optimization tasks, including the challenging but common
setting of sparse corruptions of the labels within or close to the function range.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic models have long been a central part of machine learning, and Gaussian process (GP)
models are a key workhorse for many important tasks [54], especially in the small-data regime. GPs
are flexible, non-parametric predictive models known for their high data efficiency and well-calibrated
uncertainty estimates, making them a popular choice for regression, uncertainty quantification, and
downstream applications such as Bayesian optimization (BO) [8, 24, 26] and active learning [6, 55].
GPs flexibly model a distribution over functions, but assume a particular observation model. The
standard formulation assumes i.i.d Gaussian observation noise, i.e., y(x) = f (x) + ϵ, where f (x) is
the true (latent) function value at a point x and ϵ ∼ N (0, σ 2 ), implying a homoskedastic Gaussian
likelihood. While mathematically convenient, this assumption can be a limitation in practice, since
noise distributions are often heavy-tailed or observations may be corrupted due to issues such as
sensor failures, data processing errors, or software bugs. Using a standard GP model in such settings
can result in poor predictive performance.
A number of robust GP modeling approaches have been proposed to remedy this shortcoming, most
of which fall into the following broad categories: data pre-processing (e.g., Winsorizing), modified
likelihood functions (e.g., Student-t), and model-based data selection and down-weighting procedures.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

