Molecule Design by Latent Prompt Transformer

Deqian Kong1,⋆ , Yuhao Huang2,⋆ , Jianwen Xie3,4,⋆ , Edouardo Honig1,⋆ ,
Ming Xu5 , Shuanghong Xue5 , Pei Lin6 , Sanping Zhou2 ,
Sheng Zhong5,6 , Nanning Zheng2 , Ying Nian Wu1
1

2

Department of Statistics and Data Science, UCLA
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
BioMap Research 4 Akool Research
5
Institute of Engineering in Medicine, UCSD
6
Shu Chien-Gene Lay Department of Bioengineering, UCSD

Abstract
This work explores the challenging problem of molecule design by framing it
as a conditional generative modeling task, where target biological properties or
desired chemical constraints serve as conditioning variables. We propose the
Latent Prompt Transformer (LPT), a novel generative model comprising three
components: (1) a latent vector with a learnable prior distribution modeled by a
neural transformation of Gaussian white noise; (2) a molecule generation model
based on a causal Transformer, which uses the latent vector as a prompt; and (3)
a property prediction model that predicts a molecule’s target properties and/or
constraint values using the latent prompt. LPT can be learned by maximum
likelihood estimation on molecule-property pairs. During property optimization,
the latent prompt is inferred from target properties and constraints through posterior
sampling and then used to guide the autoregressive molecule generation. After
initial training on existing molecules and their properties, we adopt an online
learning algorithm to progressively shift the model distribution towards regions
that support desired target properties. Experiments demonstrate that LPT not only
effectively discovers useful molecules across single-objective, multi-objective, and
structure-constrained optimization tasks, but also exhibits strong sample efficiency.

1

Introduction

Molecule design plays a pivotal role in drug discovery, focusing on identifying or creating molecules
with desired pharmacological or chemical properties. However, the vast and complex space of
potential drug-like molecules presents significant challenges for systematically designing efficient
machine learning models to navigate this space. Latent space optimization (LSO) (Maus et al.,
2022; Tripp et al., 2020; Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018), a two-stage procedure, has emerged as a
promising approach to address this challenge. The first stage involves training a deep generative model,
typically a deep variational auto-encoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling, 2014), to map low-dimensional
continuous vectors to the data manifold in input space, creating a simplified and continuous analog
of the original optimization problem. In the second stage, the objective function is optimized over
this learned latent space using a surrogate model. While LSO has demonstrated potential in tackling
high-dimensional and structured input spaces, existing LSO-based methods separate the training
of the generative model from the property-conditioned optimization. This decoupling can lead
to suboptimal performance, as the learned latent space may not be ideally suited to the specific
⋆

Equal Contribution. Project page: https://sites.google.com/view/latent-prompt-transformer.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

