Understanding the Role of Equivariance in
Self-supervised Learning

arXiv:2411.06508v1 [cs.LG] 10 Nov 2024

Yifei Wang∗
MIT

Kaiwen Hu*
Peking University

Sharut Gupta
MIT

Yisen Wang
Peking University

Ziyu Ye
The University of Chicago

Stefanie Jegelka
TUM† and MIT‡

Abstract
Contrastive learning has been a leading paradigm for self-supervised learning,
but it is widely observed that it comes at the price of sacrificing useful features
(e.g., colors) by being invariant to data augmentations. Given this limitation,
there has been a surge of interest in equivariant self-supervised learning (E-SSL)
that learns features to be augmentation-aware. However, even for the simplest
rotation prediction method, there is a lack of rigorous understanding of why, when,
and how E-SSL learns useful features for downstream tasks. To bridge this gap
between practice and theory, we establish an information-theoretic perspective to
understand the generalization ability of E-SSL. In particular, we identify a critical
explaining-away effect in E-SSL that creates a synergy between the equivariant and
classification tasks. This synergy effect encourages models to extract class-relevant
features to improve its equivariant prediction, which, in turn, benefits downstream
tasks requiring semantic features. Based on this perspective, we theoretically
analyze the influence of data transformations and reveal several principles for
practical designs of E-SSL. Our theory not only aligns well with existing E-SSL
methods but also sheds light on new directions by exploring the benefits of model
equivariance. We believe that a theoretically grounded understanding on the role
of equivariance would inspire more principled and advanced designs in this field.
Code is available at https://github.com/kaotty/Understanding-ESSL.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning (SSL) of data representations has made remarkable progress. Existing
SSL methods can be categorized into two types: invariant SSL (I-SSL) and equivariant SSL (ESSL). The idea of I-SSL is to encourage the representation to be invariant to input augmentations
(e.g., color jittering). Contrastive learning that pulls positive samples closer and pushes negative
samples apart is widely believed to be a prominent I-SSL paradigm, leading to rapid progress in recent
years [13, 50, 5, 80, 46, 30, 3, 32, 33, 60, 49, 14, 37, 15, 77, 64, 81]. Nevertheless, since invariant
representations lose augmentation-related information (e.g., color information), their performance on
downstream tasks can be hindered, as frequently observed in practice [47, 17, 34].
∗

Equal Contribution. Correspondence: Yifei Wang <yifei_w@mit.edu>.
CIT, MCML, MDSI
‡
EECS, CSAIL
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

