Initializing Services in Interactive ML Systems for
Diverse Users
Avinandan Bose
University of Washington
avibose@cs.washington.edu

Mihaela Curmei
University of California Berkeley
mcurmei@berkeley.edu

Jamie Morgenstern
University of Washington
jamiemmt@cs.washington.edu

Sarah Dean
Cornell University
sdean@cornell.edu

Daniel L. Jiang
University of Washington
danji@cs.washington.edu
Lillian J. Ratliff
University of Washington
ratliffl@uw.edu

Maryam Fazel
University of Washington
mfazel@uw.edu

Abstract
This paper investigates ML systems serving a group of users, with multiple models/services, each aimed at specializing to a sub-group of users. We consider
settings where upon deploying a set of services, users choose the one minimizing their personal losses and the learner iteratively learns by interacting with
diverse users. Prior research shows that the outcomes of learning dynamics, which
comprise both the services’ adjustments and users’ service selections, hinge significantly on the initial conditions. However, finding good initial conditions faces two
main challenges: (i) Bandit feedback: Typically, data on user preferences are not
available before deploying services and observing user behavior; (ii) Suboptimal
local solutions: The total loss landscape (i.e., the sum of loss functions across all
users and services) is not convex and gradient-based algorithms can get stuck in
poor local minima.
We address these challenges with a randomized algorithm to adaptively select a
minimal set of users for data collection in order to initialize a set of services. Under
mild assumptions on the loss functions, we prove that our initialization leads to
a total loss within a factor of the globally optimal total loss with complete user
preference data, and this factor scales logarithmically in the number of services.
This result is a generalization of the well-known k-means++ guarantee to a broad
problem class, which is also of independent interest. The theory is complemented
by experiments on real as well as semi-synthetic datasets.

1

Introduction

We consider a setting where a provider wants to design k services for n users with diverse preferences.
Each service uses a model parameterized by a vector θ ∈ Rd to predict users’ preferences, and users
pick a service that yields the smallest loss for them. The loss incurred by user i when choosing
a service parameterized by θ is denoted by Li (θ, ϕi ), where ϕi ∈ Rd parameterizes the user’s
preference. We want to design k services by minimizing the sum of all losses; i.e., an optimization

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

