Diffusion Model with Cross Attention as an Inductive
Bias for Disentanglement

Tao Yang1∗, Cuiling Lan2†, Yan Lu2 , Nanning Zheng1†
yt14212@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,
{culan, yanlu}@microsoft.com,
nnzheng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
and Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
2
Microsoft Research Asia
https://github.com/thomasmry/EncDiff

Abstract
Disentangled representation learning strives to extract the intrinsic factors within
the observed data. Factoring these representations in an unsupervised manner
is notably challenging and usually requires tailored loss functions or specific
structural designs. In this paper, we introduce a new perspective and framework,
demonstrating that diffusion models with cross-attention itself can serve as a
powerful inductive bias to facilitate the learning of disentangled representations.
We propose to encode an image into a set of concept tokens and treat them as
the condition of the latent diffusion model for image reconstruction, where cross
attention over the concept tokens is used to bridge the encoder and the U-Net of
the diffusion model. We analyze that the diffusion process inherently possesses
the time-varying information bottlenecks. Such information bottlenecks and cross
attention act as strong inductive biases for promoting disentanglement. Without
any regularization term in the loss function, this framework achieves superior
disentanglement performance on the benchmark datasets, surpassing all previous
methods with intricate designs. We have conducted comprehensive ablation studies
and visualization analyses, shedding a light on the functioning of this model. We
anticipate that our findings will inspire more investigation on exploring diffusion
model for disentangled representation learning towards more sophisticated data
analysis and understanding.

1

Introduction

Disentangled representation learning aims to uncover and understand the underlying causal factors
of observed data [1, 13]. This is believed to have immense potential to empower a multitude of
machine learning tasks, facilitating the models to attain better interpretability, superior generalizability,
controlled generation, and robustness [33]. Over the years, the field of disentangled representation
learning has attracted significant academic interest and many research contributions. Numerous
methods, encompassing Variational Autoencoders (VAE) based techniques (such as β-VAE [14, 2],
FactorVAE [19]), Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) based approaches (such as InfoGAN [5],
InfoGAN-CR [23]), along with others [37, 28], have been proposed to advance this field further.
∗
†

This work was done during internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

