Subject-driven Text-to-Image Generation via
Preference-based Reinforcement Learning

Yanting Miao
Department of Computer Science
University of Waterloo, Vector Institute
y43miao@uwaterloo.ca
Suraj Kothawade
Google
skothawade@google.com

William Loh
Depart of Computer Science
University of Waterloo, Vector Institute
wmloh@uwaterloo.ca
Pascal Poupart
Depart of Computer Science
University of Waterloo, Vector Institute
ppoupart@uwaterloo.ca

Abdullah Rashwan ∗
Google
arashwan@google.com

Yeqing Li
Google
yeqing@google.com

Abstract
Text-to-image generative models have recently attracted considerable interest,
enabling the synthesis of high-quality images from textual prompts. However, these
models often lack the capability to generate specific subjects from given reference
images or to synthesize novel renditions under varying conditions. Methods
like DreamBooth and Subject-driven Text-to-Image (SuTI) have made significant
progress in this area. Yet, both approaches primarily focus on enhancing similarity
to reference images and require expensive setups, often overlooking the need for
efficient training and avoiding overfitting to the reference images. In this work,
we present the λ-Harmonic reward function, which provides a reliable reward
signal and enables early stopping for faster training and effective regularization. By
combining the Bradley-Terry preference model, the λ-Harmonic reward function
also provides preference labels for subject-driven generation tasks. We propose
Reward Preference Optimization (RPO), which offers a simpler setup (requiring
only 3% of the negative samples used by DreamBooth) and fewer gradient steps for
fine-tuning. Unlike most existing methods, our approach does not require training
a text encoder or optimizing text embeddings and achieves text-image alignment
by fine-tuning only the U-Net component. Empirically, λ-Harmonic proves to be
a reliable approach for model selection in subject-driven generation tasks. Based
on preference labels and early stopping validation from the λ-Harmonic reward
function, our algorithm achieves a state-of-the-art CLIP-I score of 0.833 and a
CLIP-T score of 0.314 on DreamBench. Our Pytorch implementation is available
at https://github.com/andrew-miao/RPO.

1

Introduction

In the evolving field of generative AI, text-to-image diffusion models [28, 13, 26, 29, 27, 23, 24]
have demonstrated remarkable abilities in rendering scenes that are both imaginative and contextually
∗

This project was completed during work at Google

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

