FedLLM-Bench: Realistic Benchmarks for
Federated Learning of Large Language Models

Rui Ye1∗ Rui Ge1∗ Xinyu Zhu1
Jingyi Chai1
Yaxin Du1
2
3,1
Yang Liu
Yanfeng Wang
Siheng Chen1†
1

2

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Institute for AI Industry Research, Tsinghua University 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory

Abstract
Federated learning could enable multiple parties to collaboratively fine-tune large
language models without directly sharing their data (FedLLM). Following this
training paradigm, the community has put massive efforts from diverse aspects
including framework, performance, and privacy. However, an unpleasant fact is that
there are currently no realistic datasets and benchmarks for FedLLM and previous
works often rely on artificially constructed datasets, failing to capture properties in
real-world scenarios. Addressing this, we propose FedLLM-Bench, which involves
8 training methods, 4 training datasets, and 6 evaluation metrics, to offer a comprehensive testbed for the FedLLM community. FedLLM-Bench encompasses three
datasets (e.g., user-annotated multilingual dataset) for federated instruction tuning
and one dataset (e.g., user-annotated preference dataset) for federated preference
alignment, whose scale of client number ranges from 38 to 747. Our datasets incorporate several representative diversities: language, quality, quantity, instruction,
length, embedding, and preference, capturing properties in real-world scenarios.
Based on FedLLM-Bench, we conduct experiments on all datasets to benchmark existing FL methods and provide empirical insights (e.g., multilingual collaboration).
We believe that our FedLLM-Bench can benefit the FedLLM community by reducing required efforts, providing a practical testbed, and promoting fair comparisons.
Code and datasets are available at https://github.com/rui-ye/FedLLM-Bench.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have achieved unprecedented success in diverse domains [1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6]. These LLMs are usually trained by centralized learning paradigm, where various parties
individually collect massive data for model training. In this case, the data amount of each individual
party is hard to scale due to the high cost of collecting and annotating data. However, their data
cannot be directly shared for collaboration due to property and privacy issues.
To relieve the required cost of each party, federated learning (FL) [7, 8] has emerged as a sound
and off-the-shelf technique to facilitate collaboration, which leverages decentralized language data
to collaboratively train LLMs in a privacy-preserving way (FedLLM)1 [9, 10, 11]. To facilitate the
development of FedLLM, there has been a series of code frameworks such as OpenFedLLM [9],
FederatedScope-LLM [10], and FedML-LLM [11]; and many methods that tackle the issues of
data quality [12], safety risks [13], incentive mechanism [14], intellectual property protection [15],
privacy [16], limited resources [17], data and system heterogeneity [18] in FedLLM.
*

1

Equal contributions. † Corresponding author: sihengc@sjtu.edu.cn.
We are referring to post-training of LLMs, which is more suitable in FL considering the required resources.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

