A Cross-Domain Benchmark for Active Learning

Thorben Werner ∗
University of Hildesheim
Universitätsplatz 1 31141 Hildesheim
werner@ismll.de

Johannes Burchert∗
University of Hildesheim
Universitätsplatz 1, 31141 Hildesheim
burchert@ismll.de

Maximilian Stubbemann∗
University of Hildesheim
Universitätsplatz 1, 31141 Hildesheim
stubbemann@ismll.de
Lars Schmidt-Thieme∗
University of Hildesheim
Universitätsplatz 1, 31141 Hildesheim
schmidt-thieme@ismll.uni-hildesheim.de

Abstract
Active Learning (AL) deals with identifying the most informative samples for labeling to reduce data annotation costs for supervised learning tasks. AL research
suffers from the fact that lifts from literature generalize poorly and that only a
small number of repetitions of experiments are conducted. To overcome these
obstacles, we propose CDALBench, the first active learning benchmark which includes tasks in computer vision, natural language processing and tabular learning.
Furthermore, by providing an efficient, greedy oracle, CDALBench can be evaluated with 50 runs for each experiment. We show, that both the cross-domain character and a large amount of repetitions are crucial for sophisticated evaluation of
AL research. Concretely, we show that the superiority of specific methods varies
over the different domains, making it important to evaluate Active Learning with
a cross-domain benchmark. Additionally, we show that having a large amount of
runs is crucial. With only conducting three runs as often done in the literature,
the superiority of specific methods can strongly vary with the specific runs. This
effect is so strong, that, depending on the seed, even a well-established method’s
performance can be significantly better and significantly worse than random for
the same dataset.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (NN) have produced state-of-the-art results on many important supervised
learning tasks. Since Deep NNs usually require large amounts of labeled training data, Active
Learning (AL) deals with selecting the most informative samples out of a large pool of unlabeled
data, so that only these samples need to be labeled. It has been shown that a small labeled set of this
nature can be used to train well-performing models. In the last decade, many different algorithms
for AL have been proposed and almost every method has reported lifts over every single one of its
∗

Institute of Computer Science - Information Systems and Machine Learning Lab (ISMLL)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

