BABILong: Testing the Limits of LLMs with Long
Context Reasoning-in-a-Haystack

Yuri Kuratov∗ 1,2 Aydar Bulatov∗ 2 Petr Anokhin1 Ivan Rodkin2
Dmitry Sorokin1 Artyom Sorokin1 Mikhail Burtsev3
1

AIRI, Moscow, Russia 2 Neural Networks and Deep Learning Lab, MIPT, Dolgoprudny, Russia
3
London Institute for Mathematical Sciences, London, UK
{yurii.kuratov,bulatov.as}@phystech.edu, mb@lims.ac.uk

Abstract
In recent years, the input context sizes of large language models (LLMs) have
increased dramatically. However, existing evaluation methods have not kept pace,
failing to comprehensively assess the efficiency of models in handling long contexts. To bridge this gap, we introduce the BABILong benchmark, designed
to test language models’ ability to reason across facts distributed in extremely
long documents. BABILong includes a diverse set of 20 reasoning tasks, including fact chaining, simple induction, deduction, counting, and handling lists/sets.
These tasks are challenging on their own, and even more demanding when the
required facts are scattered across long natural text. Our evaluations show that
popular LLMs effectively utilize only 10-20% of the context and their performance
declines sharply with increased reasoning complexity. Among alternatives to incontext reasoning, Retrieval-Augmented Generation methods achieve a modest
60% accuracy on single-fact question answering, independent of context length.
Among context extension methods, the highest performance is demonstrated by
recurrent memory transformers after fine-tuning, enabling the processing of lengths
up to 50 million tokens. The BABILong benchmark is extendable to any length to
support the evaluation of new upcoming models with increased capabilities, and
we provide splits up to 10 million token lengths.

1

Introduction

Today, large language models (LLMs) and neural architectures are continually evolving and achieving
remarkable improvements, particularly in their ability to handle longer contexts (OpenAI, 2023b;
Reid et al., 2024; Anthropic, 2024). The ability of these models to process and generate text based on
rich contextual information is crucial for several reasons. For example, longer contexts provide more
information for the model to condition its outputs, leading to more accurate, contextually relevant,
and up-to-date responses. Furthermore, long-context capabilities can enhance in-context learning
by providing more in-context examples, instructions to follow, or example trajectories in context of
reinforcement learning (Chevalier et al., 2023; Agarwal et al., 2024; Lee et al., 2024).
Despite these advances in models capabilities, the benchmarks used to evaluate them have not kept
pace. For example, current benchmarks such as Longbench (Bai et al., 2023) and L-Eval (An et al.,
2023) scale only up to 40,000 tokens, while models are capable of hundreds of thousands and millions
of tokens (Rodkin et al., 2024; Reid et al., 2024; Bulatov et al., 2024; Anthropic, 2024; Liu et al.,
2024a; Gu & Dao, 2023; OpenAI, 2023a).
Creating natural and comprehensive long-context benchmarks that are human labeled is very challenging. As a consequence, synthetic benchmarks focusing on variations of "needle-in-a-haystack"
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

