Discrete-state Continuous-time Diffusion for Graph
Generation
Zhe Xu∗ Ruizhong Qiu∗ Yuzhong Chen† Huiyuan Chen† Xiran Fan† Menghai Pan†
Zhichen Zeng∗

Mahashweta Das†

Hanghang Tong∗

Abstract
Graph is a prevalent discrete data structure, whose generation has wide applications
such as drug discovery and circuit design. Diffusion generative models, as an
emerging research focus, have been applied to graph generation tasks. Overall,
according to the space of states and time steps, diffusion generative models can
be categorized into discrete-/continuous-state discrete-/continuous-time fashions.
In this paper, we formulate the graph diffusion generation in a discrete-state
continuous-time setting, which has never been studied in previous graph diffusion
models. The rationale of such a formulation is to preserve the discrete nature of
graph-structured data and meanwhile provide flexible sampling trade-offs between
sample quality and efficiency. Analysis shows that our training objective is closely
related to the generation quality and our proposed generation framework enjoys
ideal invariant/equivariant properties concerning the permutation of node ordering.
Our proposed model shows competitive empirical performance against state-ofthe-art graph generation solutions on various benchmarks and at the same time can
flexibly trade off the generation quality and efficiency in the sampling phase.

1

Introduction

Graph generation has been studied for a
long time with broad applications, based on
either the one-shot (i.e., one-step) [50, 39,
56, 51, 72, 32] or auto-regressive generation paradigm [82, 29, 42, 52]. The former
generates all the graph components at once
and the latter does that sequentially. A recent trend of applying diffusion generative
models [67, 23, 70] to graph generation
tasks attracts increasing attentions because
of its excellent performance and solid theoretical foundation. In this paper, we follow
the one-shot generation paradigm, the same
as most graph diffusion generative models.

Figure 1: A taxonomy of graph diffusion models.

Some earlier attempts at graph diffusion models treat the graph data in a continuous state space by
viewing the graph topology and features as continuous variables [56]. Such a formulation departs
from the discrete nature of graph-structured data; e.g., topological sparsity is lost and the discretization
in the generation process requires extra hyper-parameters. DiGress [73] is one of the early efforts
∗
†

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. {zhexu3, rq5, zhichenz, htong}@illinois.edu
Visa Research. {yuzchen, hchen, xirafan, menpan, mahdas}@visa.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

