UnSeg: One Universal Unlearnable Example
Generator is Enough against All Image Segmentation

Ye Sun1 , Hao Zhang2 , Tiehua Zhang3 , Xingjun Ma1† , Yu-Gang Jiang1
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
HKUST, 3 Tongji University
https://github.com/sunye23/UnSeg

Abstract
Image segmentation is a crucial vision task that groups pixels within an image into
semantically meaningful segments, which is pivotal in obtaining a fine-grained
understanding of real-world scenes. However, an increasing privacy concern exists
regarding training large-scale image segmentation models on unauthorized private
data. In this work, we exploit the concept of unlearnable examples to make images unusable to model training by generating and adding unlearnable noise into
the original images. Particularly, we propose a novel Unlearnable Segmentation
(UnSeg) framework to train a universal unlearnable noise generator that is capable of transforming any downstream images into their unlearnable version. The
unlearnable noise generator is finetuned from the Segment Anything Model (SAM)
via bilevel optimization on an interactive segmentation dataset towards minimizing
the training error of a surrogate model that shares the same architecture with SAM
but is trained from scratch. We empirically verify the effectiveness of UnSeg
across 6 mainstream image segmentation tasks, 10 widely used datasets, and 7
different network architectures, and show that the unlearnable images can reduce
the segmentation performance by a large margin. Our work provides useful insights
into how to leverage foundation models in a data-efficient and computationally
affordable manner to protect images against image segmentation models.

1

Introduction

With the growing popularity of large models, more and more data are being crawled and curated
“freely" into massive pre-training datasets to support large-scale pre-training. This has raised public
concerns about the unauthorized usage of private data posed on the web for training large-scale deep
learning models or even illegal purposes [1]. For example, it has been found that the startup company
Clearview AI developed its commercial facial recognition models by illicitly scraping vast amounts
of personal images from online social networks [23]. This has motivated researchers to develop
proactive defense measures to prevent deep learning models from exploiting private data.
One promising technique is called unlearnable examples (UEs) [25] which adds small unlearnable
noise into images to make them unexploitable to deep neural networks (DNNs). In the context of
image classification, the unlearnable noise was generated to reduce the error (or difficulty) of an
image so as to trick the model into believing that there is nothing to learn from the image. When
all the samples in a dataset are modified by unlearnable noise, they will become unexploitable to
DNN training and thus are protected. Data protection techniques with a similar objective are also
known as availability attacks [58] or indiscriminate poisoning attacks [19]. Although UEs have been
†

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

