BenchX: A Unified Benchmark Framework for
Medical Vision-Language Pretraining on Chest X-Rays

Yang Zhou1 , Tan Li Hui Faith2∗, Yanyu Xu3 , Sicong Leng4 , Xinxing Xu5 ,
Yong Liu1†, Rick Siow Mong Goh1†
1
Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC),
Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
2
National University of Singapore, Singapore
3
C-FAIR, Shandong University, China
4
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
5
Microsoft Research Asia Singapore

Abstract
Medical Vision-Language Pretraining (MedVLP) shows promise in learning generalizable and transferable visual representations from paired and unpaired medical
images and reports. MedVLP can provide useful features to downstream tasks and
facilitate adapting task-specific models to new setups using fewer examples. However, existing MedVLP methods often differ in terms of datasets, preprocessing,
and finetuning implementations. This pose great challenges in evaluating how well
a MedVLP method generalizes to various clinically-relevant tasks due to the lack of
unified, standardized, and comprehensive benchmark. To fill this gap, we propose
BenchX, a unified benchmark framework that enables head-to-head comparison
and systematical analysis between MedVLP methods using public chest X-ray
datasets. Specifically, BenchX is composed of three components: 1) Comprehensive datasets covering nine datasets and four medical tasks; 2) Benchmark suites
to standardize data preprocessing, train-test splits, and parameter selection; 3)
Unified finetuning protocols that accommodate heterogeneous MedVLP methods
for consistent task adaptation in classification, segmentation, and report generation,
respectively. Utilizing BenchX, we establish baselines for nine state-of-the-art
MedVLP methods and found that the performance of some early MedVLP methods
can be enhanced to surpass more recent ones, prompting a revisiting of the developments and conclusions from prior works in MedVLP. Our code are available at
https://github.com/yangzhou12/BenchX.

1

Introduction

Vision-language pretraining involves training models on large datasets of images and text to learn
the relationships between visual and textual data. This pretraining process allows models to learn
generalizable representations that can be adapted for specific tasks using fewer training data. Recent
advancements in Medical Vision Language Pretraining (MedVLP), driven by rich knowledge from
medical reports, play a crucial role in advancing representation learning within the medical domain.
By leveraging paired and unpaired medical images and reports, MedVLP has demonstrated strong
transfer performance for a wide range of downstream medical tasks with better data efficiency
[43, 20, 46].
∗
†

Work done during internship at IHPC, A*STAR.
Joint senior authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

