Injecting Undetectable Backdoors in
Obfuscated Neural Networks and Language Models

Alkis Kalavasis
Yale University
alkis.kalavasis@yale.edu

Amin Karbasi
Yale University
amin.karbasi@yale.edu

Argyris Oikonomou
Yale University
argyris.oikonomou@yale.edu

Katerina Sotiraki
Yale University
katerina.sotiraki@yale.edu

Grigoris Velegkas
Yale University
grigoris.velegkas@yale.edu

Manolis Zampetakis
Yale University
manolis.zampetakis@yale.edu

Abstract
As ML models become increasingly complex and integral to high-stakes domains
such as finance and healthcare, they also become more susceptible to sophisticated
adversarial attacks. We investigate the threat posed by undetectable backdoors,
as defined in Goldwasser et al. [2022], in models developed by insidious external
expert firms. When such backdoors exist, they allow the designer of the model
to sell information on how to slightly perturb their input to change the outcome
of the model. We develop a general strategy to plant backdoors to obfuscated
neural networks, that satisfy the security properties of the celebrated notion of
indistinguishability obfuscation. Applying obfuscation before releasing neural
networks is a strategy that is well motivated to protect sensitive information of
the external expert firm. Our method to plant backdoors ensures that even if the
weights and architecture of the obfuscated model are accessible, the existence of
the backdoor is still undetectable. Finally, we introduce the notion of undetectable
backdoors to language models and extend our neural network backdoor attacks to
such models based on the existence of steganographic functions.

1

Introduction

It is widely acknowledged that deep learning models are susceptible to manipulation through adversarial attacks Szegedy et al. [2013], Gu et al. [2017]. Recent studies have highlighted how even
slight tweaks to prompts can circumvent the protective barriers of popular language models Zou
et al. [2023]. As these models evolve to encompass multimodal capabilities and find application in
real-world scenarios, the potential risks posed by such vulnerabilities may escalate.
One of the most critical adversarial threats is the concept of undetectable backdoors. Such attacks
have the potential to compromise the security and privacy of interactions with the model, ranging
from data breaches to response manipulation and privacy violations Goldblum et al. [2022]. Imagine
a bank that wants to automate the loan approval process. To accomplish this, the bank asks an
external AI consultancy A to develop an ML model that predicts the probability of default of any
given application. To validate the accuracy of the model, the bank conducts rigorous testing on
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

