Sub-optimal Experts mitigate Ambiguity
in Inverse Reinforcement Learning

Riccardo Poiani
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano
riccardo.poiani@polimi.it

Gabriele Curti
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano
gabriele.curti@mail.polimi.it

Alberto Maria Metelli
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano
albertomaria.metelli@polimi.it
Marcello Restelli
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano
marcello.restelli@polimi.it

Abstract
Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) deals with the problem of deducing a
reward function that explains the behavior of an expert agent who is assumed to
act optimally in an underlying unknown task. Recent works have studied the IRL
problem from the perspective of recovering the feasible reward set, i.e., the class
of reward functions that are compatible with a unique optimal expert. However,
in several problems of interest it is possible to observe the behavior of multiple
experts with different degree of optimality (e.g., racing drivers whose skills ranges
from amateurs to professionals). For this reason, in this work, we focus on the
reconstruction of the feasible reward set when, in addition to demonstrations from
the optimal expert, we observe the behavior of multiple sub-optimal experts. Given
this problem, we first study the theoretical properties showing that the presence
of multiple sub-optimal experts, in addition to the optimal one, can significantly
shrink the set of compatible rewards, ultimately mitigating the inherent ambiguity
of IRL. Furthermore, we study the statistical complexity of estimating the feasible
reward set with a generative model and analyze a uniform sampling algorithm that
turns out to be minimax optimal whenever the sub-optimal experts’ performance
level is sufficiently close to that of the optimal expert.

1

Introduction

Inverse Reinforcement Learning [IRL, 26] deals with the problem of recovering a reward function
that explains the behavior of an expert agent who is assumed to act optimally in an underlying
unknown task. Over the years, the IRL problem has consistently captured the attention of the research
community (see, for instance, [4] and [1] for in-depth surveys). Indeed, this general scenario, where
the reward function needs to be learned, emerges in numerous real-world applications. A example
arises from human-in-the-loop settings [25], where the expert is a human solving a task, and an
explicit specification of the human’s goal in the form of a reward function is often unavailable.
Notably, humans encounter difficulty in expressing their intentions in a numerical form, preferring
instead to demonstrate what they perceive as the correct behavior. Once we retrieve a reward function,
(i) we obtain explicit information for understanding the expert’s choices, and, furthermore, (ii) we
can utilize it to train reinforcement learning agents, even under shifts in the underlying system.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

