Inverse M-Kernels for Linear Universal
Approximators of Non-Negative Functions

Hideaki Kim
NTT Corporation
hideaki.kin@ntt.com

Abstract
Kernel methods are widely utilized in machine learning ﬁeld to learn, from training data, a latent function in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space. It is well
known that the approximator thus obtained usually achieves a linear representation, which brings various computational beneﬁts, while maintaining great representation power (i.e., universal approximation). However, when non-negativity
constraints are imposed on the function’s outputs, the literature usually takes the
kernel method-based approximators as offering linear representations at the expense of limited model ﬂexibility or good representation power by allowing for
their nonlinear forms. The main contribution of this paper is to derive a sufﬁcient
condition for a positive deﬁnite kernel so that it may construct ﬂexible and linear approximators of non-negative functions. We call a kernel function that offers
these attributes an inverse M-kernel; it is a generalization of the inverse M-matrix.
Furthermore, we show that for a one-dimensional input space, universal exponential/Abel kernels are inverse M-kernels and construct linear universal approximators of non-negative functions. To the best of our knowledge, it is the ﬁrst time
that the existence of linear universal approximators of non-negative functions has
been elucidated. We conﬁrm the effectiveness of our results by experiments on the
problems of non-negativity-constrained regression, density estimation, and intensity estimation. Finally, we discuss issues and perspectives on multi-dimensional
input settings.

1

Introduction

Non-parametric estimation of latent functions continues to be of theoretical and practical importance in a wide spectrum of disciplines such as signal/image processing [13, 32], system control
[12], geostatistics [3], bioinformatics [28], and clinical research [4]. Kernel method, one of the most
established techniques, learns ﬂexible function approximators by embedding data points into higher
dimensional reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHSs) [26, 29]. For a broad class of learning
problems, kernel methods invoke the representer theorem [27, 35] and recast the inﬁnite-dimensional
functional problems as their ﬁnite-dimensional counterparts, where the obtained approximators have
linear representation, i.e., ﬁnite linear combinations of kernel functions evaluated on data points.
Signiﬁcant computational beneﬁts are attained by the linear representation such as convex optimization and cheap evaluation/integration of approximators.
In recent years, great attention has been paid to kernel methods with non-negativity constraints
on function outputs [6, 17, 17, 31]; crucial applications include non-negativity-constrained regression, density estimation, and intensity estimation. Compared to unconstrained alternatives, nonnegativity-constrained kernel methods developed to date are faced with a problematic trade-off between linearity and ﬂexibility: the obtained approximators either can have linear representations at
the expense of degraded representation power [17], or achieve good representation power (i.e., uni38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

