Distributionally Robust Performative Prediction

Yuekai Sun
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
yuekai@umich.edu

Songkai Xue
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
sxue@umich.edu

Abstract
Performative prediction aims to model scenarios where predictive outcomes subsequently influence the very systems they target. The pursuit of a performative
optimum (PO)—minimizing performative risk—is generally reliant on modeling of
the distribution map, which characterizes how a deployed ML model alters the data
distribution. Unfortunately, inevitable misspecification of the distribution map can
lead to a poor approximation of the true PO. To address this issue, we introduce
a novel framework of distributionally robust performative prediction and study
a new solution concept termed as distributionally robust performative optimum
(DRPO). We show provable guarantees for DRPO as a robust approximation to
the true PO when the nominal distribution map is different from the actual one.
Moreover, distributionally robust performative prediction can be reformulated as
an augmented performative prediction problem, enabling efficient optimization.
The experimental results demonstrate that DRPO offers potential advantages over
traditional PO approach when the distribution map is misspecified at either microor macro-level.

1

Introduction

In numerous fields where predictive analytics play an important role, decisions made on the basis of
machine learning models do not just passively predict outcomes but actively influence future input
data. Consider the domain of financial services, such as credit scoring and loan issuance, where a
model’s decision to grant or deny an application can affect the applicant’s future financial behaviors
and, consequently, the profile of future applicants. Similarly, in educational settings, the decision
process for school admissions can shape the applicant pool, as those who are accepted often share
their success strategies, indirectly influencing the preparation of future candidates. These examples
highlight the study of performative prediction [29], a recent framework that facilitates a formal
examination of learning in the presence of performative distribution shift resulting from deployed
ML models.
Delving deeper into the formulations of performative prediction, the concept of a distribution map
emerges as pivotal. This map characterizes the impact that a deployed ML model has on the
underlying data distribution, which is a crucial element in navigating performative effects. The
literature primarily revolves around the pursuit of performative stability (PS), a model which is
optimal for the distribution it induces [29, 25, 5, 8]. However, a more ambitious target is the
performative optimum (PO), which seeks the minimization of performative risk, the risk of the
deployed model on the distribution it induces. Efficiently achieving PO typically necessitates a
modeling of the distribution map [26, 14, 15, 24]. Practically, the precise influence of a model on the
data ecosystem is intricate and dynamic, making perfect specification an unattainable ideal.
In this work, we propose a distributionally robust performative prediction framework that aims
to enhance robustness against a spectrum of distribution maps, thereby mitigating the issue of
misspecification. Our contributions are summarized as follows: 1) in Section 2, we formalize the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

