Graph-based Uncertainty Metrics for
Long-form Language Model Outputs

Mingjian Jiang
Stanford University
jiangm@stanford.edu
Prasanna Sattigeri
IBM Research
psattig@us.ibm.com

Yangjun Ruan
Stanford University
ryoungj@stanford.edu

Salim Roukos
IBM Research
roukos@us.ibm.com

Tatsunori Hashimoto
Stanford University
thashim@stanford.edu

Abstract
Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) have significantly improved text
generation capabilities, but these systems are still known to hallucinate, and granular uncertainty estimation for long-form LLM generations remains challenging. In this work, we
propose Graph Uncertainty – which represents the relationship between LLM generations and
claims within them as a bipartite graph and estimates the claim-level uncertainty with a family
of graph centrality metrics. Under this view, existing uncertainty estimation methods based
on the concept of self-consistency can be viewed as using degree centrality as an uncertainty
measure, and we show that more sophisticated alternatives such as closeness centrality provide
consistent gains at claim-level uncertainty estimation. Moreover, we present uncertaintyaware decoding techniques that leverage both the graph structure and uncertainty estimates
to improve the factuality of LLM generations by preserving only the most reliable claims.
Compared to existing methods, our graph-based uncertainty metrics lead to an average of 6.8%
relative gains on AUPRC across various long-form generation settings, and our end-to-end
system provides consistent 2-4% gains in factuality over existing decoding techniques while
significantly improving the informativeness of generated responses1 .

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) [1–5] have demonstrated remarkable capabilities and been widely
used as an interactive chatbot to provide knowledge and answers to user queries. However, they still
struggle with generating false information, often referred to as “hallucinations” [6], which hinders
their ability to provide calibrated [7–10] and factual [11, 12] responses and ultimately undermines the
trust users place in their outputs. Improving uncertainty estimation techniques is crucial for building
trust in LLMs and mitigating the risks associated with their deployment in real-world applications.
While many existing uncertainty estimation techniques for LLMs primarily focus on estimating the
uncertainty of their answers to multiple-choice questions [13, 7, 8] or their entire generated responses
(typically in a short form) [8, 14, 9, 15], they are often not sufficiently informative in real-world
applications where LLMs generate paragraphs of texts consisting of a mixture of true and false claims
[12]. In such scenarios, more granular uncertainty estimates are needed to help users distinguish the
reliability of each individual claim within the generated text. Recent approaches [11, 16] attempt to
measure the uncertainty of each claim by its consistency with randomly sampled responses based on
the concept of self-consistency [17]. However, they do not fully leverage the semantic relationships
between claims and responses that could support more granular uncertainty estimation.
1

Our code is available at https://github.com/Mingjianjiang-1/Graph-based-Uncertainty.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

