Learning Versatile Skills with Curriculum Masking

Yao Tang∗1
1

Zhihui Xie∗1 Zichuan Lin2 Deheng Ye2 Shuai Li#1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Tencent AI Lab

Abstract
Masked prediction has emerged as a promising pretraining paradigm in offline
reinforcement learning (RL) due to its versatile masking schemes, enabling flexible inference across various downstream tasks with a unified model. Despite the
versatility of masked prediction, it remains unclear how to balance the learning of
skills at different levels of complexity. To address this, we propose CurrMask, a
curriculum masking pretraining paradigm for sequential decision making. Motivated by how humans learn by organizing knowledge in a curriculum, CurrMask
adjusts its masking scheme during pretraining for learning versatile skills. Through
extensive experiments, we show that CurrMask exhibits superior zero-shot performance on skill prompting tasks, goal-conditioned planning tasks, and competitive
finetuning performance on offline RL tasks. Additionally, our analysis of training
dynamics reveals that CurrMask gradually acquires skills of varying complexity by
dynamically adjusting its masking scheme. Code is available at here.

1

Introduction

Humans distinguish themselves from machines by their capacity to adapt and generalize. One
crucial factor behind this discrepancy is the drive to acquire reusable knowledge (e.g., concepts and
behaviors) even in the absence of explicit reward (White, 1959). This has motivated research in
unsupervised reinforcement learning (RL) (Laskin et al., 2021; Chebotar et al., 2021), in which the
agent is required to learn from reward-free offline data (Carroll et al., 2022; Schwarzer et al., 2021)
or online interaction (Liu and Abbeel, 2021; Yarats et al., 2021) for pretraining.
To build generic decision-making agents, great efforts have been made recently to apply selfsupervised learning objectives for unsupervised offline pretraining (Schwarzer et al., 2021; Sun et al.,
2023). Among these studies, one popular approach is masked prediction, a simple but versatile selfsupervision framework that has proven its effectiveness in domains like language (Devlin et al., 2019)
and vision (He et al., 2022). By masking a portion of the input trajectory and predicting it conditioned
on the remaining unmasked tokens, the model can not only capture rich representations but also learn
transferable behaviors. For example, given a masked trajectory (s1 , [MASK], s2 , a2 , [MASK], a3 ), a
model learned by masked prediction is forced to reason about both dynamics (i.e., masked state s3 )
and behaviors (i.e., masked action a1 ).
Given the effectiveness of masked prediction, an important question arises: how can we design
and arrange the masking schemes for decision-making data to maximize its benefits? To explore
this question, our research stems from the finding that models trained with token-wise random
masking, a widely adopted masking strategy in natural language modeling, fall short in modeling
long-term dependencies (see Figure 4). While randomly masked words describe semantically dense
information, state-action sequences in decision-making data contain heavy information redundancy
(e.g., consecutive states are usually similar). This causes the model to predict masked tokens solely
based on their neighboring unmasked tokens. Besides, state-action sequences naturally come with a
∗
#

Equal contribution.
Correspondence to: Shuai Li⟨shuaili8@sjtu.edu.cn⟩.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

