Iteratively Refined Behavior Regularization for Offline
Reinforcement Learning

1

Yi Ma1,2 , Jianye Hao3,4∗, Xiaohan Hu3 , Yan Zheng3∗ Chenjun Xiao5
School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University, mayi@sxu.edu.cn
2
Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence
and Chinese Information Processing of Ministry of Education
3
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
{jianye.hao, huxiaohan, yanzheng}@tju.edu.cn
4
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
5
The Chinese University of Hongkong, Shenzhen, chenjunx@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
One of the fundamental challenges for offline reinforcement learning (RL) is
ensuring robustness to data distribution. Whether the data originates from a nearoptimal policy or not, we anticipate that an algorithm should demonstrate its
ability to learn an effective control policy that seamlessly aligns with the inherent
distribution of offline data. Unfortunately, behavior regularization, a simple yet
effective offline RL algorithm, tends to struggle in this regard. In this paper, we
propose a new algorithm that substantially enhances behavior-regularization based
on conservative policy iteration. Our key observation is that by iteratively refining
the reference policy used for behavior regularization, conservative policy update
guarantees gradually improvement, while also implicitly avoiding querying out-ofsample actions to prevent catastrophic learning failures. We prove that in the tabular
setting this algorithm is capable of learning the optimal policy covered by the offline
dataset, commonly referred to as the in-sample optimal policy. We then explore
several implementation details of the algorithm when function approximations
are applied. The resulting algorithm is easy to implement, requiring only a few
lines of code modification to existing methods. Experimental results on the D4RL
benchmark indicate that our method outperforms previous state-of-the-art baselines
in most tasks, clearly demonstrate its superiority over behavior regularization.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved considerable success in various decision-making problems,
including games [1], software automation testing [2], recommendation and advertising [3], logistics
optimization [4] and robotics [5]. A critical obstacle that hinders a broader application of RL is
its trial-and-error learning paradigm. For applications such as education, autonomous driving and
healthcare, active data collection could be either impractical or dangerous [6]. Instead of learning
actively, a more favorable approach is to employ scalable data-driven learning methods that can utilize
existing data and progressively improve as more training data becomes available. This motivates
offline RL, of which the primary objective is to learn a control policy solely from previously collected
data without online interactions with environment.
Offline datasets frequently offer limited coverage of the state-action space. Directly utilizing standard
RL algorithms to such datasets can result in extrapolation errors when bootstrapping from out-ofdistribution (OOD) state-actions, consequently causing significant overestimations in value functions.
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

