Extensive-Form Game Solving via Blackwell
Approachability on Treeplexes

Darshan Chakrabarti
IEOR Department
Columbia University
dc3595@columbia.edu

Julien Grand-Clément
ISOM Department
HEC Paris
grand-clement@hec.fr

Christian Kroer
IEOR Department
Columbia University
christian.kroer@columbia.edu

Abstract
We introduce the first algorithmic framework for Blackwell approachability on
the sequence-form polytope, the class of convex polytopes capturing the strategies
of players in extensive-form games (EFGs). This leads to a new class of regretminimization algorithms that are stepsize-invariant, in the same sense as the Regret
Matching and Regret Matching+ algorithms for the simplex. Our modular framework can be combined with any existing regret minimizer over cones to compute
a Nash equilibrium in two-player zero-sum EFGs with perfect recall, through the
self-play framework. Leveraging predictive online mirror
√ descent, we introduce
Predictive Treeplex Blackwell+ (PTB+ ), and show a O(1/ T ) convergence rate to
Nash equilibrium in self-play. We then show how to stabilize PTB+ with a stepsize,
resulting in an algorithm with a state-of-the-art O(1/T ) convergence rate. We
provide an extensive set of experiments to compare our framework with several
algorithmic benchmarks, including CFR+ and its predictive variant, and we highlight
interesting connections between practical performance and the stepsize-dependence
or stepsize-invariance properties of classical algorithms.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we focus on solving Extensive-Form Games (EFGs). Finding a Nash equilibrium of a
two-player zero-sum EFG can be cast as solving
min max ⟨x, M y⟩

x∈X y∈Y

(1)

where the sets X , Y are two sequence-form polytopes (also referred to as treeplexes) representing
the strategies x, y of each player, and M is a payoff matrix. EFGs have been successfully used
to obtain superhuman performances in several recent poker AI breakthroughs [37, 4, 5]. Many
algorithms have been developed based on (1). Since X and Y are polytopes, (1) can be formulated
as a linear program [38]. However, because X and Y themselves have very large dimensions in
realistic applications, first-order methods (FOMs) and regret minimization approaches are preferred
for large-scale game solving. FOMs such as the Excessive Gap Technique (EGT, [32]) and Mirror
Prox [31] instantiated for EFGs [23, 27] converge to a Nash equilibrium at a rate of O(1/T ), where T
is the number of iterations. Regret minimization techniques rely on a folk theorem relating the regrets
of the players and the duality gap of the average iterates [19]. For instance, predictive online mirror
descent with the treeplexes X and Y as decision sets achieves a O(1/T ) convergence rate [14].
Counterfactual regret minimization (CFR) [39] is a regret minimizer for the treeplex that runs regret
minimizers locally, i.e. directly at the level of the information sets of each player. CFR+ , used in
virtually all poker AI milestones [37, 30, 5], instantiates the CFR framework with a regret minimizer
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

