Enhancing LLM Reasoning via Vision-Augmented
Prompting

Ziyang Xiao1 , Dongxiang Zhang14∗, Xiongwei Han2 , Xiaojin Fu2 , Wing Yin Yu2
Tao Zhong2 , Sai Wu14 , Yuan Wang3 , Jianwei Yin1 , Gang Chen1
1
Zhejiang University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
School of Business, Singapore University of Social Sciences
4
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone(Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
{xiaoziyang, zhangdongxiang, wusai, cg}@zju.edu.cn
{hanxiongwei, rocket.YuWingYin, zhongtao5}@huawei.com
fuxiaojin32@hotmail.com, Jessicawang36@gmail.com
zjuyjw@cs.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Verbal and visual-spatial information processing are two critical subsystems that
activate different brain regions and often collaborate together for cognitive reasoning. Despite the rapid advancement of LLM-based reasoning, the mainstream
frameworks, such as Chain-of-Thought (CoT) and its variants, primarily focus
on the verbal dimension, resulting in limitations in tackling reasoning problems
with visual and spatial clues. To bridge the gap, we propose a novel dual-modality
reasoning framework called Vision-Augmented Prompting (VAP). Upon receiving
a textual problem description, VAP automatically synthesizes an image from the
visual and spatial clues by utilizing external drawing tools. Subsequently, VAP
formulates a chain of thought in both modalities and iteratively refines the synthesized image. Finally, a conclusive reasoning scheme based on self-alignment is
proposed for final result generation. Extensive experiments are conducted across
four versatile tasks, including solving geometry problems, Sudoku, time series
prediction, and travelling salesman problem. The results validate the superiority of
VAP over existing LLMs-based reasoning frameworks.

1

Introduction

The human cognitive system is characterized by the presence of two specialized subsystems within the
working memory: the phonological loop, which processes verbal information, and the visual-spatial
sketchpad, which processes visual and spatial information [1]. Both of them play a crucial role in
problem-solving by offering qualitatively distinct strategies for comprehending and manipulating
information [2]. Recently, with the rapid advancement of LLMs, there have emerged various reasoning
frameworks, such as Chain of Thought (CoT) [3], Self-consistent CoT (CoT-SC) [4], and Tree of
Thoughts (ToT) [5]. Although these frameworks have shown impressive performance across a wide
range of NLP tasks, they primarily focus on the verbal dimension with text-only representations,
resulting in limitations in tasks that require visual and spatial interpretation (e.g., geometry problems
or grid puzzles).
In this paper, we propose a novel dual-modality reasoning approach called Vision-Augmented
Prompting (VAP) that analogizes human cognition subsystems with the assistance of multimodal
large language models (MLLMs). VAP takes textual problems as input and uses self-synthesized
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

