SimVG: A Simple Framework for Visual Grounding
with Decoupled Multi-modal Fusion

Ming Dai1 , Lingfeng Yang2 , Yihao Xu1 , Zhenhua Feng3 , Wankou Yang1,4∗
1

3

Southeast University 2 Nanjing University of Science and Technology
Jiangnan University 4 Advanced Ocean Institute of Southeast Univerisity, Nantong
{mingdai, 220211848, wkyang}@seu.edu.cn,
yanglfnjust@njust.edu.cn, fengzhenhua@jiangnan.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual grounding is a common vision task that involves grounding descriptive
sentences to the corresponding regions of an image. Most existing methods use
independent image-text encoding and apply complex hand-crafted modules or
encoder-decoder architectures for modal interaction and query reasoning. However, their performance significantly drops when dealing with complex textual
expressions. This is because the former paradigm only utilizes limited downstream
data to fit the multi-modal feature fusion. Therefore, it is only effective when
the textual expressions are relatively simple. In contrast, given the wide diversity of textual expressions and the uniqueness of downstream training data, the
existing fusion module, which extracts multimodal content from a visual-linguistic
context, has not been fully investigated. In this paper, we present a simple yet
robust transformer-based framework, SimVG, for visual grounding. Specifically,
we decouple visual-linguistic feature fusion from downstream tasks by leveraging existing multimodal pre-trained models and incorporating additional object
tokens to facilitate deep integration of downstream and pre-training tasks. Furthermore, we design a dynamic weight-balance distillation method in the multi-branch
synchronous learning process to enhance the representation capability of the simpler branch. This branch only consists of a lightweight MLP, which simplifies
the structure and improves reasoning speed. Experiments on six widely used
VG datasets, i.e., RefCOCO/+/g, ReferIt, Flickr30K, and GRefCOCO, demonstrate the superiority of SimVG. Finally, the proposed method not only achieves
improvements in efficiency and convergence speed but also attains new state-ofthe-art performance on these benchmarks. Codes and models are available at
https://github.com/Dmmm1997/SimVG.

1

Introduction

Visual grounding (VG) aims to predict the corresponding regions of an image through linguistic
expressions. The task necessitates a comprehensive understanding of each modality, as well as the
modeling of consistency between image context and text. Some benchmarks focus on addressing
phrase localization [26, 50], which entails locating all objects mentioned in a sentence within an
image. Another aspect emphasizes resolving referring expression comprehension (REC) [80, 48, 47],
characterized by only one target corresponding to a sentence. Recently, a new type of general
referring expression comprehension (GREC) [37, 17] task has emerged. GREC is similar to REC,
but in which a sentence can have multiple targets or no target at all.
∗

Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

