Consistency Purification: Effective and Efficient
Diffusion Purification towards Certified Robustness
Yiquan Li1∗ Zhongzhu Chen2∗ Kun Jin2∗ Jiongxiao Wang1∗ Jiachen Lei3
Bo Li4 Chaowei Xiao1
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison; 2 University of Michigan-Ann Arbor;
3
California Institute of Technology ;4 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
Diffusion Purification, purifying noised images with diffusion models, has been
widely used for enhancing certified robustness via randomized smoothing. However, existing frameworks often grapple with the balance between efficiency and
effectiveness. While the Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM) offers
an efficient single-step purification, it falls short in ensuring purified images reside
on the data manifold. Conversely, the Stochastic Diffusion Model effectively places
purified images on the data manifold but demands solving cumbersome stochastic
differential equations, while its derivative, the Probability Flow Ordinary Differential Equation (PF-ODE), though solving simpler ordinary differential equations,
still requires multiple computational steps. In this work, we demonstrated that an
ideal purification pipeline should generate the purified images on the data manifold
that are as much semantically aligned to the original images for effectiveness in
one step for efficiency. Therefore, we introduced Consistency Purification, an
efficiency-effectiveness Pareto superior purifier compared to the previous work.
Consistency Purification employs the consistency model, a one-step generative
model distilled from PF-ODE, thus can generate on-manifold purified images with
a single network evaluation. However, the consistency model is designed not for
purification thus it does not inherently ensure semantic alignment between purified
and original images. To resolve this issue, we further refine it through Consistency
Fine-tuning with LPIPS loss, which enables more aligned semantic meaning while
keeping the purified images on data manifold. Our comprehensive experiments
demonstrate that our Consistency Purification framework achieves state-of-the-art
certified robustness and efficiency compared to baseline methods.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models were first proposed for high-quality image generation [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] and have been
extended to generative tasks across various modalities, including audio [6, 7, 8], video [9, 10], and
3D object [11, 12, 13]. A diffusion model for image generation typically involves two key processes:
(1) a forward diffusion process, which transforms the source image into an isotropic Gaussian by
gradually adding Gaussian noise, and (2) the reverse diffusion process, which uses a Deep Neural
Network (DNN) to perform iterative denoising starting from random Gaussian noise.
Due to the inherent denoising capability of diffusion models, there have been widely applied to
improve the robustness of DNNs. This enhancement is achieved by Diffusion Purification [14, 15,
16, 17, 18], which purifies the network inputs to reduce the effects of various types of unforeseen
corruptions or adversarial attacks. Among these, one particularly suitable and effective scenario
of purification is to improve certified robustness through randomized smoothing [19] for image
∗

The first four authors contributed equally. Correspondence to: Jiongxiao Wang <jwang2929@wisc.edu>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

