Unveiling Encoder-Free Vision-Language Models

1

Haiwen Diao1,2∗ Yufeng Cui2∗ Xiaotong Li3,2 Yueze Wang2 Huchuan Lu1† Xinlong Wang2†
Dalian University of Technology 2 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence 3 Peking University
diaohw@mail.dlut.edu.cn, yfcui@baai.ac.cn, lixiaotong@stu.pku.edu.cn
yzwang@baai.ac.cn, lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn, wangxinlong@baai.ac.cn
Code & Models: https://github.com/baaivision/EVE

Abstract
Existing vision-language models (VLMs) mostly rely on vision encoders to extract
visual features followed by large language models (LLMs) for visual-language
tasks. However, the vision encoders set a strong inductive bias in abstracting
visual representation, e.g., resolution, aspect ratio, and semantic priors, which
could impede the flexibility and efficiency of the VLMs. Training pure VLMs
that accept the seamless vision and language inputs, i.e., without vision encoders,
remains challenging and rarely explored. Empirical observations reveal that direct
training without encoders results in slow convergence and large performance
gaps. In this work, we bridge the gap between encoder-based and encoder-free
models, and present a simple yet effective training recipe towards pure VLMs.
Specifically, we unveil the key aspects of training encoder-free VLMs efficiently
via thorough experiments: (1) Bridging vision-language representation inside one
unified decoder; (2) Enhancing visual recognition capability via extra supervision.
With these strategies, we launch EVE, an encoder-free vision-language model that
can be trained and forwarded efficiently. Notably, solely utilizing 35M publicly
accessible data, EVE can impressively rival the encoder-based VLMs of similar
capacities across multiple vision-language benchmarks. It significantly outperforms
the counterpart Fuyu-8B [3] with mysterious training procedures and undisclosed
training data. We believe that EVE provides a transparent and efficient route for
developing pure decoder-only architecture across modalities.

1

Introduction

Recently, significant advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) have catalyzed the emergence
of Vision-Language Models (VLMs), showcasing powerful visual perception and cognition capability
in visual question answering, image captioning, world knowledge understanding, etc. Typically, vision
encoders (e.g., CLIP [61] and EVA [22]) focus on extracting highly-compressed visual-semantic
representations, succeeded by adaptable language models (e.g., LLaMA [75] and Vicuna [10]) to
handle vision-language alignments and instruction-following requirements. Nevertheless, these
encoder-based VLMs have several potential drawbacks as shown in Figure 1:
(1) Image Resolution / Aspect Ratio. Existing LVMs are pre-trained with square and fixed-size
images. However, this restriction forces VLMs to resize, pad, or partition images of varying
shapes [48, 84, 51, 20], resulting in large layout distortion, fragmented connection between image
slices, and extra computational burden [81], especially in terms of high-resolution images.
(2) Deployment Overhead. Generally, LVMs and LLMs are executed successively. The growing
scale of LVMs [8, 73, 13] severely undermines computational efficiency in real-world deployment,
especially when high-resolution images are divided and processed through LVMs multiple times.
∗

Equal contribution. † Correspondence to lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn, wangxinlong@baai.ac.cn.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

