Frequency-aware Generative Models for Multivariate
Time Series Imputation

Xinyu Yang1 , Yu Sun1∗ , Xiaojie Yuan1 , Xinyang Chen2∗
College of Computer Science, DISSec, Nankai University, China
{yangxinyu@dbis.,sunyu@,yuanxj@}nankai.edu.cn
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
chenxinyang@hit.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Missing data in multivariate time series are common issues that can affect the
analysis and downstream applications. Although multivariate time series data
generally consist of the trend, seasonal and residual terms, existing works mainly
focus on optimizing the modeling for the first two items. However, we find that the
residual term is more crucial for getting accurate fillings, since it is more related
to the diverse changes of data and the biggest component of imputation errors.
Therefore, in this study, we introduce frequency-domain information and design
Frequency-aware Generative Models for Multivariate Time Series Imputation
(FGTI). Specifically, FGTI employs a high-frequency filter to boost the residual
term imputation, supplemented by a dominant-frequency filter for the trend and
seasonal imputation. Cross-domain representation learning module then fuses
frequency-domain insights with deep representations. Experiments over various
datasets with real-world missing values show that FGTI achieves superiority in
both data imputation and downstream applications.

1

Introduction

Missing data are commonly observed in the multivariate time series due to diverse reasons [25],
which would encumber subsequent analysis and applications [17]. It is not surprising that more
accurate missing data imputation generally leads to better performance in downstream applications.1
Existing techniques [13; 28] have revealed that time series data can be decomposed into three distinct
terms, i.e., trend, seasonal, and residual, and try to compute an imputation by modeling the first
two items as accurately as possible. Figure 1 reports a survey for the imputation accuracy of the
three terms by representative imputation methods over the pre-decomposed KDD [6] dataset with
10% missing values.2 The dataset comprises 8,034 consecutive readings of meteorological and air
quality data taken over a year in Beijing. In this dataset, the trend term may reflect long-term changes
in climate or air quality conditions, and the seasonal term might capture patterns associated with
different seasons. Moreover, the residual term may consist of short-term, irregular, and high-frequency
changes. As shown in Figure 1, the imputation error is mainly caused by the residual term, which has
not been well studied, unfortunately.
Recent studies indicate that the high-frequency components are intricately related to the residual
[46; 58; 26] and contain critical information for imputing the residual term. Unfortunately, deep
learning architectures cannot generalize well in modeling high-frequency components. [38; 43]. To
∗

Corresponding authors.
Please see an empirical study in Section 4.5.
2
Please see Section 2 for a brief survey, see Appendix A.5.1 for detailed experiment setup.
1

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

