Trading Place for Space: Increasing Location
Resolution Reduces Contextual Capacity in
Hippocampal Codes

Spencer Rooke1 Zhaoze Wang2 Ronald W. Di Tullio3∗ Vijay Balasubramanian1,4,5∗
1
Departments of Physics 2 of Computer and Information Science and 3 Neuroscience
University of Pennsylvania; 4 Rudolf Peierls Centre for Theoretical Physics, University of Oxford;
and 5 Santa Fe Institute
∗: Equal contribution
srooke@sas.upenn.edu zhaoze@seas.upenn.edu
ron.w.ditullio@gmail.com vijay@physics.upenn.edu

Abstract
Many animals learn cognitive maps of their environment - a simultaneous representation of context, experience, and position. Place cells in the hippocampus, named
for their explicit encoding of position, are believed to be a neural substrate of
these maps, with place cell "remapping" explaining how this system can represent
different contexts. Briefly, place cells alter their firing properties, or "remap", in
response to changes in experiential or sensory cues. Substantial sensory changes,
produced, e.g., by moving between environments, cause large subpopulations of
place cells to change their tuning entirely. While many studies have looked at the
physiological basis of remapping, we lack explicit calculations of how the contextual capacity of the place cell system changes as a function of place field firing
properties. Here, we propose a geometric approach to understanding population
level activity of place cells. Using known firing field statistics, we investigate how
changes to place cell firing properties affect the distances between representations
of different environments within firing rate space. Using this approach, we find
that the number of contexts storable by the hippocampus grows exponentially with
the number of place cells, and calculate this exponent for environments of different
sizes. We identify a fundamental trade-off between high resolution encoding of
position and the number of storable contexts. This trade-off is tuned by place cell
width, which might explain the change in firing field scale along the dorsal-ventral
axis of the hippocampus. We demonstrate that clustering of place cells near likely
points of confusion, such as boundaries, increases the contextual capacity of the
place system within our framework and conclude by discussing how our geometric
approach could be extended to include other cell types and abstract spaces.

1

Introduction

Decades of experiments suggest that the mammalian hippocampus is crucial for the formation of
episodic memories and spatial navigation [1, 2, 3]. Neural recordings of rodents during active
navigation led to the discovery of place cells by John O’keefe [4], named for their spatially localized
firing patterns. These place cells were quickly theorized to be the substrate of the cognitive map - an
animal’s simultaneous and abstract representation of context, experience, and position [3, 5]. Further
experiments led to the discovery of remapping [6, 7, 8], during which place cells alter their firing
properties in response to changes in sensory and contextual cues. Large contextual changes lead to
global remapping, in which population level maps of activity appearing in different contexts are nearly
orthogonal, independent of correlations within an environment [9, 10]. Many have speculated that
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

