RobIR: Robust Inverse Rendering for
High-Illumination Scenes

Ziyi Yang1 Yanzhen Chen1 Xinyu Gao1 Yazhen Yuan2
Yu Wu2 Xiaowei Zhou1 Xiaogang Jin1†
1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

2

Tencent

Abstract
Implicit representation has opened up new possibilities for inverse rendering. However, existing implicit neural inverse rendering methods struggle to handle strongly
illuminated scenes with significant shadows and slight reflections. The existence
of shadows and reflections can lead to an inaccurate understanding of the scene,
making precise factorization difficult. To this end, we present RobIR, an implicit
inverse rendering approach that uses ACES tone mapping and regularized visibility
estimation to reconstruct accurate BRDF of the object. By accurately modeling
the indirect radiance field, normal, visibility, and direct light simultaneously, we
are able to accurately decouple environment lighting and the object’s PBR materials without imposing strict constraints on the scene. Even in high-illumination
scenes with shadows and specular reflections, our method can recover high-quality
albedo and roughness with no shadow interference. RobIR outperforms existing
methods in both quantitative and qualitative evaluations. Code is available at
https://github.com/ingra14m/RobIR.

1

Introduction

Inverse rendering, the task of extracting the geometry, materials, and lighting of a 3D scene from 2D
images, is a longstanding challenge in computer graphics and computer vision. Previous methods,
such as providing geometry for the entire scene [35, 46], modeling shape representation [21, 34,
52, 14] or pre-providing multiple known light information [10], have achieved plausible results
using prior information. To achieve clear albedo and roughness decomposition, factors such as light
obscuration, reflection, or refraction must be taken into account. Among these, hard and soft shadows
are particularly challenging to eliminate, as they play a critical role not only in obtaining cleaner
material but also in accurately modeling geometry and light sources. Although some data-driven
approaches [22, 39] have performed plausible shadow removal at the image level, these methods are
not generally applicable for inverse rendering.
Since the advent of NeRF [32], implicit representation has garnered significant interest in portraying
scenes as neural radiance fields. By applying implicit neural representation to inverse rendering [3,
19, 54], plausible factorization can be achieved in simple scenes with weak light intensity. Thanks to
NeRFactor [55] and its relevant work [8], which extend previous works by explicitly representing
visibility, implicit inverse rendering can be improved with simple shadow removal and clear edge in
albedo and roughness. Recently, InvRender [56] has taken the scene factorization problem to a new
level by modeling indirect illumination, serving as the baseline in our experiment.
However, in high-illumination scenarios with strong shadows or subtle specular reflections, the
current methods for implicit inverse rendering have shown limitations in accurately modeling each
decomposed part for BRDF estimation. Especially, it will lead to shadow baking in albedo and
roughness, thereby causing serious artifacts in relighting and other downstream applications. To
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

