Parameter Symmetry and Noise Equilibrium
of Stochastic Gradient Descent
Liu Ziyin
Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
NTT Research

Mingze Wang
Peking University
mingzewang@stu.pku.edu.cn

ziyinl@mit.edu

Hongchao Li
The University of Tokyo

Lei Wu
Peking University

lhc@cat.phys.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

leiwu@math.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Symmetries are prevalent in deep learning and can significantly influence the
learning dynamics of neural networks. In this paper, we examine how exponential symmetries – a broad subclass of continuous symmetries present in the
model architecture or loss function – interplay with stochastic gradient descent
(SGD). We first prove that gradient noise creates a systematic motion (a “Noether
flow”) of the parameters θ along the degenerate direction to a unique initializationindependent fixed point θ∗ . These points are referred to as the noise equilibria
because, at these points, noise contributions from different directions are balanced
and aligned. Then, we show that the balance and alignment of gradient noise can
serve as a novel alternative mechanism for explaining important phenomena such
as progressive sharpening/flattening and representation formation within neural
networks and have practical implications for understanding techniques like representation normalization and warmup.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its variants have become the cornerstone algorithms used in
deep learning. In the continuous-time limit, the algorithm can be written as [19, 13, 21, 32, 9]:
√
dθt = −∇L(θt ) dt + 2σ 2 Σ(θt ) dWt ,
(1)
where Σ(θ) is the covariance matrix of gradient noise (Section 3) with the prefactor σ 2 = η/(2S)
modeling the impact of a finite learning rate η and batch size S; Wt denotes the Brownian motion.
When σ = 0, Eq. (1) corresponds to gradient descent (GD)1 . However, SGD and GD can exhibit
significantly different behaviors, often converging to solutions with significantly different levels of
performance [31, 39, 44, 22, 49]. Notably, even when σ 2 ≪ 1, where we expect a close resemblance
between SGD and GD over finite time [19], their long-time behaviors still differ substantially [26].
These observations indicate that gradient noise can bias the dynamics significantly, and revealing its
underlying mechanism is thus crucial for understanding the disparities between SGD and GD.
Contribution. In this paper, we study the how of SGD noise biases training through the lens of
symmetry. Our key contributions are summarized as follows. We show that
1. when symmetry exists in the loss function, the dynamics of SGD can be precisely characterized
and is different from GD along the degenerate direction;
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).
1

“Gradient descent” and “gradient flow” are used interchangeably as we work in the continuous-time limit.

