On Convergence of Adam for Stochastic Optimization
under Relaxed Assumptions

Yusu Hong
Center for Data Science
and School of Mathematical Sciences
Zhejiang University
yusuhong@zju.edu.cn

Junhong Lin∗
Center for Data Science
Zhejiang University
junhong@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we study Adam in non-convex smooth scenarios with potential unbounded gradients and affine variance noise. We consider a general noise model
which governs affine variance noise, bounded noise, and sub-Gaussian noise. We
show that Adam
√ with a specific hyper-parameter setup can find a stationary point
with a Õ(1/ T ) rate in high probability under this general noise model where T
denotes total number iterations, matching the lower rate of stochastic first-order
algorithms up to logarithm factors. Moreover, we show that under the same setup,
Adam without√corrective terms and RMSProp can find a stationary point with a
Õ(1/T + σ0 / T ) rate which is adaptive to the noise level σ0 . We also provide a
probabilistic convergence result for Adam under a generalized smooth condition
which allows unbounded smoothness parameters and has been illustrated empirically to capture the smooth property of many practical objective functions more
accurately.

1

Introduction

Since its introduction by [34], the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD): xt+1 = xt − ηt gt has
achieved significant success in solving the unconstrained stochastic optimization problems:
min f (x),

x∈Rd

where f (x) = Eξ [fξ (x, ξ)],

(1)

where ξ is a random variable, gt is the stochastic gradients and ηt is the step-size. From then on,
numerous literature focused on the convergence behavior of SGD in various scenarios. Several
studies focused on the non-convex smooth scenario where the stochastic gradient g(x) is unbiased
with affine variance noise, i.e., for some constants σ0 , σ1 ≥ 0 and all x ∈ Rd ,
E[∥g(x) − ∇f (x)∥2 ] ≤ σ02 + σ12 ∥∇f (x)∥2 .

(2)

Under the noise assumption (2), [3] provided an almost-sure
convergence bound for SGD. [4] proved
√
that SGD could reach a stationary point with a O(1/ T ) rate when step-sizes are tuned by problemparameters such as the smooth parameter L. The theoretical result also revealed that the analysis of
SGD under (2) is not essentially different from the bounded noise case [17].
In the popular field of deep learning, a range of variants based on SGD, known as adaptive gradient
methods have emerged. These methods employ the past gradients to adaptively tune their stepsizes and are preferred to SGD for minimizing various objective functions due to their efficiency.
Among these methods, Adam [23] has been one of the most effective methods empirically. Generally
∗

The corresponding author is Junhong Lin.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

