Is Mamba Compatible with Trajectory Optimization
in Offline Reinforcement Learning?

Yang Dai1 Oubo Ma2 Longfei Zhang1 Xingxing Liang1∗
Shengchao Hu3 Mengzhu Wang4 Shouling Ji2 Jincai Huang1 Li Shen5∗
1

Laboratory for Big Data and Decision, National University of Defense Technology
2
Zhejiang University 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
Hebei University of Technology 5 Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
{daiyang2000,zhanglongfei,liangxingxing,huangjincai}@nudt.edu.cn
{mob, sji}@zju.edu.cn; charles-hu@sjtu.edu.cn; {dreamkily,mathshenli}@gmail.com

Abstract
Transformer-based trajectory optimization methods have demonstrated exceptional
performance in offline Reinforcement Learning (offline RL). Yet, it poses challenges due to substantial parameter size and limited scalability, which is particularly
critical in sequential decision-making scenarios where resources are constrained
such as in robots and drones with limited computational power. Mamba, a promising new linear-time sequence model, offers performance on par with transformers
while delivering substantially fewer parameters on long sequences. As it remains
unclear whether Mamba is compatible with trajectory optimization, this work aims
to conduct comprehensive experiments to explore the potential of Decision Mamba
(dubbed DeMa) in offline RL from the aspect of data structures and essential
components with the following insights: (1) Long sequences impose a significant
computational burden without contributing to performance improvements since
DeMa’s focus on sequences diminishes approximately exponentially. Consequently,
we introduce a Transformer-like DeMa as opposed to an RNN-like DeMa. (2) For
the components of DeMa, we identify the hidden attention mechanism as a critical
factor in its success, which can also work well with other residual structures and
does not require position embedding. Extensive evaluations demonstrate that our
specially designed DeMa is compatible with trajectory optimization and surpasses
previous methods, outperforming Decision Transformer (DT) with higher performance while using 30% fewer parameters in Atari, and exceeding DT with only a
quarter of the parameters in MuJoCo.

1

Introduction

Offline Reinforcement Learning (Offline RL) [1] has gained significant attention due to its ability to
learn strategies without interacting with the environment, which is particularly beneficial in situations
where real-time interaction is expensive or risky [2–4]. With a static dataset, offline RL can be
implemented through three distinct learning methods [5]: (1) model-based algorithm [6–8], (2)
model-free algorithm [9–11], (3) trajectory optimization[12–16]. The first two methods require
long-term credit assignment through the Bellman equation, leading to the "deadly triad" problem
known to destabilize RL [17]. In contrast, trajectory optimization methods treat RL problems as
sequence modeling problems to get better performance and generalization [12]. Most trajectory
optimization methods rely on transformers, which perform credit assignment directly through the
∗

Corresponding authors: Li Shen and Xingxing Liang.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

