A Flexible, Equivariant Framework for Subgraph
GNNs via Graph Products and Graph Coarsening

Guy Bar-Shalom∗
Computer Science
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
guy.b@campus.technion.ac.il

Yam Eitan∗
Electrical & Computer Engineering
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
yameitan1997@gmail.com

Fabrizio Frasca
Electrical & Computer Engineering
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
fabrizio.frasca.effe@gmail.com

Haggai Maron
Electrical & Computer Engineering
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
NVIDIA Research
haggaimaron@gmail.com

Abstract
Subgraph GNNs enhance message-passing GNNs expressivity by representing
graphs as sets of subgraphs, demonstrating impressive performance across various
tasks. However, their scalability is hindered by the need to process large numbers
of subgraphs. While previous approaches attempted to generate smaller subsets
of subgraphs through random or learnable sampling, these methods often yielded
suboptimal selections or were limited to small subset sizes, ultimately compromising their effectiveness. This paper introduces a new Subgraph GNN framework
to address these issues. Our approach diverges from most previous methods by
associating subgraphs with node clusters rather than with individual nodes. We
show that the resulting collection of subgraphs can be viewed as the product of
coarsened and original graphs, unveiling a new connectivity structure on which we
perform generalized message passing.
Crucially, controlling the coarsening function enables meaningful selection of
any number of subgraphs. In addition, we reveal novel permutation symmetries
in the resulting node feature tensor, characterize associated linear equivariant
layers, and integrate them into our Subgraph GNN. We also introduce novel node
marking strategies and provide a theoretical analysis of their expressive power
and other key aspects of our approach. Extensive experiments on multiple graph
learning benchmarks demonstrate that our method is significantly more flexible
than previous approaches, as it can seamlessly handle any number of subgraphs,
while consistently outperforming baseline approaches. Our code is available at
https://github.com/BarSGuy/Efficient-Subgraph-GNNs.

1

Introduction

Subgraph GNNs [4, 12, 39, 8, 27, 29, 38, 3] have recently emerged as a promising direction in
graph neural network research, addressing the expressiveness limitations of Message Passing Neural
Networks (MPNNs) [24, 35, 25]. In essence, a Subgraph GNN operates on a graph by transforming
it into a collection of subgraphs, generated based on a specific selection policy. Examples of
such policies include removing a single node from the original graph or simply marking a node
without changing the graph’s original connectivity [26]. The model then processes these subgraphs
using an equivariant architecture, aggregates the derived representations, and makes graph- or nodelevel predictions. The growing popularity of Subgraph GNNs stems not only from their enhanced
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

