Hallo3D: Multi-Modal Hallucination Detection and
Mitigation for Consistent 3D Content Generation

Hongbo Wang1,2 Jie Cao1,2 Jin Liu1,3 Xiaoqiang Zhou1,4 Huaibo Huang1,2∗ Ran He1,2
1
MAIS & NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China
4
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
wanghongbo2024@ia.ac.cn, jie.cao@cripac.ia.ac.cn, liujin2@shanghaitech.edu.cn
xq525@mail.ustc.edu.cn, huaibo.huang@cripac.ia.ac.cn, rhe@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Recent advances in pretrained 2D diffusion models have significantly improved
visual prior guidance for 3D content generation. However, this process often lacks
geometric constraints, leading to spatial perception hallucinations and multi-view
inconsistencies. To address this, we introduce Hallo3D, a tuning-free method for
3D content generation that leverages the geometric perception capabilities of large
multi-modal models to detect and mitigate these hallucinations. Our approach
follows a generation-detection-correction paradigm, using multi-modal inconsistencies as query information to guide the detection of hallucinations and formulate
enhanced negative prompts that ensure consistent renderings. Additionally, we
propose a denoising strategy that employs attention mechanisms to maintain consistency in color and texture across multiple views during visual guidance. Our
method is data-independent, easily integrates with existing 3D content generation
frameworks, and supports both text-driven and image-driven approaches. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our method significantly improves the consistency
and quality of generated 3D content, particularly in mitigating hallucinations
common with 2D pretrained models.

1

Introduction

Recent studies on 3D content generation have made significant progress, emerging as a central
research focus in computer vision and computer graphics. The approaches for 3D content generation
can be categorized into two primary categories: those based on 2D priors and those based on 3D priors.
The strategies utilizing 2D priors typically learn 3D representations by approximating the probability
distribution of 2D rendered images relative to a pre-trained diffusion model. This approximation is
achieved during the visual guidance phase through a sophisticated optimization technique known as
Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) [40].
However, methods based on 2D priors often suffer from overfitting to specific viewpoints of rendered
images, resulting in generated 3D content that deviates from the expected distribution [2]. This overfitting leads to spatial perception inaccuracies, such as the Janus problem, where the generated objects
display implausible duplications of features like faces or limbs, as depicted in Fig.1. An intuitive
would be to learn priors from high-quality 3D data [19, 36, 50, 65, 62, 29, 18]. However, the limited
availability and the often sparse supervision of 3D data pose significant challenges to maintaining view
consistency and enhancing the generalizability of the generated content [23, 21]. Moreover, due to 3D
∗

Huaibo Huang is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

