Improving Adaptivity via Over-Parameterization in
Sequence Models

Yicheng Li
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
liyc22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Qian Lin ∗
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
qianlin@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
It is well known that eigenfunctions of a kernel play a crucial role in kernel
regression. Through several examples, we demonstrate that even with the same
set of eigenfunctions, the order of these functions significantly impacts regression
outcomes. Simplifying the model by diagonalizing the kernel, we introduce an
over-parameterized gradient descent in the realm of sequence model to capture the
effects of various orders of a fixed set of eigen-functions. This method is designed
to explore the impact of varying eigenfunction orders. Our theoretical results show
that the over-parameterization gradient flow can adapt to the underlying structure of
the signal and significantly outperform the vanilla gradient flow method. Moreover,
we also demonstrate that deeper over-parameterization can further enhance the
generalization capability of the model. These results not only provide a new
perspective on the benefits of over-parameterization and but also offer insights into
the adaptivity and generalization potential of neural networks beyond the kernel
regime.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the remarkable success of neural networks in a wide array of machine learning
applications has spurred a search for theoretical frameworks capable of explaining their efficacy
and efficiency. One such framework is the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) theory (see, e.g., Jacot
et al. [2018], Allen-Zhu et al. [2019]), which has emerged as a pivotal tool for understanding the
dynamics of neural network training in the infinite-width limit. The NTK theory posits that the
training dynamics of wide neural networks can be closely approximated by a kernel gradient descent
method with the corresponding NTK, elucidating their convergence behaviors during gradient descent
and shedding light on their generalization capabilities. Parallel to this, an extensive literature on
kernel regression (see, e.g., Bauer et al. [2007], Yao et al. [2007]) has studied its generalization
properties, showing its minimax optimality under certain conditions and providing insights into the
bias-variance trade-off. Thus, one can almost fully understand the generalization properties of neural
networks in the NTK regime by analyzing the kernel regression method.
However, the application of NTK theory to analyze neural networks, while invaluable, essentially
frames the problem within a traditional statistical method by a fixed kernel. The NTK analysis, by its
reliance on the fixed kernel approximation, can not entirely account for the adaptability and flexibility
exhibited by neural networks, particularly those of finite width that deviate from the theoretical
infinite-width limit [Woodworth et al., 2020]. Moreover, empirical evidence [Wenger et al., 2023,
Seleznova and Kutyniok, 2022] also suggests that the assumption of a constant kernel during training,
a cornerstone of NTK analysis, may not hold in practical scenarios where the network architecture or
∗
Corresponding author Qian Lin also affiliates with Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing,
China

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

