Learning to compute Gröbner bases

Hiroshi Kera∗
Chiba University,
Zuse Institute Berlin
kera@chiba-u.jp

Yuki Ishihara
Nihon University
ishihara.yuki@nihon-u.ac.jp

Yuta Kambe
Mitsubishi Electric
kambe.yuta@bx.mitsubishielectric.co.jp

Tristan Vaccon
Limoges University
tristan.vaccon@unilim.fr

Kazuhiro Yokoyama
Rikkyo University
kazuhiro@rikkyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Solving a polynomial system, or computing an associated Gröbner basis, has
been a fundamental task in computational algebra. However, it is also known for
its notorious doubly exponential time complexity in the number of variables in
the worst case. This paper is the first to address the learning of Gröbner basis
computation with Transformers. The training requires many pairs of a polynomial
system and the associated Gröbner basis, raising two novel algebraic problems:
random generation of Gröbner bases and transforming them into non-Gröbner
ones, termed as backward Gröbner problem. We resolve these problems with
0-dimensional radical ideals, the ideals appearing in various applications. Further,
we propose a hybrid input embedding to handle coefficient tokens with continuity
bias and avoid the growth of the vocabulary set. The experiments show that our
dataset generation method is a few orders of magnitude faster than a naive approach,
overcoming a crucial challenge in learning to compute Gröbner bases, and Gröbner
computation is learnable in a particular class.

1

Introduction

Understanding the properties of polynomial systems and solving them have been a fundamental
problem in computational algebra and algebraic geometry with vast applications in cryptography [8,
93], control theory [71], statistics [27, 41], computer vision [78], systems biology [60], and so
forth. Special sets of polynomials called Gröbner bases [16] play a key role to this end. In linear
algebra, the Gaussian elimination simplifies or solves a system of linear equations by transforming its
coefficient matrix into the reduced row echelon form. Similarly, a Gröbner basis can be regarded as a
reduced form of a given polynomial system, and its computation is a generalization of the Gaussian
elimination to general polynomial systems. However, computing a Gröbner basis is known for its
notoriously bad computational cost in theory and practice. It is an NP-hard problem with the doubly
exponential worst-case time complexity in the number of variables [29, 67]. Nevertheless, because of
its importance, various algorithms have been proposed in computational algebra to obtain Gröbner
bases in better runtime. Examples include Faugère’s F4/F5 algorithms [33, 34] and M4GB [66].
∗

corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

