A Local Method for Satisfying Interventional Fairness
with Partially Known Causal Graphs

Haoxuan Li1,2 Yue Liu3,∗ Zhi Geng4 Kun Zhang2,5
Peking University 2 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
3
Renmin University of China 4 Beijing Technology and Business University
5
Carnegie Mellon University
hxli@stu.pku.edu.cn, liuyue stats@ruc.edu.cn
zhigeng@btbu.edu.cn, kunz1@cmu.edu

1

Abstract
Developing fair automated machine learning algorithms is critical in making safe
and trustworthy decisions. Many causality-based fairness notions have been proposed to address the above issues by quantifying the causal connections between
sensitive attributes and decisions, and when the true causal graph is fully known,
certain algorithms that achieve interventional fairness have been proposed. However, when the true causal graph is unknown, it is still challenging to effectively
and efficiently exploit partially directed acyclic graphs (PDAGs) to achieve interventional fairness. To exploit the PDAGs for achieving interventional fairness,
previous methods have been built on variable selection or causal effect identification, but limited to reduced prediction accuracy or strong assumptions. In this
paper, we propose a general min-max optimization framework that can achieve
interventional fairness with promising prediction accuracy and can be extended
to maximally oriented PDAGs (MPDAGs) with added background knowledge.
Specifically, we first estimate all possible treatment effects of sensitive attributes
on a given prediction model from all possible adjustment sets of sensitive attributes via an efficient local approach. Next, we propose to alternatively update
the prediction model and possible estimated causal effects, where the prediction
model is trained via a min-max loss to control the worst-case fairness violations.
Extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets verify the superiority of our methods. To benefit the research community, we have reAleased our
project at https://github.com/haoxuanli-pku/NeurIPS24-Interventional-Fairnesswith-PDAGs.

1

Introduction

Making automated machine learning algorithms fair is critical to producing safe and trustworthy
decisions with different sensitive attributes [Brennan et al., 2009, Dieterich et al., 2016, Agarwal
et al., 2018, Chen et al., 2018, Chouldechova et al., 2018, Hoffman et al., 2018, Yurochkin et al., 2019,
Li et al., 2023]. To achieve fair predictions, association-based and causality-based fairness notions
have been proposed. Specifically, the former requires statistical independence between the sensitive
attribute and predicted outcome [Dwork et al., 2012, Hardt et al., 2016, Chouldechova, 2017, Jin
et al., 2024a,b], whereas the later investigates causal effect of the sensitive attribute on the predicted
outcome, requiring that the predicted outcome be the same across the real-world without intervention
and the counterfactual world with intervention on sensitive attribute [Zhang and Bareinboim, 2018,
Zhang et al., 2017a,b, 2018a,b, Khademi et al., 2019, Galhotra et al., 2022].
∗

Yue Liu is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

