FEEL-SNN: Robust Spiking Neural Networks with
Frequency Encoding and Evolutionary Leak Factor

1

Mengting Xu1,2 De Ma 1,2 HuaJin Tang 1,2 Qian Zheng1,2 ∗ Gang Pan 1,2 ∗
The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{xumengting, made, htang, qianzheng, gpan}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Currently, researchers think that the inherent robustness of spiking neural networks
(SNNs) stems from their biologically plausible spiking neurons, and are dedicated
to developing more bio-inspired models to defend attacks. However, most work
relies solely on experimental analysis and lacks theoretical support, and the directencoding method and fixed membrane potential leak factor they used in spiking
neurons are simplified simulations of those in the biological nervous system,
which makes it difficult to ensure generalizability across all datasets and networks.
Contrarily, the biological nervous system can stay reliable even in a highly complex
noise environment, one of the reasons is selective visual attention and non-fixed
membrane potential leaks in biological neurons. This biological finding has inspired
us to design a highly robust SNN model that closely mimics the biological nervous
system. In our study, we first present a unified theoretical framework for SNN
robustness constraint, which suggests that improving the encoding method and
evolution of the membrane potential leak factor in spiking neurons can improve
SNN robustness. Subsequently, we propose a robust SNN (FEEL-SNN) with
Frequency Encoding (FE) and Evolutionary Leak factor (EL) to defend against
different noises, mimicking the selective visual attention mechanism and non-fixed
leak observed in biological systems. Experimental results confirm the efficacy of
both our FE, EL, and FEEL methods, either in isolation or in conjunction with
established robust enhancement algorithms, for enhancing the robustness of SNNs.
Our code is available at https://github.com/zju-bmi-lab/FEEL_SNN.

1

Introduction

In recent years, brain-inspired spiking neural networks (SNNs) [21] have been increasingly prominent.
Unlike traditional artificial neural networks (ANNs), which process a single image using floating-point
values, spiking neural networks encode spatial-pixel image into temporal spike train. Information is
transmitted by the occurrence of spikes (using 0 to signify no spike and 1 to denote a spike) whenever
the membrane potential of a spiking neuron exceeds its threshold, thereby emulating biological
neurons [30, 37, 14]. The distinctive spatio-temporal characteristics, discrete representation, and
event-driven properties of SNNs enable them to operate efficiently on neuromorphic hardware [26, 4,
20, 46]. This makes them increasingly applicable to a variety of tasks [42, 19, 48], such as spatiotemporal pattern recognition [41] and high-speed detection [15]. As SNNs attract increasing attention
from academia and industry, the issue of security [35] becomes more important. When SNNs are
applied to safety-critical systems, their reliability should be a major concern [10]. While SNNs have
demonstrated better robustness compared to ANNs [11, 32, 31], recent studies have shown that they
are still vulnerable to noise [17, 8]. Among all types of perturbations, adversarial noise [35], which
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

