Warm-up Free Policy Optimization:
Improved Regret in Linear Markov Decision
Processes
Asaf Cassel
Tel Aviv University
acassel@mail.tau.ac.il

Aviv Rosenberg
Google Research
avivros@google.com

Abstract
Policy Optimization (PO) methods are among the most popular Reinforcement
Learning (RL) algorithms in practice. Recently, Sherman et al. [2023a] proposed a
PO-based algorithm with rate-optimal regret guarantees under the linear Markov
Decision Process (MDP) model. However, their algorithm relies on a costly pure
exploration warm-up phase that is hard to implement in practice. This paper
eliminates this undesired warm-up phase, replacing it with a simple and efficient
contraction mechanism. Our PO algorithm achieves rate-optimal regret with improved dependence on the other parameters of the problem (horizon and function
approximation dimension) in two fundamental settings: adversarial losses with
full-information feedback and stochastic losses with bandit feedback.

1

Introduction

Policy Optimization (PO) is a widely used method in Reinforcement Learning (RL) that achieved
tremendous empirical success, with applications ranging from robotics and computer games [Schulman et al., 2015, 2017, Mnih et al., 2015, Haarnoja et al., 2018] to Large Language Models (LLMs;
Stiennon et al. [2020], Ouyang et al. [2022]). Theoretical work on policy optimization algorithms
initially considered tabular Markov Decision Processes (MDPs; Even-Dar et al. [2009], Neu et al.
[2010b], Shani et al. [2020], Luo et al. [2021]), where the number of states is assumed to be finite and
small. In recent years the theory was generalized to infinite state spaces under function approximation,
specifically under linear function approximation in the linear MDP model [Luo et al., 2021, Dai et al.,
2023, Sherman et al., 2023b,a, Liu et al., 2023].
Recently, Sherman et al. [2023a] presented the first policy optimization
√ algorithm that achieves ratee
optimal regret in linear MDPs, i.e., a regret bound of O(poly(H,
d) K), where K is the number of
interaction episodes, H is the horizon, and d is the dimension of the linear function approximation.
However, their algorithm requires a pure exploration warm-up phase to obtain an initial estimate
of the transition dynamics. To that end, they utilize the algorithm of Wagenmaker et al. [2022b]
for reward-free exploration which is not based on the policy optimization paradigm. Moreover,
although this algorithm is computationally efficient, it relies on intricate estimation techniques that
are hard to implement in practice and unlikely to generalize beyond linear function approximation
(see discussion in section 4).
In this paper, we propose a novel contraction mechanism to avoid this costly warm-up phase. Both our
contraction mechanism and the warm-up phase serve a similar purpose – ensuring that the Q-value
estimates are bounded and yield “simple” policies. But, unlike the warm-up, our method is integrated
directly into the PO algorithm, implemented using a simple conditional truncation of the Q-estimates,
and only contributes a lower-order term to the final regret bound. Moreover, our approach is much
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

