RanDumb: Random Representations Outperform
Online Continually Learned Representations

Ameya Prabhu1∗ Shiven Sinha2∗ Ponnurangam Kumaraguru2 Philip H.S. Torr1
Ozan Sener3+ Puneet K. Dokania1+
1
2
3
University of Oxford
IIIT Hyderabad
Apple
§ https://github.com/drimpossible/RanDumb

Abstract
Continual learning has primarily focused on the issue of catastrophic forgetting
and the associated stability-plasticity tradeoffs. However, little attention has been
paid to the efficacy of continually learned representations, as representations are
learned alongside classifiers throughout the learning process. Our primary contribution is empirically demonstrating that existing online continually trained deep
networks produce inferior representations compared to a simple pre-defined random transforms. Our approach projects raw pixels using a fixed random transform,
approximating an RBF-Kernel initialized before any data is seen. We then train
a simple linear classifier on top without storing any exemplars, processing one
sample at a time in an online continual learning setting. This method, called
RanDumb, significantly outperforms state-of-the-art continually learned representations across all standard online continual learning benchmarks. Our study reveals
the significant limitations of representation learning, particularly in low-exemplar
and online continual learning scenarios. Extending our investigation to popular
exemplar-free scenarios with pretrained models, we find that training only a linear
classifier on top of pretrained representations surpasses most continual fine-tuning
and prompt-tuning strategies. Overall, our investigation challenges the prevailing
assumptions about effective representation learning in online continual learning.

NCM

Fixed Random Transform

RanDumb

Decorrelate

Approximate RBF-Kernel 

Linear Layer

Traditional

avg pool

3x3 conv, 512

3x3 conv, 512

3x3 conv, 512

3x3 conv, 512

3x3 conv, 512

3x3 conv, 512, /2

3x3 conv, 128

3x3 conv, 64

3x3 conv, 128, /2

3x3 conv, 64

3x3 conv, 64

3x3 conv, 64

3x3 conv, 64

pool, /2

3x3 conv, 64

7x7 conv, 64, /2

FC

Figure 1: Our primary analysis in this work is ablating the deep feature extractor (bottom center) by
replacing it with a random projection (top center) to isolate the effect of online continual representation
learning in the deep network. We demonstrate that random projections not only match but consistently
outperform continually learned representations, highlighting the poor quality of the continually
learned representations. RanDumb (top) maps raw pixels to a high-dimensional space using random
Fourier projections, then decorrelates the features using the Mahalanobis distance [43] and classifies
based on the nearest class mean.
∗

authors contributed equally, + equal advising

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

