Nearly Minimax Optimal Regret for Multinomial
Logistic Bandit

Joongkyu Lee
Seoul National University
Seoul, South Korea
jklee0717@snu.ac.kr

Min-hwan Oh
Seoul National University
Seoul, South Korea
minoh@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we study the contextual multinomial logistic (MNL) bandit problem
in which a learning agent sequentially selects an assortment based on contextual
information, and user feedback follows an MNL choice model. There has been
a significant discrepancy between lower and upper regret bounds, particularly
regarding the maximum assortment size K. Additionally, the variation in reward
structures between these bounds complicates the quest for optimality. Under uniform rewards, where ?
all items have the same expected reward, we establish a regret
lower bound of Ωpd T {Kq and propose a constant-time
algorithm, OFU-MNL+,
?
that achieves a matching upper bound of Õpd T {Kq. We also provide instancedependent minimax regret bounds under
? uniform rewards. Under non-uniform
?
rewards, we prove a lower bound of Ωpd T q and an upper bound of Õpd T q, also
achievable by OFU-MNL+. Our empirical studies support these theoretical findings.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work in the contextual MNL bandit
literature to prove minimax optimality — for either uniform or non-uniform reward
setting — and to propose a computationally efficient algorithm that achieves this
optimality up to logarithmic factors.

1

Introduction

The multinomial logistic (MNL) bandit framework [47, 48, 7, 8, 40, 41, 44, 5, 53] describes sequential
assortment selection problems in which an agent offer a sequence of assortments of at most K item
from a set of N possible items and receives feedback only for the chosen decisions. The choice
probability of each outcome is characterized by an MNL model [37]. This framework allows modeling
of various real-world situations such as recommender systems and online retails, where selections of
assortments are evaluated based on the user-choice feedback among offered multiple options.
In this paper, we study the contextual MNL bandit problem [8, 7, 43, 16, 40, 41, 44, 5], where
the features of items and possibly contextual information about a user at each round are available.
Despite many recent advances, [16, 40, 41, 44, 5], however, no previous studies have proven the
minimax
? optimality of contextual MNL bandits. Chen et al. [16] proposed a regret lower bound
of Ωpd T {Kq, where d is the number of features, T is the total number of rounds, and K is the
maximum size of assortments, assuming the uniform rewards, i.e., rewards are all same for each
? of
the total N items. Furthermore, Chen and Wang [15] established a regret lower bound of Ωp N T q
in the non-contextual setting (hence, dependence on N appears instead of d), which is tighter in terms
of K. It is important to note the difference in the assumptions for the attraction parameter for the
outside option v0 . Chen and Wang [15] assumed for the attraction parameter for the outside option
to be v0 “ K, whereas Chen et al. [16] assumed v0 “ 1. Therefore, it remains an open question
whether and how the value of v0 affects both lower and upper bounds of regret.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

