Abstracted Shapes as Tokens - A Generalizable and
Interpretable Model for Time-series Classification

Yunshi Wen ∗
Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute
weny2@rpi.edu
Tsui-Wei Weng
University of California,
San Diego
lweng@ucsd.edu

Tengfei Ma∗
Stony Brook University
tengfei.ma@stonybrook.edu

Lam M. Nguyen
IBM Research
lamnguyen.mltd@ibm.com

Anak Agung Julius
Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute
agung@ecse.rpi.edu

Abstract
In time-series analysis, many recent works seek to provide a unified view and
representation for time-series across multiple domains, leading to the development
of foundation models for time-series data. Despite diverse modeling techniques,
existing models are black boxes and fail to provide insights and explanations
about their representations. In this paper, we present VQShape, a pre-trained,
generalizable, and interpretable model for time-series representation learning and
classification. By introducing a novel representation for time-series data, we
forge a connection between the latent space of VQShape and shape-level features.
Using vector quantization, we show that time-series from different domains can
be described using a unified set of low-dimensional codes, where each code can
be represented as an abstracted shape in the time domain. On classification tasks,
we show that the representations of VQShape can be utilized to build interpretable
classifiers, achieving comparable performance to specialist models. Additionally,
in zero-shot learning, VQShape and its codebook can generalize to previously
unseen datasets and domains that are not included in the pre-training process. The
code and pre-trained weights are available at https://github.com/YunshiWen/
VQShape.

1

Introduction

As one of the fundamental forms of data, time-series (TS) exist in a wide range of domains and
applications, including healthcare, weather, traffic, motions, human activities, sensors, etc. Modeling
TS data across multiple domains has been a challenging task since TS data can have diverse sampling
rates, lengths, magnitudes, frequencies, and noise levels. Due to this heterogeneity, most of the
existing machine learning methods for TS modeling focus only on a single dataset or a single domain.
Recently, motivated by the success of large pre-trained models in natural language processing and
computer vision, various approaches adopted from these two fields have been proposed to build
a unified view and feature space for TS data from different domains [Liang et al., 2024]. Most
of the models use a transformer as the backbone and pre-train it on a diverse range of datasets
[Zerveas et al., 2021, Nie et al., 2023, Goswami et al., 2024]. These methods have achieved great
success in TS representation learning, benefiting various downstream tasks and demonstrating their
∗

Corresponding to Yunshi Wen (weny2@rpi.edu) and Tengfei Ma (tengfei.ma@stonybrook.edu)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

