Get rich quick: exact solutions reveal how unbalanced
initializations promote rapid feature learning
Daniel Kunin∗1 Allan Raventós∗1 Clémentine Dominé2 Feng Chen1
David Klindt3 Andrew Saxe2 Surya Ganguli1
1

Stanford University

2

University College London

3

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory

Abstract
While the impressive performance of modern neural networks is often attributed
to their capacity to efficiently extract task-relevant features from data, the mechanisms underlying this rich feature learning regime remain elusive, with much
of our theoretical understanding stemming from the opposing lazy regime. In
this work, we derive exact solutions to a minimal model that transitions between
lazy and rich learning, precisely elucidating how unbalanced layer-specific initialization variances and learning rates determine the degree of feature learning.
Our analysis reveals that they conspire to influence the learning regime through
a set of conserved quantities that constrain and modify the geometry of learning
trajectories in parameter and function space. We extend our analysis to more
complex linear models with multiple neurons, outputs, and layers and to shallow
nonlinear networks with piecewise linear activation functions. In linear networks,
rapid feature learning only occurs from balanced initializations, where all layers
learn at similar speeds. While in nonlinear networks, unbalanced initializations that
promote faster learning in earlier layers can accelerate rich learning. Through a
series of experiments, we provide evidence that this unbalanced rich regime drives
feature learning in deep finite-width networks, promotes interpretability of early
layers in CNNs, reduces the sample complexity of learning hierarchical data, and
decreases the time to grokking in modular arithmetic. Our theory motivates further
exploration of unbalanced initializations to enhance efficient feature learning.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has transformed machine learning, demonstrating remarkable capabilities in a myriad
of tasks ranging from image recognition to natural language processing. It’s widely believed that
the impressive performance of these models lies in their capacity to efficiently extract task-relevant
features from data. However, understanding this feature acquisition requires unraveling a complex interplay between datasets, network architectures, and optimization algorithms. Within this framework,
two distinct regimes, determined at initialization, have emerged: the lazy and the rich.
Lazy regime. Various investigations have revealed a notable phenomenon in overparameterized neural
networks, where throughout training the networks remain close to their linearization [1, 2, 3, 4, 5].
Seminal work by Jacot et al. [6], demonstrated that in the infinite-width limit, the Neural Tangent
Kernel (NTK), which describes the evolution of the neural network through training, converges to a
deterministic limit. Consequently, the network learns a solution akin to kernel regression with the
NTK matrix. Termed the lazy or kernel regime, this domain has been characterized by a deterministic
NTK [6, 7], minimal movement in parameter space [8], static hidden representations, exponential
learning curves, and implicit biases aligned with a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) norm
[9]. However, Chizat et al. [8] challenged this understanding, asserting that the lazy regime isn’t a
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to kunin@stanford.edu and aravento@stanford.edu.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

