Revealing Distribution Discrepancy
by Sampling Transfer in Unlabeled Data

Zhilin Zhao1,2
Longbing Cao1
Xuhui Fan1
Wei-Shi Zheng2,3∗
1
School of Computing, Macquarie University, Australia
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
zhaozhl7@hotmail.com, {longbing.cao,xuhui.fan}@mq.edu.au, wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
There are increasing cases where the class labels of test samples are unavailable,
creating a significant need and challenge in measuring the discrepancy between
training and test distributions. This distribution discrepancy complicates the assessment of whether the hypothesis selected by an algorithm on training samples
remains applicable to test samples. We present a novel approach called Importance
Divergence (I-Div) to address the challenge of test label unavailability, enabling
distribution discrepancy evaluation using only training samples. I-Div transfers the
sampling patterns from the test distribution to the training distribution by estimating
density and likelihood ratios. Specifically, the density ratio, informed by the selected hypothesis, is obtained by minimizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence between
the actual and estimated input distributions. Simultaneously, the likelihood ratio
is adjusted according to the density ratio by reducing the generalization error of
the distribution discrepancy as transformed through the two ratios. Experimentally,
I-Div accurately quantifies the distribution discrepancy, as evidenced by a wide
range of complex data scenarios and tasks.

1

Introduction

The assumption that data are independently and identically distributed (IID) is staple in statistical
machine learning. It suggests that a hypothesis selected by an algorithm, after observing several
training samples, should perform effectively on test samples from the same unknown distribution.
However, this assumption often oversimplifies the intricate and diverse nature of real-world data,
particularly in non-IID scenarios [1, 2]. Thus, if training samples are considered in-distribution (ID),
there is a risk that test samples may deviate from this distribution, characterized as out-of-distribution
(OOD) [3]. This distribution discrepancy between training and test distributions poses a critical
and challenging non-IID learning [2] question: How to quantify the applicability of a hypothesis
derived from training samples to test samples?. This question is generally applicable to areas like
OOD generalization [4], OOD detection [5, 6], domain adaptation [7, 8], transfer learning [9],
semi-supervised learning [10], robust learning [11], and adversarial learning [12].
The applicability of a hypothesis can be determined by the distribution discrepancy between training
and test distributions. When the two distributions align, meaning both training and test samples
are ID, the hypothesis derived from training samples can be seamlessly applied to test samples.
However, in reality, particularly when test samples fall OOD, this scenario rarely holds. Under such
circumstances, decisions must be based on the extent of the distribution discrepancy. This may
require enhancing the hypothesis generalization capability towards test samples or rejecting these
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

