Self-Supervised Alignment with Mutual Information
Learning to Follow Principles without Preference Labels

Jan-Philipp Fränken∗ Eric Zelikman
Tobias Gerstenberg

Rafael Rafailov

Kanishk Gandhi

Noah D. Goodman

Stanford University

Abstract
When prompting a language model (LM), users often expect the model to adhere
to a set of behavioral principles across diverse tasks, such as producing insightful
content while avoiding harmful or biased language. Instilling such principles (i.e.,
a constitution) into a model is resource-intensive, technically challenging, and
generally requires human preference labels or examples. We introduce SAMI, an
iterative algorithm that finetunes a pretrained language model (without requiring
preference labels or demonstrations) to increase the conditional mutual information
between constitutions and self-generated responses given queries from a dataset. On
single-turn dialogue and summarization, a SAMI-trained mistral-7b outperforms
the initial pretrained model, with win rates between 66% and 77% . Strikingly,
it also surpasses an instruction-finetuned baseline (mistral-7b-instruct) with
win rates between 55% and 57% on single-turn dialogue. SAMI requires a
model that writes the principles. To avoid dependence on strong models for writing
principles, we align a strong pretrained model (mixtral-8x7b) using constitutions
written by a weak instruction-finetuned model (mistral-7b-instruct), achieving a 65% win rate on summarization. Finally, we investigate whether SAMI
generalizes to diverse summarization principles (e.g., “summaries should be scientific”) and scales to stronger models (llama3-70b), finding that it achieves win
rates of up to 68% for learned and 67% for held-out principles compared to the
base model. Our results show that a pretrained LM can learn to follow constitutions
without using preference labels, demonstrations, or human oversight.

1

Introduction

Pretraining yields language models (LMs) with a vast array of knowledge and abilities. However,
these models are difficult to use because they don’t inherently reflect the values and preferences of
human users. To address this issue, various alignment finetuning methods have become crucial for
transforming LMs into useful AI assistants [25, 29, 6, intera alia]. The success of these methods raises
the question: Why do they work so well? Increasing evidence suggests that alignment finetuning
methods expose and amplify aspects of the behavior distribution already implicit in the base pretrained
model [e.g., 43, 21]. In this paper we build on this insight: We hypothesize that pretrained base
models already have a weak statistical connection between behavioral principles, described in natural
language, and the behavior that would realize them. We can encourage this connection by optimizing
the conditional mutual information between principles and model responses given queries from a
dataset. Finetuning the base model in this way requires no human preferences or examples yet yields
a model which follows principles.
∗

Corresponding author: jphilipp@stanford.edu. Code: https://github.com/janphilippfranken/sami

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

