On Feature Learning in
Structured State Space Models

Leena Chennuru Vankadara†1
1

Jin Xu†2

AGI Foundations, Amazon
University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center∗,

3

Moritz Haas 3
2

Volkan Cevher1,4

University of Oxford∗
LIONS, EPFL∗

4

Abstract
This paper studies the scaling behavior of state-space models (SSMs) and their
structured variants, such as Mamba, that have recently arisen in popularity as
alternatives to transformer-based neural network architectures. Specifically, we
focus on the capability of SSMs to learn features as their network width approaches
infinity. Our findings reveal that established scaling rules, such as the Maximal
Update Parameterization, fail to support feature learning as these models cannot
be represented in the form of Tensor Programs. Additionally, we demonstrate that
spectral scaling conditions, shown to be effective for feature learning in a host
of other architectures, do not hold the same implications for SSMs. Through a
detailed signal propagation analysis in SSMs, both forward and backward, we
identify the appropriate scaling necessary for non-trivial feature evolution in the
infinite-width limit. Our proposed scaling shows behavior akin to the Maximal
Update Parameterization, such as improved stability, better generalization, and
transferability of optimal hyper-parameters from small to large scale SSMs.

1

Introduction

State-space models (SSMs), such as Mamba (Gu and Dao, 2023), have become popular in deep learning as alternatives to transformers like GPT and BERT series (Radford et al., 2019, Brown et al., 2020,
Achiam et al., 2023, Devlin et al., 2018, Touvron et al., 2023, Chowdhery et al., 2023, Gemini Team
et al., 2023). SSMs integrate elements from RNNs, CNNs, and control models, excelling in inference
and handling long contexts (Gu et al., 2021, Gupta et al., 2022, Gu et al., 2022, Smith et al., 2022).
The success of foundation models based on transformers and SSMs alike is largely attributed to
their scale—both in terms of data and model size. However, this increased scale often introduces
challenges, such as precision issues due to instability or the vanishing/exploding gradient problems.
Additionally, the sequential nature of state-space models (SSMs) makes them notoriously difficult
to train. Therefore, developing a rigorous understanding of how SSMs scale as their dimensions
increase and identifying optimal scaling rules is crucial.
In this vein, infinite-width asymptotics, such as Neural tangent kernel (NTK) analyses have been a
central tool providing key insights in DL theory. However, a key limitation of the NTK analysis is
the lack of feature learning in the infinite width limit (Yang and Littwin, 2023). Feature learning
addresses the more realistic training setting where we have unrestricted movement of the neural
network parameters (Yang and Littwin, 2023).
Intriguingly, recent work by Yang and Hu (2021) showed that under an expanded space of hyperparameters, which includes layer-wise scaling of the learning rates, one can find a unique parameterization called Maximal Update pPrameterization (µP) that induces non-trivial feature evolution
∗
† denotes equal contribution. This work was conducted during Jin’s, Moritz’ and Volkan’s time at Amazon.
Correspondence to: aaron.jin.xu@gmail.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

