GeSS: Benchmarking Geometric Deep Learning under
Scientific Applications with Distribution Shifts

Deyu Zou1∗, Shikun Liu2∗, Siqi Miao2 , Victor Fung2 , Shiyu Chang3 , Pan Li2
University of Science and Technology of China, zoudeyu2020@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
2
Georgia Institute of Technology, {shikun.liu,siqi.miao,victorfung,panli}@gatech.edu
3
University of California, Santa Barbara, chang87@ucsb.edu
1

Abstract
Geometric deep learning (GDL) has gained significant attention in scientific fields,
for its proficiency in modeling data with intricate geometric structures. Yet, very
few works have delved into its capability of tackling the distribution shift problem,
a prevalent challenge in many applications. To bridge this gap, we propose GeSS, a
comprehensive benchmark designed for evaluating the performance of GDL models
in scientific scenarios with distribution shifts. Our evaluation datasets cover diverse
scientific domains from particle physics, materials science to biochemistry, and
encapsulate a broad spectrum of distribution shifts including conditional, covariate,
and concept shifts. Furthermore, we study three levels of information access
from the out-of-distribution (OOD) test data, including no OOD information, only
unlabeled OOD data, and OOD data with a few labels. Overall, our benchmark
results in 30 different experiment settings, and evaluates 3 GDL backbones and
11 learning algorithms in each setting. A thorough analysis of the evaluation
results is provided, poised to illuminate insights for GDL researchers and domain
practitioners who are to use GDL in their applications.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) techniques, as a powerful and efficient approach, have been widely used in
diverse scientific fields, including high energy physics (HEP) [15], materials science [20], and drug
discovery [81], propelling ML4S (ML for Science) into a promising direction. In particular, geometric
deep learning (GDL) is gaining much focus in scientific applications because many scientific data can
be represented as point cloud data embedded in a complex geometric space. Current GDL research
mainly focuses on neural network architectures design [79, 19, 36, 73, 78, 47], capturing geometric
properties (e.g., invariance and equivariance properties), to learn useful representations for geometric
data, and these backbones have shown to be successful in various GDL scenarios.
However, ML models in scientific applications consistently face challenges related to data distribution
shifts (PS (X, Y ) ̸= PT (X, Y )) between the training (source) domain S and the test (target) domain
T . In particular, the regime expected to have new scientific discoveries has often been less explored
and thus holds limited data with labels. To apply GDL techniques to such a regime, researchers often
resort to training models over labeled data from well-explored regimes or theory-guided simulations,
whose distribution may not align well with the real-world to-be-explored regime of scientific interest.
In materials science, for example, the OC20 dataset [10] covers a broad space of catalyst surfaces
and adsorbates. ML models trained over this dataset may be expected to extrapolate to new catalyst
compositions such as oxide electrocatalysts [80]. Additionally, in HEP, models are often trained
based on simulated data and are expected to generalize to real experiments, which hold more variable
conditions and may differ substantially from simulations [50].
* Equal contribution. Code and data are available at https://github.com/Graph-COM/GESS.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

