Communication-Efficient Federated Group
Distributionally Robust Optimization

Zhishuai Guo, Tianbao Yang∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Texas A&M University
zhishguo@tamu.edu,tianbao-yang@tamu.edu

Abstract
Federated learning faces challenges due to the heterogeneity in data volumes and
distributions at different clients, which can compromise model generalization ability
to various distributions. Existing approaches to address this issue based on group
distributionally robust optimization (GDRO) often lead to high communication
and sample complexity. To this end, this work introduces algorithms tailored for
communication-efficient Federated Group Distributionally Robust Optimization
(FGDRO). Our contributions are threefold: Firstly, we introduce the FGDRO-CVaR
algorithm, which optimizes the average top-K losses while reducing communication
complexity to O(1/ϵ4 ), where ϵ denotes the desired precision level. Secondly, our
FGDRO-KL algorithm is crafted to optimize KL regularized FGDRO, cutting
communication complexity to O(1/ϵ3 ). Lastly, we propose FGDRO-KL-Adam
to to utilize Adam-type local updates in FGDRO-KL, which not only maintains
a communication cost of O(1/ϵ3 ) but also shows potential to surpass SGD-type
local steps in practical applications. The effectiveness of our algorithms has
been demonstrated on a variety of real-world tasks, including natural language
processing and computer vision.

1

Introduction

Federated learning enables effective model training without the need to share raw data [38, 48]. It
is essential in contexts where data privacy and ownership are paramount, such as in inter-hospital
collaborations [54] and mobile device networks [20]. However, clients often have data of varying
volumes and distinct distributions, which poses notable challenges in maintaining generalization
behavior [50, 27]. Generalization here refers to the model’s ability to perform consistently across
different clients, including those that have not participated in the training [23, 79].
In this study, we tackle the issue using federated group distributionally robust optimization (FGDRO),
formulated as follows:
N
X
min F (w) := max
pi ℓi (w) − λϕ(p).
(1)
w

p∈∆N

i=1

Here, w denotes a machine learning model, and N represents the number of clients. For each client i,
Di represents its local data distribution, and ℓi (w) = Ez∼Di ℓ(w; z) represents theP
loss calculated
from that local distribution. ∆N denotes a N -dimensional simplex, which constrains i pi = 1. The
vector p = [p1 , ..., pN ] comprises the weights assigned to each of the N clients. The function ϕ(p)
acts as a regularization term, with λ > 0 being an adjustable parameter. This framework aims to
assign higher weights to machines with greater losses while discouraging substantial deviations of
these weights from a specified distribution.
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

