F IN C ON: A Synthesized LLM Multi-Agent System
with Conceptual Verbal Reinforcement for Enhanced
Financial Decision Making

Yangyang Yu1,⋆ , Zhiyuan Yao1,⋆ , Haohang Li1,⋆ , Zhiyang Deng1,⋆ , Yuechen Jiang1,⋆ , Yupeng Cao1,⋆
Zhi Chen1,⋆ , Jordan W. Suchow1 , Zhenyu Cui1 , Rong Liu1 , Zhaozhuo Xu1 , Denghui Zhang1
Koduvayur Subbalakshmi1 , Guojun Xiong2 , Yueru He3 , Jimin Huang 3 , Dong Li3 , Qianqian Xie3,†
1
Stevens Institute of Technology 2 Harvard University 3 The Fin AI
⋆
These authors contributed equally † Corresponding author: qianqian.xie@yale.edu

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have shown potential in complex financial tasks,
but sequential financial decision-making remains challenging due to the volatile
environment and the need for intelligent risk management. While LLM-based
agent systems have achieved impressive returns, optimizing multi-source information synthesis and decision-making through timely experience refinement is
underexplored. We introduce F IN C ON, an LLM-based multi-agent framework
with CONceptual verbal reinforcement for diverse FINancial tasks. Inspired by
real-world investment firm structures, F IN C ON employs a manager-analyst hierarchy, enabling synchronized cross-functional agent collaboration towards unified
goals via natural language interactions. Its dual-level risk-control component
enhances decision-making by monitoring daily market risk and updating systematic
investment beliefs through self-critique. These conceptualized beliefs provide
verbal reinforcement for future decisions, selectively propagated to relevant agents,
improving performance while reducing unnecessary peer-to-peer communication
costs. F IN C ON generalizes well across tasks, including single stock trading and
portfolio management. 1

1

Introduction

The intricacies and fluctuations inherent in financial markets pose significant challenges for making
high-quality, sequential investment decisions. In tasks such as single stock trading and portfolio
management, each intelligent decision is driven by multiple market interactions and the integration
of diverse information streams, characterized by varying levels of timeliness and modalities [1, 2].
The primary objective of these tasks is to maximize profit while managing present market risks in an
open-ended environment.
In practice, trading firms often depend on synthesized teamwork, structured hierarchically with
functional roles such as data analysts, risk analysts, and portfolio managers communicating across
levels [3, 4]. These roles are responsible for the careful integration of diverse resources. However,
the cognitive limitations of human team members can hinder their capacity to rapidly process market
signals and achieve optimal investment outcomes [5].
To enhance investment returns and address the limitations of human decision-making, various
studies have explored methods such as deep reinforcement learning (DRL) to develop agent systems
that simulate market environments and automate investment strategies [6, 7, 8]. Concurrently,
1

We will release the code and demo in the following repo https://github.com/The-FinAI/FinCon

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

