How to Solve Contextual Goal-Oriented Problems with
Offline Datasets?
Ying Fan1 , Jingling Li2 , Adith Swaminathan3 , Aditya Modi3 , Ching-An Cheng3
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison 2 ByteDance Research 3 Microsoft Research

Abstract
We present a novel method, Contextual goal-Oriented Data Augmentation (CODA),
which uses commonly available unlabeled trajectories and context-goal pairs to
solve Contextual Goal-Oriented (CGO) problems. By carefully constructing an
action-augmented MDP that is equivalent to the original MDP, CODA creates a
fully labeled transition dataset under training contexts without additional approximation error. We conduct a novel theoretical analysis to demonstrate CODA’s
capability to solve CGO problems in the offline data setup. Empirical results also
showcase the effectiveness of CODA, which outperforms other baseline methods
across various context-goal relationships of CGO problem. This approach offers a
promising direction to solving CGO problems using offline datasets.

1

Introduction

Goal-oriented problems [16] are an important class of sequential decision-making problems with
widespread applications, ranging from robotics [39], game-playing [12], to logistics [24]. In particular,
many real-world goal oriented problems are contextual, where the objective of the agent is to reach
a goal set communicated by a context. For example, consider instructing a truck operator with the
context “Deliver goods to a warehouse in the Bay area”. Given such a context and an initial state, it is
acceptable to reach any feasible goal (a reachable warehouse location) in the goal set (warehouse
locations including non-reachable ones). We call such problems Contextual Goal-Oriented (CGO)
problems, which form an important special case of contextual Markov Decision Process (MDP) [10].
CGO is a practical setup that includes goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (GCRL) as a special
case (the context in GCRL is just the target goal), but in general contexts in CGO problem can be
more abstract (like high-level task instructions in the above example) and the relationship between
contexts and goals are not known beforehand. CGO problems are challenging because 1) the rewards
are sparse as in GCRL and 2) the contexts can be difficult to map into feasible goals. Nevertheless,
CGO problem has an important structure that the transition dynamics (e.g., navigating a city road
network) are independent of the contexts that specify tasks. Therefore, efficient multitask learning
can be achieved by sharing dynamics data across tasks.
In this paper, we study solving for CGO problems in an offline setup. We suppose access to two
datasets — an (unlabeled) dynamics dataset of trajectories, and a (labeled) context-goal dataset
containing pairs of contexts and goal examples. Such datasets are commonly available in practice.
The typical contextual datasets for imitation learning (IL) (which has pairs of contexts and expert
trajectories) is one example, since we can convert the contextual IL data into dynamics data and
context-goal pairs. Generally, this setup also covers scenarios where expert trajectories are not
accessible (e.g., because of diverse contexts and initial states), since it does not assume goal examples
to appear in the trajectories or the contexts are readily paired with transitions in expert trajectories.
Instead, it allows the dynamics datasets and the context-goal datasets to be independently collected.
For example, in robotics, task-agnostic play data can be obtained at scale [22, 34] in an unsupervised
manner whereas instruction datasets (e.g., [25]) can provide context-goal pairs. In navigation, self38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

