MoMu-Diffusion: On Learning Long-Term
Motion-Music Synchronization and Correspondence

Fuming You, Minghui Fang, Li Tang, Rongjie Huang, Yongqi Wang, Zhou Zhao∗
Zhejiang University
fumyou13@gmail.com

Abstract
Motion-to-music and music-to-motion have been studied separately, each attracting
substantial research interest within their respective domains. The interaction
between human motion and music is a reflection of advanced human intelligence,
and establishing a unified relationship between them is particularly important.
However, to date, there has been no work that considers them jointly to explore
the modality alignment within. To bridge this gap, we propose a novel framework,
termed MoMu-Diffusion, for long-term and synchronous motion-music generation.
Firstly, to mitigate the huge computational costs raised by long sequences, we
propose a novel Bidirectional Contrastive Rhythmic Variational Auto-Encoder
(BiCoR-VAE) that extracts the modality-aligned latent representations for both
motion and music inputs. Subsequently, leveraging the aligned latent spaces, we
introduce a multi-modal Transformer-based diffusion model and a cross-guidance
sampling strategy to enable various generation tasks, including cross-modal, multimodal, and variable-length generation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
MoMu-Diffusion surpasses recent state-of-the-art methods both qualitatively and
quantitatively, and can synthesize realistic, diverse, long-term, and beat-matched
music or motion sequences. The generated samples and codes are available at
https://momu-diffusion.github.io/.

Motion Sequence

MoMu-Diffusion

Joint
Generation

Music-to-Motion

Long-Term Synthesis

Motion-to-Music

Aligned Latent Space

Variable-Length Syn.

Video

BiCoR-VAE

Beat-Matching

Music Mel-Spectrogram

Figure 1: The pipeline of MoMu-Diffusion. MoMu-Diffusion integrates the alignment of motion and
music through the novel Bidirectional Contrastive Rhythmic Auto-Encoder (BiCoR-VAE). Leveraging
the aligned latent space, MoMu-Diffusion facilitates both cross-modal and multi-modal generations.

1

Introduction

Dancing to the musical beats or creating a variety of rhythmically synchronized music for a given
motion is a fundamental aspect of human creativity. Music and human motions serve as universal
languages that are shared by all civilizations, transcending cultural and geographical boundaries
around the world [25]. For computational methodologies, the motion-music generation poses several
challenges: 1) maintaining long-term coherence in typically lengthy motion-music sequences 2)
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

