Sequential Decision Making with Expert
Demonstrations under Unobserved Heterogeneity

Vahid Balazadeh
University of Toronto
vahid@cs.toronto.edu

Keertana Chidambaram
Stanford University
vck@stanford.edu

Rahul G. Krishnan∗
University of Toronto
rahulgk@cs.toronto.edu

Viet Nguyen
University of Toronto
viet@cs.toronto.edu

Vasilis Syrgkanis⋆
Stanford University
vsyrgk@stanford.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of online sequential decision-making given auxiliary
demonstrations from experts who made their decisions based on unobserved contextual information. These demonstrations can be viewed as solving related but
slightly different problems than what the learner faces. This setting arises in many
application domains, such as self-driving cars, healthcare, and finance, where expert demonstrations are made using contextual information, which is not recorded
in the data available to the learning agent. We model the problem as zero-shot
meta-reinforcement learning with an unknown distribution over the unobserved
contextual variables and a Bayesian regret minimization objective, where the unobserved variables are encoded as parameters with an unknown prior. We propose the Experts-as-Priors algorithm (ExPerior), an empirical Bayes approach
that utilizes expert data to establish an informative prior distribution over the
learner’s decision-making problem. This prior distribution enables the application
of any Bayesian approach for online decision-making, such as posterior sampling.
We demonstrate that our strategy surpasses existing behaviour cloning, online,
and online-offline baselines for multi-armed bandits, Markov decision processes
(MDPs), and partially observable MDPs, showcasing the broad reach and utility of
ExPerior in using expert demonstrations across different decision-making setups.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has found success in complex decision-making tasks, spanning areas
such as game playing [1, 2, 3], robotics [4, 5], and aligning with human preferences [6]. However,
RL’s considerable sample inefficiency, necessitating millions of training frames for convergence,
remains a significant challenge. A notable body of work within RL has been dedicated to integrating
expert demonstrations to accelerate the learning process, employing strategies like offline pretraining
[7] and the use of combined offline-online datasets [8, 9]. While these approaches are theoretically
sound and empirically validated [10, 11], they typically presume homogeneity between the offline
and online datasets. A vital question arises about the effectiveness of these methods when expert
data embody heterogeneous tasks, indistinguishable by the learner.
An important example of such heterogeneity is in situations where experts operate with additional
information not available to the learner, a scenario previously explored in imitation learning with
unobserved contexts [12, 13, 14, 15]. Existing literature either relies on the availability of experts
to query during training [16, 17, 18, 19] or focuses on the assumptions that enable imitation learn∗

Equal contribution. Our code is accessible at https://github.com/vdblm/experior

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

