Continual Audio-Visual Sound Separation

Weiguo Pian1 Yiyang Nan2 Shijian Deng1 Shentong Mo3 Yunhui Guo1 Yapeng Tian1
1

The University of Texas at Dallas 2 Brown University 3 Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a novel continual audio-visual sound separation task,
aiming to continuously separate sound sources for new classes while preserving performance on previously learned classes, with the aid of visual guidance. This problem is crucial for practical visually guided auditory perception as it can significantly
enhance the adaptability and robustness of audio-visual sound separation models,
making them more applicable for real-world scenarios where encountering new
sound sources is commonplace. The task is inherently challenging as our models
must not only effectively utilize information from both modalities in current tasks
but also preserve their cross-modal association in old tasks to mitigate catastrophic
forgetting during audio-visual continual learning. To address these challenges, we
propose a novel approach named ContAV-Sep (Continual Audio-Visual Sound
Separation). ContAV-Sep presents a novel Cross-modal Similarity Distillation
Constraint (CrossSDC) to uphold the cross-modal semantic similarity through incremental tasks and retain previously acquired knowledge of semantic similarity in
old models, mitigating the risk of catastrophic forgetting. The CrossSDC can seamlessly integrate into the training process of different audio-visual sound separation
frameworks. Experiments demonstrate that ContAV-Sep can effectively mitigate
catastrophic forgetting and achieve significantly better performance compared
to other continual learning baselines for audio-visual sound separation. Code is
available at: https://github.com/weiguoPian/ContAV-Sep_NeurIPS2024.

1

Introduction

Humans can effortlessly separate and identify individual sound sources in daily experience [25, 7, 64,
33]. This skill plays a crucial role in our ability to understand and interact with the complex auditory
environments that surround us [34]. However, replicating this capability in machines remains a
significant challenge due to the inherent complexity of real-world auditory scenes [7, 77]. Inspired by
the multisensory perception of humans [62, 60], audio-visual sound separation tackles this challenge
by utilizing visual information to guide the separation of individual sound sources in an audio mixture.
Recent advances in deep learning have led to significant progress in audio-visual sound separation [84,
23, 21, 67, 14, 65, 81, 63, 11, 71]. Benefiting from more advanced architectures (e.g., U-Net [84, 23],
Transformer [14], and diffusion models [27]) and discriminative visual cues (e.g., grounded visual
objects [67], motion [83], and dynamic gestures [21]), audio-visual separation models are able to
separate sounds ranging from domain-specific speech, musical instrument sounds to open-domain
general sounds within training sound categories. However, a limitation of these studies is their focus
on scenarios where all sound source classes are presently known, overlooking the potential inclusion
of unknown sound source classes during inference in real-world applications. This oversight leads to
the catastrophic forgetting issue [32, 3], where the fine-tuning of models on new classes detrimentally
impacts their performance on previously learned classes. Despite Chen et al. [14] demonstrating
that their iQuery model can generalize to new classes well through simple fine-tuning, it still suffers
from the catastrophic forgetting problem on old classes. This prevents the trained models from
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

