Task-oriented Time Series Imputation Evaluation via
Generalized Representers

Zhixian Wang1,2 , Linxiao Yang2 , Liang Sun2 , Qingsong Wen2 , Yi Wang1∗
1
The University of Hong Kong, 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
zxwang@eee.hku.hk, linxiao.ylx@alibaba-inc.com, liang.sun@alibaba-inc.com,
qingsongedu@gmail.com, yiwang@eee.hku.hk

Abstract
Time series analysis is widely used in many fields such as power energy, economics,
and transportation, including different tasks such as forecasting, anomaly detection, classification, etc. Missing values are widely observed in these tasks, and
often leading to unpredictable negative effects on existing methods, hindering their
further application. In response to this situation, existing time series imputation
methods mainly focus on restoring sequences based on their data characteristics,
while ignoring the performance of the restored sequences in downstream tasks.
Considering different requirements of downstream tasks (e.g., forecasting), this
paper proposes an efficient downstream task-oriented time series imputation evaluation approach. By combining time series imputation with neural network models
used for downstream tasks, the gain of different imputation strategies on downstream tasks is estimated without retraining, and the most favorable imputation
value for downstream tasks is given by combining different imputation strategies
according to the estimated gain. The corresponding code can be found in the
repository https://github.com/hkuedl/Task-Oriented-Imputation.

1

Introduction

Time series analysis plays a crucial role in many real-world applications, such as energy, finance,
healthcare, and other fields [1, 2, 3]. For example, forecasting load series forms the basis for further
decision-making in power dispatch in the power grid system, thereby generating a significant amount
of economic benefits [4, 5, 6]. However, collecting time series data, especially high-quality ones, is
challenging. Due to the instability of the external environment, sensor failures, and even ethical and
legal privacy issues, missing values are prevalent in time series data [7]. For instance, in the BDG2
load series dataset [8], widely used in building energy analysis, the ratio of complete time series data
is less than 10%.
To handle missing values in time series data, numerous methods have been proposed for time series
imputation in the literature. Based on the features of the imputation methods, these approaches can
be divided into statistical and machine learning methods, such as ARIMA and KNN [9, 10], as well
as deep learning-based methods [11, 12, 13, 14]. Both types of methods generally use reconstruction
errors of missing values to guide learning and perform evaluation. Recently, some researchers have
turned their attention to evaluation strategies based on downstream task performance [15]. However,
in most cases, downstream tasks are classification tasks [13], while forecasting tasks, as another
important branch of time series-related tasks, have not been fully considered. The main challenge for
time series forecasting is that the time series serves as both input and label (output) for the model
during training, whereas in classification tasks, it only serves as input for the model.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

