Consensus Learning with Deep Sets for Essential
Matrix Estimation
Dror Moran
Fadi Khatib

Yuval Margalit

Guy Trostianetsky

Meirav Galun

Ronen Basri

Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics
Weizmann Institute of Science

Abstract
Robust estimation of the essential matrix, which encodes the relative position
and orientation of two cameras, is a fundamental step in structure from motion
pipelines. Recent deep-based methods achieved accurate estimation by using
complex network architectures that involve graphs, attention layers, and hard
pruning steps. Here, we propose a simpler network architecture based on Deep
Sets. Given a collection of point matches extracted from two images, our method
identifies outlier point matches and models the displacement noise in inlier matches.
A weighted DLT module uses these predictions to regress the essential matrix. Our
network achieves accurate recovery that is superior to existing networks with
significantly more complex architectures.

1

Introduction

Estimating the relative pose of two cameras depicting a stationary scene is a fundamental computer
vision task and a basic step in multiview structure from motion (SFM) [33, 24, 45, 1, 51, 43, 20, 26, 35]
and simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) [22, 47, 7, 21] pipelines. Both classical and
recent deep network-based algorithms (see a review in Section 2) use point matches to compute the
essential matrix, which encodes the relative position and orientation of the two cameras. Identifying
such point matches by existing heuristics, however, is prone to mistakes, due to possibly large
viewpoint changes, illumination differences, and the presence of ambiguous repetitive scene structures,
resulting in noisy matches and extremely large numbers of outlier matches (often as many as 95%)
that must be identified and pruned to enable accurate pose recovery.
Classical SFM algorithms use RANSAC [16] to robustly identify inliers and estimate pose parameters.
While RANSAC has been used effectively for consensus recovery, learning-based deep network
approaches have introduced a competitive alternative, making steady progress in accuracy while
allowing for efficient inference and demonstrating resilience to very large fractions of outliers. This
progress was obtained at the price of complicating the network architecture, e.g., using message
passing in local, near-neighbour graphs [58, 28, 31, 52] or expensive attention (transformer) layers
[28, 52], along with the addition of hard pruning steps [58, 28, 52].
In this paper, we introduce a simpler network architecture for consensus learning based on the Deep
Sets framework [55]. Deep Sets architectures are based on shared, element-wise layers that are
combined with global features produced by summing the element-wise features. Zaheer et al. and
others [55, 50] proved that such architectures can express universal permutation-equivariant functions
over sets. In our network, the input set elements include pairs of keypoints, i.e., the coordinates
of matching pairs of points. In each layer, element-wise features are produced by a linear layer
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

