MSPE: Multi-Scale Patch Embedding Prompts Vision
Transformers to Any Resolution

Wenzhuo Liu1,2 , Fei Zhu3 , Shijie Ma1,2 , Cheng-Lin Liu1,2∗
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, UCAS
2
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, CASIA
3
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI-CAS
{liuwenzhuo2020, zhufei2018, mashijie2021}@ia.ac.cn, liucl@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Although Vision Transformers (ViTs) have recently advanced computer vision
tasks significantly, an important real-world problem was overlooked: adapting to
variable input resolutions. Typically, images are resized to a fixed resolution, such
as 224x224, for efficiency during training and inference. However, uniform input
size conflicts with real-world scenarios where images naturally vary in resolution.
Modifying the preset resolution of a model may severely degrade the performance.
In this work, we propose to enhance the model adaptability to resolution variation
by optimizing the patch embedding. The proposed method, called Multi-Scale
Patch Embedding (MSPE), substitutes the standard patch embedding with multiple
variable-sized patch kernels and selects the best parameters for different resolutions,
eliminating the need to resize the original image. Our method does not require
high-cost training or modifications to other parts, making it easy to apply to most
ViT models. Experiments in image classification, segmentation, and detection
tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of MSPE, yielding superior performance on
low-resolution inputs and performing comparably on high-resolution inputs with
existing methods. Code is available at https://github.com/SmallPigPeppa/
MSPE.

1

Introduction

Vision Transformers (ViTs) [1, 2, 3, 4] have achieved significant success in various computer vision
tasks, becoming a viable alternative to traditional convolutional neural networks [5, 6, 7, 8]. ViT
divides an image into multiple patches, converts these patches into tokens via the patch embedding
layer, and feeds them into the Transformer model [9, 10]. The token representations are usually
obtained using a convolutional neural network (CNN). Early CNN architectures like AlexNet [11]
were designed for fixed-size images (e.g., 224x224). For easy comparison, this setting has been
maintained by subsequent image recognition models, including ViT [2]. For fitting neural network
input layer size, ViTs typically resize the input image to a fixed resolution 2 and divide it into a specific
number of patches [12, 13, 14]. This practice restricts ViT models to processing single-resolution
inputs. However, fixed input sizes conflict with real-world scenarios where image resolution varies due
to camera devices/parameters, object size, and distance. This discrepancy can significantly degrade
ViT’s performance on different-resolution images. Changing the preset size requires retraining, and
every resolution necessitates an individual model. Therefore, a natural question arises: Is it possible
for a single ViT model to process different resolutions directly?
∗

Corresponding author.
The term resolution refers to the width and height of images input into neural networks. In this paper,
resolution and image size are used interchangeably.
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

