C 2M 3: Cycle-Consistent Multi-Model Merging

Donato Crisostomi
Sapienza University of Rome
crisostomi@di.uniroma1.it
Daniele Baieri
Sapienza University of Rome
baieri@di.uniroma1.it

Marco Fumero
Institute of Science and Technology Austria
fumero@di.uniroma1.it
Florian Bernard
University of Bonn
fb@uni-bonn.de

Emanuele Rodolà
Sapienza University of Rome
rodola@di.uniroma1.it

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel data-free method for merging neural networks
in weight space. Differently from most existing works, our method optimizes for
the permutations of network neurons globally across all layers. This allows us to
enforce cycle consistency of the permutations when merging n ≥ 3 models, allowing circular compositions of permutations to be computed without accumulating
error along the path. We qualitatively and quantitatively motivate the need for
such a constraint, showing its benefits when merging sets of models in scenarios
spanning varying architectures and datasets. We finally show that, when coupled
with activation renormalization, our approach yields the best results in the task.

1

Introduction

In the early days of deep learning, modes — parameters corresponding to local minima of the loss
landscape — were considered to be isolated. Being depicted as points at the bottom of convex
valleys, they were thought to be separated by high-energy barriers that made the transition between
them impossible. However, a series of recent works have gradually challenged this perspective, first
showing that modes can be actually connected by paths of low energy [10, 14], and later that, in
some cases, these paths may even be linear [13]. While linear paths in [13] could only be obtained
after training the equally-initialized models for a few epochs, follow-up work [11] speculated that the
isolation of modes is a result of the permutation symmetries of the neurons. In fact, given a layer
Wℓ of a fixed network A, a large number of functionally-equivalent networks can be obtained by
permuting the neurons of Wℓ by some permutation P and then anti-permuting the columns of the
subsequent layer Wℓ+1 . This intuition led to the conjecture that all modes lie in the same convex
region of the parameter space, denoted as basin, when taking into account all possible permutations
of the neurons of a network.This motivated a series of works trying to align different modes by
optimizing for the neuron permutations [1, 21, 29, 36]. This has strong implications for model
merging, where different models, possibly trained with different initializations [1, 29, 34] or on
different datasets and tasks [1, 36], are aggregated into a single one. In this work, we focus on the
data-free setting, aligning networks based on some similarity function that is computed directly
over the neurons themselves. To this end, we follow Ainsworth et al. [1] and formalize the problem
of model merging as an assignment problem, proposing a new algorithm that is competitive with
previous approaches while allowing global constraints to be enforced.
The problem We investigate the problem of merging n > 2 models, noting that existing pairwise
approaches such as [1] do not guarantee cycle consistency of the permutations (see Figure 1). As
shown in Figure 2b and Figure 2a, going from a model A to a model C through a model B, and
then mapping back to A, results in a different model than the starting one — specifically, the target
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

