A Prompt-Based Knowledge Graph Foundation Model
for Universal In-Context Reasoning

†

Yuanning Cui† , Zequn Sun† , Wei Hu†‡∗
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
‡
National Institute of Healthcare Data Science, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
yncui.nju@gmail.com, {sunzq, whu}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Extensive knowledge graphs (KGs) have been constructed to facilitate knowledgedriven tasks across various scenarios. However, existing work usually develops
separate reasoning models for different KGs, lacking the ability to generalize and
transfer knowledge across diverse KGs and reasoning settings. In this paper, we
propose a prompt-based KG foundation model via in-context learning, namely
KG-ICL, to achieve a universal reasoning ability. Specifically, we introduce a
prompt graph centered with a query-related example fact as context to understand
the query relation. To encode prompt graphs with the generalization ability to
unseen entities and relations in queries, we first propose a unified tokenizer that
maps entities and relations in prompt graphs to predefined tokens. Then, we
propose two message passing neural networks to perform prompt encoding and
KG reasoning, respectively. We conduct evaluation on 43 different KGs in both
transductive and inductive settings. Results indicate that the proposed KG-ICL
outperforms baselines on most datasets, showcasing its outstanding generalization
and universal reasoning capabilities. The source code is accessible on GitHub:
https://github.com/nju-websoft/KG-ICL.

1

Introduction

Reasoning on knowledge graphs (KGs) involves inferring new relational facts from existing ones.
Early related work primarily focuses on reasoning over a static KG in the transductive setting,
but lacks the generalization ability to handle new entities or relations in the KG. Recent research
[1, 2, 3, 4] considers the relational patterns between seen and unseen entities, enabling inductive
reasoning. However, these methods still lack the transferability to reason over unseen KGs due to the
unshared and unlinked entity and relation vocabularies between the pre-trained KG and unseen KGs.
The primary challenge in generalizing to new entities, relations, and even different KGs lies in how
to represent such unseen data. Some methods [1, 2, 3, 4] aggregate query-conditioned relational
structures to represent entities. They can conduct inductive reasoning over unseen entities using
these relative entity representations without the need of pre-trained entity embeddings. However,
these methods cannot reason over unseen relations. To resolve this issue, some recent methods [5, 6]
develop relative relation representations. They model relation interactions using a query-conditioned
relation graph, where each node represents a relation and an edge indicates that the linked two relations
share a subject or object entity in the KG. They conduct message passing on the query-conditioned
relation graph to represent relations.
However, the relation graph only describes the connectivity of relations in the KG, with less attention
to the local context of the entity and relation in a query. As a result, these methods usually fail to
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

