Observational Scaling Laws and
the Predictability of Language Model Performance

Yangjun Ruan1,2,3
yjruan@cs.toronto.edu
1

Chris J. Maddison2,3
cmaddis@cs.toronto.edu

Stanford University

2

University of Toronto

Tatsunori Hashimoto1
thashim@stanford.edu
3

Vector Institute

Abstract
Understanding how language model performance varies with scale is critical to
benchmark and algorithm development. Scaling laws are one approach to building
this understanding, but the requirement of training models across many different
scales has limited their use. We propose an alternative, observational approach
that bypasses model training and instead builds scaling laws from ∼100 publically
available models. Building a single scaling law from multiple model families
is challenging due to large variations in their training compute efficiencies and
capabilities. However, we show that these variations are consistent with a simple,
generalized scaling law where language model performance is a function of a
low-dimensional capability space, and model families only vary in their efficiency
in converting training compute to capabilities. Using this approach, we show the
surprising predictability of complex scaling phenomena: we show that several
emergent phenomena follow a smooth, sigmoidal behavior and are predictable
from small models; we show that the agent performance of models such as GPT-4
can be precisely predicted from simpler non-agentic benchmarks; and we show
how to predict the impact of post-training interventions like Chain-of-Thought and
Self-Consistency as language model capabilities continue to improve.

1

Introduction

Language model (LM) scaling plays a central role in discussions of model capabilities and affects
everything from the tasks they can perform to the effectiveness of post-training techniques such as
Chain-of-Thought [99]. Due to this importance, understanding and predicting LM behaviors across
scales, benchmarks, and algorithmic interventions is a major question for many researchers and
engineers. Machine learning researchers may wish to understand whether their proposed algorithmic
interventions remain effective in the face of future model scaling, while engineers and benchmark
builders may wish to understand whether complex capabilities such as agentic abilities will scale
predictably in the same way as existing LM benchmarks.
Scaling laws [6, 36, 37, 44, 65] have been powerful tools for understanding the scaling trend
of LMs, which have shown that LMs follow a precise power-law relationship between compute
measures (such as training FLOPs) and downstream capabilities ranging from perplexity [37, 44] to
benchmark performance [34, 35]. This power-law relationship has been used in a variety of ways –
including hyperparameter and architecture selection [9, 37, 44] as well as model capability forecasting
[25, 66, 67]. Unfortunately, scaling analyses remain uncommon in many benchmarking and posttraining studies, as most researchers do not have the compute resources to build scaling laws from
scratch, and open models are trained at too few scales (3-5) for reliable scaling predictions.
We show that many scaling analyses, such as understanding complex LM capabilities (e.g., “emergent”
behaviors) and post-training interventions, can be done with a lower-cost, higher-resolution, and
broader-coverage alternative to the standard approach of training LMs across compute scales.
The starting point of our work is the observation that there now exist hundreds of open models
spanning a large range of scales and capabilities. While we cannot directly use these models for
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

