LION: Linear Group RNN for 3D Object
Detection in Point Clouds
Zhe Liu1∗ , Jinghua Hou1∗ , Xinyu Wang1∗, Xiaoqing Ye3 , Jingdong Wang3 ,
Hengshuang Zhao2 , Xiang Bai1†
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology
The University of Hong Kong 3 Baidu Inc., China
https://happinesslz.github.io/projects/LION
2

Abstract
The benefit of transformers in large-scale 3D point cloud perception tasks, such as
3D object detection, is limited by their quadratic computation cost when modeling
long-range relationships. In contrast, linear RNNs have low computational complexity and are suitable for long-range modeling. Toward this goal, we propose a
simple and effective window-based framework built on LInear grOup RNN (i.e.,
perform linear RNN for grouped features) for accurate 3D object detection, called
LION. The key property is to allow sufficient feature interaction in a much larger
group than transformer-based methods. However, effectively applying linear group
RNN to 3D object detection in highly sparse point clouds is not trivial due to its limitation in handling spatial modeling. To tackle this problem, we simply introduce a
3D spatial feature descriptor and integrate it into the linear group RNN operators to
enhance their spatial features rather than blindly increasing the number of scanning
orders for voxel features. To further address the challenge in highly sparse point
clouds, we propose a 3D voxel generation strategy to densify foreground features
thanks to linear group RNN as a natural property of auto-regressive models. Extensive experiments verify the effectiveness of the proposed components and the
generalization of our LION on different linear group RNN operators including
Mamba, RWKV, and RetNet. Furthermore, it is worth mentioning that our LIONMamba achieves state-of-the-art on Waymo, nuScenes, Argoverse V2, and ONCE
datasets. Last but not least, our method supports kinds of advanced linear RNN
operators (e.g., RetNet, RWKV, Mamba, xLSTM and TTT) on small but popular
KITTI dataset for a quick experience with our linear RNN-based framework.

1

Introduction

3D object detection serves as a fundamental technique in 3D perception and is widely used in
navigation robots and self-driving cars. Recently, transformer-based [56] feature extractors have
made significant progress in general tasks of Natural Language Processing (NLP) and 2D vision by
flexibly modeling long-range relationships. To this end, some researchers have made great efforts to
transfer the success of transformers to 3D object detection. Specifically, to reduce the computation
costs, SST [15] and SWFormer [53] divide point clouds into pillars and implement window attention
for pillar feature interaction in a local 2D window. Considering some potential information loss of
the pillar-based manners along the height dimension, DSVT-Voxel [60] further adopts voxel-based
formats and implements set attention for voxel feature interaction in a limited group size.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

