UQ-Guided Hyperparameter Optimization for
Iterative Learners
Jiesong Liu⋄ , Feng Zhang⋆ , Jiawei Guan⋆ , Xipeng Shen⋄ ,
Department of Computer Science, North Carolina State University
⋆
School of Information, Renmin University of China
jliu93@ncsu.edu, guanjw@ruc.edu.cn, fengzhang@ruc.edu.cn, xshen5@ncsu.edu
⋄

Abstract
Hyperparameter Optimization (HPO) plays a pivotal role in unleashing the potential
of iterative machine learning models. This paper addresses a crucial aspect that has
largely been overlooked in HPO: the impact of uncertainty in ML model training.
The paper introduces the concept of uncertainty-aware HPO and presents a novel
approach called the UQ-guided scheme for quantifying uncertainty. This scheme
offers a principled and versatile method to empower HPO techniques in handling
model uncertainty during their exploration of the candidate space. By constructing
a probabilistic model and implementing probability-driven candidate selection
and budget allocation, this approach enhances the quality of the resulting model
hyperparameters. It achieves a notable performance improvement of over 50% in
terms of accuracy regret and exploration time.

1

Introduction

Hyperparameter optimization (HPO) is essential for unleashing the power of iterative machine
learning models [4, 18, 40]. Hyperparameters include traditional parameters like learning rates
and more complex ones like neural architectures and data augmentation policies. For iterative
learners (multi-fidelity and early stopping methods specifically), practitioners can obtain intermediate
validation loss after each iteration and use them for model assessment; the main goal of HPO is to
explore a vast candidate space to find candidates that lead to optimal model performance.
There are many designs in the literature to solve the HPO problem. Successive Halving (SH) [19],
for example, terminates training of candidate configurations with poor performance early so as to
save computing resources for more well-behaved candidates. Bayesian optimization [17, 34], another
optimization method, uses a surrogate model to guide the selection of candidate configurations for
assessment.
There is however a lack of systematic treatment of an important factor in HPO designs, the uncertainty
inherent in the dynamics of the training process of iterative machine learning applications. Because
of the uncertainty, a model with a candidate hyperparameter configuration (or candidate in short)
performing poorly in an early stage of its training could turn out to be the best model after convergence.
Such candidates are however likely to be stopped from proceeding further or be completely discarded
by existing HPO methods in the early stages, because their selections of candidates are mostly based
on the currently observed performance, for lack of a way to treat the uncertainty properly. In 100
experiments of Successive Halving, for instance, the actually best candidates were discarded in
the first 8–22 iterations of training, causing 48% performance regrets in validation loss (details in
Section 3.1 Figure 1 and Section 4 Figure 3).
This paper introduces model uncertainty into the design of HPO methods for iterative learners
and establishes the concept of uncertainty-aware HPO. At the core of uncertainty-aware HPO is
a novel uncertainty quantization (UQ) guided scheme, named UQ-guided scheme, which unifies
the selection of candidates and the scheduling of training budget—two most important operations
in HPO—into a single UQ-based formal decision process. The UQ-guided scheme builds on a
probabilistic uncertainty-based model, designed to approximate the statistical effects of discarding
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

