D ISTRICT N ET: Decision-aware learning for
geographical districting

Cheikh Ahmed
Polytechnique Montreal
cheikh-abdallahi.ahmed@polymtl.ca
Axel Parmentier
CERMICS, École des Ponts
axel.parmentier@enpc.fr

Alexandre Forel
Polytechnique Montreal
alexandre.forel@polymtl.ca
Thibaut Vidal
Polytechnique Montreal
thibaut.vidal@polymtl.ca

Abstract
Districting is a complex combinatorial problem that consists in partitioning a geographical area into small districts. In logistics, it is a major strategic decision
determining operating costs for several years. Solving districting problems using
traditional methods is intractable even for small geographical areas and existing
heuristics often provide sub-optimal results. We present a structured learning
approach to find high-quality solutions to real-world districting problems in a few
minutes. It is based on integrating a combinatorial optimization layer, the capacitated minimum spanning tree problem, into a graph neural network architecture.
To train this pipeline in a decision-aware fashion, we show how to construct target
solutions embedded in a suitable space and learn from target solutions. Experiments show that our approach outperforms existing methods as it can significantly
reduce costs on real-world cities.

1

Introduction

Districting aims to partition a geographical area made of several basic units (BUs) into small,
balanced, and connected areas known as districts. Districting has a wide array of applications in many
areas such as electoral politics (Williams, 1995; Webster, 2013; Ricca et al., 2013), sales territory
design (López-Pérez and Ríos-Mercado, 2013; Zoltners and Sinha, 2005), school zoning (Ferland
and Guénette, 1990), and distribution (Zhou et al., 2002; Zhong et al., 2007). These problems are
challenging because of the combinatorial complexity of assigning BUs to districts.
In this paper, we focus on districting and routing, one of the more complex forms of districting. In that
case, the goal is to minimize the routing costs over all districts, where each district is serviced by a
vehicle starting from a common depot. Since districting is a long-term strategic decision, the delivery
requests in each district are unknown and modeled as a point process. As a two-stage stochastic
and combinatorial problem, districting and routing can be solved to optimality only on very small
instances. For example, in our experiments, finding the optimal solution of a districting problem with
60 BUs and 10 districts required around 400 CPU-core days. Further, while several heuristic methods
have been proposed based on estimating district costs (Daganzo, 1984; Figliozzi, 2007), they tend to
lead the search towards low-quality solutions on large instances (Ferraz et al., 2024).
In this study, we present a structured-learning approach called D ISTRICT N ET that integrates an
optimization layer in a deep learning architecture, as shown in Figure 1. D ISTRICT N ET learns to
approximate districting problems with a simpler one: the capacitated minimum spanning tree (CMST).
D ISTRICT N ET predicts the cost of each arc of the CMST graph using a graph neural network (GNN)
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

