Disentangling the Roles of Distinct Cell Classes with
Cell-Type Dynamical Systems

Aditi Jha
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Princeton University
aditijha@princeton.edu
Carlos D. Brody
Princeton Neuroscience Institute
Princeton University
brody@princeton.edu

Diksha Gupta
Sainsbury Wellcome Center
University College London
diksha.gupta@ucl.ac.uk
Jonathan W. Pillow
Princeton Neuroscience Institute
Princeton University
pillow@princeton.edu

Abstract
Latent dynamical systems have been widely used to characterize the dynamics of
neural population activity in the brain. However, these models typically ignore the
fact that the brain contains multiple cell types. This limits their ability to capture
the functional roles of distinct cell classes, and to predict the effects of cell-specific
perturbations on neural activity or behavior. To overcome these limitations, we
introduce the “cell-type dynamical systems” (CTDS) model. This model extends
latent linear dynamical systems to contain distinct latent variables for each cell
class, with biologically inspired constraints on both dynamics and emissions. To
illustrate our approach, we consider neural recordings with distinct excitatory
(E) and inhibitory (I) populations. The CTDS model defines separate latents for
both cell types, and constrains the dynamics so that E (I) latents have a strictly
positive (negative) effects on other latents. We applied CTDS to recordings from rat
frontal orienting fields (FOF) and anterior dorsal striatum (ADS) during an auditory
decision-making task. The model achieved higher accuracy than a standard linear
dynamical system (LDS), and revealed that the animal’s choice can be decoded
from both E and I latents and thus is not restricted to a single cell-class. We also
performed in-silico optogenetic perturbation experiments in the FOF and ADS,
and found that CTDS was able to replicate the experimentally observed effects
of different perturbations on behavior, whereas a standard LDS model—which
does not differentiate between cell types—did not. Crucially, our model allowed
us to understand the effects of these perturbations by revealing the dynamics of
different cell-specific latents. Finally, CTDS can also be used to identify cell types
for neurons whose class labels are unknown in electrophysiological recordings.
These results illustrate the power of the CTDS model to provide more accurate and
more biologically interpretable descriptions of neural population dynamics and
their relationship to behavior.

1

Introduction

Advancements in neural recording technologies have made it possible to record from hundreds of
neurons simultaneously [32–34]. Understanding the dynamics of these high-dimensional populations
and their relationship to complex behavior is a fundamental goal of computational neuroscience.
Dynamical systems have proven to be extremely useful in this pursuit [20, 3, 11, 12]. Latent dynamical
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

