Kermut: Composite kernel regression for protein
variant effects
Peter Mørch Groth∗ †
University of Copenhagen
Novonesis
Lars Olsen
Novonesis

Mads Herbert Kerrn∗†
University of Copenhagen

Jesper Salomon
Novonesis

Wouter Boomsma†
University of Copenhagen

Abstract
Reliable prediction of protein variant effects is crucial for both protein optimization
and for advancing biological understanding. For practical use in protein engineering, it is important that we can also provide reliable uncertainty estimates for
our predictions, and while prediction accuracy has seen much progress in recent
years, uncertainty metrics are rarely reported. We here provide a Gaussian process
regression model, Kermut, with a novel composite kernel for modeling mutation
similarity, which obtains state-of-the-art performance for supervised protein variant
effect prediction while also offering estimates of uncertainty through its posterior. An analysis of the quality of the uncertainty estimates demonstrates that our
model provides meaningful levels of overall calibration, but that instance-specific
uncertainty calibration remains more challenging.

1

Introduction

Accurately predicting protein variant effects is crucial for both advancing biological understanding
and for engineering and optimizing proteins towards specific traits. Recently, much progress has been
made in the field as a result of advances in machine learning-driven modeling [1–3], data availability
[4, 5], and relevant benchmarks [6, 7].
While prediction accuracy has received considerable attention, the ability to quantify the uncertainties
of predictions has been less intensely explored. This is of immediate practical consequence. One of
the main purposes of protein variant effect prediction is as an aid for protein engineering and design,
to propose promising candidates for subsequent experimental characterization. For this purpose, it is
essential that we can quantify, on an instance-to-instance basis, how trustworthy our predictions are.
Specifically, in a Bayesian optimization setting, most choices of acquisition function actively rely on
predicted uncertainties to guide the optimization, and well-calibrated uncertainties have been shown
to correlate with optimization performance [8].
Our goal with this paper is to start a discussion on the quality of the estimated uncertainties of
supervised protein variant effect prediction. Gaussian Processes (GP) are a standard choice for
uncertainty quantification due to the closed form expression of the posterior. We therefore first ask the
question whether state-of-the-art performance can be obtained within the GP framework. We propose
a composite kernel that comfortably achieves this goal, and subsequently investigate the quality of
the uncertainty estimates from such a model. Our results show that while standard approaches like
reliability diagrams give the impression of good levels of calibration, the quantification of per-instance
uncertainties is more challenging. We make our model available as a baseline and encourage the
∗
†

equal contribution
corresponding authors: petergroth@di.ku.dk, make@di.ku.dk, wb@di.ku.dk

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

