Fetch and Forge: Efficient Dataset
Condensation for Object Detection

Ding Qi1∗ Jian Li2† Jinlong Peng2 Bo Zhao4
Shuguang Dou1 Jialin Li2 Jiangning Zhang2
Yabiao Wang3,2† Chengjie Wang2 Cairong Zhao1†
1
Tongji University 2 Tencent YouTu Lab
3
Zhejiang University 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Dataset condensation (DC) is an emerging technique capable of creating compact
synthetic datasets from large originals while maintaining considerable performance.
It is crucial for accelerating network training and reducing data storage requirements. However, current research on DC mainly focuses on image classification,
with less exploration of object detection. This is primarily due to two challenges:
(i) the multitasking nature of object detection complicates the condensation process, and (ii) Object detection datasets are characterized by large-scale and highresolution data, which are difficult for existing DC methods to handle. As a remedy,
we propose DCOD, the first dataset condensation framework for object detection.
It operates in two stages: Fetch and Forge, initially storing key localization and
classification information into model parameters, and then reconstructing synthetic
images via model inversion. For the complex of multiple objects in an image, we
propose Foreground Background Decoupling to centrally update the foreground of
multiple instances and Incremental PatchExpand to further enhance the diversity
of foregrounds. Extensive experiments on various detection datasets demonstrate
the superiority of DCOD. Even at an extremely low compression rate of 1%, we
achieve 46.4% and 24.7% AP50 on the VOC and COCO, respectively, significantly
reducing detector training duration.

1

Introduction

In the past decade, the field of deep learning has witnessed the emergence of high-performance models,
driven by the development of convolutional and Transformer networks [10, 24, 8, 5]. These models,
while benefiting from large-scale datasets, also encounter significant challenges such as data storage
and the demand for extensive training resources. Dataset condensation (or distillation) [27, 32, 2]
has emerged in response, aiming to synthesize a small amount of data that approximates the training
effectiveness of original datasets, thus offering hope to alleviate this dilemma.
Current dataset condensation (DC) research mainly focuses on image classification and is divided
into two main frameworks: Meta-learning and Data-matching [11]. As shown in Figure 1 (a), the
Meta-learning framework [27, 17, 34, 15] optimizes synthetic datasets by minimizing performance
risks on the original dataset’s validation set, using a bi-level optimization process. In contrast, Figure 1
(b) illustrates the Data-matching framework, which aligns gradients [32], feature distributions [31], or
training trajectories [2] to simulate the original data’s impact during different model training stages.
∗
†

Work done when Ding Qi is an intern in Tencent YouTu Lab, and the advisor is Jian Li.
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

