ProG: A Graph Prompt Learning Benchmark
Chenyi Zi1∗, Haihong Zhao1∗, Xiangguo Sun2, # , Yiqing Lin3 , Hong Cheng2 , Jia Li1
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management,
and Shun Hing Institute of Advanced Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Tsinghua University
# corresponding author: xiangguosun@cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Artificial general intelligence on graphs has shown significant advancements across
various applications, yet the traditional ‘Pre-train & Fine-tune’ paradigm faces
inefficiencies and negative transfer issues, particularly in complex and few-shot
settings. Graph prompt learning emerges as a promising alternative, leveraging
lightweight prompts to manipulate data and fill the task gap by reformulating
downstream tasks to the pretext. However, several critical challenges still remain:
how to unify diverse graph prompt models, how to evaluate the quality of graph
prompts, and to improve their usability for practical comparisons and selection.
In response to these challenges, we introduce the first comprehensive benchmark
for graph prompt learning. Our benchmark integrates SIX pre-training methods
and FIVE state-of-the-art graph prompt techniques, evaluated across FIFTEEN
diverse datasets to assess performance, flexibility, and efficiency. We also present
‘ProG’, an easy-to-use open-source library that streamlines the execution of various
graph prompt models, facilitating objective evaluations. Additionally, we propose
a unified framework that categorizes existing graph prompt methods into two main
approaches: prompts as graphs and prompts as tokens. This framework enhances
the applicability and comparison of graph prompt techniques. The code is available
at: https://github.com/sheldonresearch/ProG.

1

Introduction

Recently, artificial general intelligence (AGI) on graphs has emerged as a new trend in various
applications like drug design [59, 38], protein prediction [10], social analysis [49, 64, 52], etc. To
achieve this vision, one key question is how to learn useful knowledge from non-linear data (like
graphs) and how to apply it to various downstream tasks or domains. Classical approaches mostly
leverage the ‘Pre-train & Fine-tune’ paradigm, which first designs some pretext with easily access
data as the pre-training task for the graph neural network model, and then adjusts partial or entire
model parameters to fit new downstream tasks. Although much progress has been achieved, they are
still not effective and efficient enough. For example, adjusting the pre-trained model will become very
time-consuming with the increase in model complexity [25, 24, 48, 23]. In addition, a natural gap
between these pretexts and downstream tasks makes the task transferring very hard, and sometimes
may even cause negative transfer [57, 30, 29]. These problems are particularly serious in few-shot
settings.
To further alleviate the problems above, Graph Prompt Learning [50, 28] has attracted more attention
recently. As shown in Figure 1, graph prompts seek to manipulate downstream data by inserting an
additional small prompt graph and then reformulating the downstream task to the pre-training task
without changing the pre-trained Graph Neural Network (GNN) model. Since a graph prompt is
usually lightweight, tuning this prompt is more efficient than the large backbone model. Compared
∗

The first two authors contributed equally to this work. Listing order is random.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

