VLKEB: A Large Vision-Language Model Knowledge
Editing Benchmark
Han Huang1,2∗ Haitian Zhong2∗
Shu Wu2

Liang Wang2

Tao Yu2

Qiang Liu2†

Tieniu Tan2,3

1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
2
New Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR),
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
Nanjing University

Abstract
Recently, knowledge editing on large language models (LLMs) has received considerable attention. Compared to this, editing Large Vision-Language Models
(LVLMs) faces extra challenges from diverse data modalities and complicated
model components, and data for LVLMs editing are limited. The existing LVLM
editing benchmark, which comprises three metrics (Reliability, Locality, and Generality), falls short in the quality of synthesized evaluation images and cannot assess
whether models apply edited knowledge in relevant content. Therefore, we employ
more reliable data collection methods to construct a new Large Vision-Language
Model Knowledge Editing Benchmark, VLKEB, and extend the Portability metric
for more comprehensive evaluation. Leveraging a multi-modal knowledge graph,
our image data are bound with knowledge entities. This can be further used to
extract entity-related knowledge, which constitutes the base of editing data. We
conduct experiments of different editing methods on five LVLMs, and thoroughly
analyze how do they impact the models. The results reveal strengths and deficiencies of these methods and hopefully provide insights for future research. The codes
and dataset are available at: https://github.com/VLKEB/VLKEB.

1

Introduction

With the rapid advancement and widespread deployment of LLMs, knowledge editing has emerged
as an important topic [1–4]. The knowledge stored within LLMs can suffer from issues such as
errors, deficiencies and obsolescence. Knowledge editing aims to efficiently correct and update this
information while ensuring minimal impact on unrelated content. Numerous LLM editing methods
have been proposed [5–14] and benchmarks have been established to assess these approaches. Metrics
such as Reliability, Generality, Locality and Portability are commonly used [2] in these benchmarks.
Reliability defines a reliable edit where the post-edit model produces the target answer for a given
case. Generality requires the post-edit model to understand equivalent neighbors, such as rephrased
sentences. Locality emphasizes localized editing, ensuring that the output of unrelated knowledge is
retained. Portability evaluates whether models effectively apply edited knowledge to relevant content.
These methods and benchmarks have greatly advanced the research in LLM knowledge editing.
In contrast, the task of knowledge editing for LVLMs has not been extensively studied. Currently,
only one benchmark (MMEdit [15]) explores LVLM editing. This benchmark extends Reliability,
∗
†

Equal contribution. # han.huang@cripac.ia.ac.cn # haitian.zhong@cripac.ia.ac.cn
Corresponding author. # qiang.liu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

