Frequency Adaptive Normalization For
Non-stationary Time Series Forecasting

Weiwei Ye1 Songgaojun Deng2 Qiaosha Zou3 Ning Gui1∗
Central South University 2 University of Amsterdam 3 Zhejiang Lab
wwye155@gmail.com, s.deng@uva.nl, qiaoshazou@zhejianglab.org, ninggui@gmail.com
1

Abstract
Time series forecasting typically needs to address non-stationary data with evolving
trend and seasonal patterns. To address the non-stationarity, reversible instance
normalization has been recently proposed to alleviate impacts from the trend with
certain statistical measures, e.g., mean and variance. Although they demonstrate
improved predictive accuracy, they are limited to expressing basic trends and are
incapable of handling seasonal patterns. To address this limitation, this paper
proposes a new instance normalization solution, called frequency adaptive normalization (FAN), which extends instance normalization in handling both dynamic
trend and seasonal patterns. Specifically, we employ the Fourier transform to identify instance-wise predominant frequent components that cover most non-stationary
factors. Furthermore, the discrepancy of those frequency components between
inputs and outputs is explicitly modeled as a prediction task with a simple MLP
model. FAN is a model-agnostic method that can be applied to arbitrary predictive
backbones. We instantiate FAN on four widely used forecasting models as the
backbone and evaluate their prediction performance improvements on eight benchmark datasets. FAN demonstrates significant performance advancement, achieving
7.76%∼37.90% average improvements in MSE. Our code is publicly available2 .

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting plays a key role in various fields such as traffic [8], finance [23] and infectious
disease [1], etc. Recent research focuses on deep learning-based methods, as they demonstrate
promising capabilities to capture complex dependencies between variables [47, 42, 46]. However,
time series with trends and seasonality, also called non-stationary time series [15], create covariate
pattern shifts across different time steps. These dynamics pose significant challenges in forecasting.
To mitigate non-stationarity issues, reversible normalization has been proposed [33, 17] which first
removes non-stationary information from the input and returns the information back to rebuild the
output. Current work focuses on removing non-stationary signals with statistical measures, e.g., mean
and variance in the time domain [10, 28]. However, while these methods have improved prediction
accuracy, these statistical measures are only capable of extracting the most prominent component,
i.e., the trend, leaving substantial room for improvement. They, we argued, can hardly measure the
characteristics of seasonal patterns, which are quite common in many time series. This significantly
limits their capability to handle the non-stationarity, especially the seasonal patterns.
We illustrate an example featuring one of the simplest non-stationary signals in Fig. 1. This graph
shows a time-variant signal with a gradually damping frequency, which is widely seen in many
passive systems, e.g., spring-mass damper systems. As depicted in Fig. 1, the three input stages
∗
2

Corresponding author
http://github.com/wayne155/FAN

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

