LLM-ESR: Large Language Models Enhancement for
Long-tailed Sequential Recommendation
∗

Qidong Liu1,2 , Xian Wu3 , Yejing Wang2 , Zijian Zhang2, 4 ,
∗
∗
Feng Tian5 , Yefeng Zheng3, 6 , Xiangyu Zhao2
1
School of Auto. Science & Engineering, MOEKLINNS Lab, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
City University of Hong Kong
3
Jarvis Research Center, Tencent YouTu Lab, 4 Jilin University
5
School of Comp. Science & Technology, MOEKLINNS Lab, Xi’an Jiaotong University
6
Medical Artificial Intelligence Lab, Westlake University
liuqidong@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {kevinxwu, yefengzheng}@tencent.com,
yejing.wang@my.cityu.edu.hk, zhangzijian@jlu.edu.cn,
fengtian@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, xianzhao@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Sequential recommender systems (SRS) aim to predict users’ subsequent choices
based on their historical interactions and have found applications in diverse fields
such as e-commerce and social media. However, in real-world systems, most users
interact with only a handful of items, while the majority of items are seldom consumed. These two issues, known as the long-tail user and long-tail item challenges,
often pose difficulties for existing SRS. These challenges can adversely affect user
experience and seller benefits, making them crucial to address. Though a few works
have addressed the challenges, they still struggle with the seesaw or noisy issues
due to the intrinsic scarcity of interactions. The advancements in large language
models (LLMs) present a promising solution to these problems from a semantic
perspective. As one of the pioneers in this field, we propose the Large Language
Models Enhancement framework for Sequential Recommendation (LLM-ESR).
This framework utilizes semantic embeddings derived from LLMs to enhance SRS
without adding extra inference load from LLMs. To address the long-tail item challenge, we design a dual-view modeling framework that combines semantics from
LLMs and collaborative signals from conventional SRS. For the long-tail user challenge, we propose a retrieval augmented self-distillation method to enhance user
preference representation using more informative interactions from similar users.
To verify the effectiveness and versatility of our proposed enhancement framework,
we conduct extensive experiments on three real-world datasets using three popular
SRS models. The results show that our method surpasses existing baselines consistently, and benefits long-tail users and items especially. The implementation code
is available at https://github.com/Applied-Machine-Learning-Lab/LLM-ESR.

1

Introduction

The objective of sequential recommendation is to predict the next likely item for users based on
their historical records [7, 54]. Owing to its wide-ranging applicability in various domains such as ecommerce [48] and social media [5], sequential recommendation has garnered considerable attention
in recent years. Given that the essence of sequential recommendation revolves around extracting user
preferences from their interaction records, several innovative architectures have been proposed. For
∗

Corresponding authors: Xian Wu, Feng Tian and Xiangyu Zhao

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

