ROBIN: Robust and Invisible Watermarks for
Diffusion Models with Adversarial Optimization

Huayang Huang1 , Yu Wu1,∗, Qian Wang2
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
2
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University
{hyhuang,wuyucs,qianwang}@whu.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Watermarking generative content serves as a vital tool for authentication, ownership
protection, and mitigation of potential misuse. Existing watermarking methods face
the challenge of balancing robustness and concealment. They empirically inject a
watermark that is both invisible and robust and passively achieve concealment by
limiting the strength of the watermark, thus reducing the robustness. In this paper,
we propose to explicitly introduce a watermark hiding process to actively achieve
concealment, thus allowing the embedding of stronger watermarks. To be specific,
we implant a robust watermark in an intermediate diffusion state and then guide the
model to hide the watermark in the final generated image. We employ an adversarial
optimization algorithm to produce the optimal hiding prompt guiding signal for
each watermark. The prompt embedding is optimized to minimize artifacts in the
generated image, while the watermark is optimized to achieve maximum strength.
The watermark can be verified by reversing the generation process. Experiments
on various diffusion models demonstrate the watermark remains verifiable even
under significant image tampering and shows superior invisibility compared to
other state-of-the-art robust watermarking methods.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models (DMs) are revolutionizing content creation and generating stunningly realistic
imagery across diverse domains [17, 33, 60]. The advent of text-to-image diffusion models [31, 30,
58], coupled with personalized generation techniques [53, 7, 32, 15, 41, 59], enables the creation of
highly specific content by virtually anyone. However, it has raised concerns about authenticity and
ownership, including the risk of plagiarism [34, 22] and the potential misuse of images of public
figures [39, 5]. Consequently, governments and businesses are increasingly advocating for robust
mechanisms to verify the origins of generative content [19, 45].
Watermarking offers a proactive approach to authenticate the source of generated content. This
technique embeds imperceptible secret messages within the generated content. These messages serve
as unique identifiers, confirming the image’s origin while remaining invisible to the human eye. They
also need to be robust enough to withstand potential distortions encountered during online sharing.
Existing watermarking techniques face a significant challenge in striking a balance between concealment and robustness. Traditional post-processing methods [46, 9] employ an empirical approach to
identify an invisible and robust watermark and embed it within the generated image. They passively
achieve concealment by limiting the watermark strength, consequently compromising robustness.
Conversely, stronger watermarks, while enhancing robustness, can introduce visible artifacts into the
generated image. Recent advancements in in-processing watermarking for diffusion models expect
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

