Are nuclear masks all you need for improved
out-of-domain generalisation? A closer look at cancer
classification in histopathology

Dhananjay Tomar
University of Oslo
dhananjt@ifi.uio.no

Alexander Binder
Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg,
Singapore Institute of Technology
alexander.binder@ovgu.de

Andreas Kleppe∗
Oslo University Hospital, University of Oslo,
UiT The Arctic University of Norway
andrekle@ifi.uio.no

Abstract
Domain generalisation in computational histopathology is challenging because the
images are substantially affected by differences among hospitals due to factors like
fixation and staining of tissue and imaging equipment. We hypothesise that focusing
on nuclei can improve the out-of-domain (OOD) generalisation in cancer detection.
We propose a simple approach to improve OOD generalisation for cancer detection
by focusing on nuclear morphology and organisation, as these are domain-invariant
features critical in cancer detection. Our approach integrates original images with
nuclear segmentation masks during training, encouraging the model to prioritise
nuclei and their spatial arrangement. Going beyond mere data augmentation, we
introduce a regularisation technique that aligns the representations of masks and
original images. We show, using multiple datasets, that our method improves
OOD generalisation and also leads to increased robustness to image corruptions
and adversarial attacks. The source code is available at https://github.com/
undercutspiky/SFL/

1

Introduction

Domain generalisation in histopathology is a crucial challenge because domain shifts naturally occur
among hospitals and even within a single hospital or laboratory, e.g., temporally or among human
operators and observers such as pathologists. Non-biological factors that substantially alter the
images include differences in scanners, staining protocols, fixation of tissue, and even minor aspects
like the manufacturer and storage conditions of stains [1].
Collecting data from numerous hospitals to address these domain shifts is often impractical and
may not adequately reflect the full variability present in routine clinical practice, thus making it
difficult to build computational histopathology models that generalise well. This leads us to focus
on single-domain generalisation (S-DG) in this paper, specifically on how to train a model using
data from only one hospital (considered a domain here) that generalises well to data from other
hospitals. Popular S-GD methods in histopathology apply data augmentation and stain normalisation
[2, 3]. The effectiveness of S-GD methods developed for natural images remains underexplored in
histopathology [3]. Here, we compare these methods to a new, simple approach that we propose.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

