Rethinking Weight Decay for Robust Fine-Tuning of
Foundation Models
Junjiao Tian
Georgia Institute of Technology
jtian73@gatech.edu

Chengyue Huang
Georgia Institute of Technology
chuang475@gatech.edu

Zsolt Kira
Georgia Institute of Technology
zkira@gatech.edu

Abstract
Modern optimizers such as AdamW, equipped with momentum and adaptive learning rate, are designed to escape local minima and explore the vast parameter space.
This exploration is beneficial for finding good loss basins when training from
scratch. It is not necessarily ideal when resuming from a powerful foundation
model because it can lead to large deviations from the pre-trained initialization
and, consequently, worse robustness and generalization. At the same time, strong
regularization on all parameters can lead to under-fitting. We hypothesize that selectively regularizing the parameter space is the key to fitting and retraining the pretrained knowledge. This paper proposes a new weight decay technique, Selective
Projection Decay (SPD), that selectively imposes a strong penalty on certain layers
while allowing others to change freely. Intuitively, SPD expands and contracts
the parameter search space for layers with consistent and inconsistent loss reduction, respectively. Experimentally, when equipped with SPD, Adam consistently
provides better in-distribution generalization and out-of-distribution robustness
performance on multiple popular vision and language benchmarks. Code available
at https://github.com/GT-RIPL/Selective-Projection-Decay.git.

1

Introduction

Modern optimizers, such as Adam [1], LARS [2], and LAMB [3] usually include momentum and
adaptive learning rates. They help optimizers avoid local minima and accelerate learning [4, 5] to
explore wider parameter spaces. However, we hypothesize that this behavior is not always beneficial
for fine-tuning from a well pre-trained foundation model, especially when fine-tuning a few layers is
already sufficient for fitting the target data [6, 7, 8, 9]. Several prior works have found that unnecessary
exploration will lead to large deviation from the initialization and worse robustness [10, 11], and
constraining the deviation can improve a model’s generalization on in-distribution (ID) data and
robustness to out-of-distribution (OOD) data [12, 13, 14]1 . For example, L2-SP [13] imposes a
regularization term on the distance between the current and pre-trained models. More recently,
TPGM [10] and FTP [11] propose to learn different hard constraints for each layer. These new
works have demonstrated impressive results on benchmarks. However, they are either difficult to
tune, specialized to specific settings, or require significant computation and storage overhead. This
motivates us to ask whether a simple few-liner solution exists for this fundamental problem.
1

In this paper, ID generalization and OOD robustness refer to test accuracy on the fine-tuning distribution
and robust accuracy on other shifted distributions, respectively.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

