EpiCare: A Reinforcement Learning
Benchmark for Dynamic Treatment Regimes

Mason Hargrave
Center for Studies in Physics and Biology
The Rockefeller University
New York, NY, USA
mhargrave@rockefeller.edu

Alex Spaeth
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA, USA
atspaeth@ucsc.edu

Logan Grosenick∗
Dept. of Psychiatry and BMRI
Weill Cornell Medicine, Cornell University
New York, NY, USA
log4002@med.cornell.edu

Abstract
Healthcare applications pose significant challenges to existing reinforcement learning (RL) methods due to implementation risks, limited data availability, short
treatment episodes, sparse rewards, partial observations, and heterogeneous treatment effects. Despite significant interest in using RL to generate dynamic treatment
regimes for longitudinal patient care scenarios, no standardized benchmark has
yet been developed. To fill this need we introduce Episodes of Care (EpiCare),
a benchmark designed to mimic the challenges associated with applying RL to
longitudinal healthcare settings. We leverage this benchmark to test five stateof-the-art offline RL models as well as five common off-policy evaluation (OPE)
techniques. Our results suggest that while offline RL may be capable of improving
upon existing standards of care given sufficient data, its applicability does not
appear to extend to the moderate to low data regimes typical of current healthcare
settings. Additionally, we demonstrate that several OPE techniques standard in
the the medical RL literature fail to perform adequately on our benchmark. These
results suggest that the performance of RL models in dynamic treatment regimes
may be difficult to meaningfully evaluate using current OPE methods, indicating
that RL for this application domain may still be in its early stages. We hope that
these results along with the benchmark will facilitate better comparison of existing
methods and inspire further research into techniques that increase the practical
applicability of medical RL.

1

Introduction

Most human diseases evolve over time, many with trajectories that can be influenced by the right
treatment [1]. Dynamic treatment regimes (DTRs) are adaptive medical policies which define a set
of decision rules to determine the treatment to apply to a patient given the patient’s medical history,
including past treatments and observations [2]. Although latent biology drives disease progression,
physicians lack direct access to the true biological state of any given patient and instead must rely
on indirect and often partial clinical observations that correlate with this hidden state [1, 3, 4, 5, 6].
∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

