RCDN: Towards Robust Camera-Insensitivity
Collaborative Perception via Dynamic Feature-based
3D Neural Modeling

Tianhang Wang
Tongji University
tianya_wang@tongji.edu.cn

Fan Lu
Tongji University
lufan@tongji.edu.cn

Guang Chen∗
Tongji University
guangchen@tongji.edu.cn

Zehan Zheng
Tongji University
zhengzehan@tongji.edu.cn

Changjun Jiang
Tongji University
cjjiang@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
Collaborative perception is dedicated to tackling the constraints of single-agent
perception, such as occlusions, based on the multiple agents’ multi-view sensor
inputs. However, most existing works assume an ideal condition that all agents’
multi-view cameras are continuously available. In reality, cameras may be highly
noisy, obscured or even failed during the collaboration. In this work, we introduce a
new robust camera-insensitivity problem: how to overcome the issues caused by the
failed camera perspectives, while stabilizing high collaborative performance with
low calibration cost? To address above problems, we propose RCDN, a Robust
Camera-insensitivity collaborative perception with a novel Dynamic feature-based
3D Neural modeling mechanism. The key intuition of RCDN is to construct
collaborative neural rendering field representations to recover failed perceptual
messages sent by multiple agents. To better model collaborative neural rendering
field, RCDN first establishes a geometry BEV feature based time-invariant static
field with other agents via fast hash grid modeling. Based on the static background
field, the proposed time-varying dynamic field can model corresponding motion
vectors for foregrounds with appropriate positions. To validate RCDN, we create
OPV2V-N, a new large-scale dataset with manual labelling under different camera
failed scenarios. Extensive experiments conducted on OPV2V-N show that RCDN
can be ported to other baselines and improve their robustness in extreme camerainsensitivity settings.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent collaborative perception[1–5] obtains better and more holistic perception by allowing
multiple agents to exchange complementary perceptual information. This field has the potential to
effectively address various persistent challenges in single-perception, such as occlusion[6, 7]. The
associated techniques and systems also process significant promise in various domains, such as the
utilization of multiple unmanned aerial aircraft for search and rescue operations[8–10], the automation
and mapping of multiple robots[11–13]. As an emerging field, the research of collaborative perception
faces several issues that need to be addressed. These challenges include the need for high-quality
datasets[14–17], the formulation of models that are agnostic to specific tasks and models[18, 19], and
the ability to handle pose error and adversarial attacks[20, 21].
∗

Corresponding Author. Our code is available at: https://github.com/ispc-lab/RCDN.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

