Provable Editing of Deep Neural Networks using
Parametric Linear Relaxation
Aditya V. Thakur
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616, USA
avthakur@ucdavis.edu

Zhe Tao
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616, USA
zhetao@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
Ensuring that a DNN satisfies a desired property is critical when deploying DNNs
in safety-critical applications. There are efficient methods that can verify whether
a DNN satisfies a property, as seen in the annual DNN verification competition (VNN-COMP). However, the problem of provably editing a DNN to satisfy
a property remains challenging. We present PREPARED,1 the first efficient technique for provable editing of DNNs. Given a DNN N with parameters θ, input
polytope P, and output polytope Q, PREPARED finds new parameters θ such that
∀x ∈ P. N (x ; θ ) ∈ Q while minimizing the changes ∥θ − θ∥. Given a DNN and a
property it violates from the VNN-COMP benchmarks, PREPARED is able to provably
edit the DNN to satisfy this property within 45 seconds. PREPARED is efficient
because it relaxes the NP-hard provable editing problem to solving a linear program.
The key contribution is the novel notion of Parametric Linear Relaxation, which
enables PREPARED to construct tight output bounds of the DNN that are parameterized by the new parameters θ . We demonstrate that PREPARED is more efficient
and effective compared to prior DNN editing approaches i) using the VNN-COMP
benchmarks, ii) by editing CIFAR10 and T INY I MAGE N ET image-recognition
DNNs, and BERT sentiment-classification DNNs for local robustness, and iii) by
training a DNN to model a geodynamics process and satisfy physics constraints.

1

Introduction

Ensuring that a DNN is correct and avoids harmful behaviors is critical when deploying them,
especially in safety-critical contexts [8]. In such scenarios, it is vital to guarantee that a DNN satisfies
a given property, e.g., a safety specification [35]. Towards this end, DNN verifiers aim to determine
whether a DNN satisfies the given property [1]. There are efficient methods for DNN verification that
can handle a wide-range of DNN architectures and properties, as seen in the annual DNN verification
competition (VNN-COMP) [5]. However, the success of DNN verification reveals the next challenge:
provably editing a DNN to satisfy a property. Formally, we define the provable editing problem as:
def 
Definition 1.1. Given a DNN N with parameters θ, an input polytope P = x | Dx ≤ e and an
def 
output polytope Q = y | Ay ≤ b , the provable editing problem is to find new parameters θ that
min ∥θ − θ∥

s.t.

∀x ∈ P. N (x ; θ ) ∈ Q

(1)

Provable editing can be used, for instance, to ensure that a classifier DNN is locally robust for an
def
input x . In this case, the input polytope P = {x ′ | ∥x − x ′ ∥∞ ≤ ε} is the L∞ ball around x with
1

PREPARED stands for PRovable Editing using PArametric linear RElaxation of Deep neural networks.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

