Guided Trajectory Generation with Diffusion Models
for Offline Model-based Optimization

1

Taeyoung Yun1 Sujin Yun1 Jaewoo Lee1 Jinkyoo Park1,2
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) 2 Omelet.ai
{99yty, yunsj0625, jaewoo, jinkyoo.park}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Optimizing complex and high-dimensional black-box functions is ubiquitous in
science and engineering fields. Unfortunately, the online evaluation of these
functions is restricted due to time and safety constraints in most cases. In offline
model-based optimization (MBO), we aim to find a design that maximizes the
target function using only a pre-existing offline dataset. While prior methods
consider forward or inverse approaches to address the problem, these approaches
are limited by conservatism and the difficulty of learning highly multi-modal
mappings. Recently, there has been an emerging paradigm of learning to improve
solutions with synthetic trajectories constructed from the offline dataset. In this
paper, we introduce a novel conditional generative modeling approach to produce
trajectories toward high-scoring regions. First, we construct synthetic trajectories
toward high-scoring regions using the dataset while injecting locality bias for
consistent improvement directions. Then, we train a conditional diffusion model
to generate trajectories conditioned on their scores. Lastly, we sample multiple
trajectories from the trained model with guidance to explore high-scoring regions
beyond the dataset and select high-fidelity designs among generated trajectories
with the proxy function. Extensive experiment results demonstrate that our method
outperforms competitive baselines on Design-Bench and its practical variants. The
code is publicly available in https://github.com/dbsxodud-11/GTG.

1

Introduction

Optimizing complex and high-dimensional black-box functions is ubiquitous in science and engineering fields, including biological sequence design [1], materials discovery [2], and mechanical design
[3, 4]. Traditional methods like Bayesian optimization have been developed to solve the problem by
iteratively querying a black-box function. However, the online evaluation of the black-box function is
restricted in most real-world situations due to time and safety constraints.
Fortunately, we often have access to a previously collected offline dataset. This problem setting
is referred to as offline model-based optimization (MBO), and our objective is to find a design
that maximizes a target function using solely an offline dataset [5]. As no online evaluation is
available, a key challenge of MBO is the out-of-distribution (OOD) issue arising from limited data
coverage. Suppose we train a proxy that predicts function values given input designs and naively
apply a gradient-based optimizer based on the proxy to identify the optimal design. It would fall into
sub-optimal results due to inaccurate predictions of the proxy in unseen regions.
To mitigate this issue, forward approaches mostly consider training a robust surrogate model against
adversarial optimization of inputs and applying gradient-based maximization. Trabucco et al. [6]
train a proxy with the regularization term to prevent overestimation on OOD designs. Fu and Levine
[7] leverage normalized maximum likelihood estimator to handle uncertainty on unseen regions.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

