PaGoDA : Progressive Growing of a One-Step
Generator from a Low-Resolution Diffusion Teacher
Dongjun Kim∗ †
Stanford University
CA, USA
dongjun@stanford.edu
Wei-Hsiang Liao
Sony AI

Chieh-Hsin Lai∗
Sony AI
Tokyo, Japan
chieh-hsin.lai@sony.com

Yuhta Takida
Sony AI

Naoki Murata
Sony AI

Yuki Mitsufuji
Sony AI, Sony Group Corporation

Toshimitsu Uesaka
Sony AI

Stefano Ermon
Stanford University

Abstract
The diffusion model performs remarkable in generating high-dimensional content
but is computationally intensive, especially during training. We propose Progressive
Growing of Diffusion Autoencoder (PaGoDA), a novel pipeline that reduces the
training costs through three stages: training diffusion on downsampled data, distilling the pretrained diffusion, and progressive super-resolution. With the proposed
pipeline, PaGoDA achieves a 64× reduced cost in training its diffusion model on
8× downsampled data; while at the inference, with the single-step, it performs
state-of-the-art on ImageNet across all resolutions from 64 × 64 to 512 × 512, and
text-to-image. PaGoDA’s pipeline can be applied directly in the latent space, adding
compression alongside the pre-trained autoencoder in Latent Diffusion Models (e.g.,
Stable Diffusion). The code is available at https://github.com/sony/pagoda.

1

Introduction

Diffusion Models (DM) [1, 2], which generate content through gradual denoising, have recently
achieved high fidelity in high-dimensional generation [3, 4]. While slow sampling has been improved
by distilling trained DMs into single-step generators [5–7], DMs remain computationally intensive,
especially at high resolutions, requiring substantial data and GPU resources, thereby limiting largescale training to a few organizations [8, 9]. This highlights the need for a more efficient pipeline to
reduce both training and inference costs while maintaining the quality.
To address these challenges, we present Progressive Growing of Diffusion Autoencoder (PaGoDA),
a novel pipeline that significantly reduces costs while achieving competitive quality with one-step
sampling. PaGoDA is built on a simple yet effective idea: while diffusion distillation [6] is typically
treated as a final stage of the whole pipeline, we explore to have one more stage for the superresolution after diffusion distillation. This approach led us to design PaGoDA with three distinct
stages as below.
∗
†

Equal contribution
This work was partially done during an internship at Sony AI.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

