Generalization Analysis for Label-Specific
Representation Learning

Yi-Fan Zhang1,3 , Min-Ling Zhang2,3∗
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
3
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University),
Ministry of Education, China
{yfzh, zhangml}@seu.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Label-specific representation learning (LSRL), i.e., constructing the representation
with specific discriminative properties for each class label, is an effective strategy
to improve the performance of multi-label learning. However, the generalization
analysis of LSRL is still in its infancy. The existing theory bounds for multilabel learning, which preserve the coupling among different components, are
invalid for LSRL. In an attempt to overcome this challenge and make up for the
gap in the generalization theory of LSRL, we develop a novel vector-contraction
inequality and derive the generalization bound for general function class of LSRL
with a weaker dependency on the number of labels than the state of the art. In
addition, we derive generalization bounds for typical LSRL methods, and these
theoretical results reveal the impact of different label-specific representations on
generalization analysis. The mild bounds without strong assumptions explain the
good generalization ability of LSRL.

1

Introduction

Multi-label learning has received continued attention in machine learning community due to its
widespread encounters in real-world applications, where each object is represented by a single
instance associated with multiple class labels [Zhang and Zhou, 2014, Liu et al., 2022]. The goal of
multi-label learning is to model real-world objects with multiple semantics. It has made important
advances in multimedia content annotation [Cabral et al., 2011, You et al., 2020], text categorization
[Rubin et al., 2012, Xun et al., 2020], bioinformatics [Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2012, Chen et al., 2017]
and other fields [Yu et al., 2005]. The failure to take into account that each class label may possess its
own discriminative properties results in the most straightforward strategy which exploits the identical
representation of an instance for dealing with multi-label data being perhaps suboptimal [Zhang and
Wu, 2015, Huang et al., 2016, Hang and Zhang, 2022]. In recent years, label-specific representation
learning (LSRL) [Zhang and Wu, 2015] has been proposed to facilitate the discrimination of each
class label by tailoring its own representations. Due to its ability to model distinct characteristics for
each class label, LSRL has become an effective strategy to improve the performance of multi-label
learning [Huang et al., 2015, 2016, 2018, Yu and Zhang, 2022, Hang and Zhang, 2022, Hang et al.,
2022]. Although LSRL has achieved impressive empirical advances in multi-label learning, the
problem of understanding LSRL theoretically remains completely under-explored.
In recent years, efforts to explain why multi-label models generalize well is an important open
problem in multi-label learning community. The empirical success of LSRL makes the generalization
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

