PROSPECT PTMs: Rich Labeled Tandem Mass
Spectrometry Dataset of Modified Peptides for
Machine Learning in Proteomics

Wassim Gabriel 1∗

Omar Shouman 1∗

Ayla Schroeder 1

Florian Boessl 1

Mathias Wilhelm 1,2
{firstname.lastname}@tum.de
1

Computational Mass Spectrometry
School of Life Sciences
Technical University of Munich
Freising, Germany

2

Munich Data Science Institute (MDSI)
Technical University of Munich
Garching, Germany

Abstract
Post-Translational Modifications (PTMs) are changes that occur in proteins after
synthesis, influencing their structure, function, and cellular behavior. PTMs are
essential in cell biology; they regulate protein function and stability, are involved
in various cellular processes, and are linked to numerous diseases. A particularly
interesting class of PTMs are chemical modifications such as phosphorylation
introduced on amino acid side chains because they can drastically alter the physicochemical properties of the peptides once they are present. One or more PTMs
can be attached to each amino acid of the peptide sequence. The most commonly
applied technique to detect PTMs on proteins is bottom-up Mass Spectrometrybased proteomics (MS), where proteins are digested into peptides and subsequently
analyzed using Tandem Mass Spectrometry (MS/MS). While an increasing number
of machine learning models are published focusing on MS/MS-related property
prediction of unmodified peptides, high-quality reference data for modified peptides is missing, impeding model development for this important class of peptides.
To enable researchers to train machine learning models that can accurately predict
the properties of modified peptides, we introduce four high-quality labeled datasets
for applying machine and deep learning to tasks in MS-based proteomics. The four
datasets comprise several subgroups of peptides with 1.2 million unique modified
peptide sequences and 30 unique pairs of (amino-acid, PTM), covering both experimentally introduced and naturally occurring modifications on various amino acids.
We evaluate the utility and importance of the dataset by providing benchmarking
results on models trained with and without modifications and highlighting the
impact of including modified sequences on downstream tasks. We demonstrate
that predicting the properties of modified peptides is more challenging but has a
broad impact since they are often the core of protein functionality and its regulation,
and they have a potential role as biomarkers in clinical applications. Our datasets
contribute to applied machine learning in proteomics by enabling the research
community to experiment with methods to encode PTMs as model inputs and to
benchmark against reference data for model comparison. With a proper data split
for three common tasks in proteomics, we provide a robust way to evaluate model
performance and assess generalization on unseen modified sequences.
∗

Equal Contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

