Unsupervised Homography Estimation on Multimodal
Image Pair via Alternating Optimization

Sanghyeob Song1,3
Jaihyun Lew1
Hyemi Jang2
Sungroh Yoon1,2∗
1
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
3
Samsung Electro-Mechanics
{songsang7, fudojhl, wkdal9512, sryoon}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Estimating the homography between two images is crucial for mid- or high-level
vision tasks, such as image stitching and fusion. However, using supervised
learning methods is often challenging or costly due to the difficulty of collecting
ground-truth data. In response, unsupervised learning approaches have emerged.
Most early methods, though, assume that the given image pairs are from the same
camera or have minor lighting differences. Consequently, while these methods
perform effectively under such conditions, they generally fail when input image
pairs come from different domains, referred to as multimodal image pairs.
To address these limitations, we propose AltO, an unsupervised learning framework
for estimating homography in multimodal image pairs. Our method employs a twophase alternating optimization framework, similar to Expectation-Maximization
(EM), where one phase reduces the geometry gap and the other addresses the
modality gap. To handle these gaps, we use Barlow Twins loss for the modality gap
and propose an extended version, Geometry Barlow Twins, for the geometry gap.
As a result, we demonstrate that our method, AltO, can be trained on multimodal
datasets without any ground-truth data. It not only outperforms other unsupervised
methods but is also compatible with various architectures of homography estimators.
The source code can be found at: https://github.com/songsang7/AltO

1

Introduction

Homography is defined as the relationship between two planes when a 3D view is projected onto two
different 2D planes. Many mid- or high-level vision tasks, such as image stitching [1], multispectral
image fusion [2], and 3D reconstruction [3, 4], require low-level vision tasks such as image registration
or alignment as preprocessing steps. Image registration is the process of aligning the coordinate
systems of a given pair of images by estimating their geometric relationship. If the relationship
between the image pair is a linear transformation, it is called homography.
Homography estimation for image alignment is known as reducing the geometric gap between a pair
of images as depicted in Figure 1. It has been an active area of research since the pre-deep learning era,
with prominent algorithms such as SIFT [5], SURF [6], and ORB [7]. The advent of deep learning
ushered in the exploration of end-to-end approaches utilizing supervised learning, beginning with
DHN [8]. These studies demonstrated the effectiveness of deep learning in homography estimation.
However, supervised learning assumes the availability of ground-truth data for the relationship
between image pairs or pre-aligned image pairs. The assumption is often unrealistic in real-world
scenarios. Therefore, the rise of unsupervised learning has become essential to overcome these
practical challenges.
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

