S EM C ODER: Training Code Language Models with
Comprehensive Semantics Reasoning

Yangruibo Ding
Columbia University
yrbding@cs.columbia.edu

Jinjun Peng
Columbia University
jinjun@cs.columbia.edu

Marcus J. Min
Columbia University
jm5025@columbia.edu

Gail Kaiser
Columbia University
kaiser@cs.columbia.edu

Junfeng Yang
Columbia University
junfeng@cs.columbia.edu

Baishakhi Ray
Columbia University
rayb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Code Large Language Models (Code LLMs) have excelled at tasks like code completion but often miss deeper semantics such as execution effects and dynamic states.
This paper aims to bridge the gap between Code LLMs’ reliance on static text data
and the need for semantic understanding for complex tasks like debugging and
program repair. We introduce a novel strategy, monologue reasoning, to train Code
LLMs to reason comprehensive semantics, encompassing high-level functional descriptions, local execution effects of individual statements, and overall input/output
behavior, thereby linking static code text with dynamic execution states. We begin
by collecting P Y X, a clean Python corpus of fully executable code samples with
functional descriptions and test cases. We propose training Code LLMs not only to
write code but also to understand code semantics by reasoning about key properties,
constraints, and execution behaviors using natural language, mimicking human verbal debugging, i.e., rubber-duck debugging. This approach led to the development
of S EM C ODER, a Code LLM with only 6.7B parameters, which shows competitive
performance with GPT-3.5-turbo on code generation and execution reasoning tasks.
S EM C ODER achieves 79.3% on HumanEval (GPT-3.5-turbo: 76.8%), 63.6% on
CRUXEval-I (GPT-3.5-turbo: 50.3%), and 63.9% on CRUXEval-O (GPT-3.5turbo: 59.0%). We also study the effectiveness of S EM C ODER’s monologue-style
execution reasoning compared to concrete scratchpad reasoning, showing that our
approach integrates semantics from multiple dimensions more smoothly. Finally,
we demonstrate the potential of applying learned semantics to improve Code LLMs’
debugging and self-refining capabilities. Our data, code, and models are available
at: https://github.com/ARiSE-Lab/SemCoder.

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in code language models (Code LMs) [1–5] have revolutionized the field of
programming [6–8]. These models, trained primarily on vast corpora of programming-related text
such as source code and docstrings [9], excel at automating tasks like code generation.
Unfortunately, the reliance on static text data limits the ability of existing Code LMs to understand
what the programs are actually doing, especially to reason about the deeper semantics intrinsic to
code execution. The lack of semantic understanding unsurprisingly often leads to poor performance
in debugging and repairing errors in generated code [10]. Code LMs struggle with reasoning about
program semantics in both static and dynamic settings. In a static setting, the challenge lies in
understanding the intended behavior of the code without running it, requiring deep comprehension of
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

