Disentangling and mitigating the impact of task
similarity for continual learning

Naoki Hiratani
Department of Neuroscience
Washington University in St Louis
St Louis, MO 63110
hiratani@wustl.edu

Abstract
Continual learning of partially similar tasks poses a challenge for artificial neural
networks, as task similarity presents both an opportunity for knowledge transfer and
a risk of interference and catastrophic forgetting. However, it remains unclear how
task similarity in input features and readout patterns influences knowledge transfer
and forgetting, as well as how they interact with common algorithms for continual
learning. Here, we develop a linear teacher-student model with latent structure
and show analytically that high input feature similarity coupled with low readout
similarity is catastrophic for both knowledge transfer and retention. Conversely,
the opposite scenario is relatively benign. Our analysis further reveals that taskdependent activity gating improves knowledge retention at the expense of transfer,
while task-dependent plasticity gating does not affect either retention or transfer
performance at the over-parameterized limit. In contrast, weight regularization
based on the Fisher information metric significantly improves retention, regardless
of task similarity, without compromising transfer performance. Nevertheless, its
diagonal approximation and regularization in the Euclidean space are much less
robust against task similarity. We demonstrate consistent results in a permuted
MNIST task with latent variables. Overall, this work provides insights into when
continual learning is difficult and how to mitigate it.

1

Introduction

Artificial neural networks surpass human capabilities in various domains, yet struggle with continual
learning. These networks tend to forget previously learned tasks when trained sequentially—a
problem known as catastrophic forgetting [44, 16, 23, 32]. This phenomenon affects not only
supervised training of feedforward networks but also extends to recurrent neural networks [10],
reinforcement learning tasks [30], and fine-tuning of large language models [41]. Many algorithms
for mitigating catastrophic forgetting have been developed previously, including rehearsal techniques
[48, 49, 59], weight regularization [30, 36, 67], and activity-gating methods [15, 54, 42, 56], among
others [57, 50, 63, 21]. However, these methods often hinder forward and backward knowledge
transfer [28, 39, 29], and thus it remains unclear how to achieve knowledge transfer and retention
simultaneously.
A key factor for continual learning is task similarity. If two subsequent tasks are similar, there is a
potential for a knowledge transfer from one task to another, but the risk of interference also becomes
high [47, 28, 35, 11, 39]. The impact of task similarity on transfer and retention performance is
particularly complicated because two tasks can be similar in different manners [65, 32]. Sometimes
familiar input features need to be associated with novel output patterns, but at other times, novel
input features need to be associated with familiar output patterns. Previous works observed that these
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

