Data Augmentation with Diffusion for
Open-Set Semi-Supervised Learning

Seonghyun Ban1* , Heesan Kong1* , Kee-Eung Kim1, 2†
1
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST
2
School of Computing, KAIST
shban@ai.kaist.ac.kr, hskong@ai.kaist.ac.kr, kekim@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) seeks to utilize unlabeled data to overcome the
limited amount of labeled data and improve model performance. However, many
SSL methods typically struggle in real-world scenarios, particularly when there is a
large number of irrelevant instances in the unlabeled data that do not belong to any
class in the labeled data. Previous approaches often downweight instances from
irrelevant classes to mitigate the negative impact of class distribution mismatch
on model training. However, by discarding irrelevant instances, they may result
in the loss of valuable information such as invariance, regularity, and diversity
within the data. In this paper, we propose a data-centric generative augmentation
approach that leverages a diffusion model to enrich labeled data using both labeled
and unlabeled samples. A key challenge is extracting the diversity inherent in the
unlabeled data while mitigating the generation of samples irrelevant to the labeled
data. To tackle this issue, we combine diffusion model training with a discriminator
that identifies and reduces the impact of irrelevant instances. We also demonstrate
that such a trained diffusion model can even convert an irrelevant instance into
a relevant one, yielding highly effective synthetic data for training. Through a
comprehensive suite of experiments, we show that our data augmentation approach
significantly enhances the performance of SSL methods, especially in the presence
of class distribution mismatch.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs), trained using a large amount of labeled datasets, have shown to achieve
remarkable performance in a variety of supervised learning tasks, such as image classification (LeCun
et al., 2015; Krizhevsky et al., 2017) and object detection (Everingham et al., 2010; Lin et al.,
2014). Nonetheless, the intensive labor of annotating vast datasets often renders the construction of
sufficiently large labeled datasets prohibitively expensive for numerous applications (Oliver et al.,
2018). To address this, semi-supervised learning (SSL) (Chapelle et al., 2009) has emerged as a
viable approach, which aims to leverage abundant unlabeled data to overcome the limited availability
of labeled data.
Recent progress in SSL has made many noteworthy advancements, including techniques such as
pseudo-labeling (Lee, 2013; Pham et al., 2021), consistency regularization (Sajjadi et al., 2016;
Tarvainen & Valpola, 2017; Sohn et al., 2020), and entropy minimization (Grandvalet & Bengio,
2004; Miyato et al., 2018; Berthelot et al., 2019). However, a common limitation of these methods
is their reliance on the critical assumption that both unlabeled and labeled data instances are drawn
* Equal Contribution.
†

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

