Last-Iterate Global Convergence of Policy Gradients
for Constrained Reinforcement Learning

Alessandro Montenegro
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
alessandro.montenegro@polimi.it
Matteo Papini
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
matteo.papini@polimi.it

Marco Mussi
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
marco.mussi@polimi.it
Alberto Maria Metelli
Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
albertomaria.metelli@polimi.it

Abstract
Constrained Reinforcement Learning (CRL) tackles sequential decision-making
problems where agents are required to achieve goals by maximizing the expected
return while meeting domain-specific constraints, which are often formulated as
expected costs. In this setting, policy-based methods are widely used since they
come with several advantages when dealing with continuous-control problems.
These methods search in the policy space with an action-based or parameter-based
exploration strategy, depending on whether they learn directly the parameters
of a stochastic policy or those of a stochastic hyperpolicy. In this paper, we
propose a general framework for addressing CRL problems via gradient-based
primal-dual algorithms, relying on an alternate ascent/descent scheme with dualvariable regularization. We introduce an exploration-agnostic algorithm, called
C-PG, which exhibits global last-iterate convergence guarantees under (weak)
gradient domination assumptions, improving and generalizing existing results.
Then, we design C-PGAE and C-PGPE, the action-based and the parameter-based
versions of C-PG, respectively, and we illustrate how they naturally extend to
constraints defined in terms of risk measures over the costs, as it is often requested
in safety-critical scenarios. Finally, we numerically validate our algorithms on
constrained control problems, and compare them with state-of-the-art baselines,
demonstrating their effectiveness.

1

Introduction

When applying Reinforcement Learning (RL, Sutton and Barto, 2018) to real-world scenarios, we
are tasked with addressing large-scale continuous control problems where, in addition to reaching
a goal, it is necessary to meet structural or utility-based constraints. For instance, an autonomousdriving car has its main objective of getting to the desired destination (i.e., goal) while avoiding
collisions, ensuring the safety of people on the streets, adhering to traffic rules, and respecting
the physical requirements of the engine to avoid damaging it (i.e., constraints) (Likmeta et al.,
2020). To pursue such an objective, it is necessary to extend the RL problem formulation with the
possibility to account for constraints. Constrained Reinforcement Learning (CRL, Uchibe and Doya,
2007) aims at solving this family of problems by employing RL techniques to tackle Constrained
Markov Decision Processes (CMDPs, Altman, 1999), which provide an established and widely-used
framework for modeling constrained control tasks. The conventional CRL framework primarily
focuses on constraints related directly to expected costs (Stooke et al., 2020; Ding et al., 2020; Ying
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

