Implicit-Zoo: A Large-Scale Dataset of Neural Implicit
Functions for 2D Images and 3D Scenes

Qi Ma1,2 Danda Pani Paudel2 Ender Konukoglu1 Luc Van Gool1,2
1
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich 2 INSAIT, Sofia University

Abstract
Neural implicit functions have demonstrated significant importance in various
areas such as computer vision and graphics. Their advantages include the ability to
represent complex shapes and scenes with high fidelity, smooth interpolation capabilities, and continuous representations. Despite these benefits, the development
and analysis of implicit functions have been limited by the lack of comprehensive
datasets and the substantial computational resources required for their implementation and evaluation. To address these challenges, we introduce "Implicit-Zoo": a
large-scale dataset requiring thousands of GPU training days designed to advance
research and development in this field. Our dataset includes diverse 2D and 3D
scenes, such as CIFAR-10, ImageNet-1K, and Cityscapes for 2D image tasks, and
the OmniObject3D dataset for 3D vision tasks. We ensure high quality through
strict checks, refining or filtering out low-quality data. Using Implicit-Zoo, we
showcase two immediate benefits as it enables to: (1) learn token locations for
transformer models; (2) directly regress 3D cameras poses of 2D images with
respect to NeRF models. This in turn leads to an improved performance in all
three task of image classification, semantic segmentation, and 3D pose regression
– thereby unlocking new avenues for research. Our data and implementation are
available at: https://github.com/qimaqi/Implicit-Zoo/

Figure 1: The Implicit-Zoo dataset and its example utilities. We demonstrate three tasks using
Implicit-Zoo: classification, segmentation, and 3D pose regression. Details of the problem statement
can be found in section 4. The INRs are colorized differently to indicate their training data sources.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

