MambaSCI: Efficient Mamba-UNet for Quad-Bayer
Patterned Video Snapshot Compressive Imaging

Zhenghao Pan1,∗, Haijin Zeng2,∗, Jiezhang Cao3 , Yongyong Chen1,† , Kai Zhang4 , Yong Xu1
1

Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), 2 Ghent University,
3
Harvard University, 4 Nanjing University

Abstract
Color video snapshot compressive imaging (SCI) employs computational imaging
techniques to capture multiple sequential video frames in a single Bayer-patterned
measurement. With the increasing popularity of quad-Bayer pattern in mainstream
smartphone cameras for capturing high-resolution videos, mobile photography
has become more accessible to a wider audience. However, existing color video
SCI reconstruction algorithms are designed based on the traditional Bayer pattern.
When applied to videos captured by quad-Bayer cameras, these algorithms often
result in color distortion and ineffective demosaicing, rendering them impractical
for primary equipment. To address this challenge, we propose the MambaSCI
method, which leverages the Mamba and UNet architectures for efficient reconstruction of quad-Bayer patterned color video SCI. To the best of our knowledge,
our work presents the first algorithm for quad-Bayer patterned SCI reconstruction,
and also the initial application of the Mamba model to this task. Specifically, we
customize Residual-Mamba-Blocks, which residually connect the Spatial-Temporal
Mamba (STMamba), Edge-Detail-Reconstruction (EDR) module, and Channel
Attention (CA) module. Respectively, STMamba is used to model long-range
spatial-temporal dependencies with linear complexity, EDR is for better edge-detail
reconstruction, and CA is used to compensate for the missing channel information
interaction in Mamba model. Experiments demonstrate that MambaSCI surpasses
state-of-the-art methods with lower computational and memory costs. PyTorch
style pseudo-code for the core modules is provided in the supplementary materials.
Code is at https://github.com/PAN083/MambaSCI.

1

Introduction

濄濇濂濆澔澜濘澶澝

澧澫
In recent years, there has been significant progress in en濁濕濡濖濕濇澷澽澡澶
澧澩
hancing imaging quality in smartphone image sensors. One
澧澧
notable trend is the adoption of the quad-Bayer Color Filter
澹濚濚濝濗濝濙濢濨濇澷澽澡澶 濇濈澺濣濦濡濙濦澡澶
澧澥 濁濕濡濖濕濇澷澽澡濇
Array (CFA) pattern [1]. Smartphones such as the iPhone 14
澦澭
Pro/Max, vivo X90 Pro+, Xiaomi 13S Ultra, and OPPO Find
濇濈澺濣濦濡濙濦澡濇
澦澫
X6 Pro utilize quad-Bayer array to enhance image quality in
澹濚濚濝濗濝濙濢濨濇澷澽澡濇
澦澩
low-light conditions and offer higher resolution for mobile
澤
澩澤澤澤
澥澤澤澤澤
澺激濃濄濇澔澜澻澝
G
H
photography [2, 3]. Unlike the traditional RGGB Bayer CFA
pattern, the quad-Bayer pattern expands each pixel into four Figure 1: (a) Bayer CFA vs. Quad-Bayer
sub-pixels and arranges them periodically [4, 5], as depicted CFA. (b) PSNR and FLOPS on color simin Fig. 1(a). This arrangement allows for larger pixels by ulation videos (larger size means more

∗

parameters).
Equal contribution. † Corresponding Author: Yongyong Chen (YongyongChen.cn@gmail.com)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

