DreamSteerer: Enhancing Source Image Conditioned
Editability using Personalized Diffusion Models

Zhengyang Yu1∗
Zhaoyuan Yang2
Jing Zhang1†
1
2
Australian National University
GE Research
{zhengyang.yu,jing.zhang}@anu.edu.au zhaoyuan.yang@ge.com

Abstract
Recent text-to-image personalization methods have shown great promise in teaching a diffusion model user-specified concepts given a few images for reusing the
acquired concepts in a novel context. With massive efforts being dedicated to
personalized generation, a promising extension is personalized editing, namely
to edit an image using personalized concepts, which can provide a more precise
guidance signal than traditional textual guidance. To address this, a straightforward
solution is to incorporate a personalized diffusion model with a text-driven editing
framework. However, such a solution often shows unsatisfactory editability on
the source image. To address this, we propose DreamSteerer, a plug-in method
for augmenting existing T2I personalization methods. Specifically, we enhance
the source image conditioned editability of a personalized diffusion model via
a novel Editability Driven Score Distillation (EDSD) objective. Moreover, we
identify a mode trapping issue with EDSD, and propose a mode shifting regularization with spatial feature guided sampling to avoid such an issue. We further
employ two key modifications to the Delta Denoising Score framework that enable high-fidelity local editing with personalized concepts. Extensive experiments
validate that DreamSteerer can significantly improve the editability of several
T2I personalization baselines while being computationally efficient. Project page:
https://github.com/Dijkstra14/DreamSteerer.

1

Introduction

Text-to-Image Diffusion Probabilistic Models (T2I DPMs) [58, 61] have revolutionized novel content
creation due to their superior capacity in both sample fidelity and mode coverage, as well as their
flexibility in achieving effortless concept composition [44] and user-friendly control [35]. Despite
the success of these models, the limited expressiveness of natural language may lead to ambiguity in
real-world scenarios where users demand greater specificity and engagement in the creation process.
This challenge has sparked extensive research in T2I Personalization [10, 16, 62]. Specifically,
personalization is the process of teaching T2I DPMs a novel visual concept with a few (usually
3-8) reference images by fine-tuning the pre-trained model parameters. After personalization, the
personal concept is linked to a rare token in the text encoder dictionary, e.g., "[my_dog]", enabling
flexible reuse of the visual concept in new contexts, e.g., "a photo of [my_dog] wearing an astronaut
suit". Despite the success of these models, the majority of previous works have been focusing on
personalized generation, emphasizing the preservation of concept identity across varying textual
conditions. In this work, we explore a natural extension on these methods to perform image editing
with acquired concepts, namely personalized editing, which can be promising in enabling higher level
∗
†

Work was partially done while Zhengyang Yu was an intern at GE Research.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

