Context-Aware Testing: A New Paradigm for Model
Testing with Large Language Models

Paulius Rauba∗
University of Cambridge
pr501@cam.ac.uk

Nabeel Seedat∗
University of Cambridge
ns741@cam.ac.uk

Max Ruiz Luyten
University of Cambridge
mr971@cam.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
The predominant de facto paradigm of testing ML models relies on either using
only held-out data to compute aggregate evaluation metrics or by assessing the
performance on different subgroups. However, such data-only testing methods
operate under the restrictive assumption that the available empirical data is the
sole input for testing ML models, disregarding valuable contextual information
that could guide model testing. In this paper, we challenge the go-to approach of
data-only testing and introduce context-aware testing (CAT) which uses context as
an inductive bias to guide the search for meaningful model failures. We instantiate
the first CAT system, SMART Testing, which employs large language models to
hypothesize relevant and likely failures, which are evaluated on data using a selffalsification mechanism. Through empirical evaluations in diverse settings, we
show that SMART automatically identifies more relevant and impactful failures
than alternatives, demonstrating the potential of CAT as a testing paradigm.

1

Introduction

The ability to rigorously test and validate machine learning (ML) models is crucial for their reliable
deployment in real-world applications. Despite solid aggregate performance, ML models are unreliable in a variety of real-world scenarios, such as on different subgroups [1–6], or encountering
data deviating from its training distribution [7–10], often resulting in significant financial or societal
consequences. These failures point to deficiencies in the way we test such ML models. To understand
this in greater detail, let’s address two questions: how are we currently testing ML models and can
we do better?
How are we testing? The predominant de facto paradigm of testing ML models relies on using
only held-out data to evaluate the model either on average or by assessing performance on different
subgroups within the dataset. Such data-only methods optimize a given objective function to find
subgroups (or slices of data) within the dataset where a trained model underperforms relative to
aggregate performance. We refer to this relative underperformance as a model failure. However,
data-only methods operate under the restrictive assumption that the available empirical data is the sole
input for testing ML model performance. In practice, this is almost always violated. It is common to
have a priori knowledge of where models are likely to fail, given the problem context.
The restrictive assumption of data-only methods comes at a significant cost. Specifically, data-only
methods, which have been the go-to approach for ML testing, are required to iterate and test the
∗

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

