BrainBits: How Much of the Brain are Generative
Reconstruction Methods Using?

David Mayo1*

Christopher Wang1*

Albert Shaw3
1

MIT CSAIL, CBMM

Asa Harbin2*

Abdulrahman Alabdulkareem1

Boris Katz1
2

MIT Lincoln Laboratory

Andrei Barbu1
3

Google DeepMind

Abstract
When evaluating stimuli reconstruction results it is tempting to assume that higher
fidelity text and image generation is due to an improved understanding of the
brain or more powerful signal extraction from neural recordings. However, in
practice, new reconstruction methods could improve performance for at least
three other reasons: learning more about the distribution of stimuli, becoming
better at reconstructing text or images in general, or exploiting weaknesses in
current image and/or text evaluation metrics. Here we disentangle how much of
the reconstruction is due to these other factors vs. productively using the neural
recordings. We introduce BrainBits, a method that uses a bottleneck to quantify
the amount of signal extracted from neural recordings that is actually necessary
to reproduce a method’s reconstruction fidelity. We find that it takes surprisingly
little information from the brain to produce reconstructions with high fidelity. In
these cases, it is clear that the priors of the methods’ generative models are so
powerful that the outputs they produce extrapolate far beyond the neural signal
they decode. Given that reconstructing stimuli can be improved independently by
either improving signal extraction from the brain or by building more powerful
generative models, improving the latter may fool us into thinking we are improving
the former. We propose that methods should report a method-specific random
baseline, a reconstruction ceiling, and a curve of performance as a function of
bottleneck size, with the ultimate goal of using more of the neural recordings.

1

Introduction

Applying powerful generative models to decoding images and text from the brain has become an
active area of research with many proposed methods of mapping brain responses to model inputs. A
race between publications is driving down the reconstruction error to produce higher fidelity images
and text [17, 27, 28]. It could be easy to assume that as the field gets better at reconstructing stimuli,
we will simultaneously be getting better at modeling vision and language processing in the brain. We
argue that this is not necessarily the case.
There are several reasons why a method might have higher quality reconstructions yet actually
require the same or less signal from the brain. For example, a much larger model can learn a
stronger prior over the space of images and text, so even if it were given less information from
the brain, it might produce better reconstructions. In particular, a generative model might become
more fine-tuned toward the distribution of images and text that are used in standard datasets. This is
problematic because so few open neuroscience datasets exist, and even fewer at the scale that would
*

Equal contribution. Code available at https://github.com/czlwang/BrainBits. Correspondence to
DM and CW at {dmayo2, czw}@mit.edu and AH at asaharbin@ll.mit.edu.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

