Convolutions and More as Einsum: A Tensor Network
Perspective with Advances for Second-Order Methods

Felix Dangel
Vector Institute
Toronto, Canada
fdangel@vectorinstitute.ai

Abstract
Despite their simple intuition, convolutions are more tedious to analyze than dense
layers, which complicates the transfer of theoretical and algorithmic ideas to convolutions. We simplify convolutions by viewing them as tensor networks (TNs) that
allow reasoning about the underlying tensor multiplications by drawing diagrams,
manipulating them to perform function transformations like differentiation, and
efficiently evaluating them with einsum. To demonstrate their simplicity and
expressiveness, we derive diagrams of various autodiff operations and popular curvature approximations with full hyper-parameter support, batching, channel groups,
and generalization to any convolution dimension. Further, we provide convolutionspecific transformations based on the connectivity pattern which allow to simplify
diagrams before evaluation. Finally, we probe performance. Our TN implementation accelerates a recently-proposed KFAC variant up to 4.5 x while removing the
standard implementation’s memory overhead, and enables new hardware-efficient
tensor dropout for approximate backpropagation.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks [CNNs, 39] mark a milestone in the development of deep learning
architectures as their ‘sliding window’ approach represents an important inductive bias for vision
tasks. Their intuition is simple to explain with graphical illustrations [e.g. 21]. Yet, convolutions are
more challenging to analyze than dense layers in multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) or transformers [71].
One reason is that they are hard to express in matrix notation and—even in index notation—compact
expressions that are convenient to work with only exist for special hyper-parameters [e.g. 27, 2]. Many
hyper-parameters (stride, padding, . . . ) and additional features like channel groups [36] introduce
even more complexity that is inherited by related routines, e.g. for autodiff. We observe a delay of
analytic and algorithmic developments between MLPs vs. CNNs, e.g.
• Approximate Hessian diagonal: 1989 vs. 2024
• Hessian rank: 2021 vs. 2023
• Gradient descent learning dynamics: 2014 vs. 2023
• Neural tangent kernel (NTK): 2018 vs. 2019
• Kronecker-factored quasi-Newton methods: 2021 vs. 2022
• Kronecker-factored curvature (KFAC, KFRA, KFLR): (2015, 2017, 2017) vs. (2016, 2020, 2020)
The software support for less standard routines some of these methods require also reflects this gap.
Some functions only support special dimensions [15]. Others use less efficient workarounds (§5.1) or
are not provided at all (§B.4). And they are hard to modify as the code is either closed-source [12] or
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

