Distributionally Robust Reinforcement Learning with
Interactive Data Collection: Fundamental Hardness
and Near-Optimal Algorithms

Miao Lu1∗
Han Zhong2∗
Tong Zhang3
Jose Blanchet1
Department of Management Science and Engineering, Stanford University
2
Center for Data Science, Peking University
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
1

Abstract
Distributionally robust reinforcement learning (DRRL), often framed as a robust
Markov decision process (RMDP), seeks to find a robust policy that achieves good
performance under the worst-case scenario among all environments within a prespecified uncertainty set centered around the training environment. Unlike previous
work, which relies on a generative model or a pre-collected offline dataset enjoying
good coverage of the deployment environment, we tackle robust RL via interactive
data collection, where the learner interacts with the training environment only and
refines the policy through trial and error. In this robust RL paradigm, two main
challenges emerge: managing the distributional robustness while striking a balance
between exploration and exploitation during data collection. Initially, we establish
that sample-efficient learning without additional assumptions is unattainable owing
to the curse of support shift; i.e., the potential disjointedness of the distributional
supports between training and testing environments. To circumvent such a hardness
result, we introduce the vanishing minimal value assumption to RMDPs with a
total-variation distance robust set, postulating that the minimal value of the optimal
robust value function is zero. Such an assumption effectively eliminates the support
shift issue for RMDPs with a TV distance robust set, and we present an algorithm
with a provable sample complexity guarantee. Our work makes the initial step to
uncovering the inherent difficulty of robust RL via interactive data collection and
sufficient conditions for sample-efficient algorithms with sharp sample complexity.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) serves as a framework for addressing complex decision-making problems through iterative interactions with environments. The advancements in deep reinforcement
learning have enabled the successful application of the general RL framework across various domains,
including mastering strategic games, such as Go (Silver et al., 2017), robotics (Kober et al., 2013),
and tuning large language models (LLMs; Ouyang et al. (2022)). The critical factors contributing
to these successes encompass not only the potency of deep neural networks and modern deep RL
algorithms but also the availability of substantial training data. However, there are scenarios, such as
healthcare (Wang et al., 2018) and autonomous driving (Kiran et al., 2021), among others, where
collecting data in the target domain is challenging, costly, or even unfeasible.
In such cases, the sim-to-real transfer (Kober et al., 2013; Sadeghi and Levine, 2016; Peng et al.,
2018; Zhao et al., 2020) becomes a remedy – a process in which the RL agents are trained in some
simulated environment and subsequently deployed in real-world settings. Nevertheless, the training
∗

Equal contribution. Email to miaolu@stanford.edu, hanzhong@stu.pku.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

