eXponential FAmily Dynamical Systems (XFADS):
Large-scale nonlinear Gaussian state-space modeling

Matthew Dowling
Champalimaud Research, Champalimaud Foundation, Portugal
matthew.dowling@research.fchampalimaud.org
Yuan Zhao
National Institute of Mental Health, USA
yuan.zhao@nih.gov
Il Memming Park
Champalimaud Research, Champalimaud Foundation, Portugal
memming.park@research.fchampalimaud.org

Abstract
State-space graphical models and the variational autoencoder framework provide
a principled apparatus for learning dynamical systems from data. State-of-the-art
probabilistic approaches are often able to scale to large problems at the cost of flexibility of the variational posterior or expressivity of the dynamics model. However,
those consolidations can be detrimental if the ultimate goal is to learn a generative
model capable of explaining the spatiotemporal structure of the data and making
accurate forecasts. We introduce a low-rank structured variational autoencoding
framework for nonlinear Gaussian state-space graphical models capable of capturing dense covariance structures that are important for learning dynamical systems
with predictive capabilities. Our inference algorithm exploits the covariance structures that arise naturally from sample based approximate Gaussian message passing
and low-rank amortized posterior updates – effectively performing approximate
variational smoothing with time complexity scaling linearly in the state dimensionality. In comparisons with other deep state-space model architectures our approach
consistently demonstrates the ability to learn a more predictive generative model.
Furthermore, when applied to neural physiological recordings, our approach is
able to learn a dynamical system capable of forecasting population spiking and
behavioral correlates from a small portion of single trials.

1

Introduction

State-space models (SSM) are invaluable for understanding the temporal structure of complex natural
phenomena through their underlying dynamics 1–3 . While engineering or physics problems often
assume the dynamical laws of the system of interest are known to a high degree of accuracy, in
an unsupervised data-driven investigation, they have to be learned from the observed data. The
variational autoencoder (VAE) framework makes it possible to jointly learn the parameters of the
state-space description and an inference network to amortize posterior computation of the unknown
latent state 4–7 . However, it can be challenging to structure the variational approximation and design
an inference network that permits fast evaluation of the loss function (evidence lower bound or ELBO)
while preserving the temporal structure of the posterior.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

