Diffusion Forcing: Next-token Prediction Meets
Full-Sequence Diffusion

Boyuan Chen
MIT CSAIL
boyuanc@mit.edu

Diego Martı́ Monsó∗
Technical University of Munich
diego.marti@tum.de

Max Simchowitz
MIT CSAIL
msimchow@mit.edu

Russ Tedrake
MIT CSAIL
russt@mit.edu

Yilun Du
MIT CSAIL
yilundu@mit.edu
Vincent Sitzmann
MIT CSAIL
sitzmann@mit.edu

Abstract
This paper presents Diffusion Forcing, a new training paradigm where a diffusion
model is trained to denoise a set of tokens with independent per-token noise
levels. We apply Diffusion Forcing to sequence generative modeling by training
a causal next-token prediction model to generate one or several future tokens
without fully diffusing past ones. Our approach is shown to combine the strengths
of next-token prediction models, such as variable-length generation, with the
strengths of full-sequence diffusion models, such as the ability to guide sampling
to desirable trajectories. Our method offers a range of additional capabilities, such
as (1) rolling-out sequences of continuous tokens, such as video, with lengths past
the training horizon, where baselines diverge and (2) new sampling and guiding
schemes that uniquely profit from Diffusion Forcing’s variable-horizon and causal
architecture, and which lead to marked performance gains in decision-making
and planning tasks. In addition to its empirical success, our method is proven to
optimize a variational lower bound on the likelihoods of all subsequences of tokens
drawn from the true joint distribution. Project website: https://boyuan.space/
diffusion-forcing/

1

Introduction

Probabilistic sequence modeling plays a crucial role in diverse machine learning applications including
natural language processing [6, 47], video prediction [31, 69] and decision making [3, 22]. Next-token
prediction models in particular have a number of desirable properties. They enable the generation of
sequences with varying length [32, 21, 37] (generating only a single token or an “infinite” number
of tokens via auto-regressive sampling), can be conditioned on varying amounts of history [21, 37],
support efficient tree search[70, 23, 25], and can be used for online feedback control [22, 3].
Current next-token prediction models are trained via teacher forcing [64], where the model predicts
the immediate next token based on a ground truth history of previous tokens. This results in two
limitations: (1) there is no mechanism by which one can guide the sampling of a sequence to
minimize a certain objective, and (2) current next-token models easily become unstable on continuous
data. For example, when attempting to auto-regressively generate a video (as opposed to text [6] or
vector-quantized latents [33]) past the training horizon, slight errors in frame-to-frame predictions
accumulate and the model diverges.
∗

Work done as a visiting student at MIT.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

