Reasoning Multi-Agent Behavioral Topology for
Interactive Autonomous Driving

1

Haochen Liu1,2 Li Chen2,3 Yu Qiao2 Chen Lv1† Hongyang Li2,3†
Nanyang Technological University 2 Shanghai AI Lab 3 University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Autonomous driving system aims for safe and social-consistent driving through
the behavioral integration among interactive agents. However, challenges remain due to multi-agent scene uncertainty and heterogeneous interaction. Current
dense and sparse behavioral representations struggle with inefficiency and inconsistency in multi-agent modeling, leading to instability of collective behavioral
patterns when integrating prediction and planning (IPP). To address this, we initiate a topological formation that serves as a compliant behavioral foreground to
guide downstream trajectory generations. Specifically, we introduce Behavioral
Topology (BeTop), a pivotal topological formulation that explicitly represents
the consensual behavioral pattern among multi-agent future. BeTop is derived
from braid theory to distill compliant interactive topology from multi-agent future
trajectories. A synergistic learning framework (BeTopNet) supervised by BeTop
facilitates the consistency of behavior prediction and planning within the predicted
topology priors. Through imitative contingency learning, BeTop also effectively
manages behavioral uncertainty for prediction and planning. Extensive verification
on large-scale real-world datasets, including nuPlan and WOMD, demonstrates
that BeTop achieves state-of-the-art performance in both prediction and planning
tasks. Further validations on the proposed interactive scenario benchmark showcase planning compliance in interactive cases. Code and model is available at
https://github.com/OpenDriveLab/BeTop.

1

Introduction

Autonomous driving system aspires to safe, humanoid, and socially compatible maneuvers [1]. This
drives for formulation, prediction, and negotiation of collective future behaviors among interactive
agents and autonomous vehicles (AVs) [2]. Remarkable accuracy is achieved by learning-based
paradigms [3], including end-to-end modular design [4–7], social modeling [8, 9], and trajectorylevel integration [10–13]. However, substantial challenges arise in real-world cases due to scene
uncertainty and volatile interactive patterns for multi-agent future behaviors.
To embrace compliant patterns for multi-agent future behaviors, current formulations fall into two
mainstreams, dense representation and sparse representation (Fig. 1). Dense representation quantizes agent behaviors under ego-centric rasterization, forecasting bird’s eye view (BEV) occupancy
probabilities [14, 7, 15] or temporal flow [16–18]. It is easy to deduce interactions, perform scalable
behaviors for agents [19], and align with BEV perceptions [20]. Still, dense representation is hindered
by frozen receptions. It causes safety-vulnerable intractability and occlusions potentially interacting
with ego maneuvers [16, 21]. Contrary to pixel-wise behavioral probability, sparse representation
forecasts agent-anchored set of trajectories [22–25] or intention distributions [10, 26, 27]. Its multimodal formulation for each agent marks the elasticity in diverse behavioral uncertainty and tractability
under flexile spatial semantics. However, behavioral misalignment [28] and modality collapse [24]
Work done while Haochen’s internship at Shanghai AI Lab. † Equal co-advising.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

