Unsupervised Anomaly Detection in The Presence of
Missing Values

Feng Xiao1
Jicong Fan 1,2∗
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
2
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen, China
xiaofeng.cs.ds@gmail.com
fanjicong@cuhk.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Anomaly detection methods typically require fully observed data for model training
and inference and cannot handle incomplete data, while the missing data problem
is pervasive in science and engineering, leading to challenges in many important
applications such as abnormal user detection in recommendation systems and
novel or anomalous cell detection in bioinformatics, where the missing rates can
be higher than 30% or even 80%. In this work, first, we construct and evaluate
a straightforward strategy, “impute-then-detect”, via combining state-of-the-art
imputation methods with unsupervised anomaly detection methods, where the
training data are composed of normal samples only. We observe that such twostage methods frequently yield imputation bias from normal data, namely, the
imputation methods are inclined to make incomplete samples “normal”, where the
fundamental reason is that the imputation models learned only on normal data and
cannot generalize well to abnormal data in the inference stage. To address this
challenge, we propose an end-to-end method that integrates data imputation with
anomaly detection into a unified optimization problem. The proposed model learns
to generate well-designed pseudo-abnormal samples to mitigate the imputation
bias and ensure the discrimination ability of both the imputation and detection
processes. Furthermore, we provide theoretical guarantees for the effectiveness
of the proposed method, proving that the proposed method can correctly detect
anomalies with high probability. Experimental results on datasets with manually
constructed missing values and inherent missing values demonstrate that our proposed method effectively mitigates the imputation bias and surpasses the baseline
methods significantly. The source code of our method is available at https://
github.com/jicongfan/ImAD-Anomaly-Detection-With-Missing-Data.

1

Introduction

Anomaly detection (AD) [Breunig et al., 2000, Schölkopf et al., 2001, Liu et al., 2008, Pevnỳ, 2016,
Zong et al., 2018, Ruff et al., 2018, Cai and Fan, 2022, Fu et al., 2024, Zhang et al., 2024, Xiao
et al., 2025], aiming at identifying anomalous or novel samples in data, is a crucial machine learning
problem. It finds extensive applications in many high-stakes fields such as biology, healthcare,
finance, and cybersecurity. Data missing or incompleteness, a persistent and unavoidable issue in
many real-world situations, often arises during the processes of data collection, transmission, and
storage. Moreover, in fields like bioinformatics (e.g. single-cell RNA sequencing) [Zhang and
Zhang, 2018], psychology (e.g. questionnaire data) [Schlomer et al., 2010], and recommendation
systems (e.g. user-item interaction data) [Shani and Gunawardana, 2011, Fan et al., 2024], the data
missing rates are often higher than 30% or even 80%. Indeed, the missing data problems lead to
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

