Coarse-to-Fine Concept Bottleneck Models

Konstantinos P. Panousis1,2,5∗
1

Inria

2

Dino Ienco1,2,3,4

Inrae 4 UMR TETIS
panousis@aueb.gr
diego.marcos@inria.fr
dino.ienco@inrae.fr

University of Montpellier

3

Diego Marcos1,2
5

Department of Statistics, AUEB

Abstract
Deep learning algorithms have recently gained significant attention due to their
impressive performance. However, their high complexity and un-interpretable
mode of operation hinders their confident deployment in real-world safety-critical
tasks. This work targets ante hoc interpretability, and specifically Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs). Our goal is to design a framework that admits a highly
interpretable decision making process with respect to human understandable concepts, on two levels of granularity. To this end, we propose a novel two-level
concept discovery formulation leveraging: (i) recent advances in vision-language
models, and (ii) an innovative formulation for coarse-to-fine concept selection via
data-driven and sparsity-inducing Bayesian arguments. Within this framework,
concept information does not solely rely on the similarity between the whole image
and general unstructured concepts; instead, we introduce the notion of concept
hierarchy to uncover and exploit more granular concept information residing in
patch-specific regions of the image scene. As we experimentally show, the proposed construction not only outperforms recent CBM approaches, but also yields a
principled framework towards interpetability.

1

Introduction

The recent advent of foundation models has greatly popularized the deployment of deep learning
approaches to a variety of tasks and applications. However, in most cases, deep architectures are
treated in an alarming black-box manner: given an input, they produce a particular prediction, with
their mode of operation and complexity preventing any potential investigation of their decisionmaking process. This property not only raises serious questions concerning their deployment in
safety-critical applications, but at the same time, it could actively preclude their adoption in settings
that could otherwise benefit societal advances, e.g., medical applications.
This conspicuous shortcoming of modern architectures has fortunately gained a lot of attention
from the research community in recent years, expediting the design of novel frameworks towards
deep learning interpretability. Within this frame of reference, there exist two core approaches:
ante and post hoc. The latter aims to provide explanations to conventional pretrained models, e.g.,
Network Dissection [1], while the former aims to devise inherently interpretable models. In this
context, Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) constitute one of the best-known approaches [9]; these
comprise: (i) an intermediate Concept Bottleneck Layer (CBL), a layer whose neurons are tied to
human understandable concepts, e.g., textual descriptions, followed by (ii) a linear decision layer.
Thus, the final decision constitutes a linear combination of the CBL’s concepts, leading to a more
interpretable decision mechanism. However, typical CBM approaches are accompanied by four
significant drawbacks: (i) they commonly require hand-annotated concepts, (ii) they usually exhibit
∗

Code available at: https://github.com/konpanousis/Coarse-To-Fine-CBMs

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

