Self-Healing Machine Learning: A Framework for
Autonomous Adaptation in Real-World Environments

Paulius Rauba
University of Cambridge
pr501@cam.ac.uk

Nabeel Seedat
University of Cambridge
ns741@cam.ac.uk

Krzysztof Kacprzyk
University of Cambridge
kk751@cam.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Real-world machine learning systems often encounter model performance degradation due to distributional shifts in the underlying data generating process (DGP).
Existing approaches to addressing shifts, such as concept drift adaptation, are
limited by their reason-agnostic nature. By choosing from a pre-defined set of
actions, such methods implicitly assume that the causes of model degradation are
irrelevant to what actions should be taken, limiting their ability to select appropriate
adaptations. In this paper, we propose an alternative paradigm to overcome these
limitations, called self-healing machine learning (SHML). Contrary to previous
approaches, SHML autonomously diagnoses the reason for degradation and proposes diagnosis-based corrective actions. We formalize SHML as an optimization
problem over a space of adaptation actions to minimize the expected risk under the
shifted DGP. We introduce a theoretical framework for self-healing systems and
build an agentic self-healing solution H-LLM which uses large language models to
perform self-diagnosis by reasoning about the structure underlying the DGP, and
self-adaptation by proposing and evaluating corrective actions. Empirically, we
analyze different components of H-LLM to understand why and when it works,
demonstrating the potential of self-healing ML.

1

Introduction
Accuracy, %

Drop in
Possible adaptation
Consider the following scenario: You are tasked with monStable performance
Performance
strategies
itoring the performance of a black-box model f deployed
in production. After some time, you notice that the predictive performance of f has started to degrade. What would
be the appropriate action a you should take to ensure that
Environment
the model’s performance returns to its prior performance
change
levels: a1 : re-train the model on a subset of the data; a2 :
Time
Past
Future
change the type of the model used; a3 : remove discovered
corrupted values; a4 : add new covariates?
Figure 1: Different adaptation strategies
Clearly, the answer to this question is “it depends”. Differ- a1 , . . . , a4 might result in different perent actions might result in different behavior of the model formance after an environment change.
over time, as illustrated in Fig. 1. If we could pinpoint why the performance of the model has
degraded, it could help us understand what actions are most promising, since we could select an
action which would directly address the root cause of the problem.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

