Who’s Gaming the System? A Causally-Motivated
Approach for Detecting Strategic Adaptation

Trenton Chang1

Lindsay Warrenburg2 Sae-Hwan Park2 Ravi B. Parikh2,3
Maggie Makar1 Jenna Wiens1
1
University of Michigan 2 University of Pennsylvania 3 Emory University
{ctrenton,mmakar,wiensj}@umich.edu
{lindsay.warrenburg,sae-hwan.park}@pennmedicine.upenn.edu
ravi.bharat.parikh@emory.edu

Abstract
In many settings, machine learning models may be used to inform decisions that
impact individuals or entities who interact with the model. Such entities, or agents,
may game model decisions by manipulating their inputs to the model to obtain
better outcomes and maximize some utility. We consider a multi-agent setting
where the goal is to identify the “worst offenders:” agents that are gaming most
aggressively. However, identifying such agents is difficult without being able
to evaluate their utility function. Thus, we introduce a framework featuring a
gaming deterrence parameter, a scalar that quantifies an agent’s (un)willingness
to game. We show that this gaming parameter is only partially identifiable. By
recasting the problem as a causal effect estimation problem where different agents
represent different “treatments,” we prove that a ranking of all agents by their
gaming parameters is identifiable. We present empirical results in a synthetic data
study validating the usage of causal effect estimation for gaming detection and
show in a case study of diagnosis coding behavior in the U.S. that our approach
highlights features associated with gaming.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) models often guide decisions that impact individuals or entities. Attributes
describing an individual or entity are often inputs to such models. In response, such entities may
modify their attributes to obtain a more desirable outcome. But changing one’s attributes may be costly
due to the difficulty of generating supporting evidence, or penalties for fraud. This behavior is called
gaming or strategic adaptation [1]. Strategic adaptation frames gaming as “utility maximization:”
agents change their attributes to maximize a payout, but incur a cost for modifying attributes.
As an illustrative example, we turn to the health insurance industry. In the United States (U.S.),
contracted health insurance companies report their enrollees’ diagnoses to the government, which
calculates a payout based on reported diagnoses via a publicly available model [2]. The payout is
intended to support care of the enrollee in relation to the diagnosis. Companies may attempt to
maximize payouts by reporting extraneous diagnoses, an illegal practice known as “upcoding” [3].
Despite increasing awareness of upcoding [3, 4, 5, 6], upcoding costs U.S. taxpayers over $12B U.S.
dollars annually [7], even with substantial investment in audits ($100.7M U.S. dollars, 2023 [8])
and payout changes to adjust for gaming [9, 10]. Since audits may not scale and often overlook
fraud [11, 12], tools for flagging gaming-prone agents could help target audits. Beyond health
insurance, gaming emerges in responses to credit-scoring algorithms [13, 14] and driver responses to
rider allocation algorithms in ride-sharing apps [15].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

