Easy-to-Hard Generalization:
Scalable Alignment Beyond Human Supervision

Zhiqing Sun1∗, Longhui Yu2∗, Yikang Shen3 , Weiyang Liu4,5 ,
Yiming Yang1†, Sean Welleck1†, Chuang Gan3,6†
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Peking University, 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
4
University of Cambridge, 5 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, 6 UMass Amherst
Code: Edward-Sun/easy-to-hard

Abstract
Current AI alignment methodologies rely on human-provided demonstrations or
judgments, and the learned capabilities of AI systems would be upper-bounded by
human capabilities as a result. This raises a challenging research question: How can
we keep improving the systems when their capabilities have surpassed the levels of
humans? This paper answers this question in the context of tackling hard reasoning
tasks (e.g., level 4-5 MATH problems) via learning from human annotations on
easier tasks (e.g., level 1-3 MATH problems), which we term as easy-to-hard
generalization. Our key insight is that an evaluator (reward model) trained on
supervisions for easier tasks can be effectively used for scoring candidate solutions
of harder tasks and hence facilitating easy-to-hard generalization over different
levels of tasks. Based on this insight, we propose a novel approach to scalable
alignment, which firstly trains the (process-supervised) reward models on easy
problems (e.g., level 1-3), and then uses them to evaluate the performance of policy
models on hard problems. We show that such easy-to-hard generalization from
evaluators can enable easy-to-hard generalizations in generators either through
re-ranking or reinforcement learning (RL). Notably, our process-supervised 7b
RL model and 34b model (reranking@1024) achieves an accuracy of 34.0% and
52.5% on MATH500, respectively, despite only using human supervision on easy
problems. Our approach suggests a promising path toward AI systems that advance
beyond the frontier of human supervision.

1

Introduction

Rapid advancements in large language models (LLMs) indicate that in the near future, highly
sophisticated AI systems could surpass human capabilities in certain areas, significantly enhancing
our capabilities in solving harder problems beyond the levels we can currently solve [47, 49]. Since
the current AI alignment methods mostly rely on either supervised fine-tuning (SFT) with humanprovided demonstrations [59, 78, 14] or reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF)
[97, 68, 50], their capabilities would be inherently limited as humans cannot always provide helpful
demonstrations or supervision on the hard tasks beyond their expertise [64].
In order to build future AI systems for tackling complex challenges, such as advancing scientific
knowledge, it is crucial to develop new approaches for scalable oversight challenge, i.e., to supervise
the AI systems that can potentially outperform humans in most skills [9]. The key question is:
• Can we limit human supervision to easier tasks, yet enable the model to excel in harder tasks?
* Equal contributions as leading authors.
†

Equal contributions as senior authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

