OT4P: Unlocking Effective Orthogonal Group Path for
Permutation Relaxation
Yaming Guo1,4 , Chen Zhu2∗, Hengshu Zhu3,4∗, Tieru Wu1∗
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University
2
School of Management, University of Science and Technology of China
3
Computer Network Information Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
{yamingguo98,zc3930155,zhuhengshu}@gmail.com,wutr@jlu.edu.cn

Abstract
Optimization over permutations is typically an NP-hard problem that arises extensively in ranking, matching, tracking, etc. Birkhoff polytope-based relaxation
methods have made significant advancements, particularly in penalty-free optimization and probabilistic inference. Relaxation onto the orthogonal group offers unique
potential advantages such as a lower representation dimension and preservation
of inner products; however, equally effective approaches remain unexplored. To
bridge the gap, we present a temperature-controlled differentiable transformation
that maps unconstrained vector space to the orthogonal group, where the temperature, in the limit, concentrates orthogonal matrices near permutation matrices.
This transformation naturally implements a parameterization for the relaxation
of permutation matrices, allowing for gradient-based optimization of problems
involving permutations. Additionally, by deriving a re-parameterized gradient
estimator, this transformation also provides efficient stochastic optimization over
the latent permutations. Extensive experiments involving the optimization over
permutation matrices validate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1

Introduction

Permutation refers to the reordering of elements within a finite set, commonly encountered in
problems involving bijections between two equally sized sets [17, 42, 15, 12]. A permutation of n
elements can be denoted by an n × n permutation matrix, which is a square binary matrix that has
exactly one entry of 1 in each row and each column, with all otherP
entries beingP
0. We denote the set
of all n-order permutation matrices as Pn := {P ∈ {0, 1}n×n | i Pi,j = 1, j Pi,j = 1 (∀i, j)}.
This work considers optimization over permutation matrices:
min f (P ).

P ∈Pn

(1)

Due to the combinatorial nature of permutation matrices, the cardinality of the set Pn grows factorially
with the dimension n, typically rendering the problem NP-hard [26]. From a theoretical perspective,
one of the most renowned special cases of Equation (1) is the quadratic assignment problem, which
has attracted extensive research [37, 44]. In practical terms, Equation (1) also arises extensively in
various machine learning tasks, including ranking [20, 75, 67, 68], matching [2], tracking [43], etc.
Previous studies have proposed relaxing permutation matrices into continuous spaces, including the
convex hull of permutation matrices—the Birkhoff polytope [15, 42]—and their embeddings in a
differentiable manifold—the orthogonal group [72, 27]. Recently, relaxation methods involving the
Birkhoff polytope have made significant advancements, particularly in penalty-free optimization
∗

Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

