Differentially Private Stochastic Gradient Descent with
Fixed-Size Minibatches: Tighter RDP Guarantees with
or without Replacement

Jeremiah Birrell
Texas State University
jbirrell@txstate.edu

Reza Ebrahimi
University of South Florida
ebrahimim@usf.edu

Rouzbeh Behnia
University of South Florida
behnia@usf.edu

Jason Pacheco
University of Arizona
pachecoj@cs.arizona.edu

Abstract
Differentially private stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD) has been instrumental
in privately training deep learning models by providing a framework to control and
track the privacy loss incurred during training. At the core of this computation
lies a subsampling method that uses a privacy amplification lemma to enhance
the privacy guarantees provided by the additive noise. Fixed size subsampling is
appealing for its constant memory usage, unlike the variable sized minibatches
in Poisson subsampling. It is also of interest in addressing class imbalance and
federated learning. Current computable guarantees for fixed-size subsampling
are not tight and do not consider both add/remove and replace-one adjacency
relationships. We present a new and holistic Rényi differential privacy (RDP)
accountant for DP-SGD with fixed-size subsampling without replacement (FSwoR)
and with replacement (FSwR). For FSwoR we consider both add/remove and
replace-one adjacency, where we improve on the best current computable bound
by a factor of 4. We also show for the first time that the widely-used Poisson
subsampling and FSwoR with replace-one adjacency have the same privacy to
leading order in the sampling probability. Our work suggests that FSwoR is often
preferable to Poisson subsampling due to constant memory usage. Our FSwR
accountant includes explicit non-asymptotic upper and lower bounds and, to the
authors’ knowledge, is the first such RDP analysis of fixed-size subsampling with
replacement for DP-SGD. We analytically and empirically compare fixed size and
Poisson subsampling, and show that DP-SGD gradients in a fixed-size subsampling
regime exhibit lower variance in practice in addition to memory usage benefits.

1

Introduction

Differentially private stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD) (Abadi et al., 2016) (DP-SGD) has
been one of the cornerstones of privacy preserving deep learning. DP-SGD allows a so-called
moments accountant technique to sequentially track privacy leakage (Abadi et al., 2016). This
technique is subsumed by Rényi differential privacy (RDP) (Mironov, 2017), a relaxation of standard
differential privacy (DP) (Dwork and Rothblum, 2016) that is widely used in private deep learning
and implemented in modern DP libraries such as Opacus (Meta Platforms, 2024) and autodp (Zhu
and Wang, 2019; Zhu et al., 2022). RDP facilitates rigorous analysis when the dataset is accessed by a
sequence of randomized mechanisms as in DP-SGD. While other privacy accountant frameworks such
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

