Long-Tailed Out-of-Distribution Detection via
Normalized Outlier Distribution Adaptation

Wenjun Miao∗
Beihang University, China
miaowenjun@buaa.edu.cn

Guansong Pang†
Singapore Management University, Singapore
gspang@smu.edu.sg

Jin Zheng∗†
Beihang University, China
jinzheng@buaa.edu.cn

Xiao Bai∗
Beihang University, China
baixiao@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
One key challenge in Out-of-Distribution (OOD) detection is the absence of groundtruth OOD samples during training. One principled approach to address this issue
is to use samples from external datasets as outliers (i.e., pseudo OOD samples) to
train OOD detectors. However, we find empirically that the outlier samples often
present a distribution shift compared to the true OOD samples, especially in LongTailed Recognition (LTR) scenarios, where ID classes are heavily imbalanced,
i.e., the true OOD samples exhibit very different probability distribution to the
head and tailed ID classes from the outliers. In this work, we propose a novel
approach, namely normalized outlier distribution adaptation (AdaptOD), to tackle
this distribution shift problem. One of its key components is dynamic outlier
distribution adaptation that effectively adapts a vanilla outlier distribution based on
the outlier samples to the true OOD distribution by utilizing the OOD knowledge
in the predicted OOD samples during inference. Further, to obtain a more reliable
set of predicted OOD samples on long-tailed ID data, a novel dual-normalized
energy loss is introduced in AdaptOD, which leverages class- and sample-wise
normalized energy to enforce a more balanced prediction energy on imbalanced ID
samples. This helps avoid bias toward the head samples and learn a substantially
better vanilla outlier distribution than existing energy losses during training. It also
eliminates the need of manually tuning the sensitive margin hyperparameters in
energy losses. Empirical results on three popular benchmarks for OOD detection
in LTR show the superior performance of AdaptOD over state-of-the-art methods.
Code is available at https://github.com/mala-lab/AdaptOD.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are widely known to be overconfident about what they do not know
when applying them to real-world scenarios in open environments [15,42], such as autonomous driving
[18] and medical diagnosis [21]. Consequently, the high-confidence predictions can misclassify
out-of-distribution (OOD) samples from unknown classes as one of the known or in-distribution
(ID) classes [24, 48]. This issue is further amplified when ID samples exhibit a class-imbalanced
distribution in Long-Tailed Recognition (LTR) scenarios. This is because head samples often receive
similarly high-confident prediction as OOD samples, while the tail samples receive substantially
∗
†

Beihang University and Beihang Jiangxi Research Institute
Corresponding authors: G. Pang and J. Zheng

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

