Advancing Video Anomaly Detection:
A Concise Review and a New Dataset
Liyun Zhu1

Lei Wang1,2,∗ Arjun Raj1 Tom Gedeon3 Chen Chen4
Australian National University, 2 Data61/CSIRO,
3
Curtin University, 4 University of Central Florida
{liyun.zhu, lei.w, u7526852}@anu.edu.au,
tom.gedeon@curtin.edu.au, chen.chen@crcv.ucf.edu
1

Abstract
Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) finds widespread applications in security surveillance, traffic monitoring, industrial monitoring, and healthcare. Despite extensive
research efforts, there remains a lack of concise reviews that provide insightful
guidance for researchers. Such reviews would serve as quick references to grasp
current challenges, research trends, and future directions. In this paper, we present
such a review, examining models and datasets from various perspectives. We emphasize the critical relationship between model and dataset, where the quality and
diversity of datasets profoundly influence model performance, and dataset development adapts to the evolving needs of emerging approaches. Our review identifies
practical issues, including the absence of comprehensive datasets with diverse
scenarios.2 To address this, we introduce a new dataset, Multi-Scenario Anomaly
Detection (MSAD), comprising 14 distinct scenarios captured from various camera
views. Our dataset has diverse motion patterns and challenging variations, such as
different lighting and weather conditions, providing a robust foundation for training
superior models. We conduct an in-depth analysis of recent representative models
using MSAD and highlight its potential in addressing the challenges of detecting
anomalies across diverse and evolving surveillance scenarios. [Project website]

1

Introduction
CUHK Avenue

ShanghaiTech

UCF-Crime

UBnormal

CUVA

MSAD (ours)

Anomaly

Normality

UCSD Ped

Figure 1: A comparison of existing datasets such as UCSD Ped, CUHK Avenue, ShanghaiTech,
UCF-Crime, UBnormal and CUVA vs. our Multi-Scenario Anomaly Detection (MSAD) dataset.
Video Anomaly Detection (VAD) aims to automatically identify unusual occurrences in videos, enabling various applications in surveillance and monitoring [99]. Detecting anomalies is a challenging
∗

Corresponding author.
In this paper, the term ‘scenario’ is used to signify different contexts such as retail, manufacturing, the
education sector, smart cities, and others. In the context of different camera views, existing literature sometimes
uses the term ‘scene’ to refer to the camera scene from a specific camera viewpoint.
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

