Kronecker-Factored Approximate Curvature for
Physics-Informed Neural Networks

Felix Dangel∗
Vector Institute
Toronto
Canada
fdangel@vectorinstitute.ai

Johannes Müller∗
Chair of Mathematics of Information Processing
RWTH Aachen University
Aachen, Germany
mueller@mathc.rwth-aachen.de

Marius Zeinhofer∗
Seminar for Applied Mathematics, ETH Zürich,
Department of Nuclear Medicine, University Hospital Freiburg
marius.zeinhofer@uniklinik-freiburg.de

Abstract
Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) are infamous for being hard to train.
Recently, second-order methods based on natural gradient and Gauss-Newton
methods have shown promising performance, improving the accuracy achieved by
first-order methods by several orders of magnitude. While promising, the proposed
methods only scale to networks with a few thousand parameters due to the high
computational cost to evaluate, store, and invert the curvature matrix. We propose
Kronecker-factored approximate curvature (KFAC) for PINN losses that greatly
reduces the computational cost and allows scaling to much larger networks. Our
approach goes beyond the established KFAC for traditional deep learning problems
as it captures contributions from a PDE’s differential operator that are crucial for
optimization. To establish KFAC for such losses, we use Taylor-mode automatic
differentiation to describe the differential operator’s computation graph as a forward
network with shared weights. This allows us to apply KFAC thanks to a recently
developed general formulation for networks with weight sharing. Empirically, we
find that our KFAC-based optimizers are competitive with expensive second-order
methods on small problems, scale more favorably to higher-dimensional neural
networks and PDEs, and consistently outperform first-order methods and LBFGS.

1

Introduction

Neural network-based approaches to numerically solve partial differential equations (PDEs) are
growing at an unprecedented speed. The idea to train network parameters to minimize the residual of
a PDE traces back to at least Dissanayake & Phan-Thien [15], Lagaris et al. [28], but was only recently
popularized under the name deep Galerkin method (DGM) and Physics-informed neural networks
(PINNs) through the works of Sirignano & Spiliopoulos [52], Raissi et al. [50]. PINNs are arguably
one of the most popular network-based approaches to the numerical solution of PDEs as they are easy
to implement, seamlessly incorporate measurement data, and promise to work well in high dimensions.
Despite their immense popularity, PINNs are notoriously difficult to optimize [57] and fail to provide
satisfactory accuracy when trained with first-order methods, even for simple problems [64, 41].
Recently, second-order methods that use the function space geometry to design preconditioners
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

