RoleAgent: Building, Interacting, and Benchmarking
High-quality Role-Playing Agents from Scripts

Jiaheng Liu*1 , Zehao Ni*3,6 , Haoran Que*2 , Tao Sun2 , Zekun Wang2 , Jian Yang2 ,
Jiakai Wang3 , Hongcheng Guo2 , Zhongyuan Peng3 , Ge Zhang4 , Jiayi Tian2 ,
Xingyuan Bu5 , Ke Xu2 , Wenge Rong2 , Junran Peng†,3,6 , Zhaoxiang Zhang1,6
1
Nanjing University, 2 Beihang University, 3 University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences,
4
University of Waterloo, 5 Beijing Institute of Technology,
6
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Believable agents can empower interactive applications ranging from immersive
environments to rehearsal spaces for interpersonal communication. Recently, generative agents have been proposed to simulate believable human behavior by using
Large Language Models. However, the existing method heavily relies on humanannotated agent profiles (e.g., name, age, personality, relationships with others,
and so on) for the initialization of each agent, which cannot be scaled up easily. In
this paper, we propose a scalable RoleAgent framework to generate high-quality
role-playing agents from raw scripts, which includes building and interacting stages.
Specifically, in the building stage, we use a hierarchical memory system to extract
and summarize the structure and high-level information of each agent for the raw
script. In the interacting stage, we propose a novel innovative mechanism with four
steps to achieve a high-quality interaction between agents. Finally, we introduce a
systematic and comprehensive evaluation benchmark called RoleAgentBench to
evaluate the effectiveness of our RoleAgent, which includes 100 and 28 roles for
20 English and 5 Chinese scripts, respectively. Extensive experimental results on
RoleAgentBench demonstrate the effectiveness of RoleAgent.

1

Introduction

In cognitive models [6] and virtual environments [21, 3], researchers and practitioners have envisioned
computational agents that can serve as believable proxies of human behavior. Such simulations of
human behavior could populate virtual spaces and communities with realistic social phenomena [11,
31], test social science theories [4, 19], and underpin open world non-playable characters [21, 32].
Recently, Large Language Models [5] (LLMs) are used to simulate human behaviors at a single time
point [31, 17], and the Generative Agents [30] in Fig. 1(a) produce agents that can retrieve relevant
events and interactions over a long period, reflect on those memories to draw higher-level inferences,
and reason to create plans and reactions that make sense at the moment and the longer-term arc of the
agent’s behaviors. However, these generative agents heavily rely on human-annotated agent profiles
(e.g., name, age, personality, relationships with others, and so on) for the initialization of each agent,
which influences the scalability to scale up the number of agents a lot. In contrast, in Fig. 1(b), we
propose a more flexible agent framework called RoleAgent to automatically produce high-quality
agents from the existing unprocessed scripts without using any human efforts on the initialization of
* First three authors contributed equally.
†
Corresponding Author: Junran Peng.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

