ACFun: Abstract-Concrete Fusion Facial Stylization

Jiapeng Ji, Kun Wei∗, Ziqi Zhang, Cheng Deng
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University
Xi’an 710071, China
jiapengji777@gmail.com, weikunsk@gmail.com, zqzh9116@gmail.com,
chdeng.xd@gmail.com

Abstract
Owing to advancements in image synthesis techniques, stylization methodologies
for large models have garnered remarkable outcomes. However, when it comes to
processing facial images, the outcomes frequently fall short of expectations. Facial
stylization is predominantly challenged by two significant hurdles. Firstly, obtaining a large dataset of high-quality stylized images is difficult. The scarcity and
diversity of artistic styles make it impractical to compile comprehensive datasets
for each style. Secondly, while many methods can transfer colors and strokes from
style images, these elements alone cannot fully capture a specific style, which
encompasses both concrete and abstract visual elements. Additionally, facial stylization often alters the visual features of the face, making it challenging to balance
these changes with the need to retain facial information. To address these issues, we
propose a novel method called ACFun, which uses only one style image and one
facial image for facial stylization. ACFun comprises an Abstract Fusion Module
(AFun) and a Concrete Fusion Module (CFun), which separately learn the abstract
and concrete features of the style and face. We also design a Face and Style Imagery
Alignment Loss to align the style image with the face image in the latent space.
Finally, we generate styled facial images from noise directly to complete the facial
stylization task. Experiments show that our method outperforms others in facial
stylization, producing highly artistic and visually pleasing results.

1

Introduction

Style transfer is a long-standing research topic that aims to generate a new artistic image from an
arbitrary input pair of natural images and painting images by combining the content of the natural
image and the style of the painting image. With the rapid development of deep learning, optimizationbased methods [1–3] and feed-forward based methods [4, 2, 5, 6] continually emerged. These
methods have made progress in visual quality and computational efficiency. However, these style
transfer techniques can only modify low-level image features such as strokes and colors, and they
are unable to adjust high-level semantics such as shape and content. It’s like using the style image
as a template to paint the content image instead of truly creating a new image based on the style.
Style encompasses not only basic visual elements like strokes and colors but also deeper aspects
such as structure, layout, and shape. These elements combine to create a unique visual language and
form of expression. In the context of facial stylization, the challenges of style transfer are even more
significant. Facial recognition relies on distinct and recognizable individual characteristics, which
means that style transfer must capture the visual features of the style image and seamlessly integrate
them into the target image while preserving facial recognizability.
With the rapid development of diffusion model-based image generation methods, several style transfer
methods [7–9] have emerged, but these methods usually require a set of images belonging to the same
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

