End-to-End Ontology Learning with
Large Language Models

Andy Lo
University of Cambridge
cyal4@cam.ac.uk
Wenda Li
University of Edinburgh
wenda.li@ed.ac.uk

Albert Q. Jiang
University of Cambridge
qj213@cam.ac.uk
Mateja Jamnik
University of Cambridge
mateja.jamnik@cl.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Ontologies are useful for automatic machine processing of domain knowledge
as they represent it in a structured format. Yet, constructing ontologies requires
substantial manual effort. To automate part of this process, large language models
(LLMs) have been applied to solve various subtasks of ontology learning. However,
this partial ontology learning does not capture the interactions between subtasks.
We address this gap by introducing OLLM, a general and scalable method for
building the taxonomic backbone of an ontology from scratch. Rather than focusing on subtasks, like individual relations between entities, we model entire
subcomponents of the target ontology by finetuning an LLM with a custom regulariser that reduces overfitting on high-frequency concepts. We introduce a novel
suite of metrics for evaluating the quality of the generated ontology by measuring
its semantic and structural similarity to the ground truth. In contrast to standard
syntax-based metrics, our metrics use deep learning techniques to define more
robust distance measures between graphs. Both our quantitative and qualitative
results on Wikipedia show that OLLM outperforms subtask composition methods,
producing more semantically accurate ontologies while maintaining structural
integrity. We further demonstrate that our model can be effectively adapted to new
domains, like arXiv, needing only a small number of training examples. Our source
code and datasets are available at https://github.com/andylolu2/ollm.

1

Introduction

An ontology is a formal and structural way of representing domain-specific concepts and their
relations [16]. They can be simple (e.g., Wikipedia categories) consisting of concepts and only a
small number of types of taxonomic relations (e.g., is-a relationships), or they can be complex (e.g.,
Schema.org) consisting of axioms or many types of relations. For example, a simple ontology for
programming languages might contain two concepts “Dynamically-typed language” and “Python”,
and one relation “Dynamically-typed language → Python”, representing the knowledge that Python
is a dynamically-typed language. A more complex ontology might contain axioms too, for example,
“all programming languages are either dynamically or statically typed”. In this paper, we focus on
ontologies with only concepts and taxonomic relations. Compared to typical deep learning models,
which represent knowledge implicitly in its weights, ontologies capture knowledge in a structured
and explicit manner, making them reliable, easy to edit and human-interpretable. Such benefits of
ontologies have led to their wide adoption in practice. For example, Wikipedia categories have been
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

