Error Correction Output Codes for Robust Neural
Networks against Weight-errors:
A Neural Tangent Kernel Point of View

Anlan Yu∗
Lehigh University
any218@lehigh.edu

Shusen Jing∗
University of California, San Francisco
shusen.jing@ucsf.edu

Wujie Wen
North Carolina State University
wwen2@ncsu.edu

Ning Lyu
Lehigh University
nil418@lehigh.edu

Zhiyuan Yan
Lehigh University
zhy6@lehigh.edu

Abstract
Error correcting output code (ECOC) is a classic method that encodes binary
classifiers to tackle the multi-class classification problem in decision trees and
neural networks. Among ECOCs, the one-hot code has become the default choice
in modern deep neural networks (DNNs) due to its simplicity in decision making.
However, it suffers from a significant limitation in its ability to achieve high robust
accuracy, particularly in the presence of weight-errors. While recent studies have
experimentally demonstrated that the non-one-hot ECOCs with multi-bits error
correction ability, could be a better solution, there is a notable absence of theoretical
foundations that can elucidate the relationship between codeword design, weighterror magnitude, and network characteristics, so as to provide robustness guarantees.
This work is positioned to bridge this gap through the lens of neural tangent kernel
(NTK). We have two important theoretical findings: 1) In clean models (without
weight-errors), utilizing one-hot code and non-one-hot ECOC is akin to altering
decoding metrics from l2 distance to Mahalanobis distance. 2) There exists a
threshold, determined by the normalized distance among codewords, the DNN
architecture, and the scale of weight-errors. If the distance between a clean output
(without weight-errors) and its nearest codewords is smaller than this threshold,
then the DNN can make predictions as if it is free of weight-errors. Based on these
findings, we further demonstrate how to practically use them to identify optimal
ECOCs for simple tasks (small number of classes) and complex tasks (large number
of classes), by balancing the code orthogonality (as per finding 1) and code distance
(as per finding 2). Extensive experimental results across four datasets and four
DNN models validate the superior performance of constructed codes, guided by
our findings, compared to existing ECOCs. To our best knowledge, this is the first
work providing theoretical explanations for the effectiveness of ECOCs and offers
associated design guidance for optimal ECOCs specifically tailored to DNNs.

1

Introduction

Inspired by error correction codes in wireless communication and memory system, error correction
output codes (ECOCs) are proposed to improve the generalization performance of multi-class
classification in decision trees by decomposing a complex problem into simpler binary classification
*

These authors contributed equally to this work

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

