Faster Algorithms for User-Level Private Stochastic
Convex Optimization∗

Andrew Lowy
Wisconsin Institute for Discovery
University of Wisconsin-Madison
alowy@wisc.edu

Daogao Liu
Department of Computer Science
University of Washington
liudaogao@gmail.com

Hilal Asi
Apple Machine Learning Research
hilal.asi94@gmail.com

Abstract
We study private stochastic convex optimization (SCO) under user-level differential
privacy (DP) constraints. In this setting, there are n users (e.g., cell phones), each
possessing m data items (e.g., text messages), and we need to protect the privacy
of each user’s entire collection of data items. Existing algorithms for user-level DP
SCO are impractical in many large-scale machine learning scenarios because: (i)
they make restrictive assumptions on the smoothness parameter of the loss function
and require the number of users to grow polynomially with the dimension of the
parameter space; or (ii) they are prohibitively slow, requiring at least (mn)3/2
gradient computations for smooth losses and (mn)3 computations for non-smooth
losses. To address these limitations, we provide novel user-level DP algorithms with
state-of-the-art excess risk and runtime guarantees, without stringent assumptions.
First, we develop a linear-time algorithm with state-of-the-art excess risk (for a
non-trivial linear-time algorithm) under a mild smoothness assumption. Our second
algorithm applies to arbitrary smooth losses and achieves optimal excess risk in
≈ (mn)9/8 gradient computations. Third, for non-smooth loss functions, we obtain
optimal excess risk in n11/8 m5/4 gradient computations. Moreover, our algorithms
do not require the number of users to grow polynomially with the dimension.

1

Introduction

The increasing ubiquity of machine learning (ML) systems in industry and society has sparked serious
concerns about the privacy of the personal data used to train these systems. Much work has shown
that ML models may violate individuals’ privacy by leaking their sensitive training data [SSSS17,
LLL+ 24a, LLL+ 24b]. For instance, large language models (LLMs) are vulnerable to black-box
attacks that extract individual training examples [CTW+ 21]. Differential privacy (DP) [DMNS06]
prevents ML models from leaking their training data.
The classical definition of differential privacy—item-level differential privacy [DMNS06]—is illsuited for many modern applications. Item-level DP ensures that the inclusion or exclusion of any
one training example has a negligible impact on the model’s outputs. If each person (a.k.a. user)
contributes only one piece of training data, then item-level DP provides a strong guarantee that each
user’s data cannot be leaked. However, in many modern ML applications, such as training LLMs on
users’ data in federated learning, each user contributes a large number of training examples [XZ24].
∗

Authors are listed reverse alphabetically.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

