Matching the Statistical Query Lower Bound for
k-Sparse Parity Problems with Sign Stochastic
Gradient Descent
Yiwen Kou∗
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
evankou@cs.ucla.edu

Zixiang Chen∗
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
chenzx19@cs.ucla.edu

Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Sham M. Kakade
Kempner Institute at Harvard University
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
sham@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
The k-sparse parity problem is a classical problem in computational complexity and
algorithmic theory, serving as a key benchmark for understanding computational
classes. In this paper, we solve the k-sparse parity problem with sign stochastic
gradient descent, a variant of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) on two-layer fullyconnected neural networks. We demonstrate that this approach can efficiently
√ solve
the k-sparse parity problem on a d-dimensional hypercube (k ≤ O( d)) with
O(dk−1 ) using 2Θ(k) neurons, matching the established
a sample complexity of e
k
Ω(d ) lower bounds of Statistical Query (SQ) models2 . Our theoretical analysis
begins by constructing a good neural network capable of correctly solving the
k-parity problem. We then demonstrate how a trained neural network with sign
SGD can effectively approximate this good network, solving the k-parity problem
with small statistical errors. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first result that
matches the SQ lower bound for solving k-sparse parity problem using gradientbased methods.

1

Introduction

The k-parity problem, defined on a binary sequence of length d, is a fundamental problem in the
field of computational complexity and algorithmic theory. This problem involves finding a subset
of cardinality k by assessing if the occurrence of 1’s in this subset is even or odd. The complexity
of the problem escalates as the parameter k increases. Its significance, while evidently practical, is
rooted in its theoretical implications; it serves as a vital benchmark in the study of computational
complexity classes and has profound implications for our understanding of P versus NP (Vardy, 1997;
Downey et al., 1999; Dumer et al., 2003) and other cornerstone questions in computational theory
(Blum, 2005; Klivans et al., 2006). Furthermore, the k-parity problem’s complexity underpins many
theoretical models in error detection and information theory (Dutta et al., 2008), and is instrumental
∗

Equal contribution
e k−1 ) sample complexity implies O(d
e k ) query complexity, because each sample corresponds to d
The O(d
scalar-valued queries.
2

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

