Multi-Instance Partial-Label Learning with
Margin Adjustment

Wei Tang1,2 , Yin-Fang Yang1,2 , Zhaofei Wang1,2 , Weijia Zhang3 , Min-Ling Zhang1,2∗
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
2
Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration (Southeast University),
Ministry of Education, China
3
School of Information and Physical Sciences, The University of Newcastle,
Callaghan, NSW 2308, Australia
tangw@seu.edu.cn, yangyf22@gmail.com, wangzf@seu.edu.cn,
weijia.zhang@newcastle.edu.au, zhangml@seu.edu.cn

1

Abstract
Multi-instance partial-label learning (MIPL) is an emerging learning framework
where each training sample is represented as a multi-instance bag associated with
a candidate label set. Existing MIPL algorithms often overlook the margins for
attention scores and predicted probabilities, leading to suboptimal generalization
performance. A critical issue with these algorithms is that the highest prediction
probability of the classifier may appear on a non-candidate label. In this paper, we
propose an algorithm named M IPL M A, i.e., Multi-Instance Partial-Label learning with Margin Adjustment, which adjusts the margins for attention scores and
predicted probabilities. We introduce a margin-aware attention mechanism to dynamically adjust the margins for attention scores and propose a margin distribution
loss to constrain the margins between the predicted probabilities on candidate and
non-candidate label sets. Experimental results demonstrate the superior performance of M IPL M A over existing MIPL algorithms, as well as other well-established
multi-instance learning algorithms and partial-label learning algorithms.

1

Introduction

Weakly supervised learning is a powerful strategy for constructing predictive models with limited supervision. Based on the quality and quantity of supervision, Zhou [1] systematically categorizes weak
supervision into three types: inexact, inaccurate, and incomplete supervision. Inexact supervision
indicates a coarse alignment between instances and labels, which is a common and challenging issue
in real-world tasks. Multi-instance learning (MIL) [2–8] and partial-label learning (PLL) [9–15] are
two predominant weekly supervised learning frameworks for learning from samples with inexact
supervision in the instance space and the label space, respectively.
Recently, multi-instance partial-label learning (MIPL) [16] has been introduced to handle dual
inexact supervision, where inexact supervision exists in both the instance space and label space.
Therefore, MIPL can be seen as a generalized framework of MIL and PLL. In MIPL, a training
sample is represented as a multi-instance bag associated with a candidate label set. The candidate
label set comprises one true label and the remaining are false positives. The multi-instance bag
contains at least one instance corresponding to the true label and does not contain any instance
associated with the false positives. Additionally, positive instances refer to the instances that belong
to the true label, while negative instances represent the remaining instances in the bag that are not
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

