CoMERA: Computing- and Memory-Efficient
Training via Rank-Adaptive Tensor Optimization

Zi Yang ∗
University at Albany, SUNY
zyang8@albany.edu
Samridhi Choudhary
Amazon Alexa AI
samridhc@amazon.com
Siegfried Kunzmann
Amazon Alexa AI
kunzman@amazon.com

Ziyue Liu
University of California at Santa Barbara
ziyueliu@ucsb.edu
Xinfeng Xie
Meta
xinfeng@meta.com

Cao Gao
Meta
caogao@meta.com

Zheng Zhang
University of California at Santa Barbara
zhengzhang@ece.ucsb.edu

Abstract
Training large AI models such as LLMs and DLRMs costs massive GPUs and
computing time. The high training cost has become only affordable to big tech
companies, meanwhile also causing increasing concerns about the environmental impact. This paper presents CoMERA, a Computing- and Memory-Efficient
training method via Rank-Adaptive tensor optimization. CoMERA achieves rankadaptive tensor-compressed (pre)-training via a multi-objective optimization formulation and improves the training to provide both a high compression ratio and
excellent accuracy in the training process. Our optimized numerical computation
(e.g., optimized tensorized embedding and tensor-network contractions) and GPU
implementation eliminate part of the run-time overhead in the tensorized training on
GPU. This leads to, for the first time, 2 − 3× speedup per training epoch compared
with standard training. CoMERA also outperforms the recent GaLore in terms of
both memory and computing efficiency. Specifically, CoMERA is 2× faster per
training epoch and 9× more memory-efficient than GaLore on a tested six-encoder
transformer with single-batch training. Our method also shows ∼ 2× speedup than
standard pre-training on a BERT-like code-generation LLM while achieving 4.23×
compression ratio in pre-training. With further HPC optimization, CoMERA may
reduce the pre-training cost of many other LLMs. An implementation of CoMERA
is available at https://github.com/ziyangjoy/CoMERA.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have gained success in solving numerous engineering problems. These
approaches usually use a huge number of variables to parametrize a network, and require massive
hardware resources to train the model. For instance, the Deep Learning Recommendation Model
(DLRM) released by Meta (which is smaller than the practical product) [32] has 4.2 billion parameters;
GPT-3 [4] has 175 billion parameters. OpenAI shows that the computing power required for key AI
tasks has doubled every 3.4 months [1] since 2012. Training a large language model like ChatGPT
and LLaMA from scratch often takes several weeks or months on thousands of GPUs [3, 2].
∗

The majority of this work was done when the first author was a postdoc at UC Santa Barbara.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

