DeltaDEQ: Exploiting Heterogeneous Convergence for
Accelerating Deep Equilibrium Iterations

Zuowen Wang Longbiao Cheng Pehuen Moure Niklas Hahn Shih-Chii Liu
Institute of Neuroinformatics, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich
{zuowen, shih}@ini.uzh.ch

Abstract
Implicit neural networks including deep equilibrium models have achieved superior
task performance with better parameter efficiency in various applications. However,
it is often at the expense of higher computation costs during inference. In this
work, we identify a phenomenon named heterogeneous convergence that exists
in deep equilibrium models and other iterative methods. We observe much faster
convergence of state activations in certain dimensions therefore indicating the
dimensionality of the underlying dynamics of the forward pass is much lower than
the defined dimension of the states. We thereby propose to exploit heterogeneous
convergence by storing past linear operation results (e.g., fully connected and
convolutional layers) and only propagating the state activation when its change
exceeds a threshold. Thus, for the already converged dimensions, the computations
can be skipped. We verified our findings and reached 84% FLOPs reduction on
the implicit neural representation task, 73% on the Sintel and 76% on the KITTI
datasets for the optical flow estimation task while keeping comparable task accuracy
with the models that perform the full update.

1

Introduction

Implicit neural networks [2, 13] have gained much attention in recent years. They are capable of
matching or surpassing state-of-the-art performance in domains such as computer vision [3, 4, 17, 32,
41, 46], language modeling [2] and audio processing [32, 35]. Implicit networks typically model these
tasks with certain dynamics represented by the evolution of the intermediate hidden states and are
often described as fixed-point equations or differential equations. The implicit models, represented
by the deep equilibrium (DEQ) model family, often achieve better parameter efficiency for reaching a
similar level of task accuracy as their regular neural network counterparts. Furthermore, the implicit
function theorem assists implicit models in avoiding the need for direct differentiation through
numerous forward steps, like those required in back-propagation through time, which demands
substantial memory for training.
Despite their compact architectural design with fewer parameters, implicit models frequently require
extensive computations during inference to better approximate the fixed point. The fixed point is
typically computed with fixed-point iteration methods [4] or other root-solving techniques such as
Broyden [7] or Anderson [54] methods, all of which require multiple forward passes of the model.
The substantial computational cost at inference time significantly hinders the deployment of implicit
models. Various strategies have been developed to reduce this computational burden, including
fixed-point reuse [4, 41] to accelerate the convergence of the forward pass for temporally correlated
inputs like consecutive video frames, and global early stopping criteria [4] that halt the forward pass
once the absolute or relative change of the hidden states norm is below a threshold. However, these
approaches uniformly control the termination of updates across all dimensions of the hidden states
and they fail to consider the internal structure of the dynamics.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

