Simple and Fast Distillation of Diffusion Models

Zhenyu Zhou1,2 Defang Chen3† Can Wang1,2 Chun Chen1,2 Siwei Lyu3
1
Zhejiang University, State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security
2
Hangzhou High-Tech Zone (Binjiang) Institute of Blockchain and Data Security
3
University at Buffalo, State University of New York
{zhyzhou, defchern}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion-based generative models have demonstrated their powerful performance
across various tasks, but this comes at a cost of the slow sampling speed. To achieve
both efficient and high-quality synthesis, various distillation-based accelerated sampling methods have been developed recently. However, they generally require
time-consuming fine tuning with elaborate designs to achieve satisfactory performance in a specific number of function evaluation (NFE), making them difficult to
employ in practice. To address this issue, we propose Simple and Fast Distillation
(SFD) of diffusion models, which simplifies the paradigm used in existing methods
and largely shortens their fine-tuning time up to 1000×. We begin with a vanilla
distillation-based sampling method and boost its performance to state of the art by
identifying and addressing several small yet vital factors affecting the synthesis
efficiency and quality. Our method can also achieve sampling with variable NFEs
using a single distilled model. Extensive experiments demonstrate that SFD strikes
a good balance between the sample quality and fine-tuning costs in few-step image
generation task. For example, SFD achieves 4.53 FID (NFE=2) on CIFAR-10
with only 0.64 hours of fine-tuning on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU. Our code is
available at https://github.com/zju-pi/diff-sampler.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have attracted increasing interest in recent years due to their remarkable generative abilities across various domains, including
image [41, 44, 42], video [14, 2], audio [20, 24],
and molecular structures [54]. These models
progressively transform a noisy input into a realistic output through iterative denoising steps.
Diffusion models are preferred over other generative models [9, 19] for their high-quality synthesis, stable training and a strong theoretical
foundation rooted in stochastic differential equations [51]. However, achieving high-quality synthesis with diffusion models typically requires
hundreds to thousands of sampling steps, resulting in slow sampling speeds and a significant
challenge for practical applications.
†

Figure 1: Comparison of acceleration methods on diffusion models. For better visualization, the time axis is
shifted by adding one hour to the actual time required.
Our method achieves good performance with a small
fine-tuning cost. Note that it takes about 200 hours to
train a diffusion model from scratch in this setting.

Corresponding author. Work partially done during Defang’s time at Zhejiang University.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

