Feature-Level Adversarial Attacks and Ranking
Disruption for Visible-Infrared Person
Re-identification
Xi Yang1 , Huanling liu1 , De Cheng1∗, Nannan Wang1 , Xinbo Gao2
Xidian University, 2 Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications
yangx@xidian.edu.cn,huanlingliu@stu.xidian.edu.cn, dcheng@xidian.edu.cn
nnwang@xidian.edu.cn, gaoxb@cqupt.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Visible-infrared person re-identification (VIReID) is widely used in fields such
as video surveillance and intelligent transportation, imposing higher demands on
model security. In practice, the adversarial attacks based on VIReID aim to disrupt
output ranking and quantify the security risks of models. Although numerous
studies have been emerged on adversarial attacks and defenses in fields such
as face recognition, person re-identification, and pedestrian detection, there is
currently a lack of research on the security of VIReID systems. To this end, we
propose to explore the vulnerabilities of VIReID systems and prevent potential
serious losses due to insecurity. Compared to research on single-modality ReID,
adversarial feature alignment and modality differences need to be particularly
emphasized. Thus, we advocate for feature-level adversarial attacks to disrupt the
output rankings of VIReID systems. To obtain adversarial features, we introduce
Universal Adversarial Perturbations (UAP) to simulate common disturbances in
real-world environments. Additionally, we employ a Frequency-Spatial Attention
Module (FSAM), integrating frequency information extraction and spatial focusing
mechanisms, and further emphasize important regional features from different
domains on the shared features. This ensures that adversarial features maintain
consistency within the feature space. Finally, we employ an Auxiliary Quadruple
Adversarial Loss to amplify the differences between modalities, thereby improving
the distinction and recognition of features between visible and infrared images,
which cause the system to output incorrect rankings. Extensive experiments on two
VIReID benchmarks (i.e., SYSU-MM01, RegDB) and different systems validate
the effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

VIReID is widely applied in key tasks such as security monitoring[1–3]. Suppose the law enforcement
agency of a city uses ReID system to monitor public places for tracking criminal suspects. Internal
personnel may attempt to deceive the system by modifying the images [4–6]of criminal suspects due
to improper behavior or other reasons, in order to protect specific individuals. According to Figure1,
infrared adversarial samples will erroneously match visible samples, while visible adversarial samples
will also erroneously match infrared samples. The credibility and stability of VIReID are crucial in
such special application scenarios. However, there is currently insufficient theoretical research on the
security of VIReID. Therefore, this paper explores how to obtain better adversarial features and how
to address the task characteristics of VIReID modality differences and re-ranking.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

