Learning on Large Graphs
using Intersecting Communities

Ben Finkelshtein
University of Oxford
Michael Bronstein
University of Oxford / AITHYRA

İsmail İlkan Ceylan
University of Oxford
Ron Levie
Technion -– Israel Institute of Technology

Abstract
Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs) are a staple of graph machine learning.
MPNNs iteratively update each node’s representation in an input graph by aggregating messages from the node’s neighbors, which necessitates a memory complexity
of the order of the number of graph edges. This complexity might quickly become
prohibitive for large graphs provided they are not very sparse. In this paper, we
propose a novel approach to alleviate this problem by approximating the input
graph as an intersecting community graph (ICG) – a combination of intersecting
cliques. The key insight is that the number of communities required to approximate
a graph does not depend on the graph size. We develop a new constructive version
of the Weak Graph Regularity Lemma to efficiently construct an approximating
ICG for any input graph. We then devise an efficient graph learning algorithm
operating directly on ICG in linear memory and time with respect to the number of
nodes (rather than edges). This offers a new and fundamentally different pipeline
for learning on very large non-sparse graphs, whose applicability is demonstrated
empirically on node classification tasks and spatio-temporal data processing.

1

Introduction

The vast majority of graph neural networks (GNNs) learn representations of graphs based on the
message passing paradigm [22], where every node representation is synchronously updated based on
an aggregate of messages flowing from its neighbors. This mode of operation hence assumes that the
set of all graph edges are loaded in the memory, which leads to a memory complexity bottleneck.
Specifically, considering a graph with N nodes and E edges, message-passing leads to a memory
complexity that is linear in the number of edges, which quickly becomes prohibitive for large graphs
especially when E ≫ N . This limitation motivated a body of work with the ultimate goal of making
the graph machine learning pipeline amenable to large graphs [24, 12, 13, 7, 65].
In this work, we take a drastically different approach to alleviate this problem and design a novel
graph machine learning pipeline for learning over large graphs with memory complexity linear in the
number of nodes. At the heart of our approach lies a graph approximation result which informally
states the following: every undirected graph with node features can be represented by a linear
combination of intersecting communities (i.e., cliques) such that the number of communities required
to achieve a certain approximation error is independent of the graph size for dense graphs. Intuitively,
this results allows us to utilize an “approximating graph”, which we call intersecting community
graph (ICG), for learning over large graphs. Based on this insight — radically departing from the
standard message-passing paradigm — we propose a new class of neural networks acting on the ICG
and on the set of nodes from the original input graph, which leads to an algorithm with memory and
runtime complexity that is linear in the number nodes.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

