Achieving Linear Convergence with Parameter-Free
Algorithms in Decentralized Optimization

Ilya Kuruzov
Innopolis University
kuruzov.ia@phystech.edu.

Gesualdo Scutari
Purdue University
gscutari@purdue.edu.

Alexander Gasnikov
Innopolis University
gasnikov@yandex.ru

Abstract
This paper addresses the minimization of the sum of strongly convex, smooth
functions over a network of agents without a centralized server. Existing decentralized algorithms require knowledge of functions and network parameters, such
as the Lipschitz constant of the global gradient and/or network connectivity, for
hyperparameter tuning. Agents usually cannot access this information, leading
to conservative selections and slow convergence or divergence. This paper introduces a decentralized algorithm that eliminates the need for specific parameter
tuning. Our approach employs an operator splitting technique with a novel variable
metric, enabling a local backtracking line-search to adaptively select the stepsize
without global information or extensive communications. This results in favorable
convergence guarantees and dependence on optimization and network parameters
compared to existing nonadaptive methods. Notably, our method is the first adaptive decentralized algorithm that achieves linear convergence for strongly convex,
smooth objectives. Preliminary numerical experiments support our theoretical
findings, demonstrating superior performance in convergence speed and scalability.

1

Introduction

We study optimization across a network of m > 1 agents, modeled as an undirected, static graph,
possibly with no centralized server. The agents cooperatively solve the following problem:
minn

x∈R

m
X

fi (x),

(P)

i=1

where fi : Rn → R is the loss function of agent i, assumed to be strongly convex and smooth (i.e.,
with gradient being Lipschitz continuous), and accessible only to agent i.
This formulation applies to various fields, particularly emphasizing decentralized machine learning
problems where datasets are produced and collected at different locations. Traditionally, statistical
and computational methods in this domain have relied on a centralized paradigm, aggregating
computational resources at a single, central location. However, this approach is increasingly unsuitable
for modern applications with many machines, leading to server congestion, inefficient communication,
and high energy consumption [27, 23]. This has motivated the surge of learning algorithms that target
decentralized networks with no servers, a.k.a. mesh networks, which is the setting of this paper.
Decentralized convex optimization has a long history, with numerous algorithms applicable to
Problem (P); recent tutorials include [34, 41, 6, 33, 45]. Lack of adaptivity: These methods share
the hurdle of relying sensibly on the tuning of hyperparameters, such as the stepsize (a.k.a. learning
rate), for both theoretical and practical convergence. Existing theories ensure convergence under
generally conservative bounds on the stepsize, which depend on parameters like the Lipschitz constant
of the global gradient, the spectral gap of the graph adjacency matrix, or other topological properties.
Acquiring such information is challenging in practice, due to physical or privacy limitations and
computational/communication constraints. This often leads to manual tuning, which is not only
tedious but also results in less predictable, problem-dependent, and non-reproducible performance.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

