M ICROA DAM: Accurate Adaptive Optimization with
Low Space Overhead and Provable Convergence
Ionut-Vlad Modoranu1∗
Mher Safaryan1
Grigory Malinovsky2
1
Thomas Robert
Peter Richtárik2
Dan Alistarh1

Eldar Kurtic1

1

2

Institute of Science and Technology Austria (ISTA)
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)

Abstract
We propose a new variant of the Adam optimizer [Kingma and Ba, 2014] called
M ICROA DAM that specifically minimizes memory overheads, while maintaining
theoretical convergence guarantees. We achieve this by compressing the gradient
information before it is fed into the optimizer state, thereby reducing its memory
footprint significantly. We control the resulting compression error via a novel
instance of the classical error feedback mechanism from distributed optimization [Seide et al., 2014, Alistarh et al., 2018, Karimireddy et al., 2019] in which
the error correction information is itself compressed to allow for practical memory
gains. We prove that the resulting approach maintains theoretical convergence
guarantees competitive to those of AMSGrad, while providing good practical performance. Specifically, we show that M ICROA DAM can be implemented efficiently
on GPUs: on both million-scale (BERT) and billion-scale (LLaMA) models, M I CROA DAM provides practical convergence competitive to that of the uncompressed
Adam baseline, with lower memory usage and similar running time. Our code is
available at https://github.com/IST-DASLab/MicroAdam.

1

Introduction

The Adam [Kingma and Ba, 2014] adaptive optimizer and its variants [Reddi et al., 2019, Loshchilov
and Hutter, 2019] has emerged as a dominant choice for training deep neural networks (DNNs),
especially in the case of large language models (LLMs) with billions of parameters. Yet, its versatility
comes with the drawback of substantial memory overheads: relative to naive SGD-based optimization,
the Adam optimizer states doubles the memory overhead, as it requires storing two additional parameters for each variable. For large-scale models, these memory demands pose a significant challenge. In
turn, this has spurred research into memory-efficient adaptive optimizers, such as AdaFactor [Shazeer
and Stern, 2018], 8-bit Adam [Dettmers et al., 2021], or the very recent GaLore [Zhao et al., 2024]
low-rank projection approach. Despite their popularity and practical utility, the above methods lack
rigorous convergence guarantees, and often trade off memory reductions with decreased convergence
in practice. This raises the question of whether it is possible to design adaptive optimizers that are
not only memory-efficient, but also maintain strong theoretical and practical performance metrics.
Contributions. In this paper, we address this gap by introducing M ICROA DAM, an adaptive optimizer
which guarantees low memory usage but also ensures provable convergence. We develop our approach
to improve the performance of finetuning LLMs and mainly focus on the research question “are all
gradient entries important for optimization?” To answer this question, we start from the idea that
we can allow the (lossy) sparse projection of gradient information before it enters the optimizer
states; crucially, different from prior work, we ensure convergence by correcting for the inherent error
∗

Correspondence to ionut-vlad.modoranu@ista.ac.at

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

