An Information Theoretic Perspective on
Conformal Prediction
Fabio Valerio Massoli Christos Louizos† Arash Behboodi†
Qualcomm AI Research∗
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
{acorreia, fmassoli, clouizos, behboodi}@qti.qualcomm.com

Alvaro H.C. Correia

Abstract
Conformal Prediction (CP) is a distribution-free uncertainty estimation framework
that constructs prediction sets guaranteed to contain the true answer with a userspecified probability. Intuitively, the size of the prediction set encodes a general
notion of uncertainty, with larger sets associated with higher degrees of uncertainty.
In this work, we leverage information theory to connect conformal prediction to
other notions of uncertainty. More precisely, we prove three different ways to upper
bound the intrinsic uncertainty, as described by the conditional entropy of the target
variable given the inputs, by combining CP with information theoretical inequalities.
Moreover, we demonstrate two direct and useful applications of such connection
between conformal prediction and information theory: (i) more principled and
effective conformal training objectives that generalize previous approaches and
enable end-to-end training of machine learning models from scratch, and (ii) a
natural mechanism to incorporate side information into conformal prediction. We
empirically validate both applications in centralized and federated learning settings,
showing our theoretical results translate to lower inefficiency (average prediction
set size) for popular CP methods.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) models have rapidly grown in popularity and reach, having now found use
in many safety-critical domains like healthcare [1] and autonomous driving [28]. In these areas,
predictions must be accompanied by reliable measures of uncertainty to ensure safe decision-making.
However, most ML models are designed and trained to produce only point estimates, which capture
only crude notions of uncertainty with no statistical guarantees. Conformal prediction (CP) [64], in
particular its split variant (SCP) [47], has recently gained in popularity as a principled and scalable
solution to equip any, potentially black-box, model with proper uncertainty estimates in the form of
prediction sets; in loose terms, larger sets are associated with higher degrees of uncertainty.
In this work, we take a closer look at conformal prediction through the lens of information theory (IT),
establishing a connection between conformal prediction and the underlying intrinsic uncertainty of
the data-generating process, as captured by the conditional entropy H(Y |X) = −EPXY [log PY |X ]
of the target variable Y given the inputs X. We prove conformal prediction can be used to bound
H(Y |X) from above in three different ways: one derived from the data processing inequality, which
we dub DPI bound, and two coming from a variation of Fano’s inequality [19], a model agnostic one,
which we call (simple) Fano bound, and another informed by the predictive model itself, to which
we refer as model-based Fano bound. To the best of our knowledge, these bounds represent the first
bridge connecting information theory and conformal prediction, which we hope will bring new tools
to both fields. We already present two such tools in this paper: (i) we show our upper bounds serve as
∗

Qualcomm AI Research, Qualcomm Technologies Netherlands B.V (Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative
of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.). † Equal contribution.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

