WikiDBs: A Large-Scale Corpus of
Relational Databases from Wikidata
Liane Vogel,1 Jan-Micha Bodensohn,2,1 Carsten Binnig,1,2
1
Technical University of Darmstadt, Germany
2
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), Darmstadt, Germany

Abstract
Deep learning on tabular data, and particularly tabular representation learning,
has recently gained growing interest. However, representation learning for relational databases with multiple tables is still an underexplored area, which may
be attributed to the lack of openly available resources. To support the development of foundation models for tabular data and relational databases, we introduce
WikiDBs, a novel open-source corpus of 100,000 relational databases. Each
database consists of multiple tables connected by foreign keys. The corpus is based
on Wikidata and aims to follow certain characteristics of real-world databases. In
this paper, we describe the dataset and our method for creating it. By making our
code publicly available, we enable others to create tailored versions of the dataset,
for example, by creating databases in different languages. Finally, we conduct a
set of initial experiments to showcase how WikiDBs can be used to train for data
engineering tasks, such as missing value imputation and column type annotation.

1

Introduction

The importance of representation learning on relational data. Foundation models for text,
images, and videos support users in many every-day tasks, reducing the manual effort required for
end tasks such as machine translation, image generation, and automated software development [13].
While research on learning such foundation models is currently dominated by text and images,
considerable progress has recently been made on other modalities such as tabular data [14, 6]. This is
important since a non-negligible amount of data is expressed in tabular form, in particular enterprise
data [11]. Pre-trained foundation models that are specialized to handle relational data could reduce
the manual effort required for many data-heavy tasks such as data integration and data cleaning [47].
Over the last years, several deep learning-based approaches have been developed to solve data
engineering tasks like entity matching [38] and missing value imputation [35] on individual tables.
These efforts have been supported by various large-scale table corpora, such as GitTables [23] and
WikiTables [8], which provide the training data required to train these deep learning models.
Lack of large corpora for relational databases. Considerable amounts of tabular data, especially
in enterprise contexts, are not stored in individual self-contained tables, but rather in relational
databases consisting of multiple tables that are closely connected by foreign key relationships. For
these types of relational databases, however, there is a lack of large-scale openly available training
data as well as deep neural network architectures that can process multiple related tables. Collecting
large corpora of such relational data is not trivial. Due to the sensitivity of the data stored in
relational databases, real-world enterprise databases are typically highly confidential and therefore
not accessible to the scientific community, resulting in a lack of openly available corpora.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

