Accelerating Matroid Optimization through Fast
Imprecise Oracles

Franziska Eberle
Technical University of Berlin
Germany
f.eberle@tu-berlin.de
Zhenwei Liu
University of Bremen
Germany
zhenwei@uni-bremen.de

Felix Hommelsheim
University of Bremen
Germany
fhommels@uni-bremen.de
Nicole Megow
University of Bremen
Germany
nmegow@uni-bremen.de

Alexander Lindermayr
University of Bremen
Germany
linderal@uni-bremen.de

Jens Schlöter
Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica
The Netherlands
jens.schloter@cwi.nl

Abstract
Querying complex models for precise information (e.g. trafﬁc models, database
systems, large ML models) often entails intense computations and results in long
response times. Thus, weaker models that give imprecise results quickly can be advantageous, provided inaccuracies can be resolved using few queries to a stronger
model. In the fundamental problem of computing a maximum-weight basis of a
matroid, a well-known generalization of many combinatorial optimization problems, algorithms have access to a clean oracle to query matroid information. We
additionally equip algorithms with a fast but dirty oracle. We design and analyze practical algorithms that only use few clean queries w.r.t. the quality of the
dirty oracle, while maintaining robustness against arbitrarily poor dirty oracles, approaching the performance of classic algorithms for the given problem. Notably,
we prove that our algorithms are, in many respects, best-possible. Further, we
outline extensions to other matroid oracle types, non-free dirty oracles and other
matroid problems.

1

Introduction

We study the power of a two-oracle model [1, 4, 5, 34, 36] for fundamental matroid optimization
problems, which generalize many problems in combinatorial optimization.
The two-oracle model is an emerging technique for augmenting a problem where algorithms access
information via oracles. The idea is to abstract from subroutines, such as Neuronal Network (NN)
inference or graph algorithms, which compute required information from underlying models. Already today the size of such models can be arbitrarily large, and they are expected to grow further
in the near future. Thus, computing precise results for each oracle query can be (too) expensive. To
mitigate these costs, we assume to have access to a second oracle that is less expensive but gives
possibly imprecise answers. Such an oracle can be an efﬁcient heuristic or a smaller NN. The goal is
to leverage this fast dirty oracle to obtain enough information in order to query the expensive clean
oracle as little as possible. This model has been successfully applied to, e.g., clustering [4, 34],
sorting [1], priority queues [5], or data labeling [36].
We study this model in the context of matroid optimization. Matroids play a central and unifying
role in combinatorial optimization as numerous classic problems can be framed as matroid basis
problems, e.g., problems in resource allocation and network design. A matroid M = (E, I) is a
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

