On the Necessity of Collaboration for
Online Model Selection with Decentralized Data
Junfan Li1
Zheshun Wu1
Zenglin Xu2,3,4 ∗
Irwin King5
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
2
Pengcheng Lab
3
Artificial Intelligence Innovation and Incubation (AI3 ) Institute, Fudan University
4
Shanghai Academy of AI for Science
5
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
lijunfan@hit.edu.cn
wuzhsh23@gmail.com
zenglin@gmail.com
king@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
1

Abstract
We consider online model selection with decentralized data over M clients, and
study the necessity of collaboration among clients. Previous work proposed various
federated algorithms without demonstrating their necessity, while we answer the
question from a novel perspective of computational constraints. We prove lower
bounds on the regret, and propose a federated algorithm and analyze the upper
bound. Our results show (i) collaboration is unnecessary in the absence of computational constraints on clients; (ii) collaboration is necessary if the computational
cost on each client is limited to o(K), where K is the number of candidate hypothesis spaces. We clarify the unnecessary nature of collaboration in previous
federated algorithms for distributed online multi-kernel learning, and improve the
regret bounds at a smaller computational and communication cost. Our algorithm
relies on three new techniques including an improved Bernstein’s inequality for
martingale, a federated online mirror descent framework, and decoupling model
selection and prediction, which might be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Model selection which is a fundamental problem for offline machine learning focuses on how to select
a suitable hypothesis space for a machine learning algorithm [Mitchell, 1997, Bartlett et al., 2002,
Mohri et al., 2018]. Model selection for online machine learning is called online model selection
(OMS), such as model selection for online supervised learning [Foster et al., 2017, Zhang and Liao,
2018, Zhang et al., 2021, Li and Liao, 2022], model selection for online active learning [Karimi
et al., 2021], and model selection for contextual bandits [Foster et al., 2019, Pacchiano et al., 2020,
Ghosh and Chowdhury, 2022]. We consider model selection for online supervised learning. Let
F = {F1 , . . . , FK } contain K hypothesis spaces and `(·, ·) be a loss function. For a sequence of
examples {(xt , yt )}t=1,...,T , we aim to adapt to the case that the optimal hypothesis space Fi∗ ∈ F
is given by an oracle and we run an online learning algorithm in Fi∗ . OMS can be defined by
minimizing the regret, i.e.,
!
T
T
X
X
min
`(ft (xt ), yt ) − min
`(f (xt ), yt ) ,
f1 ,...,fT

∗

t=1

f ∈Fi∗

t=1

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

