HyperLogic: Enhancing Diversity and Accuracy in
Rule Learning with HyperNets

Yang Yang1 , Wendi Ren1 , Shuang Li1∗
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
{yangyang8, wendiren}@link.cuhk.edu.cn, lishuang@cuhk.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Exploring the integration of if-then logic rules within neural network architectures
presents an intriguing area. This integration seamlessly transforms the rule learning
task into neural network training using backpropagation and stochastic gradient
descent. From a well-trained sparse and shallow neural network, one can interpret
each layer and neuron through the language of logic rules, and a global explanatory
rule set can be directly extracted. However, ensuring interpretability may impose
constraints on the flexibility, depth, and width of neural networks. In this paper,
we propose HyperLogic: a flexible approach leveraging hypernetworks to generate weights of the main network. HyperLogic can be combined with existing
differentiable rule learning methods to generate diverse rule sets, each capable
of capturing heterogeneous patterns in data. This provides a simple yet effective
method to increase model flexibility and preserve interpretability. We theoretically
analyze the benefits of the HyperLogic by examining the approximation error and
generalization capabilities under two types of regularization terms: sparsity and
diversity regularization. Experiments on real data demonstrate that our method can
learn more diverse, accurate, and concise rules. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/YangYang-624/HyperLogic.

1

Introduction

Despite the significant impact of deep learning on society, its lack of interpretability limits its use in
critical areas that demand high transparency. For instance, in high-risk domains such as healthcare,
finance, and law, the decision-making process of models needs to be fully open and explainable to
users and relevant regulatory authorities to gain necessary trust and legitimacy [1, 2, 3]. Compared to
the “black box” models, which may perform well but are uninterpretable, people prefer intrinsically
interpretable model for decision support [4, 5], such as a set of concise IF-THEN rules.
Traditional rule learning methods, which are based on statistical or heuristic approaches, have
been extensively explored but often struggle to simultaneously achieve two key objectives: 1)
simplicity and accuracy in rules, and 2) noise tolerance and scalability in data handling [6, 7, 8, 9, 10].
These methods typically rely on search-based techniques, which can be limited when dealing with
complex and noisy data. In contrast, deep learning, which focuses on representation learning through
embedding, is robust to noise and effectively manages large datasets. This has led to the exploration
of differentiable rule learning [11], which leverages the high performance of deep learning while
ensuring interpretability through explicit rule formulation
Differentiable rule learning primarily includes two types of methods. The first approach outputs
rules directly through the network, leveraging powerful and diverse neural models to enhance
handling of complex data patterns [12, 13, 14]. The second approach is to extract rules from network
weights [15, 16, 17], which promotes rapid training and efficient data management while enabling
the use of predefined structures to integrate expert priors [18].
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

