A Benchmark Suite for Evaluating Neural Mutual
Information Estimators on Unstructured Datasets
Kyungeun Lee
LG AI Research
Seoul, Republic of Korea
kyungeun.lee@lgresearch.ai

Wonjong Rhee
Seoul National University
Seoul, Republic of Korea
wrhee@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Mutual Information (MI) is a fundamental metric for quantifying dependency
between two random variables. When we can access only the samples, but not
the underlying distribution functions, we can evaluate MI using sample-based
estimators. Assessment of such MI estimators, however, has almost always relied on
analytical datasets including Gaussian multivariates. Such datasets allow analytical
calculations of the true MI values, but they are limited in that they do not reflect
the complexities of real-world datasets. This study introduces a comprehensive
benchmark suite for evaluating neural MI estimators on unstructured datasets,
specifically focusing on images and texts. By leveraging same-class sampling for
positive pairing and introducing a binary symmetric channel trick, we show that
we can accurately manipulate true MI values of real-world datasets. Using the
benchmark suite, we investigate seven challenging scenarios, shedding light on the
reliability of neural MI estimators for unstructured datasets.

1

Introduction

Mutual Information (MI), denoted as I(X; Y ), serves as a fundamental measure in quantifying the
dependency between two random variables [Cover, 1999]. It is mathematically defined as:


p(x, y)
I(X; Y ) = Ep(x,y) log
.
p(x)p(y)
In practice, we often rely on the estimations instead of the exact calculation of MI because we can only
access the examples sampled from joint and marginals but not the underlying distribution functions
(p(x, y) and p(x)p(y)). To this end, various sample-based MI estimators have been proposed [Fraser
and Swinney, 1986, Shwartz-Ziv and Tishby, 2017, Kraskov et al., 2004, Belghazi et al., 2018,
Poole et al., 2019, Song and Ermon, 2019, 2020, Cheng et al., 2020], and they have played a key
role in improving the deep learning performance across diverse applications, including generative
models [Chen et al., 2016], language representation learning [Oord et al., 2018, Wang et al., 2020],
domain generalization [Li et al., 2022], anomaly detection [Lei et al., 2023], and self-supervised
learning [Hjelm et al., 2018, Bachman et al., 2019, Chen et al., 2020, Chen and He, 2020, Grill et al.,
2020].
Despite the huge success of MI estimators in developing useful real-world applications, the accuracy
of MI estimators on real-world datasets largely remains underexplored because the true MI values
cannot be calculated for such datasets. Gaussian datasets, the primary benchmark in the existing
studies [Belghazi et al., 2018, Poole et al., 2019, Song and Ermon, 2019, 2020, Cheng et al., 2020],
do not adequately represent the complexity of real-world datasets. This raises a fundamental question:
do estimators that perform well on Gaussian datasets also excel with more complex datasets like
images or texts? Recently, Czyż et al. [2023] have explored non-Gaussian datasets to evaluate MI
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

