Worst-Case Offline Reinforcement Learning
with Arbitrary Data Support

Kohei Miyaguchi∗
IBM Research – Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
koheimiyaguchi@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose a method of offline reinforcement learning (RL) featuring the performance guarantee without any assumptions on the data support. Under such
conditions, estimating or optimizing the conventional performance metric is generally infeasible due to the distributional discrepancy between data and target policy
distributions. To address this issue, we employ a worst-case policy value as a new
metric and constructively show that the sample complexity bound of O(ϵ−2 ) is
attainable without any data-support conditions, where ϵ > 0 is the policy suboptimality in the new metric. Moreover, as the new metric generalizes the conventional
one, the algorithm can address standard offline RL tasks without modification. In
this context, our sample complexity bound can be seen as a strict improvement on
the previous bounds under the single-policy concentrability and the single-policy
realizability.

1

Introduction

Offline reinforcement learning (RL) (Levine et al., 2020; Prudencio et al., 2023) is a framework for
learning decision-making policies while constrained to a fixed batch of data, preventing the learner
from acquiring new information about the environment during training.
The primary challenges of offline RL are thus originated from the discrepancy between the stateaction distribution of the batch data µ(s)β(a|s) and the visitation distribution of the trained policy
dπ (s)π(a|s). Most of the previous studies have avoided directly dealing with this discrepancy by
posing the assumption known as concentrability (Munos and Szepesvári, 2008; Antos et al., 2008;
Chen and Jiang, 2019; Xie et al., 2022). Roughly speaking, the condition asserts that the ratio between
these two distributions dπ π/µβ is well-defined and uniformly bounded over the entire state-action
space. This, in turn, constrains the trained policy π to strictly stay inside the state space covered by
the data support.
However, concetrability may be impractical in real-world applications for several reasons. First,
one often ends up with a poor coverage of the state-action space when exhaustive data collection
is expensive or practically infeasible as in the domains of autonomous driving (Fang et al., 2022),
healthcare (Yu et al., 2021) and public policy-making (Abe et al., 2010). Moreover, the precise shape
of the partial coverage is unknown if the considerations making it partial are not well-documented or
disclosed. On the other hand, it is generally difficult to accurately predict if a policy will visit a given
state or not based only on the knowledge of the policy and the batch dataset. As a result, the set of
concentrable policies in a hypothesis space may be too small to achieve reasonable performance or
∗

The author is affiliated with LY Corporation at the time of publication.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

