GO4Align: Group Optimization for
Multi-Task Alignment

Jiayi Shen1 , Qi (Cheems) Wang2 , Zehao Xiao1∗, Nanne Van Noord1 , Marcel Worring1
1
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

Abstract
This paper proposes GO4Align, a multi-task optimization approach that tackles task
imbalance by explicitly aligning the optimization across tasks. To achieve this, we
design an adaptive group risk minimization strategy, comprising two techniques in
implementation: (i) dynamical group assignment, which clusters similar tasks based
on task interactions; (ii) risk-guided group indicators, which exploit consistent
task correlations with risk information from previous iterations. Comprehensive
experimental results on diverse benchmarks demonstrate our method’s performance
superiority with even lower computational costs.

1

Introduction

MTL Performance

Multi-task learning is a promising paradigm
8
Gradient-oriented methods
RLW (1.0×)
Loss-oriented methods
for handling several tasks simultaneously usThis paper
6
LS (1.0×)
ing a unified architecture. It can achieve data
PCGrad (2.23×)
SL (1.0×)
efficiency, improve generalization, and reduce
4
UW (1.0×)
GradDrop (2.06×)
computation costs compared with addressing
DWA (1.02×)
2
MGDA (2.32×)
each task individually [1]. Due to these benCAGrad
(2.09×)
0
efits, there is a growing surge of applications
IMTL-G (2.1×)
with multi-task learning in several domains, e.g.,
-2
natural language processing [2–4], computer viFAMO (1.19×)
NashMTL (2.34×)
-4
sion [1, 5, 6] and reinforcement learning [7, 8].
The crux of multi-task learning is to enable posGO4Align (1.02×)
-6
itive transfer among tasks while avoiding nega1
1.5
2
2.5
Relative Training Time
tive transfer, which usually exists among irrelevant tasks [9–11].
Figure 1: Performance and computational efficiency evaluation for MTO methods evaluated
Existing Challenges: In avoiding the negaon NYUv2. Each method’s training time is relative
tive transfer, numerous multi-task optimization
to a baseline method, which minimizes the sum of
(MTO) methods [5, 9, 12–14] have emerged and
task-specific empirical risks. Left-bottom marks
attracted rising attention in recent years. A lastcomprehensive optimal results.
ing concern in MTO is the task imbalance issue.
It describes a phenomenon where some tasks are severely under-optimized [1], which can lead to
worse overall performance with larger convergence differences across tasks.
To deal with the task imbalance issue, scaling methods are proposed for MTO. According to differences in scaling manipulations, we roughly divide MTO methods into gradient-oriented [12, 15–18]
and loss-oriented [5, 6, 19, 20]. The former tends to exhibit impressive results at the expense of
higher computational or memory requirements during training time due to the assessment of per-task
∗

Correspondence to: Zehao Xiao <zxiao4ai@gmail.com>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

