RashomonGB: Analyzing the Rashomon Effect and
Mitigating Predictive Multiplicity in Gradient Boosting

Hsiang Hsu1 , Ivan Brugere2 , Shubham Sharma2 , Freddy Lecue2 , and Chun-Fu Chen1
1
JPMorganChase Global Technology Applied Research
2
JPMorganChase AI Research
{hsiang.hsu, ivan.brugere, shubham.x2.sharma}@jpmchase.com
{freddy.lecue, richard.cf.chen}@jpmchase.com

Abstract
The Rashomon effect is a mixed blessing in responsible machine learning. It
enhances the prospects of finding models that perform well in accuracy while adhering to ethical standards, such as fairness or interpretability. Conversely, it poses
a risk to the credibility of machine decisions through predictive multiplicity. While
recent studies have explored the Rashomon effect across various machine learning
algorithms, its impact on gradient boosting—an algorithm widely applied to tabular
datasets—remains unclear. This paper addresses this gap by systematically analyzing the Rashomon effect and predictive multiplicity in gradient boosting algorithms.
We provide rigorous theoretical derivations to examine the Rashomon effect in the
context of gradient boosting and offer an information-theoretic characterization
of the Rashomon set. Additionally, we introduce a novel inference technique
called RashomonGB to efficiently inspect the Rashomon effect in practice. On
more than 20 datasets, our empirical results show that RashomonGB outperforms
existing baselines in terms of improving the estimation of predictive multiplicity
metrics and model selection with group fairness constraints. Lastly, we propose a
framework to mitigate predictive multiplicity in gradient boosting and empirically
demonstrate its effectiveness.

1

Introduction

Large-scale, complex data and the pursuit of superior performance in machine learning (ML) models
have led to increased complexity in both the models themselves and the training algorithms [44]. As
a result, it is more likely to find a plethora of distinct models, such as those found in local minima,
that exhibit statistically indistinguishable performance (e.g., test accuracy) [23]. This phenomenon,
known as the Rashomon effect [12], has urged researchers to reconsider its impact on ML models
when deployed in real-world scenarios [22, 10, 30, 26].
The impacts of the Rashomon effect reveals two sides of the same coin in responsible ML. On
one hand, it benefits the current trend of developing algorithms that prioritize responsible ML
principles beyond merely optimizing for accuracy. These principles often include interpretability [64],
causality [37], group fairness [20], counterfactual explanations [39], and feature interactions [51]. The
abundance of models with competing performance allows compliance with these principles without
significant compromises in performance. For instance, algorithmic fairness often faces a trade-off
with accuracy; the Rashomon effect allows a fairness intervention algorithm to identify a more optimal
balance among models with statistically similar performance [20]. On the other hand, the Rashomon
effect presents a risk to the credibility of machine decisions known as predictive multiplicity [56],
where competing models, generated by simply varying randomness1 in the training processes, yield
1

Such randomness includes different seeds, weight initialization, splits of mini-batches, etc.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

