Unlocking the Capabilities of Masked Generative
Models for Image Synthesis via Self-Guidance
Jiwan Hur1
1

Dong-Jae Lee1
Yunho Jeon2†

KAIST, South Korea

2

Gyojin Han1
Junmo Kim1†

Jaehyun Choi1

Hanbat National University, South Korea

{jiwan.hur, jhtwosun, hangj0820, chlwogus}@kaist.ac.kr
yhjeon@hanbat.ac.kr, junmo.kim@kaist.ac.kr

Code is available at: https://github.com/JiwanHur/UnlockMGM

Figure 1: Comparison of sampled images using 18-step MaskGIT [4] without (top) and with the
proposed self-guidance (bottom) on ImageNet 512×512 (left) and 256×256 (right) resolutions.
Each paired image is sampled using the same random seed and sampling hyperparameters. The
proposed self-guidance effectively improves the capabilities of the masked generative models.

Abstract
Masked generative models (MGMs) have shown impressive generative ability while
providing an order of magnitude efficient sampling steps compared to continuous
diffusion models. However, MGMs still underperform in image synthesis compared
to recent well-developed continuous diffusion models with similar size in terms
of quality and diversity of generated samples. A key factor in the performance of
continuous diffusion models stems from the guidance methods, which enhance
the sample quality at the expense of diversity. In this paper, we extend these
guidance methods to generalized guidance formulation for MGMs and propose
a self-guidance sampling method, which leads to better generation quality. The
proposed approach leverages an auxiliary task for semantic smoothing in vectorquantized token space, analogous to the Gaussian blur in continuous pixel space.
Equipped with the parameter-efficient fine-tuning method and high-temperature
sampling, MGMs with the proposed self-guidance achieve a superior qualitydiversity trade-off, outperforming existing sampling methods in MGMs with more
efficient training and sampling costs. Extensive experiments with the various
sampling hyperparameters confirm the effectiveness of the proposed self-guidance.
†

Corresponding authors: junmo.kim@kaist.ac.kr, yhjeon@hanbat.ac.kr

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

