Is Knowledge Power?
On the (Im)possibility of Learning from Strategic
Interactions
Nivasini Ananthakrishnan1 , Nika Haghtalab1 , Chara Podimata2 , and Kunhe Yang1
1

UC Berkeley, {nivasini,nika,kunheyang}@berkeley.edu
2
MIT & Archimedes AI, podimata@mit.edu

Abstract
When learning in strategic environments, a key question is whether agents can
overcome uncertainty about their preferences to achieve outcomes they could have
achieved absent any uncertainty. Can they do this solely through interactions
with each other? We focus this question on the ability of agents to attain the
value of their Stackelberg optimal strategy and study the impact of information
asymmetry. We study repeated interactions in fully strategic environments where
players’ actions are decided based on learning algorithms that take into account their
observed histories and knowledge of the game. We study the pure Nash equilibria
(PNE) of a meta-game where players choose these algorithms as their actions. We
demonstrate that if one player has perfect knowledge about the game, then any
initial informational gap persists. That is, while there is always a PNE in which
the informed agent achieves her Stackelberg value, there is a game where no PNE
of the meta-game allows the partially informed player to achieve her Stackelberg
value. On the other hand, if both players start with some uncertainty about the
game, the quality of information alone does not determine which agent can achieve
her Stackelberg value. In this case, the concept of information asymmetry becomes
nuanced and depends on the game’s structure. Overall, our findings suggest that
repeated strategic interactions alone cannot facilitate learning effectively enough to
earn an uninformed player her Stackelberg value.

1

Introduction

Learning to act in strategic environments is fundamental to the study of decision making under
uncertainty in a wide range of applications, such as security, economic policy, and market design
(e.g., [31, 8, 19]). In these environments, acting and learning are intimately connected: agents’ actions
and the reactions they elicit generate payoffs, and help clarify the latent preferences of other agents.
A central question is whether, through repeated interactions alone, agents (aka players) can overcome
uncertainty about each other’s preferences in order to achieve outcomes they could have achieved in
the absence of uncertainty. An extensive line of work on learning in Stackelberg Games [5, 8, 31, 35]
has focused on answering this question for achieving the Stackelberg value, which is the optimal
payoff a player guarantees herself when assuming other players will best respond to her actions.
While a player who hopes to attain her Stackelberg value in a one-shot game must know the game (i.e.,
know the utilities of all players), this line of work asks whether a player who is a-priori uninformed
can overcome her lack of knowledge and attain her Stackelberg value through repeated interactions
with other players.
By and large, existing works have studied this question by constructing learning algorithms for
uninformed players that attain their Stackelberg value, through repeated interactions with other
players who myopically best respond. While these results are encouraging for learning about the
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

