How Control Information Influences Multilingual Text
Image Generation and Editing?

Boqiang Zhang, Zuan Gao, Yadong Qu, Hongtao Xie∗
University of Science and Technology of China
{cyril,zuangao,qqqyd}@mail.ustc.edu.cn htxie@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual text generation has significantly advanced through diffusion models aimed
at producing images with readable and realistic text. Recent works primarily use
a ControlNet-based framework, employing standard font text images to control
diffusion models. Recognizing the critical role of control information in generating
high-quality text, we investigate its influence from three perspectives: input encoding, role at different stages, and output features. Our findings reveal that: 1) Input
control information has unique characteristics compared to conventional inputs
like Canny edges and depth maps. 2) Control information plays distinct roles at
different stages of the denoising process. 3) Output control features significantly
differ from the base and skip features of the U-Net decoder in the frequency domain. Based on these insights, we propose TextGen, a novel framework designed
to enhance generation quality by optimizing control information. We improve
input and output features using Fourier analysis to emphasize relevant information
and reduce noise. Additionally, we employ a two-stage generation framework to
align the different roles of control information at different stages. Furthermore, we
introduce an effective and lightweight dataset for training. Our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance in both Chinese and English text generation. The code
and dataset are available at https://github.com/CyrilSterling/TextGen.

1

Introduction

With the development of diffusion-based generative models [9, 26, 20] and image-text paired
datasets [23, 8], significant improvements have been made in the quality of image generation. Given
the prevalence of text in natural scenes (e.g., posters, slides, signs, book covers, etc.), generating
images containing text accurately and reasonably is crucial.
Recently, several methods have been proposed to address the generation of high-quality visual text
images [33, 14, 4, 28]. Among these, ControlNet-based approaches show strong potential [33, 28],
enabling flexible multilingual visual text generation, text position control, and easy integration into
existing pre-trained diffusion models. Current methods directly utilize ControlNet [36] for text
generation control, using a global glyph image of a standard font as the condition (as shown in
Figure 1). However, achieving accurate and robust control remains challenging due to the complex
and fine-grained structure of characters. Hence, we pose a meaningful question: How does control
information influence multilingual text image generation?
To address the above issue, we investigate the impact of control information on visual text generation
from three perspectives, as illustrated in Figure 1. For the input of control information, the current
model uses a glyph image to guide the generation of accurate text textures. However, unlike general
ControlNet inputs such as Canny edges, depth, or M-LSD lines, text glyph images have unique
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

