Monoculture in Matching Markets

Kenny Peng
Cornell Tech
kennypeng@cs.cornell.edu

Nikhil Garg
Cornell Tech
ngarg@cornell.edu

Abstract
Algorithmic monoculture arises when many decision-makers rely on the same
algorithm to evaluate applicants. An emerging body of work investigates possible
harms of such homogeneity, but has been limited by the challenge of incorporating
market effects in which the preferences of many applicants and decision-makers
jointly interact to determine outcomes. Addressing this challenge, we introduce a
tractable theoretical model of algorithmic monoculture in a two-sided matching
market with many participants. We use the model to analyze outcomes under monoculture (when decision-makers all evaluate applicants using a common algorithm)
and under polyculture (when decision-makers evaluate applicants independently).
All else equal, monoculture (1) selects less-preferred applicants when noise is
well-behaved, (2) matches more applicants to their top choice, though individual
applicants may be worse off and have higher variance outcomes depending on
their value to decision-makers, and (3) is more robust to disparities in the number
of applications submitted. Overall, our approach strengthens, challenges, and
broadens the scope of the existing monoculture literature.

1

Introduction

What happens when many decision-makers—in consequential domains like employment and college
admissions—all evaluate applicants using the same algorithm? This possibility has been termed
“algorithmic monoculture”—a name that references the problems arising in agriculture when a single
crop is farmed extensively, amplifying the risk of correlated widespread failures. A recent line of
work considers how a lack of variety in algorithms may warrant similar concerns; this concern may
be especially important if many decision-makers use the same large language models.
Initial inquiries into the consequences of algorithmic monoculture have identified potential harms
to both decision-makers and applicants. In seminal work initiating the formal study of algorithmic
monoculture, Kleinberg and Raghavan [35] demonstrated that firms relying on a common algorithm
may hire weaker applicants than when using idiosyncratic (but less individually accurate) hiring
processes. On the applicant side, an emerging set of work highlights the concern of systemic exclusion,
which occurs when an applicant is denied from all opportunities [16, 11, 43, 31].
This emerging literature has been limited by the challenge of incorporating market effects. Domains
where monoculture may be especially impactful—such as employment and college admissions—
share some common properties. First, participants on both sides of the market compete: workers
compete over a limited number of job openings, and firms compete over workers who can each accept
only one offer. Second, outcomes are determined by the preferences of participants on both sides:
roughly speaking, a match is formed only if both a worker and firm prefer each other over their
other options. Analyzing these interactions across many participants can be theoretically challenging;
indeed, the existing monoculture literature in the ML community considers neither markets with
many participants nor two-sided interactions.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

