A Fast Convoluted Story:
Scaling Probabilistic Inference for Integer Arithmetic

Lennert De Smet
KU Leuven
Belgium

Pedro Zuidberg Dos Martires
Örebro University
Sweden

Abstract
As illustrated by the success of integer linear programming, linear integer arithmetic is a powerful tool for modelling combinatorial problems. Furthermore, the
probabilistic extension of linear programming has been used to formulate problems
in neurosymbolic AI. However, two key problems persist that prevent the adoption
of neurosymbolic techniques beyond toy problems. First, probabilistic inference
is inherently hard, #P-hard to be precise. Second, the discrete nature of integers
renders the construction of meaningful gradients challenging, which is problematic
for learning. In order to mitigate these issues, we formulate linear arithmetic over
integer-valued random variables as tensor manipulations that can be implemented
in a straightforward fashion using modern deep learning libraries. At the core of
our formulation lies the observation that the addition of two integer-valued random
variables can be performed by adapting the fast Fourier transform to probabilities
in the log-domain. By relying on tensor operations we obtain a differentiable data
structure, which unlocks, virtually for free, gradient-based learning. In our experimental validation we show that tensorising probabilistic linear integer arithmetic
and leveraging the fast Fourier transform allows us to push the state of the art by
several orders of magnitude in terms of inference and learning times.

1

Introduction

Integer linear programming (ILP) [15, 32] uses linear arithmetic over integer variables to model
intricate combinatorial problems and has successfully been applied to domains such as scheduling [31],
telecommunications [34] and energy grid optimisation [26]. If one replaces deterministic integers
with integer-valued random variables, the resulting probabilistic arithmetic expressions can be used
to model probabilistic combinatorial problems. In particular, many problems studied in the field of
neurosymbolic AI can be described using probabilistic linear integer arithmetic.
Unfortunately, exact probabilistic inference for integer arithmetic is a #P-hard problem in general.
Consequently, even state-of-the-art probabilistic programming languages with dedicated inference
algorithms for discrete random variables, such as ProbLog [8] and Dice [13], fail to scale. The
reason being that they resort to exact enumeration algorithms, as exemplified in Figure 1. Note that
while approximate inference algorithms such as Monte Carlo methods and variational inference can
be applied to probabilistic combinatorial problems, they come with their own set of limitations, as
discussed by Cao et al. [5]. For instance, conditional inference with low-probability evidence.
In order to mitigate the computational hardness of probabilistic inference over integer-valued random
variables, we make the simple yet powerful observation that the probability mass function (PMF) of
the sum of two random variables is equal to the convolution of the PMFs of the summands. The key
advantage of this perspective is that the exact convolution for finite domains can be implemented
efficiently using the fast Fourier transform (FFT) in O(N log N ), which avoids the traditionally
quadratic behaviour of computing the PMF of a sum of two random variables (Figure 1). Moreover,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

