Learning from Highly Sparse Spatio-temporal Data

†

Leyan Deng† , Defu Lian †§∗ , Chenwang Wu† , Enhong Chen†§
School of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, University of Science and Technology of China
§
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
{dleyan, wcw1996}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {liandefu, cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Incomplete spatio-temporal data in the real world has spawned much research.
However, existing methods often utilize iterative message-passing across temporal
and spatial dimensions, resulting in substantial information loss and high computational cost. We provide a theoretical analysis revealing that such iterative
models are susceptible to data and graph sparsity, causing unstable performances
on different datasets. To overcome these limitations, we introduce a novel method
named One-step Propagation and Confidence-based Refinement (OPCR). In the
first stage, OPCR leverages inherent spatial and temporal relationships by employing a sparse attention mechanism. These modules propagate limited observations
directly to the global context through one-step imputation, which is theoretically
affected only by data sparsity. Following this, we assign confidence levels to the
initial imputations by correlating missing data with valid data. This confidencebased propagation refines the separate spatial and temporal imputation results
through spatio-temporal dependencies. We evaluate the proposed model across
various downstream tasks involving highly sparse spatio-temporal data. Empirical
results indicate that our model outperforms state-of-the-art imputation methods,
demonstrating its effectiveness and robustness.

1

Introduction

Spatio-temporal data, encompassing information distributed across both spatial and temporal dimensions, is prevalent in various domains [1]. In real world, the acquisition of spatio-temporal data
often faces practical constraints, leading to missing observations. Incomplete data undermines the
reliability and effectiveness of subsequent tasks, necessitating robust imputation techniques. However,
the existing spatio-temporal works effort addresses temporal missing (i.e., point-level missing), which
is usually caused by inevitable device failure. Beyond that, spatial missing (i.e., node-level missing)
becomes a burning issue. For example, in a traffic scenario, the management will not deploy dense
traffic sensors to reduce costs. Therefore, exploring spatially sparse data not only makes the best
use of available data but also lowers the barriers to implementing spatio-temporal models in real
scenarios. In view of the gap, Traffic4cast 2022 (T4C22) competition [2] presented sparse traffic data
collected in real urban road networks. Specifically, the competition considered three cities, where
sensors are deployed sparsely, i.e. spatial and point missing co-exist. T4C22 aims at generalizing
limited data to entire city to predict global traffic dynamics.
We first provide a theoretical analysis for general spatio-temporal iterative imputation model from
PAC-learnability perspective. Then we find that iterative methods are constrained by the sparsity and
structure of data. As the data scale and missing rate increase, the model requires more iterations.
Additionally, with an increasing number of iterations, the model requires more training samples.
Therefore, for highly sparse large-scale data, iterative methods suffer from information loss and error
accumulation. To address these issues, we propose a sparse attention-based one-step imputation and
confidence-based refinement approach. In the first stage, we propagate information from observed
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

