Piecewise-Stationary Bandits with Knapsacks

Cheung Wang Chi
Department of ISEM
National University of Singapore
Singapore, 117578
isecwc@nus.edu.sg

Xilin Zhang
Department of ISEM
National University of Singapore
Singapore, 117578
zhangxilin@u.nus.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel inventory reserving algorithm which draws new insights into
Bandits with Knapsacks (Bwk) problems in piecewise-stationary environments.
Suppose parameters ηmin , ηmax P p0, 1s respectively lower and upper bound the
ratio between the reward earned and the resources consumed in a round. Our algorithm achieves a provably near-optimal competitive ratio of Oplogpηmax {ηmin qq,
with a matching lower bound provided. Our performance guarantee is based on a
dynamic benchmark that upper bounds the optimum, different from existing works
on adversarial Bwk Immorlica et al. (2019); Kesselheim and Singla (2020) who
compare with the stationary benchmark. Different from existing non-stationary
Bwk work Liu et al. (2022), we do not require a bounded global variation.

1

Introduction

In a bandits with knapsack (Bwk) problem, each action a in the action set K is associated with a
latent and random amount of reward earned, Rt paq, and resource consumed, Ct paq, in each round
t “ 1, . . . , T . A decision maker (DM) selects an action at P K in round t, and observes bandit
řT
feedback pRt pat q, Ct pat qq. The DM targets at maximizing the total reward t“1 Rt pat q, while
řT
satisfying the hard capacity constraint t“1 Ct pat q ď B. Bwk has many real-life applications
such as dynamic pricing Babaioff et al. (2015), resource allocation Zhalechian et al. (2022), online
auction Balseiro and Gur (2019) and assortment planning Agrawal et al. (2019). Stochastic Bwk
is first introduced by Badanidiyuru et al. (2018), followed by generalizations to concave reward
with convex constraints Agrawal and Devanur (2014), combinatorial bandits Sankararaman and
Slivkins (2018) and contextual bandits Badanidiyuru et al. (2014); Agrawal and Devanur (2016). In
stochastic Bwk problems, the expected feedback ErpRt paq, Ct paqqs “ prpaq, cpaqq is stationary for
all a P K, t P t1, . . . , T u, and a sublinear-in-T regret is achievable. Nevertheless, the stationary
model could be too ideal in many applications.
Adversarial Bwk is firstly considered in Immorlica et al. (2019) where prt , ct q “ tprt paq, ct paqquaPK
can change arbitrarily over the horizon. They achieve a competitive ratio (CR) of Opd logpT qq with
respect to a static benchmark when there are d budget constraints. A static benchmark picks a fixed
optimal action (or a fixed optimal distribution over arms), and applies the same action (or distribution)
in all T rounds. Kesselheim and Singla (2020) further improve the CR to Oplogpdq logpT qq. Other
papers consider different regimes such as unlimited rounds (Rangi et al. (2018)), large budget
B “ ΩpT q (Castiglioni et al. (2022a)), strict feasibility (Castiglioni et al. (2022b)) and approximate
stationarity (Fikioris and Tardos (2023)). All these works compare with static benchmarks (see
Appendix A.1). Moreover, adversarial Bwk could be too conservative in certain real-life scenarios.
For instance, sales patterns could be stationary for a duration of time, but only change during periods
of hot seasons/promotions/new trends, which fits into our piecewise-stationary Bwk regime.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

