dopanim: A Dataset of Doppelganger Animals with
Noisy Annotations from Multiple Humans

Marek Herde∗ Denis Huseljic Lukas Rauch Bernhard Sick
University of Kassel, Hesse, Germany
∗
marek.herde@uni-kassel.de

Abstract
Human annotators typically provide annotated data for training machine learning
models, such as neural networks. Yet, human annotations are subject to noise,
impairing generalization performances. Methodological research on approaches
counteracting noisy annotations requires corresponding datasets for a meaningful
empirical evaluation. Consequently, we introduce a novel benchmark dataset,
dopanim, consisting of about 15,750 animal images of 15 classes with ground
truth labels. For approximately 10,500 of these images, 20 humans provided
over 52,000 annotations with an accuracy of circa 67%. Its key attributes include
(1) the challenging task of classifying doppelganger animals, (2) human-estimated
likelihoods as annotations, and (3) annotator metadata. We benchmark well-known
multi-annotator learning approaches using seven variants of this dataset and outline
further evaluation use cases such as learning beyond hard class labels and active
learning. Our dataset and a comprehensive codebase are publicly available to
emulate the data collection process and to reproduce all empirical results.

1

Introduction

Supervised learning with machine learning models, such as neural networks (NNs), requires annotated
data. Typically, multiple human annotators, e.g., crowdworkers [59], are tasked to provide the
corresponding annotations, e.g., class labels. These annotators perform differently for various reasons,
including bias, fatigue, and ambiguity in interpretation [16]. As a result of such imperfect annotator
performances, we obtain noisy annotations that can significantly degrade models’ generalization
performances [50]. Therefore, annotations are often requested from multiple annotators per data
instance. The intuition is that the majority vote is a reliable estimate of the ground truth annotation
(“wisdom of the crowd”). However, such an approach leads to substantially higher annotation costs
and ignores the annotators’ different performances. More advanced approaches have been proposed to
improve NNs’ robustness against noisy annotations. These advancements include new regularization
techniques [72], loss functions [76], and approaches to estimate annotator performances [43]. The
evaluation of such approaches is primarily driven by empirical research, which necessitates access to
datasets that realistically reflect the noise induced by human annotators [62]. However, due to the
often high annotation costs, the number of publicly available datasets for methodological research is
relatively low. Moreover, the potential ability of certain humans to self-assess their own knowledge
and uncertainty is typically not queried as part of the annotation campaign. Accordingly, most
existing datasets are limited to classification tasks that require no expert knowledge, provide only
hard class labels as annotations, and lack metadata [75] about the annotators.
Motivated by the critical impact of noisy annotations in practical applications and the scarcity of
corresponding datasets, we publish a novel dataset with the following profile and contributions:
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

