SGLang: Efficient Execution of
Structured Language Model Programs

Lianmin Zheng2∗ Liangsheng Yin3
Zhiqiang Xie1
Chuyue Sun1
Jeff Huang4
5
2
1
2
Cody Hao Yu
Shiyi Cao
Christos Kozyrakis
Ion Stoica
Joseph E. Gonzalez2
Clark Barrett1
Ying Sheng1∗
1

Stanford University 2 UC Berkeley 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
Texas A&M University 5 Independent Researcher

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly used for complex tasks that
require multiple generation calls, advanced prompting techniques, control flow, and
structured inputs/outputs. However, efficient systems are lacking for programming
and executing these applications. We introduce SGLang, a system for efficient
execution of complex language model programs. SGLang consists of a frontend
language and a runtime. The frontend simplifies programming with primitives for
generation and parallelism control. The runtime accelerates execution with novel
optimizations like RadixAttention for KV cache reuse and compressed finite state
machines for faster structured output decoding. Experiments show that SGLang
achieves up to 6.4× higher throughput compared to state-of-the-art inference
systems on various large language and multi-modal models on tasks including
agent control, logical reasoning, few-shot learning benchmarks, JSON decoding,
retrieval-augmented generation pipelines, and multi-turn chat. The code is publicly
available at https://github.com/sgl-project/sglang.

1

Introduction

Recent increases in the capabilities of LLMs have broadened their utility, enabling them to tackle a
wider range of general tasks and act as autonomous agents [35, 6, 36, 52, 46]. In such applications,
LLMs engage in multi-round planning, reasoning, and interaction with external environments. This
is accomplished through tool usage [41, 38], multiple input modalities [47, 2], and a wide range of
prompting techniques [30], like few-shot learning [5], self-consistency [53], skeleton-of-thought [33],
and tree-of-thought [56]. All of these new use cases require multiple, often dependent, LLM
generation calls, showing a trend of using multi-call structures to complete complex tasks [57, 21].
The emergence of these patterns signifies a shift in our interaction with LLMs, moving from simple
chatting to a more sophisticated form of programmatic usage of LLMs, which means using a program
to schedule and control the generation processes of LLMs. We refer to these programs as "Language
Model Programs" (LM Programs) [4, 20]. The advanced prompting techniques and agentic workflow
mentioned above fall within the scope of LM programs. There are two common properties of LM
programs: (1) LM programs typically contain multiple LLM calls interspersed with control flow.
This is needed to complete complex tasks and improve overall quality. (2) LM programs receive
structured inputs and produce structured outputs. This is needed to enable the composition of LM
programs and to integrate LM programs into existing software systems.
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

