Alignment for Honesty

Yuqing Yang3,5 Ethan Chern1,5 Xipeng Qiu3 Graham Neubig4 Pengfei Liu1,2,5∗
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
Fudan University 4 Carnegie Mellon University
5
Generative AI Research Lab (GAIR)
yuqingyang21@m.fudan.edu.cn ethanicchern@gmail.com
xpqiu@fudan.edu.cn gneubig@cs.cmu.edu pengfei@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent research has made significant strides in aligning large language models
(LLMs) with helpfulness and harmlessness. In this paper, we argue for the importance of alignment for honesty, ensuring that LLMs proactively refuse to answer
questions when they lack knowledge, while still not being overly conservative.
However, a pivotal aspect of alignment for honesty involves discerning an LLM’s
knowledge boundaries, which demands comprehensive solutions in terms of metric
development, benchmark creation, and training methodologies. We address these
challenges by first establishing a precise problem definition and defining “honesty”
inspired by the Analects of Confucius. This serves as a cornerstone for developing
metrics that effectively measure an LLM’s honesty by quantifying its progress
post-alignment. Furthermore, we introduce a flexible training framework which
is further instantiated by several efficient fine-tuning techniques that emphasize
honesty without sacrificing performance on other tasks. Our extensive experiments
reveal that these aligned models show a marked increase in honesty, as indicated
by our proposed metrics. We open-source all relevant resources to facilitate future
research at https://github.com/GAIR-NLP/alignment-for-honesty.

1

Introduction

A pivotal factor that contributes to the success of current large language models (LLMs) (Brown
et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023a; Anil et al., 2023) is the process of alignment (Kenton et al., 2021;
Ouyang et al., 2022), which aims to ensure that LLMs adhere to human values and intentions. The key
principles of alignment are often summarized as the “HHH” criteria: helpful, harmless, honest (Askell
et al., 2021). There has been a significant focus on enhancing the helpfulness and harmlessness of
LLMs (Bai et al., 2022a,b). However, honesty, despite its importance in establishing reliable and safe
AI (Kaddour et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Park et al., 2023), has received relatively less attention
in research (i.e., Evans et al. (2021); Kadavath et al. (2022); Cui et al. (2023)). There are several
primary challenges in improving the honesty of models.
The first challenge is that there is a long-standing debate regarding the very definition of “honesty” for
AI models (Mahon, 2015; Yudkowsky, 2018). Essentially, honesty demands the model to be faithful
to its own level of knowledge and express it candidly (Askell et al., 2021; Schulman, 2023). In this
paper, we define “honesty” based on the spirit of Confucius and Disciple (1 BC): an honest model
should candidly answer questions it knows and humbly admit to those it does not, as illustrated in
Fig. 1. Some research emphasizes calibration (Lin et al., 2022a; Cui et al., 2023), which requires the
model to convey a certain degree of uncertainty in its responses and can be seen as a finer-grained
handling of known questions.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

