Automated Multi-Task Learning for Joint Disease
Prediction on Electronic Health Records
Suhan Cui
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA, USA
suhan@psu.edu

Prasenjit Mitra
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA, USA
pmitra@psu.edu

Abstract
Electronic Health Records (EHR) have become a rich source of information with
the potential to improve patient care and medical research. In recent years, machine
learning models have proliferated for analyzing EHR data to predict patients’ future
health conditions. Among them, some studies advocate for multi-task learning
(MTL) to jointly predict multiple target diseases for improving the prediction
performance over single task learning. Nevertheless, current MTL frameworks for
EHR data have significant limitations due to their heavy reliance on human experts
to identify task groups for joint training and design model architectures. To reduce
human intervention and improve the framework design, we propose an automated
approach named AutoDP, which can search for the optimal configuration of
task grouping and architectures simultaneously. To tackle the vast joint search
space encompassing task combinations and architectures, we employ surrogate
model-based optimization, enabling us to efficiently discover the optimal solution.
Experimental results on real-world EHR data demonstrate the efficacy of the
proposed AutoDP framework. It achieves significant performance improvements
over both hand-crafted and automated state-of-the-art methods, also maintains
a feasible search cost at the same time. Source code can be found via the link:
https://github.com/SH-Src/AutoDP.

1

Introduction

In the era of big data and digital healthcare, the voluminous Electronic Health Records (EHR) can
revolutionize patient care, medical research, and clinical decision-making. Using these, the machine
learning (ML) community has been designing models to predict patients’ future health conditions,
e.g., models for mortality prediction [1], diagnosis prediction [2, 3] and hospital readmission [4].
Although most existing machine learning based prediction models are designed to be single-task,
i.e. predicting the risk of a single target disease, some works [5, 6, 7, 8, 9] designed multi-task
learning (MTL) models to jointly predict multiple targets. The motivation lies in the fact that two or
more diseases might be related to each other in terms of sharing common comorbidities, symptoms,
risk factors, etc. Consequently, training on related diseases simultaneously can offer additional
insights and potentially enhance prediction performance. While multi-task learning offers potential
advantages, the existing MTL frameworks for EHR data still suffer from the following limitations.
Limitations of the existing MTL frameworks for EHR data. To design an effective MTL framework, two fundamental challenges need to be addressed:
(1) How can we determine which tasks should be trained together? The task grouping problem [10]
involves finding groups of tasks to train jointly. Multi-task learning only provides advantages when
the tasks are synergistic, i.e., training on the tasks together makes the model learn general knowledge
that helps in performing the tasks better in the test set and prevents overfitting. Thus, given a large set
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

