Active learning of neural population dynamics
using two-photon holographic optogenetics

Andrew Wagenmaker∗
University of California, Berkeley

Lu Mi∗
Georgia Tech

Matthew S. Bull
Allen Institute for Brain Science
Kayvon Daie†
Allen Institute for Neural Dynamics

Marton Rozsa
Allen Institute for Neural Dynamics

Karel Svoboda
Allen Institute for Neural Dynamics

Matthew D. Golub†
University of Washington

Kevin Jamieson†
University of Washington

Abstract
Recent advances in techniques for monitoring and perturbing neural populations
have greatly enhanced our ability to study circuits in the brain. In particular,
two-photon holographic optogenetics now enables precise photostimulation of
experimenter-specified groups of individual neurons, while simultaneous twophoton calcium imaging enables the measurement of ongoing and induced activity
across the neural population. Despite the enormous space of potential photostimulation patterns and the time-consuming nature of photostimulation experiments, very
little algorithmic work has been done to determine the most effective photostimulation patterns for identifying the neural population dynamics. Here, we develop
methods to efficiently select which neurons to stimulate such that the resulting
neural responses will best inform a dynamical model of the neural population activity. Using neural population responses to photostimulation in mouse motor cortex,
we demonstrate the efficacy of a low-rank linear dynamical systems model, and
develop an active learning procedure which takes advantage of low-rank structure
to determine informative photostimulation patterns. We demonstrate our approach
on both real and synthetic data, obtaining in some cases as much as a two-fold
reduction in the amount of data required to reach a given predictive power. Our
active stimulation design method is based on a novel active learning procedure for
low-rank regression, which may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Neural population dynamics describe how the activities across a population of neurons evolve over
time due to local recurrent connectivity and inputs to the population from other neurons or brain areas.
Identifying these population dynamics can provide critical insight into the computations performed
by a neural population [1]. Dynamical systems models have enabled neuroscientists to generate and
test a multitude of hypotheses about how specific neural populations support the neural computations
that underlie, for example, motor control [2–4], motor timing [5, 6], decision making [7–10], working
memory [11], social behavior [12], and learning [13–16].
∗

Equally contributing first authors.
Equally contributing senior authors.
Correspondence to: ajwagen@berkeley.edu or lmi7@gatech.edu.
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

