Transformation-Invariant Learning and
Theoretical Guarantees for OOD Generalization
Omar Montasser
Yale University
omar.montasser@yale.edu

Han Shao
Harvard University
han@ttic.edu

Emmanuel Abbe
EPFL and Apple
emmanuel.abbe@epfl.ch

Abstract
Learning with identical train and test distributions has been extensively investigated
both practically and theoretically. Much remains to be understood, however, in
statistical learning under distribution shifts. This paper focuses on a distribution
shift setting where train and test distributions can be related by classes of (data)
transformation maps. We initiate a theoretical study for this framework, investigating learning scenarios where the target class of transformations is either known
or unknown. We establish learning rules and algorithmic reductions to Empirical
Risk Minimization (ERM), accompanied with learning guarantees. We obtain
upper bounds on the sample complexity in terms of the VC dimension of the class
composing predictors with transformations, which we show in many cases is not
much larger than the VC dimension of the class of predictors. We highlight that
the learning rules we derive offer a game-theoretic viewpoint on distribution shift:
a learner searching for predictors and an adversary searching for transformation
maps to respectively minimize and maximize the worst-case loss.

1

Introduction

It is desirable to train machine learning predictors that are robust to distribution shifts. In particular
when data distributions vary based on the environment, or when part of the domain is not sampled
at training such as in reasoning tasks. How can we train predictors that generalize beyond the
distribution from which the training examples are drawn from? A common challenge that arises
when tackling out-of-distribution generalization is capturing the structure of distribution shifts. A
common approach is to mathematically describe such shifts through distance or divergence measures,
as in prior work on domain adaptation theory [e.g., Redko et al., 2020] and distributionally robust
optimization [e.g., Duchi and Namkoong, 2021].
In this paper, we put forward a new formulation for out-of-distribution generalization. Our formulation
offers a conceptually different perspective from prior work, where we describe the structure of
distribution shifts through data transformations. We consider an unknown distribution D over X × Y
which can be thought of as the “training” or “source” distribution from which training examples are
drawn, and a collection of data transformation maps T = {T : X → X } which can be thought of as
encoding “target” distribution shifts, hence denoted as {T (D)}T ∈T . We consider a covariate shift
setting where labels are not altered or changed under transformations T ∈ T , and we write T (D)
for notational convenience. Our goal, which will be formalized further shortly, is to learn a single
predictor ĥ that performs well uniformly across all distributions {T (D)}T ∈T .
We view this formulation as enabling a different way to describe distribution shifts through transformations T = {T : X → X }. The collection of transformations T can be viewed as either: (a) given
to the learning algorithm as part of the problem, or (b) chosen by the learning algorithm.View (a)
represents scenarios where the target distribution shifts are known and specified by some downstream
application (e.g., learning a classifier that is invariant to image rotations and translations). View (b)
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

