Robustly overfitting latents for flexible neural image
compression

Yura Perugachi-Diaz
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
y.m.perugachidiaz@vu.nl

Arwin Gansekoele
Centrum Wiskunde
& Informatica
awg@cwi.nl

Sandjai Bhulai
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
s.bhulai@vu.nl

Abstract
Neural image compression has made a great deal of progress. State-of-the-art
models are based on variational autoencoders and are outperforming classical
models. Neural compression models learn to encode an image into a quantized
latent representation that can be efficiently sent to the decoder, which decodes
the quantized latent into a reconstructed image. While these models have proven
successful in practice, they lead to sub-optimal results due to imperfect optimization
and limitations in the encoder and decoder capacity. Recent work shows how to use
stochastic Gumbel annealing (SGA) to refine the latents of pre-trained neural image
compression models. We extend this idea by introducing SGA+, which contains
three different methods that build upon SGA. We show how our method improves
the overall compression performance in terms of the R-D trade-off, compared to its
predecessors. Additionally, we show how refinement of the latents with our bestperforming method improves the compression performance on both the Tecnick
and CLIC dataset. Our method is deployed for a pre-trained hyperprior and for a
more flexible model. Further, we give a detailed analysis of our proposed methods
and show that they are less sensitive to hyperparameter choices. Finally, we show
how each method can be extended to three- instead of two-class rounding.

1

Introduction

Image compression allows efficient sending of an image between systems by reducing their size.
There are two types of compression: lossless and lossy. Lossless image compression sends images
perfectly without losing any quality and can thus be restored in their original format, such as the PNG
format. Lossy compression, such as BPG Bellard (2014), JPEG Wallace (1992) or JPEG2000 Skodras
et al. (2001), loses some quality of the compressed image. Lossy compression aims to preserve as
much of the quality of the reconstructed image as possible, compared to its original format, while
allowing a significantly larger reduction in required storage.
Traditional methods Wallace (1992); Skodras et al. (2001), especially lossless methods, can lead to
limited compression ratios or degradation in quality. With the rise of deep learning, neural image
compression is becoming a popular method Theis et al. (2017); Toderici et al. (2017). In contrast
with traditional methods, neural image compression methods have been shown to achieve higher
compression ratios and less degradation in image quality Ballé et al. (2018); Minnen et al. (2018);
Lee et al. (2019). Additionally, neural compression techniques have shown improvements compared
to traditional codecs for other data domains, such as video. Agustsson et al. (2020); Habibian et al.
(2019); Lu et al. (2019).
In practice, neural lossy compression methods have proven to be successful and achieve state-of-theart performance Ballé et al. (2018); Cheng et al. (2020); Minnen et al. (2018); Lee et al. (2019). These
models are frequently based on variational autoencoders (VAEs) with an encoder-decoder structure
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

