Towards Stable Representations for Protein
Interface Prediction
Ziqi Gao1,2 , Zijing Liu3* , Yu Li3 , Jia Li1,2*
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
3
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)
1

Abstract
The knowledge of protein interactions is crucial but challenging for drug discovery
applications. This work focuses on protein interface prediction, which aims to
determine whether a pair of residues from different proteins interact. Existing
data-driven methods have made significant progress in effectively learning protein
structures. Nevertheless, they overlook the conformational changes (i.e., flexibility)
within proteins upon binding, leading to poor generalization ability. In this paper,
we regard the protein flexibility as an attack on the trained model and aim to
defend against it for improved generalization. To fulfill this purpose, we propose
ATProt, an adversarial training framework for protein representations to robustly
defend against the attack of protein flexibility. ATProt can theoretically guarantee
protein representation stability under complicated protein flexibility. Experiments
on various benchmarks demonstrate that ATProt consistently improves the performance for protein interface prediction. Moreover, our method demonstrates broad
applicability, performing the best even when provided with testing structures from
structure prediction models like ESMFold and AlphaFold2.

1

Introduction
(A)
Protein 1

Protein 2

Training data:
Bound structures

Structure
change

Testing data:

(B)

Unbound structures

Protein 1
bound

Protein 1
unbound

Interface
Positive
Negative

Protein 2
bound

Protein 2
unbound

Figure 1: (A). The task illustration. PIP involves predicting if there is an interaction between two
residues from different proteins. (B). The task challenge. During training, the input consists of
bound structures of two proteins. However, for testing, one can only access their unbound structures.
Protein-protein interactions are important for understanding biological processes, and for the design
of novel therapies [48, 16] and drugs [47]. The protein interface refers to the surface region of a
protein where the interaction occurs. It therefore holds the key to revealing the specific interaction
mechanism and understanding protein functions. In this work, we tackle the problem of protein
* Correspondence to: Zijing Liu (liuzijing@idea.edu.cn) and Jia Li (jialee@ust.hk).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

