Causal Discovery from Event Sequences
by Local Cause-Effect Attribution

Joscha Cüppers◦
CISPA Helmholtz Center
for Information Security
joscha.cueppers@cispa.de

Sascha Xu◦
CISPA Helmholtz Center
for Information Security
sascha.xu@cispa.de

Ahmed Musa•
Institute for Structural Analysis
TU Dresden
ahmed.musa@tu-dresden.de

Jilles Vreeken
CISPA Helmholtz Center
for Information Security
jv@cispa.de

Abstract
Sequences of events, such as crashes in the stock market or outages in a network,
contain strong temporal dependencies, whose understanding is crucial to react to
and influence future events. In this paper, we study the problem of discovering the
underlying causal structure from event sequences. To this end, we introduce a new
causal model, where individual events of the cause trigger events of the effect with
dynamic delays. We show that in contrast to existing methods based on Granger
causality, our model is identifiable for both instant and delayed effects.
We base our approach on the Algorithmic Markov Condition, by which we identify
the true causal network as the one that minimizes the Kolmogorov complexity. As
the Kolmogorov complexity is not computable, we instantiate our model using
Minimum Description Length and show that the resulting score identifies the
causal direction. To discover causal graphs, we introduce the C ASCADE algorithm,
which adds edges in topological order. Extensive evaluation shows that C ASCADE
outperforms existing methods in settings with instantaneous effects, noise, and
multiple colliders, and discovers insightful causal graphs on real-world data.

1

Introduction

Suppose we are considering a multivariate event sequence. What caused a specific event to happen?
Which variables are causes of each other? Data-driven methods can infer causal relationships from
observed data. Existing methods for discovering causal networks from event sequence data [1–3]
are based on Granger causality [4]. This purely predictive notion defines a variable X to be a cause
of another variable Y if the past of X helps to predict the future Y . It is a relatively weak notion of
causality that excludes instantaneous effects and is often unable to discover true causal dependencies;
in Granger causality, baking a cake is causal to a birthday.
In this paper, we instead build upon Pearl’s model of causality, which assumes the existence of an
an underlying causal structure in the form of a directed acyclic graph (DAG) [5]. In our context,
such a graph describes the causal relationships between types of events, such as alarms in a network.
We propose a new causal model for event sequences based on a one-to-one matching of individual
events, where we model the process of one individual event of a certain type possibly causing an
◦
•

Equal contribution
This work was done while at CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

