Streaming Detection of Queried Event Start

Cristóbal Eyzaguirre
Stanford University
Adrien Gaidon
Stanford University

Eric Tang
Stanford University
Jiajun Wu
Stanford University

Shyamal Buch
Stanford University
Juan Carlos Niebles
Stanford University

Abstract
Robotics, autonomous driving, augmented reality, and many embodied computer
vision applications must quickly react to user-defined events unfolding in real
time. We address this setting by proposing a novel task for multimodal video
understanding—Streaming Detection of Queried Event Start (SDQES). The goal
of SDQES is to identify the beginning of a complex event as described by a natural
language query, with high accuracy and low latency. We introduce a new benchmark
based on the Ego4D dataset, as well as new task-specific metrics to study streaming
multimodal detection of diverse events in an egocentric video setting. Inspired by
parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods in NLP and for video tasks, we propose
adapter-based baselines that enable image-to-video transfer learning, allowing for
efficient online video modeling. We evaluate four vision-language backbones and
three adapter architectures in both short-clip and untrimmed video settings.

1

Introduction

The ubiquity of embodied vision applications, such as robotics [1], autonomous driving [2], and
augmented reality [3], highlights the need for methods that can detect the occurrence of events with
low latency in untrimmed and egocentric video streams. Despite significant strides made in video
understanding, a review of the existing literature reveals a notable gap: most current methods are
designed for batch processing or adopt windowed approaches that result in redundant computation
when new frames are considered. These approaches are effective in addressing existing benchmark
tasks, but they fall short in practical, real-time applications due to the high computational overhead
required in processing additional new frames and their limited context.
Some prior work has attempted to bridge this gap by extending traditional offline action recognition
[4, 5, 6] and detection [7, 8] tasks to an online setting [7, 9]. In particular, online detection of action
start (ODAS) [9, 10] emphasizes low-latency1 detection of when an action from a predefined list of
classes begins in a streaming video starts. ODAS captures the urgency of the detection task, but it
cannot assess settings where the user wants to specify more complex event queries beyond the scope
of the predefined classes, nor do existing benchmarks for ODAS focus on egocentric settings, which
are important for embodied applications. Consequently, approaches trained on existing datasets
for online action detection may be constrained by the limited range of events they are designed to
recognize, reducing their applicability to more diverse or unforeseen scenarios.
1
Total latency is the sum of two factors: (1) computation latency, the time taken by a model to run on
hardware and generate a prediction for a given frame, and (2) observation latency, the number of frames of the
event that the model has to see before it identifies the specified query event has started to occur in the video. In
this paper, we propose new metrics that consider observation latency, while also reporting existing metrics of
model efficiency.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

