Expectation Alignment: Handling Reward
Misspecification in the Presence of Expectation
Mismatch
Malek Mechergui, Sarath Sreedharan
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, 80523
{Malek.Mechergui, Sarath.Sreedharan}@colostate.edu

Abstract
Detecting and handling misspecified objectives, such as reward functions, has
been widely recognized as one of the central challenges within the domain of
Artificial Intelligence (AI) safety research. However, even with the recognition
of the importance of this problem, we are unaware of any works that attempt to
provide a clear definition for what constitutes (a) misspecified objectives and (b)
successfully resolving such misspecifications. In this work, we use the theory of
mind, i.e., the human user’s beliefs about the AI agent, as a basis to develop a
formal explanatory framework, called Expectation Alignment (EAL), to understand
the objective misspecification and its causes. Our EAL framework not only acts as
an explanatory framework for existing works but also provides us with concrete
insights into the limitations of existing methods to handle reward misspecification
and novel solution strategies. We use these insights to propose a new interactive
algorithm that uses the specified reward to infer potential user expectations about
the system behavior. We show how one can efficiently implement this algorithm by
mapping the inference problem into linear programs. We evaluate our method on a
set of standard Markov Decision Process (MDP) benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Given the accelerating pace of advancement within AI, creating agents that can detect and handle
incorrectly specified objectives has become an evermore pressing problem [Dafoe et al., 2020]. This
has resulted in the development of several methods for addressing, among other forms of objective
functions, misspecified rewards (cf. Hadfield-Menell et al. [2017]). Unfortunately, these works
operate under an implicit definition of what constitutes an incorrectly specified reward function. The
few works that have tried to formalize how an agent could satisfy human objectives do so by avoiding
the objective specification step altogether [Hadfield-Menell et al., 2016].
Our primary objective with this paper is to start with an explicit formalization of what constitutes a
misspecified reward function and the potential reasons why the user may have provided one in the first
place. However, our motivation for providing such a formalization goes beyond just the pedagogical.
We see that such a formalization provides us with multiple insights of practical importance.
Our formulation will follow the intuition set by recent work (cf. [Abel et al., 2021]) that looks at
reward functions as a means of specifying a task as opposed to being an end to itself. As such, the
user starts with a target outcome or behavior or a set of outcomes or behaviors 1 that they want the
agent to achieve. The reward function proposed by the user is one whose maximization, they believe,
1

In this paper, we will focus on cases where expected/desired outcomes correspond to the agent achieving
certain states. Section 3 provides a formal definition.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

