Customizing Language Models with
Instance-wise LoRA for Sequential Recommendation

Xiaoyu Kong1 Jiancan Wu1∗ An Zhang2
Leheng Sheng2 Hui Lin3 Xiang Wang1 Xiangnan He1∗
1
MoE Key Lab of BIPC, University of Science and Technology of China
2
National University of Singapore
3
Electronic Science Research Institute of China Electronics Technology Group Corporation
kongxy@mail.ustc.edu.cn, wujcan@gmail.com
xiangnanhe@gmail.com

Abstract
Sequential recommendation systems predict the next interaction item based on
users’ past interactions, aligning recommendations with individual preferences.
Leveraging the strengths of Large Language Models (LLMs) in knowledge comprehension and reasoning, recent approaches are eager to apply LLMs to sequential
recommendation. A common paradigm is converting user behavior sequences
into instruction data, and fine-tuning the LLM with parameter-efficient fine-tuning
(PEFT) methods like Low-Rank Adaption (LoRA). However, the uniform application of LoRA across diverse user behaviors is insufficient to capture individual
variability, resulting in negative transfer between disparate sequences. To address
these challenges, we propose Instance-wise LoRA (iLoRA). We innovatively treat
the sequential recommendation task as a form of multi-task learning, integrating
LoRA with the Mixture of Experts (MoE) framework. This approach encourages
different experts to capture various aspects of user behavior. Additionally, we
introduce a sequence representation guided gate function that generates customized
expert participation weights for each user sequence, which allows dynamic parameter adjustment for instance-wise recommendations. In sequential recommendation,
iLoRA achieves an average relative improvement of 11.4% over basic LoRA in
the hit ratio metric, with less than a 1% relative increase in trainable parameters.
Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
of iLoRA, highlighting its superior performance compared to existing methods in
mitigating negative transfer and improving recommendation accuracy. Our data
and code are available at https://github.com/AkaliKong/iLoRA.

1

Introduction

Sequential recommendation [1] suggests a user’s next item of interest by analyzing his/her past
interactions, tailoring recommendations to individual preferences. As Large Language Models
(LLMs) [2] exhibit impressive proficiency in global knowledge comprehension and reasoning, their
potential for application in sequential recommendation is garnering increasing interest [3–14]. Recent
efforts [9, 10] approach the sequential recommendation task under a language generation paradigm,
wherein user behavior sequences are converted into input prompts by either purely textual prompting
(ID numbers or descriptions) [3, 5, 15, 6] or hybrid prompting with additional behavioral tokens
[9, 10, 16], achieving remarkable success. Upon scrutinizing prior studies on LLM-based sequential
recommenders, we can summarize a common fine-tuning pipeline comprising three components:
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

