MoVA: Adapting Mixture of Vision Experts to
Multimodal Context
Zhuofan Zong1,2,∗ Bingqi Ma2,∗
Hao Shao1
1

CUHK MMLab

2

Dongzhi Jiang1

SenseTime Research

3

Dazhong Shen3

Guanglu Song2

Hongsheng Li1,3,4,†

Yu Liu2,†

Shanghai AI Laboratory

4

CPII under InnoHK

Abstract
As the key component in multimodal large language models (MLLMs), the ability
of the visual encoder greatly affects MLLM’s understanding on diverse image
content. Although some large-scale pretrained vision encoders such as vision
encoders in CLIP and DINOv2 have brought promising performance, we found
that there is still no single vision encoder that can dominate various image content
understanding, e.g., the CLIP vision encoder leads to outstanding results on general
image understanding but poor performance on document or chart content. To
alleviate the bias of CLIP vision encoder, we first delve into the inherent behavior
of different pre-trained vision encoders and then propose the MoVA, a powerful
and novel MLLM, adaptively routing and fusing task-specific vision experts with
a coarse-to-fine mechanism. In the coarse-grained stage, we design a contextaware expert routing strategy to dynamically select the most suitable vision experts
according to the user instruction, input image, and expertise of vision experts.
This benefits from the powerful model function understanding ability of the large
language model (LLM). In the fine-grained stage, we elaborately conduct the
mixture-of-vision-expert adapter (MoV-Adapter) to extract and fuse task-specific
knowledge from various experts. This coarse-to-fine paradigm effectively leverages
representations from experts based on multimodal context and model expertise,
further enhancing the generalization ability. We conduct extensive experiments
to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed approach. Without any bells and
whistles, MoVA can achieve significant performance gains over current state-ofthe-art methods in a wide range of challenging multimodal benchmarks. Codes
and models are available at https://github.com/TempleX98/MoVA.

1

Introduction

Significant achievements in multimodal large language models (MLLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] have been
witnessed due to their remarkable proficiency in solving open-world tasks. MLLMs acquire visual
perception capacity while inheriting sophisticated reasoning abilities and knowledge from large language models (LLMs) [8, 9, 10]. The core idea behind MLLMs is projecting the vision representation
into an LLM through a projector, facilitating a general-purpose multimodal understanding.
General multimodal understanding requires comprehending complex image contexts across various
tasks and scenarios. The CLIP [11] vision encoder, pre-trained on large-scale image-text pairs
with a contrastive loss, is widely considered as a flexible and popular choice among the latest
leading MLLMs. However, training data and optimization target of the vision encoder determine its
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

