One-Layer Transformer Provably Learns One-Nearest
Neighbor In Context

Zihao Li1∗ Yuan Cao2∗ Cheng Gao1 Yihan He1 Han Liu3
Jason M. Klusowski1 Jianqing Fan1† Mengdi Wang1†
1
Princeton University 2 The University of Hong Kong 3 Northwestern University
{zihaoli,chenggao,yihan.he,jason.klusowski,jqfan,mengdiw}@princeton.edu
yuancao@hku.hk
hanliu@northwestern.edu

Abstract
Transformers have achieved great success in recent years. Interestingly, transformers have shown particularly strong in-context learning capability – even without
fine-tuning, they are still able to solve unseen tasks well purely based on taskspecific prompts. In this paper, we study the capability of one-layer transformers
in learning one of the most classical nonparametric estimators, the one-nearest
neighbor prediction rule. Under a theoretical framework where the prompt contains
a sequence of labeled training data and unlabeled test data, we show that, although
the loss function is nonconvex when trained with gradient descent, a single softmax attention layer can successfully learn to behave like a one-nearest neighbor
classifier. Our result gives a concrete example of how transformers can be trained
to implement nonparametric machine learning algorithms, and sheds light on the
role of softmax attention in transformer models.

1

Introduction

Transformers have emerged as one of the most powerful machine learning models since its introduction in Vaswani et al. [2017], achieving remarkable success in various tasks, including natural
language processing [Devlin et al., 2018, Achiam et al., 2023, Touvron et al., 2023], computer vision
[Dosovitskiy et al., 2020, He et al., 2022, Saharia et al., 2022], reinforcement learning [Chen et al.,
2021, Janner et al., 2021, Parisotto et al., 2020], and so on. One intriguing aspect of transformers
is their exceptional In-Context Learning (ICL) capability [Garg et al., 2022, Min et al., 2022, Wei
et al., 2023, Von Oswald et al., 2023, Xie et al., 2021, Akyürek et al., 2022]. It has been observed
that transformers can effectively solve unseen tasks solely relying on task-specific prompts, without
the need for fine-tuning. However, the underlying mechanisms and reasons behind the exceptional
in-context learning capability of transformers remain largely unexplored, leaving a significant gap
in our understanding of how and why transformers can be pretrained to exhibit such remarkable
performance.
Several recent studies have attempted to understand in-context learning (ICL) through the lens of
learning specific function classes. Notably, Garg et al. [2022] proposed a well-defined approach: the
training data includes a demonstration prompt, consisting of a sequence of labeled data and a new
unlabeled query. The in-context learning performance of a transformer is then evaluated based on
its ability to successfully execute a machine-learning algorithm to predict the query data label using
the prompt demonstration (i.e., the context). Based on such definition, several works such as Zhang
et al. [2023], Huang et al. [2023], Chen et al. [2024] investigated ICL the optimization dynamics
∗

Equal Contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

