EHRCon: Dataset for Checking Consistency between
Unstructured Notes and Structured Tables in
Electronic Health Records
Yeonsu Kwon1∗, Jiho Kim1∗, Gyubok Lee1 , Seongsu Bae1 , Daeun Kyung1 ,
Wonchul Cha2 , Tom Pollard3 , Alistair Johnson4 , Edward Choi1
1
KAIST 2 Samsung Medical Center 3 MIT 4 University of Toronto
{yeonsu.k, jiho.kim, edwardchoi}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Electronic Health Records (EHRs) are integral for storing comprehensive patient
medical records, combining structured data (e.g., medications) with detailed clinical
notes (e.g., physician notes). These elements are essential for straightforward data
retrieval and provide deep, contextual insights into patient care. However, they often
suffer from discrepancies due to unintuitive EHR system designs and human errors,
posing serious risks to patient safety. To address this, we developed EHRCon, a new
dataset and task specifically designed to ensure data consistency between structured
tables and unstructured notes in EHRs. EHRCon was crafted in collaboration with
healthcare professionals using the MIMIC-III EHR dataset, and includes manual
annotations of 4,101 entities across 105 clinical notes checked against database
entries for consistency. EHRCon has two versions, one using the original MIMICIII schema, and another using the OMOP CDM schema, in order to increase its
applicability and generalizability. Furthermore, leveraging the capabilities of large
language models, we introduce CheckEHR, a novel framework for verifying the
consistency between clinical notes and database tables. CheckEHR utilizes an
eight-stage process and shows promising results in both few-shot and zero-shot
settings. The code is available at https://github.com/dustn1259/EHRCon.

1

Introduction

Electronic Health Records (EHRs) are digital datasets comprising the rich information of a patient’s
medical history within hospitals. These records integrate both structured data (e.g., medications,
diagnoses) and detailed clinical notes (e.g., physician notes). The structured data facilitates straightforward retrieval and analysis of essential information, while clinical notes provide in-depth, contextual
insights into the patient’s condition. These two forms of data are interconnected and provide complementary information throughout the diagnostic and treatment processes. For example, a practitioner
might start by reviewing test results stored in the database, then determine a diagnosis and formulate
a treatment plan, which are documented in the clinical notes. These notes are subsequently used to
update the structured data in the database.
However, inconsistencies can arise between the two sets of data for several reasons. One primary
issue is that EHR interfaces are often designed with a focus on administrative and financial tasks,
which makes it difficult to accurately document clinical information [32]. Additionally, overburdened
practitioners might unintentionally introduce errors by importing incorrect medication lists, copying
and pasting outdated records, or entering inaccurate test results [4, 24, 38]. These errors can lead
∗

These authors contributed equally

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

