A Functional Extension of Semi-Structured Networks
David Rügamer
Department of Statistics, LMU Munich
Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)
Munich, Germany
david@stat.uni-muenchen.de
Bernard X.W. Liew, Zainab Altai
School of Sport, Rehabilitation and Exercise Sciences
University of Essex
Colchester, UK
[bl19622,z.altai]@essex.ac.uk
Almond Stöcker
Institute of Mathematics
École Polytechnic Fédéral de Lausanne (EPFL)
Lausanne, Switzerland
almond.stoecker@epfl.ch

Abstract
Semi-structured networks (SSNs) merge the structures familiar from additive
models with deep neural networks, allowing the modeling of interpretable partial
feature effects while capturing higher-order non-linearities at the same time. A
significant challenge in this integration is maintaining the interpretability of the
additive model component. Inspired by large-scale biomechanics datasets, this
paper explores extending SSNs to functional data. Existing methods in functional
data analysis are promising but often not expressive enough to account for all
interactions and non-linearities and do not scale well to large datasets. Although the
SSN approach presents a compelling potential solution, its adaptation to functional
data remains complex. In this work, we propose a functional SSN method that
retains the advantageous properties of classical functional regression approaches
while also improving scalability. Our numerical experiments demonstrate that this
approach accurately recovers underlying signals, enhances predictive performance,
and performs favorably compared to competing methods.

1

Introduction

Incorporating additive structures in neural networks to enhance interpretability has been a major
theme of recent advances in deep learning. For example, neural additive models (NAMs; [1]) allow
users to learn basis functions in an automatic, data-driven fashion using feature subnetworks and
thereby provide an alternative modeling option to basis function approaches from statistics such
as generalized additive models (GAMs; [17]). Various extensions and related proposals have been
published in recent years. Notable examples include the joint basis function learning by [41] or the
combination of GAMs and neural oblivious decision ensembles [8]. When combining structural
assumptions with arbitrary deep architectures, the resulting network is often referred to as wideand-deep [10] or semi-structured network (SSN; [49, 52]). Various extensions of SSNs have been
proposed in recent years, including SSNs for survival analysis [24, 25], ordinal data fitting [22], for
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

