Geometry Cloak: Preventing TGS-based 3D
Reconstruction from Copyrighted Images

Qi Song1,2 , Ziyuan Luo1,2 , Ka Chun Cheung2 ,
Simon See2 , Renjie Wan1∗
1
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
2
NVIDIA AI Technology Center, NVIDIA
{qisong,ziyuanluo}@life.hkbu.edu.hk
{chcheung,ssee}@nvidia.com, renjiewan@hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract
Single-view 3D reconstruction methods like Triplane Gaussian Splatting (TGS)
have enabled high-quality 3D model generation from just a single image input
within seconds. However, this capability raises concerns about potential misuse,
where malicious users could exploit TGS to create unauthorized 3D models from
copyrighted images. To prevent such infringement, we propose a novel image
protection approach that embeds invisible geometry perturbations, termed “geometry cloaks”, into images before supplying them to TGS. These carefully crafted
perturbations encode a customized message that is revealed when TGS attempts 3D
reconstructions of the cloaked image. Unlike conventional adversarial attacks that
simply degrade output quality, our method forces TGS to fail the 3D reconstruction
in a specific way - by generating an identifiable customized pattern that acts as
a watermark. This watermark allows copyright holders to assert ownership over
any attempted 3D reconstructions made from their protected images. Extensive
experiments have verified the effectiveness of our geometry cloak. Our project is
available at https://qsong2001.github.io/geometry_cloak.

1

Introduction

With the increasing importance of 3D assets, several methods have been proposed to reconstruct
or generate 3D models from single 2D images. Combining with Tensorial Radiance Fields [2],
Triplane-based Gaussian Splatting (TGS) [52] presents a compelling approach for producing 3D
models from single-view images. However, malicious users could potentially exploit TGS [52] to
generate 3D models from single-view images without authorization, posing a threat to the interests of
image copyright owners. To address this issue, it is essential for image owners to implement measures
that can safeguard their copyrighted images from being used by TGS [52].
Digital watermarking [6, 51] is an effective way of claiming the copyright of digital assets. Thus, one
potential method for safeguarding copyrighted images is to embed unique messages within images
intended for building a 3D model and then extract the embedded messages from the reconstructed
3D model. However, previous methods have proven it is difficult to transfer the embedded copyright
messages in 2D images into 3D models [31, 19]. Moreover, even if we can embed and extract
copyright messages, the 3D models might have already been used by others before the copyright
being claimed.
To prevent unauthorized 3D reconstruction from copyrighted images via TGS [52], a possible
approach is to incorporate adversarial perturbations [11, 28] into input images intended for TGS.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

