On the Noise Robustness of In-Context Learning
for Text Generation
Hongfu Gao1,2∗, Feipeng Zhang2 , Wenyu Jiang1,3 , Jun Shu4 , Feng Zheng5 , Hongxin Wei1†
1
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Southern University of Science and Technology
2
School of Economics and Finance, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
4
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
5
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have shown impressive performance on downstream tasks by in-context learning (ICL), which heavily relies on the quality of
demonstrations selected from a large set of annotated examples. Recent works
claim that in-context learning is robust to noisy demonstrations in text classification.
In this work, we show that, on text generation tasks, noisy annotations significantly
hurt the performance of in-context learning. To circumvent the issue, we propose
a simple and effective approach called Local Perplexity Ranking (LPR), which
replaces the “noisy” candidates with their nearest neighbors that are more likely to
be clean. Our method is motivated by analyzing the perplexity deviation caused
by noisy labels and decomposing perplexity into inherent perplexity and matching
perplexity. Our key idea behind LPR is thus to decouple the matching perplexity by
performing the ranking among the neighbors in semantic space. Our approach can
prevent the selected demonstrations from including mismatched input-label pairs
while preserving the effectiveness of the original selection methods. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of LPR, improving the EM score by up
to 18.75 on common benchmarks with noisy annotations. Our code is available at
https://github.com/ml-stat-Sustech/Local-Perplexity-Ranking

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable performance on downstream tasks by incontext learning (ICL) with only a few task demonstrations [7, 10]. Without requiring explicit
parameter updates, in-context learning consistently outperforms zero-shot inference on various tasks
(e.g., classification and generation), making it a compelling alternative to supervised fine-tuning
[13, 16]. In particular, the success of ICL heavily relies on the quality of demonstrations selected
from a large set of annotated examples [21, 29, 51, 60]. For those candidates, input-label mappings
solicited from humans [61, 73] or LLMs [58] can often be noisy, especially in complex tasks. This
gives rise to the importance of noise-robust ICL, which aims to construct effective demonstrations in
the presence of noisy and erroneous labels.
Previous works show that in-context learning on classification tasks is fairly robust to label noise in
the in-context demonstrations [9, 12, 32, 37, 54, 55]. However, it is still mysterious how noisy labels
affect the performance of ICL on text generation tasks. In this work, we present the first study on
in-context learning with a noisy annotated dataset for generation. Surprisingly, we empirically find
that label noise in the demonstrations significantly degrades ICL’s performance on generation tasks,
∗
†

Work done while working at SUSTech as a visiting scholar.
Corresponding author (weihx@sustech.edu.cn)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

