Model Fusion through Bayesian Optimization in
Language Model Fine-Tuning

Chaeyun Jang∗
KAIST
jcy9911@kaist.ac.kr

Hyungi Lee∗
KAIST
lhk2708@kaist.ac.kr

Jungtaek Kim†
University of Pittsburgh
jungtaek.kim@pitt.edu

Juho Lee†
KAIST
juholee@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Fine-tuning pre-trained models for downstream tasks is a widely adopted technique known for its adaptability and reliability across various domains. Despite its
conceptual simplicity, fine-tuning entails several troublesome engineering choices,
such as selecting hyperparameters and determining checkpoints from an optimization trajectory. To tackle the difficulty of choosing the best model, one effective solution is model fusion, which combines multiple models in a parameter
space. However, we observe a large discrepancy between loss and metric landscapes during the fine-tuning of pre-trained language models. Building on this
observation, we introduce a novel model fusion technique that optimizes both
the desired metric and loss through multi-objective Bayesian optimization. In
addition, to effectively select hyperparameters, we establish a two-stage procedure by integrating Bayesian optimization processes into our framework. Experiments across various downstream tasks show considerable performance improvements using our Bayesian optimization-guided method. Code will be available at:
https://github.com/chaeyoon-jang/bomf.git.

1

Introduction

The field of Natural Language Processing (NLP) has significantly advanced with the pre-training of
Transformer-based models on large amounts of texts without supervision. In general, these pre-trained
networks are fine-tuned on supervised downstream tasks to solve particular tasks. The rise of Large
Language Models (LLMs) such as GPT [50] and LLaMA [63] has increased demands for huge memory
and computing during fine-tuning on downstream tasks. In response, low rank approximation methods
such as Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [22] and Quantized Low-Rank Adaptation (QLoRA) [11] have
been adopted recently to fine-tune the LLM. However, the fine-tuning of Pretrained Language Models
(PLMs) exhibits high sensitivity to marginal variations in hyperparameters such as learning rate and
batch size, often leading to training failure and the performance drop of a fine-tuned model [45],
while searching hyperparameters requires a vast amount of resources.
An effective strategy to seek an optimal model among multiple candidates is model ensembling, which
yields impressive performance on generalization and robustness [33]. However, traditional ensemble
methods lead to several drawbacks including the space and computational costs that linearly scale
with the number of models involved. These issues are particularly pertinent for LLMs, since individual
∗
†

Co-first authors
Co-corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

