Fit for our purpose, not yours: Benchmark for a
low-resource, Indigenous language

Suzanne Duncan
Te Reo Irirangi o Te Hiku o Te Ika
Kaitāia, NZ 0410
suzanne@tehiku.co.nz

Gianna Leoni
Te Reo Irirangi o Te Hiku o te Ika
Kaitāia, NZ 0410
gianna@tehiku.co.nz

Lee Steven
Te Reo Irirangi o Te Hiku o te Ika
Kaitāia, NZ 0410
lee@tehiku.co.nz

Keoni Mahelona
Te Reo Irirangi o Te Hiku o te Ika
Kaitāia, NZ 0410
keoni@tehiku.co.nz

Peter-Lucas Jones
Te Reo Irirangi o Te Hiku o te Ika
Kaitāia, NZ 0410
peterlucas@tehiku.co.nz

Abstract
Influential and popular benchmarks in AI are largely irrelevant to developing NLP
tools for low-resource, Indigenous languages. With the primary goal of measuring
the performance of general-purpose AI systems, these benchmarks fail to give due
consideration and care to individual language communities, especially low-resource
languages. The datasets contain numerous grammatical and orthographic errors,
poor pronunciation, limited vocabulary, and the content lacks cultural relevance
to the language community. To overcome the issues with these benchmarks,
we have created a dataset for the Māori language (the Indigenous language of
Aotearoa/New Zealand) to pursue NLP tools that are ‘fit-for-our-purpose’. This
paper demonstrates how low-resourced, Indigenous languages can develop tailored,
high-quality benchmarks that; i. Reflect the unique characteristics of their language,
ii. Reflect the diversity of speakers in the language community, iii. Support the
aspirations for the tools they are developing and their language revitalisation efforts.
All of which sit within a broader understanding of the impact of colonisation on
their language.

1

Introduction

Benchmarking is used in natural language processing (NLP) and machine learning (ML) as an
objective lens to measure or track the progress and accuracy of a model. However, standardised
open-source datasets do not always provide appropriate forms of benchmarking as they rely on large
datasets and favour a small group of high-resource languages, like English (Mdhaffar et al., 2024).
This means that they fall short on low-resource, under-resourced, minority, colonised and Indigenous
languages. It has been generally agreed that the development of NLP tools requires large, annotated
datasets. Yet, scarcity of data is a common issue in the endeavour to create quality tools because NLP
research concentrates on 20 of the more widely spoken languages of the more than 7000 languages
spoken throughout the world (Magueresse et al., 2020; Mdhaffar et al., 2024; Joshi et al., 2019; Joshi
et al., 2020; Bird, 2022; Markl et al., 2024; Nicholas & Bhatia, 2023). This has culminated in a
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

