SimPO: Simple Preference Optimization
with a Reference-Free Reward
Yu Meng1∗ Mengzhou Xia2 ∗ Danqi Chen2
Computer Science Department, University of Virginia
2
Princeton Language and Intelligence (PLI), Princeton University
yumeng5@virginia.edu
{mengzhou,danqic}@cs.princeton.edu
1

Abstract
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) is a widely used offline preference optimization algorithm that reparameterizes reward functions in reinforcement learning
from human feedback (RLHF) to enhance simplicity and training stability. In this
work, we propose SimPO, a simpler yet more effective approach. The effectiveness
of SimPO is attributed to a key design: using the average log probability of a
sequence as the implicit reward. This reward formulation better aligns with model
generation and eliminates the need for a reference model, making it more compute
and memory efficient. Additionally, we introduce a target reward margin to the
Bradley-Terry objective to encourage a larger margin between the winning and
losing responses, further improving the algorithm’s performance. We compare
SimPO to DPO and its recent variants across various state-of-the-art training setups,
including both base and instruction-tuned models such as Mistral, Llama 3, and
Gemma 2. We evaluate on extensive chat-based evaluation benchmarks, including
AlpacaEval 2, MT-Bench, and Arena-Hard. Our results demonstrate that SimPO
consistently and significantly outperforms existing approaches without substantially
increasing response length. Specifically, SimPO outperforms DPO by up to 6.4
points on AlpacaEval 2 and by up to 7.5 points on Arena-Hard. Our top-performing
model, built on Gemma-2-9B-it, achieves a 72.4% length-controlled win rate on
AlpacaEval 2, a 59.1% win rate on Arena-Hard, and ranks 1st on Chatbot Arena
among <10B models with real user votes.1

1

Introduction

Learning from human feedback is crucial in aligning large language models (LLMs) with human
values and intentions [47], ensuring they are helpful, honest, and harmless [5]. Reinforcement learning
from human feedback (RLHF) [18, 58, 68] is a popular method for fine-tuning language models
to achieve effective alignment. While the classical RLHF approach [58, 65] has shown impressive
results, it presents optimization challenges due to its multi-stage procedure, which involves training a
reward model and then optimizing a policy model to maximize that reward [13].
Recently, researchers have been exploring simpler offline algorithms. Direct Preference Optimization
(DPO) [61] is one such approach. DPO reparameterizes the reward function in RLHF to directly
learn a policy model from preference data, eliminating the need for an explicit reward model. It has
gained widespread practical adoption due to its simplicity and stability. In DPO, the implicit reward
is formulated using the log ratio of the likelihood of a response between the current policy model and
the supervised fine-tuned (SFT) model. However, this reward formulation is not directly aligned with
∗
1

Equal Contribution.
Code and models can be found at https://github.com/princeton-nlp/SimPO.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

