A General Protocol to Probe Large Vision Models
for 3D Physical Understanding

Guanqi Zhan
VGG, University of Oxford
guanqi@robots.ox.ac.uk

Chuanxia Zheng
VGG, University of Oxford
cxzheng@robots.ox.ac.uk

Weidi Xie
VGG, University of Oxford
SAI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
weidi@robots.ox.ac.uk

Andrew Zisserman
VGG, University of Oxford
az@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Our objective in this paper is to probe large vision models to determine to what
extent they ‘understand’ different physical properties of the 3D scene depicted in
an image. To this end, we make the following contributions: (i) We introduce a
general and lightweight protocol to evaluate whether features of an off-the-shelf
large vision model encode a number of physical ‘properties’ of the 3D scene,
by training discriminative classifiers on the features for these properties. The
probes are applied on datasets of real images with annotations for the property.
(ii) We apply this protocol to properties covering scene geometry, scene material,
support relations, lighting, and view-dependent measures, and large vision models
including CLIP, DINOv1, DINOv2, VQGAN, Stable Diffusion. (iii) We find that
features from Stable Diffusion and DINOv2 are good for discriminative learning
of a number of properties, including scene geometry, support relations, shadows
and depth, but less performant for occlusion and material, while outperforming
DINOv1, CLIP and VQGAN for all properties. (iv) It is observed that different
time steps of Stable Diffusion features, as well as different transformer layers
of DINO/CLIP/VQGAN, are good at different properties, unlocking potential
applications of 3D physical understanding. Our project page is https://www.
robots.ox.ac.uk/~vgg/research/phy-sd/.

1

Introduction

The large-scale pre-trained vision foundation models have achieved great success in computer vision
tasks, including classification (CLIP [18, 30]), segmentation (DINO [5, 27]), and image generation
(VQGAN [11], Stable Diffusion [31]) with strong generalisation capabilities. However, they are
mainly trained with 2D images, which are the projection of the 3D physical world. This naturally
raises the question of to what extent these large-scale vision models have learned about the 3D scene
depicted with only the 2D images. Our objective in this paper is to investigate this question, and we
do this precisely by determining whether features from these large-scale pre-trained vision models
can be used to estimate the true geometric and physical properties of the 3D scene. If they can, then
that is evidence that the models encode the 3D properties. For example, as an indication that Stable
Diffusion is 3D and physics aware, Figure 1 shows the result of the off-the-shelf Stable Diffusion
model [31] inpainting masked regions in real images – it correctly predicts shadows and supporting
structures.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

