Tangent Space Causal Inference: Leveraging Vector
Fields for Causal Discovery in Dynamical Systems

Kurt Butler∗ Daniel Waxman∗ Petar M. Djurić
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Stony Brook University
{ kurt.butler, daniel.waxman, petar.djuric} @stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Causal discovery with time series data remains a challenging yet increasingly
important task across many scientific domains. Convergent cross mapping (CCM)
and related methods have been proposed to study time series that are generated
by dynamical systems, where traditional approaches like Granger causality are
unreliable. However, CCM often yields inaccurate results depending upon the
quality of the data. We propose the Tangent Space Causal Inference (TSCI) method
for detecting causalities in dynamical systems. TSCI works by considering vector
fields as explicit representations of the systems’ dynamics and checks for the degree
of synchronization between the learned vector fields. The TSCI approach is modelagnostic and can be used as a drop-in replacement for CCM and its generalizations.
We first present a basic version of the TSCI algorithm, which is shown to be more
effective than the basic CCM algorithm with very little additional computation.
We additionally present augmented versions of TSCI that leverage the expressive
power of latent variable models and deep learning. We validate our theory on
standard systems, and we demonstrate improved causal inference performance
across a number of benchmark tasks.

1

Introduction

The discovery of causal relationships is one of the most fundamental goals of scientific work.
When causal relationships are known and understood, we can explain the behavior of a system and
understand how our actions or interventions upon the system will affect its behavior [27]. This kind
of reasoning is fundamental in many problem domains, such as medicine, environmental policy, and
economics. However, it is not always possible to perform interventions and observe their effects. For
example, medical practitioners might only have one chance to prescribe a medication to help a patient.
As another example, an ecologist might find that performing a large experiment is forbiddingly
expensive or otherwise infeasible. Due to these concerns, there remains a great interest in the problem
of observational causal inference, where one infers causation without manipulating the system under
study directly.
For time series data, the most prominent tool for observational causal inference is Granger causality
[15]. Granger causality operates on the assumption that if one system (the cause) is driving changes
in another system (the effect), then the cause should have unique information about what will happen
to the effect. This is encoded in an assumption called separability, which posits that the information
needed to predict the future behavior of the effect is not contained in the effect itself. However, the
separability condition runs counter to the behavior of coupled dynamical systems: if long histories of
the effect can forecast the cause, then an autoregressive model with the appropriate lag may forecast
the effect from itself. This effect is explored in the supplementary materials of [12, 41], and we give
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

