Debiasing Synthetic Data Generated by Deep
Generative Models
Alexander Decruyenaere ∗
Ghent University Hospital – SYNDARA

Heidelinde Dehaene ∗
Ghent University Hospital – SYNDARA

Paloma Rabaey
Ghent University – imec

Christiaan Polet
Ghent University Hospital – SYNDARA

Johan Decruyenaere
Ghent University Hospital – SYNDARA

Thomas Demeester
Ghent University – imec

Stijn Vansteelandt
Ghent University – Department of Applied Mathematics,
Computer Science and Statistics
∗

Joint first authors and corresponding authors
{firstname.lastname}@ugent.be

Abstract
While synthetic data hold great promise for privacy protection, their statistical
analysis poses significant challenges that necessitate innovative solutions. The
use of deep generative models (DGMs) for synthetic data generation is known to
induce considerable bias and imprecision into synthetic data analyses, compromising their inferential utility as opposed to original data analyses. This bias and
uncertainty can be substantial enough to impede statistical convergence rates, even
in seemingly straightforward analyses like mean calculation. The standard errors
of such estimators then exhibit slower shrinkage with sample size than the typical 1
over root-n rate. This complicates fundamental calculations like p-values and confidence intervals, with no straightforward remedy currently available. In response
to these challenges, we propose a new strategy that targets synthetic data created
by DGMs for specific data analyses. Drawing insights from debiased and targeted
machine learning, our approach accounts for biases, enhances convergence rates,
and facilitates the calculation of estimators with easily approximated large sample
variances. We exemplify our proposal through a simulation study on toy data and
two case studies on real-world data, highlighting the importance of tailoring DGMs
for targeted data analysis. This debiasing strategy contributes to advancing the
reliability and applicability of synthetic data in statistical inference.

1

Introduction

The concept of generating synthetic data as a means of privacy protection was initially introduced by
Rubin (1993) within the framework of multiple imputation, a widely used technique for managing
the statistical analysis of incomplete data sets. Since its inception, a substantial body of literature
on synthetic data has emerged (Raghunathan et al., 2003; Raghunathan, 2021; Drechsler, 2011;
Raab et al., 2016; Reiter, 2005), with a recent surge in interest propelled by advancements in deep
generative modelling technology (Raghunathan, 2021; van Breugel et al., 2023; Wan et al., 2017; Yan
et al., 2022; Nowok et al., 2016; Endres et al., 2022; Hernandez et al., 2022). In this work, we focus
on tabular synthetic data and their inferential utility, which captures whether synthetic data can be
used to obtain valid estimates and inference for a population parameter (Decruyenaere et al., 2024).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

