RadarOcc: Robust 3D Occupancy Prediction with
4D Imaging Radar

Fangqiang Ding1,∗ Xiangyu Wen1,∗ Yunzhou Zhu2 Yiming Li3 Chris Xiaoxuan Lu4†
1
University of Edinburgh 2 Georgia Institute of Technology 3 New York University
4
AI Centre, Department of Computer Science, UCL

Abstract
3D occupancy-based perception pipeline has significantly advanced autonomous
driving by capturing detailed scene descriptions and demonstrating strong generalizability across various object categories and shapes. Current methods predominantly
rely on LiDAR or camera inputs for 3D occupancy prediction. These methods are
susceptible to adverse weather conditions, limiting the all-weather deployment of
self-driving cars. To improve perception robustness, we leverage the recent advances in automotive radars and introduce a novel approach that utilizes 4D imaging
radar sensors for 3D occupancy prediction. Our method, RadarOcc, circumvents
the limitations of sparse radar point clouds by directly processing the 4D radar
tensor, thus preserving essential scene details. RadarOcc innovatively addresses the
challenges associated with the voluminous and noisy 4D radar data by employing
Doppler bins descriptors, sidelobe-aware spatial sparsification, and range-wise
self-attention mechanisms. To minimize the interpolation errors associated with
direct coordinate transformations, we also devise a spherical-based feature encoding followed by spherical-to-Cartesian feature aggregation. We benchmark various
baseline methods based on distinct modalities on the public K-Radar dataset. The
results demonstrate RadarOcc’s state-of-the-art performance in radar-based 3D
occupancy prediction and promising results even when compared with LiDARor camera-based methods. Additionally, we present qualitative evidence of the
superior performance of 4D radar in adverse weather conditions and explore the
impact of key pipeline components through ablation studies.

1

Introduction

The safety of autonomous vehicles navigating in the wild hinges on a thorough understanding of
the environment’s 3D structure. As a unified scene representation built from grid-based volumetric
elements known as voxels, 3D occupancy has gained increasing attention within the autonomous
driving community [1–5]. Its rising popularity stems from its comprehensive scene depiction,
capturing both geometric and semantic aspects. Crucially, it transcends the limitations of foregroundonly representations (vs. 3D object detection [6–8]) and sparse data formats (vs. point cloud
segmentation [9–11]). Furthermore, 3D occupancy offers a detailed open-set depiction of scene
geometry, effectively handling out-of-vocabulary items (e.g., animals) and irregular shapes (e.g.,
cranes). This capability allows it to address a broader range of corner cases than previous object-based
perception approaches [12–14].
Previous research has predominantly utilized either LiDAR point clouds [2, 15–22], RGB images [4,
5, 23–33], or a combination of both [3] for 3D occupancy prediction. However, the potential of 4D
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author. Email: xiaoxuan.lu@ucl.ac.uk

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

