Towards Principled Graph Transformers

Luis Müller

Daniel Kusuma

RWTH Aachen University
luis.mueller@cs.rwth-aachen.de

RWTH Aachen University

Blai Bonet

Christopher Morris

Universitat Pompeu Fabra

RWTH Aachen University

Abstract
The expressive power of graph learning architectures based on the k-dimensional
Weisfeiler–Leman (k-WL) hierarchy is well understood. However, such architectures often fail to deliver solid predictive performance on real-world tasks, limiting their practical impact. In contrast, global attention-based models such as
graph transformers demonstrate strong performance in practice. However, comparing their expressivity with the k-WL hierarchy remains challenging, particularly since attention-based architectures rely on positional or structural encodings. To address this, we show that the recently proposed Edge Transformer,
a global attention model operating on node pairs instead of nodes, has 3-WL
expressive power when provided with the right tokenization. Empirically, we
demonstrate that the Edge Transformer surpasses other theoretically aligned architectures regarding predictive performance and is competitive with state-of-theart models on algorithmic reasoning and molecular regression tasks while not
relying on positional or structural encodings. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/luis-mueller/towards-principled-gts.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are the de-facto standard in graph learning [17, 44, 29, 51] but suffer
from limited expressivity in distinguishing non-isomorphic graphs in terms of the 1-dimensional
Weisfeiler–Leman algorithm (1-WL) [36, 51]. Hence, recent works introduced higher-order GNNs,
aligned with the k-dimensional Weisfeiler–Leman (k-WL) hierarchy for graph isomorphism testing
[1, 34, 36, 37, 39], resulting in more expressivity with an increase in k > 1. The k-WL hierarchy
draws from a rich history in graph theory and logic [3, 4, 5, 10, 50], offering a deep theoretical
understanding of k-WL-aligned GNNs. While theoretically intriguing, higher-order GNNs often fail
to deliver state-of-the-art performance on real-world problems, making theoretically grounded models
less relevant in practice [1, 37, 39]. In contrast, graph transformers [18, 20, 32, 42, 53] recently
demonstrated state-of-the-art empirical performance. However, they draw their expressive power
mostly from positional/structural encodings (PEs), making it difficult to understand these models in
terms of an expressivity hierarchy such as the k-WL. While a few works theoretically aligned graph
transformers with the k-WL hierarchy [27, 28, 54], we are not aware of any works reporting empirical
results for 3-WL-equivalent graph transformers on established graph learning datasets.
In this work, we aim to set the ground for graph learning architectures that are theoretically aligned
with the higher-order Weisfeiler–Leman hierarchy while delivering strong empirical performance
and, at the same time, demonstrate that such an alignment creates powerful synergies between
transformers and graph learning. Hence, we close the gap between theoretical expressivity and
real-world predictive power. To this end, we apply the Edge Transformer (ET) architecture, initially
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

