Reconstruction of Manipulated Garment with Guided
Deformation Prior
Ren Li

ren.li@epfl.ch

Corentin Dumery
Zhantao Deng
Computer Vision Lab, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland

corentin.dumery@epfl.ch

Pascal Fua

zhantao.deng@epfl.ch

pascal.fua@epfl.ch

Abstract
Modeling the shape of garments has received much attention, but most existing
approaches assume the garments to be worn by someone, which constrains the
range of shapes they can assume. In this work, we address shape recovery when
garments are being manipulated instead of worn, which gives rise to an even larger
range of possible shapes. To this end, we leverage the implicit sewing patterns (ISP)
model for garment modeling and extend it by adding a diffusion-based deformation
prior to represent these shapes. To recover 3D garment shapes from incomplete
3D point clouds acquired when the garment is folded, we map the points to UV
space, in which our priors are learned, to produce partial UV maps, and then fit
the priors to recover complete UV maps and 2D to 3D mappings. Experimental
results demonstrate the superior reconstruction accuracy of our method compared
to previous ones, especially when dealing with large non-rigid deformations arising
from the manipulations.

1

Introduction

Garments play an important role in our daily lives, as we interact with them through wearing, folding,
and manipulating them. Therefore, the ability to recover their 3D shape is important in many fields,
including virtual try-on, VR/AR, and robotic manipulation. However, since garments are non-rigid
thin structures with a near-infinite number of degrees of freedom, accurate reconstruction remains a
challenge, especially in the presence of massive self-occlusions caused by folding or crumpling.
Most existing techniques focus on reconstructing garments being worn by someone and therefore
constrained by the body shape. This limits the amount of crumpling and provides a shape prior that
can be exploited. In this paper, we address the even more challenging problem of recovering the
shape of garments not being worn and therefore possibly assuming arbitrary shapes, such as those of
Fig. 1.
To this end, we start from the Implicit Sewing Patterns (ISP) model [1]. As in models used by clothing
designers, each garment consists of individual 2D panels. Their 2D shape is defined by a Signed
Distance Function and 3D shape by a 2D to 3D mapping. We chose this formalism because it can
handle complex garments with various geometries, while preserving differentiability with respect to
observations. However, its 3D parameterization is limited to a single rest state for each garment and
is designed to be draped on a human body.
To handle garments unconstrained by the wearer’s body, we introduce a prior to represent the many
plausible deformations, including folding and crumpling. It is learned using a generative diffusion
model that generates 2D positional UV maps that are applicable to many different garments. We use
it to recover 3D garment shapes from incomplete 3D point clouds, such as those that are acquired
using a laser scanner when the garment is folded.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

