Fisher Flow Matching for Generative Modeling over
Discrete Data
Oscar Davis1∗

Samuel Kessler1

Mircea Petrache2

Michael Bronstein1,3
1

İsmail İlkan Ceylan1

Avishek Joey Bose1

University of Oxford, 2 Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, 3 Aithyra

Abstract
Generative modeling over discrete data has recently seen numerous success stories,
with applications spanning language modeling, biological sequence design, and
graph-structured molecular data. The predominant generative modeling paradigm
for discrete data is still autoregressive, with more recent alternatives based on
diffusion or flow-matching falling short of their impressive performance in continuous data settings, such as image or video generation. In this work, we introduce
F ISHER -F LOW, a novel flow-matching model for discrete data. F ISHER -F LOW
takes a manifestly geometric perspective by considering categorical distributions
over discrete data as points residing on a statistical manifold equipped with its natural Riemannian metric: the Fisher-Rao metric. As a result, we demonstrate discrete
data itself can be continuously reparameterised to points on the positive orthant
of the d-hypersphere Sd+ , which allows us to define flows that map any source distribution to target in a principled manner by transporting mass along (closed-form)
geodesics of Sd+ . Furthermore, the learned flows in F ISHER -F LOW can be further
bootstrapped by leveraging Riemannian optimal transport leading to improved
training dynamics. We prove that the gradient flow induced by F ISHER -F LOW
is optimal in reducing the forward KL divergence. We evaluate F ISHER -F LOW on
an array of synthetic and diverse real-world benchmarks, including designing DNA
Promoter, and DNA Enhancer sequences. Empirically, we find that F ISHER -F LOW
improves over prior diffusion and flow-matching models on these benchmarks.
Our code is available at https://github.com/olsdavis/fisher-flow.

1

Introduction

The recent success of generative models operating on continuous data such as images has been
a watershed moment for AI exceeding even the wildest expectations just a few years ago [69, 22].
A key driver of this progress has come from substantial innovations in simulation-free generative
models, the most popular of which include diffusion [38, 66] and flow matching methods [48, 73],
leading to a plethora of advances in image generation [16, 30, 55], video generation [21, 14], audio
generation [59], and 3D protein structure generation [77, 19], to name a few.
In contrast, analogous advancements in generative models over discrete data domains, such as
language models [1, 72], have been dominated by autoregressive models [79], which attribute a
simple factorisation of probabilities over sequences. Modern autoregressive models, while impressive,
have several key limitations which include the slow sequential sampling of tokens in a sequence,
the assumption of a specified ordering over discrete objects, and the degradation of performance
∗

Correspondence to oscar.davis@cs.ox.ac.uk.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

