C-GAIL: Stabilizing Generative Adversarial Imitation
Learning with Control Theory

1

Tianjiao Luo1 , Tim Pearce2 , Huayu Chen1 , Jianfei Chen1 , Jun Zhu1∗
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center,
THBI Lab, BNRist Center, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
2
Microsoft Research
{luotj21, chenhuay21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{jianfeic, dcszj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL) provides a promising approach
to training a generative policy to imitate a demonstrator. It uses on-policy Reinforcement Learning (RL) to optimize a reward signal derived from an adversarial
discriminator. However, optimizing GAIL is difficult in practise, with the training
loss oscillating during training, slowing convergence. This optimization instability
can prevent GAIL from finding a good policy, harming its final performance. In this
paper, we study GAIL’s optimization from a control-theoretic perspective. We show
that GAIL cannot converge to the desired equilibrium. In response, we analyze the
training dynamics of GAIL in function space and design a novel controller that not
only pushes GAIL to the desired equilibrium but also achieves asymptotic stability
in a simplified “one-step” setting. Going from theory to practice, we propose
Controlled-GAIL (C-GAIL), which adds a differentiable regularization term on the
GAIL objective to stabilize training. Empirically, the C-GAIL regularizer improves
the training of various existing GAIL methods, including the popular GAIL-DAC,
by speeding up the convergence, reducing the range of oscillation, and matching
the expert distribution more closely.

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL) [1] aims to learn a decision-making policy in
a sequential environment by imitating trajectories collected from an expert demonstrator. Inspired
by Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [2], GAIL consists of a learned policy serving as a
generator, and a discriminator distinguishing expert trajectories from generated ones. The learned
policy is optimized through Reinforcement Learning (RL) with a reward signal derived from the
discriminator. This paradigm offers distinct advantages over other imitation learning strategies such
as Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL), which requires an explicit model of the reward function
[3], and Behavior Cloning (BC), which suffers from a distribution mismatch during roll-outs [4].
Meanwhile, GAIL does bring certain challenges. One key issue it inherits from GANs is instability
during training [5]. GAIL presents a difficult minimax optimization problem, where the convergence
of the discriminator and the policy generator towards their optimal points is not guaranteed in general.
This problem manifests in practice as oscillating training curves and an inconsistency in matching the
expert’s performance (Fig. 1). However, recent empirical works [6–10] on GAIL mostly focus on
improving the sample efficiency and final return of the learned policy, without directly resolving the
problem of unstable training. On the other hand, theoretical works [11–14] on GAIL’s convergence
are based on strong assumptions and do not yield a practical algorithm for stabilizing training.
* Corresponding author.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

