Separate and Reconstruct:
Asymmetric Encoder-Decoder for Speech Separation

Ui-Hyeop Shin
Sangyoun Lee
Taehan Kim
Hyung-Min Park
Department of Electronic Engineering, Sogang University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
{dmlguq123,leesy0882,taehank,hpark}@sogang.ac.kr
https://dmlguq456.github.io/SepReformer_Demo

Abstract
In speech separation, time-domain approaches have successfully replaced the
time-frequency domain with latent sequence feature from a learnable encoder.
Conventionally, the feature is separated into speaker-specific ones at the final
stage of the network. Instead, we propose a more intuitive strategy that separates
features earlier by expanding the feature sequence to the number of speakers
as an extra dimension. To achieve this, an asymmetric strategy is presented in
which the encoder and decoder are partitioned to perform distinct processing in
separation tasks. The encoder analyzes features, and the output of the encoder is
split into the number of speakers to be separated. The separated sequences are then
reconstructed by the weight-shared decoder, which also performs cross-speaker
processing. Without relying on speaker information, the weight-shared network in
the decoder directly learns to discriminate features using a separation objective. In
addition, to improve performance, traditional methods have extended the sequence
length, leading to the adoption of dual-path models, which handle the much longer
sequence effectively by segmenting it into chunks. To address this, we introduce
global and local Transformer blocks that can directly handle long sequences more
efficiently without chunking and dual-path processing. The experimental results
demonstrated that this asymmetric structure is effective and that the combination
of proposed global and local Transformer can sufficiently replace the role of interand intra-chunk processing in dual-path structure. Finally, the presented model
combining both of these achieved state-of-the-art performance with much less
computation in various benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

For the well-known cocktail party problem [14, 3], single channel speech separation [30] has been
improved since the introduction of time-domain audio separation network (TasNet) [46, 47], which
processes the audio separation in the latent space instead of the short-time Fourier transform (STFT)
domain, as shown in Figure 1(a). In particular, in most speech separation methods, the process of
separating the feature sequence for each speaker is typically positioned at the final stage of the
network, as shown in Figure 1(b), which we refer to as late split. Therefore, a single feature sequence
must encode all the information for all speakers to be separated. In addition, experimental results
have shown that TasNet employing a convolution-based audio encoder/decoder performs better when
the kernel length of the audio encoder is shortened [47, 45], which requires modeling a long sequence.
Indeed, expanding the sequence in channel and temporal dimensions is necessarily beneficial, since
the separation process must include all the information for all speakers in the feature sequence.
As a solution to modeling long sequences, DPRNN [45] was proposed using a dual path model, in
which it segments long sequences into chunks and processes in terms of intra-chunk and inter-chunk
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

