Decoupled Kullback-Leibler Divergence Loss

Jiequan Cui1 Zhuotao Tian4 Zhisheng Zhong2 Xiaojuan Qi3 Bei Yu2 Hanwang Zhang1
Nanyang Technological University1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong2
The University of Hong Kong3
HIT(SZ)4

Abstract
In this paper, we delve deeper into the Kullback–Leibler (KL) Divergence loss and
mathematically prove that it is equivalent to the Decoupled Kullback-Leibler (DKL)
Divergence loss that consists of 1) a weighted Mean Square Error (wMSE) loss
and 2) a Cross-Entropy loss incorporating soft labels. Thanks to the decomposed
formulation of DKL loss, we have identified two areas for improvement. Firstly,
we address the limitation of KL/DKL in scenarios like knowledge distillation
by breaking its asymmetric optimization property. This modification ensures
that the wMSE component is always effective during training, providing extra
constructive cues. Secondly, we introduce class-wise global information into
KL/DKL to mitigate bias from individual samples. With these two enhancements,
we derive the Improved Kullback–Leibler (IKL) Divergence loss and evaluate
its effectiveness by conducting experiments on CIFAR-10/100 and ImageNet
datasets, focusing on adversarial training, and knowledge distillation tasks. The
proposed approach achieves new state-of-the-art adversarial robustness on the
public leaderboard — RobustBench and competitive performance on knowledge
distillation, demonstrating the substantial practical merits. Our code is available at
https://github.com/jiequancui/DKL.

1

Introduction

Loss functions are a critical component of training deep models. Cross-Entropy loss is particularly
important in image classification tasks [28, 55, 59, 20, 44, 12], while Mean Square Error (MSE)
loss is commonly used in regression tasks [51, 27, 25]. Contrastive loss [7, 26, 8, 23, 4, 16, 17]
has emerged as a popular objective for representation learning. The selection of an appropriate loss
function can exert a substantial influence on a model’s performance. Therefore, the development of
effective loss functions [3, 43, 73, 63, 36, 2, 65, 58, 15] remains a critical research topic in the fields
of computer vision and machine learning.
Kullback-Leibler (KL) Divergence quantifies the degree of dissimilarity between a probability
distribution and a reference distribution. As one of the most frequently used loss functions, it
finds application in various scenarios, such as adversarial training [71, 66, 14, 35], knowledge
distillation [33, 6, 73], incremental learning [5, 42], and robustness on out-of-distribution data [29].
Although many of these studies incorporate KL Divergence loss as part of their algorithms, they may
not thoroughly investigate the underlying mechanisms of the loss function. To bridge this gap, our
paper aims to elucidate the working mechanism of KL Divergence regarding gradient optimization.
Our study focuses on the analysis of Kullback–Leibler (KL) Divergence loss from the perspective of
gradient optimization. For models with softmax activation, we provide theoretical proof that it is equivalent to the Decoupled Kullback–Leibler (DKL) Divergence loss which comprises a weighted Mean
Square Error (wMSE) loss and a Cross-Entropy loss with soft labels. Figures 1(a) and (b) reveal the
equivalence between KL and DKL losses regarding gradient backpropagation. With the decomposed
formulation, it becomes more convenient to analyze how the KL loss works in training optimization.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

