One-Step Effective Diffusion Network for
Real-World Image Super-Resolution
⋆

⋆

⋆

†

Rongyuan Wu1,2, , Lingchen Sun1,2, , Zhiyuan Ma1, , Lei Zhang1,2,
1
2
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
OPPO Research Institute

{rong-yuan.wu, ling-chen.sun, zm2354.ma}@connect.polyu.hk, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk
⋆
†
Equal contribution
Corresponding author

Abstract
The pre-trained text-to-image diffusion models have been increasingly employed
to tackle the real-world image super-resolution (Real-ISR) problem due to their
powerful generative image priors. Most of the existing methods start from random
noise to reconstruct the high-quality (HQ) image under the guidance of the given
low-quality (LQ) image. While promising results have been achieved, such RealISR methods require multiple diffusion steps to reproduce the HQ image, increasing
the computational cost. Meanwhile, the random noise introduces uncertainty in
the output, which is unfriendly to image restoration tasks. To address these issues,
we propose a one-step effective diffusion network, namely OSEDiff, for the RealISR problem. We argue that the LQ image contains rich information to restore
its HQ counterpart, and hence the given LQ image can be directly taken as the
starting point for diffusion, eliminating the uncertainty introduced by random noise
sampling. We finetune the pre-trained diffusion network with trainable layers to
adapt it to complex image degradations. To ensure that the one-step diffusion
model could yield HQ Real-ISR output, we apply variational score distillation in
the latent space to conduct KL-divergence regularization. As a result, our OSEDiff
model can efficiently and effectively generate HQ images in just one diffusion step.
Our experiments demonstrate that OSEDiff achieves comparable or even better
Real-ISR results, in terms of both objective metrics and subjective evaluations, than
previous diffusion model-based Real-ISR methods that require dozens or hundreds
of steps. The source codes are released at https://github.com/cswry/OSEDiff.

1

Introduction

Image super-resolution (ISR) [13, 66, 29, 65, 6, 24, 46, 27, 61] is a classical yet still active research
problem, which aims to restore a high-quality (HQ) image from its low-quality (LQ) observation
suffering from degradations of noise, blur and low-resolution, etc. While one line of ISR research
[13, 66, 29, 65, 6] simplifies the degradation process from HQ to LQ images as bicubic downsampling
(or downsampling after Gaussian blur) and focus on the study on network architecture design, the
trained models can hardly be generalized to real-world LQ images, whose degradations are often
unknown and much more complex. Therefore, another increasingly popular line of ISR research
is the so-called real-world ISR (Real-ISR) [61, 45] problem, which aims to reproduce perceptually
realistic HQ images from the LQ images captured in real-world applications.
There are two major issues in training a Real-ISR model. One is how to build the LQ-HQ training
image pairs, and another is how to ensure the naturalness of restored images, i.e., how to ensure that
the restored images follow the distribution of HQ natural images. For the first issue, some researchers
This work is supported by the PolyU-OPPO Joint Innovation Lab.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

