Secret Collusion among AI Agents: Multi-Agent
Deception via Steganography

Sumeet Ramesh Motwani1,2 Mikhail Baranchuk2 Martin Strohmeier3 Vijay Bolina4
Philip H.S. Torr2 Lewis Hammond2 Christian Schroeder de Witt2∗
1
UC Berkeley 2 University of Oxford 3 Armasuisse Science+Technology
4
Google DeepMind

Abstract
Recent advancements in generative AI suggest the potential for large-scale interaction between autonomous agents and humans across platforms such as the
internet. While such interactions could foster productive cooperation, the ability
of AI agents to circumvent security oversight raises critical multi-agent security
problems, particularly in the form of unintended information sharing or undesirable
coordination. In our work, we establish the subfield of secret collusion, a form
of multi-agent deception, in which two or more agents employ steganographic
methods to conceal the true nature of their interactions, be it communicative or
otherwise, from oversight. We propose a formal threat model for AI agents communicating steganographically and derive rigorous theoretical insights about the
capacity and incentives of large language models (LLMs) to perform secret collusion, in addition to the limitations of threat mitigation measures. We complement
our findings with empirical evaluations demonstrating rising steganographic capabilities in frontier single and multi-agent LLM setups and examining potential
scenarios where collusion may emerge, revealing limitations in countermeasures
such as monitoring, paraphrasing, and parameter optimization. Our work is the first
to formalize and investigate secret collusion among frontier foundation models,
identifying it as a critical area in AI Safety and outlining a comprehensive research
agenda to mitigate future risks of collusion between generative AI systems.

1

Introduction

Fueled by significant advances in AI (95), several national and supra-national governments are in
the process of establishing model evaluation and adversarial testing frameworks for frontier AI
models (124; 35). Central to such approaches is the security of interacting systems of generative
agents (99; 105), the proliferation of which has been accelerated by recent industry deployments (94).
Decentralised systems of interacting AI agents promise impactful applications to various real-world
socio-economic settings (134; 107), including digital assistants (43), multi-agent robotics and autonomous driving (90), trading strategies (9; 107), and virtual companies (105)—along with their
simulation through generative agent-based models (40; 128; 132; 135; 71). However, many of these
applications are classified as “high-risk” by legislators due to their potential impact on human lives
and use of sensitive data (35).
Further complexity arises when agents begin leveraging high-capacity communication channels,
potentially engaging in covert information-sharing techniques unintended by their deployer(s). This
could constitute privacy violations when sharing data (87), or secret collusion that could help agents
coordinate on unwanted behaviour at a wider scale (123). Moreover, recent work has shown that
∗

Correspondence to: cs@robots.ox.ac.uk

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

