Deep Policy Gradient Methods Without Batch Updates,
Target Networks, or Replay Buffers

Gautham Vasan12
Fahim Shariar12
1

Mohamed Elsayed12
Colin Bellinger3

Alireza Azimi∗12

Martha White124

Jiamin He∗12

A. Rupam Mahmood124

University of Alberta 2 Amii 3 National Research Council of Canada 4 CIFAR Canada AI Chair
{vasan, mohamedelsayed, sazimi, jiamin12, fshahri1}@ualberta.ca
colin.bellinger@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca {whitem, armahmood}@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Modern deep policy gradient methods achieve effective performance on simulated
robotic tasks, but they all require large replay buffers or expensive batch updates, or
both, making them incompatible for real systems with resource-limited computers.
We show that these methods fail catastrophically when limited to small replay
buffers or during incremental learning, where updates only use the most recent
sample without batch updates or a replay buffer. We propose a novel incremental deep policy gradient method — Action Value Gradient (AVG) and a set of
normalization and scaling techniques to address the challenges of instability in
incremental learning. On robotic simulation benchmarks, we show that AVG is the
only incremental method that learns effectively, often achieving final performance
comparable to batch policy gradient methods. This advancement enabled us to
show for the first time effective deep reinforcement learning with real robots using
only incremental updates, employing a robotic manipulator and a mobile robot.1

1

Introduction

Real-time or online learning is essential for intelligent agents to adapt to unforeseen changes in
dynamic environments. However, real-time learning faces substantial challenges in many real-world
systems, such as robots, due to limited onboard computational resources and storage capacity (Hayes
and Kanan 2022, Wang et al. 2023, Michieli and Ozay 2023). The system must process observations,
compute and execute actions, and learn from experience, all while adhering to strict computational and
time constraints (Yuan and Mahmood 2022). For example, the Mars rover faces stringent limitations
on its computational capabilities and storage capacity (Verma et al. 2023), constraining the system’s
ability to run computationally intensive algorithms onboard.
Deep policy gradient methods have risen to prominence for their effectiveness in real-world control
tasks, such as dexterous manipulation of a Rubik’s cube (Akkaya et al. 2019), quadruped dribbling of
a soccer ball (Ji et al. 2023), and magnetic control of tokamak plasmas (Degrave et al. 2022). These
methods are typically used offline, such as in simulations, as they have steep resource requirements due
to their use of large storage of past experience in a replay buffer, target networks and computationally
intensive batch updates for learning. As a result, these methods are ill-suited for on-device learning
and generally challenging to use for real-time learning. To make these methods applicable to resourcelimited computers such as edge devices, a natural approach is to reduce the replay buffer size,
eliminate target networks, and use smaller batch updates that meet the resource constraints.
In Figure 1, we demonstrate using four MuJoCo tasks (Todorov et al. 2012) that the learning
performance of batch policy gradient methods degrades substantially when the replay buffer size is
1

Code: https://github.com/gauthamvasan/avg

∗

Equal Contributions.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

