Marrying Causal Representation Learning with
Dynamical Systems for Science
Dingling Yao, Caroline Muller, and Francesco Locatello
Institute of Science and Technology Austria

Abstract
Causal representation learning promises to extend causal models to hidden causal
variables from raw entangled measurements. However, most progress has focused
on proving identifiability results in different settings, and we are not aware of any
successful real-world application. At the same time, the field of dynamical systems
benefited from deep learning and scaled to countless applications but does not allow
parameter identification. In this paper, we draw a clear connection between the two
and their key assumptions, allowing us to apply identifiable methods developed
in causal representation learning to dynamical systems. At the same time, we can
leverage scalable differentiable solvers developed for differential equations to build
models that are both identifiable and practical. Overall, we learn explicitly controllable models that isolate the trajectory-specific parameters for further downstream
tasks such as out-of-distribution classification or treatment effect estimation. We
experiment with a wind simulator with partially known factors of variation. We
also apply the resulting model to real-world climate data and successfully answer
downstream causal questions in line with existing literature on climate change.
Code is available at https://github.com/CausalLearningAI/crl-dynamical-systems.

1

Introduction

Causal representation learning (CRL) [54] focuses on provably retrieving high-level latent variables
from low-level data. Recently, there have been many casual representation learning works compiling,
in various settings, different theoretical identifiability results for these latent variables [8, 26, 32,
36, 37, 58, 60, 62, 65, 66, 70, 73]. The main open challenge that remains for this line of work is
the broad applicability to real-world data. Following earlier works in disentangled representations
(see [38] for a summary of data sets), existing approaches have largely focused on visual data . This
is challenging for various reasons. Most notably, it is unclear what the causal variables should be in
computer vision problems and what would be interesting or relevant causal questions. The current
standard is to test algorithms on synthetic data sets with “made-up” latent causal graphs, e.g., with
the object class of a rendered 3d shape causing its position, hue, and rotation [65].
In parallel, the field of machine learning for science [44, 49] shows promising results on various
real-world time series data collected from some underlying dynamical systems. Some of these
works primarily focus on time-series forecasting, i.e., building a neural emulator that mimics the
behavior of the given times series data [12, 13, 25]; while others try to additionally learn an explicit
ordinary differential equation simultaneously [9, 10, 15, 18, 23, 56]. However, to the best of our
knowledge, none of these methods provide explicit identifiability analysis indicating whether the
discovered equation recovers the ground truth underlying governing process given time series
observations; or even whether the learned representation relates to the underlying steering parameters.
At the same time, many scientific questions are inherently causal, in the sense that physical laws
govern the measurements of all the natural data we can record, e.g., across different environments
and experimental settings. Identifying such an underlying physical process can boost scientific
understanding and reasoning in numerous fields; for example, in climate science, one could conduct
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

