Learning-Augmented Priority Queues

Ziyad Benomar
ENSAE, Ecole Polytechnique,
FairPlay joint team
ziyad.benomar@ensae.fr

Christian Coester
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford, UK
christian.coester@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Priority queues are one of the most fundamental and widely used data structures
in computer science. Their primary objective is to efficiently support the insertion of new elements with assigned priorities and the extraction of the highest
priority element. In this study, we investigate the design of priority queues within
the learning-augmented framework, where algorithms use potentially inaccurate
predictions to enhance their worst-case performance. We examine three prediction
models spanning different use cases, and we show how the predictions can be
leveraged to enhance the performance of priority queue operations. Moreover, we
demonstrate the optimality of our solution and discuss some possible applications.

1

Introduction

Priority queues are an essential abstract data type in computer science [Jaiswal, 1968, Brodal, 2013]
whose objective is to enable the swift insertion of new elements and access or deletion of the
highest priority element. Their applications span a wide range of problems within computer science
and beyond. They play a crucial role in sorting [Williams, 1964, Thorup, 2007], in various graph
algorithms such as Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm [Chen et al., 2007] or computing minimum
spanning trees [Chazelle, 2000], in operating systems for scheduling and load balancing [Sharma
et al., 2022], in networking protocols for managing data transmission packets [Moon et al., 2000], in
discrete simulations for efficient event processing based on occurrence time [Goh and Thng, 2004],
and in implementing hierarchical clustering algorithms [Day and Edelsbrunner, 1984, Olson, 1995].
Various data structures can be used to implement priority queues, each offering distinct advantages
and tradeoffs [Brodal, 2013]. However, it is established that a priority queue with n elements cannot
guarantee o(log n) time for all the required operations [Brodal and Okasaki, 1996]. This limitation
can be surpassed within the learning augmented framework [Mitzenmacher and Vassilvitskii, 2022],
where the algorithms can benefit from machine-learned or expert advice to improve their worst-case
performance. We propose in this work learning-augmented implementations of priority queues in
three different prediction models, detailed in the next section.
1.1

Problem definition

A priority queue is a dynamic data structure where each element x is assigned a key u from a totally
ordered universe (U, <), determining its priority. The standard operations of priority queues are:
(i) FindMin(): returns the element with the smallest key without removing it,
(ii) ExtractMin(): removes and returns the element with the smallest key,
(iii) Insert(x, u): adds a new element x to the priority queue with key u,
(iv) DecreaseKey(x, v): decreases the key of an element x to v.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

