Fast Rates for Bandit PAC Multiclass Classification
Liad Erez
Tel-Aviv University
liaderez@mail.tau.ac.il

Alon Cohen
Tel-Aviv University
Google Research
alonco@tauex.tau.ac.il

Yishay Mansour
Tel-Aviv University
Google Research
mansour.yishay@gmail.com

Tomer Koren
Tel-Aviv University
Google Research
tkoren@tauex.tau.ac.il

Shay Moran
Technion
Google Research
shaymoran1@gmail.com

Abstract
We study multiclass PAC learning with bandit feedback, where inputs are classified into one of 𝐾 possible labels and feedback is limited to whether or not the
predicted labels are correct. Our main contribution is in designing a novel learning algorithm for the agnostic (𝜀, 𝛿)-PAC
version of the problem, with sample

complexity of 𝑂 (poly(𝐾) + 1/𝜀 2 ) log(|H |/𝛿) for any finite hypothesis class H .
In terms of the leading dependence on 𝜀, this improves upon existing bounds for
the problem, that are of the form 𝑂 (𝐾/𝜀 2 ). We also provide an extension of
this result to general classes and establish similar sample complexity bounds in
which log |H | is replaced by the Natarajan dimension. This matches the optimal
rate in the full-information version of the problem and resolves an open question
studied by Daniely, Sabato, Ben-David, and Shalev-Shwartz (2011) who demonstrated that the multiplicative price of bandit feedback in realizable PAC learning
is Θ(𝐾). We complement this by revealing a stark contrast with the agnostic case,
where the price of bandit feedback is only 𝑂 (1) as 𝜀 → 0. Our algorithm utilizes
a stochastic optimization technique to minimize a log-barrier potential based on
Frank-Wolfe updates for computing a low-variance exploration distribution over
the hypotheses, and is made computationally efficient provided access to an ERM
oracle over H .

1

Introduction

Multiclass classification is a fundamental learning problem in which a learner is tasked with classifying objects into one of 𝐾 possible labels. In bandit multiclass classification [18], upon making
a prediction, the learner does not observe the true label, but only whether or not the prediction was
correct. As a concrete example, consider a the task of classifying images, say, from the ImageNet
dataset, with the number of labels 𝐾 being several thousands. After the learner predicts a label for a
particular image, both the image and the prediction are shown to a human rater who is asked if the
prediction is correct or not, after which the answer is revealed to the learner. Thus, the learner faces
a bandit multiclass classification instance as the true label is not revealed in case the prediction was
deemed incorrect by the rater.
Much of previous work on the foundations of bandit multiclass classification focused on the online
setting [18, 10, 9, 21, 23, 13], where the goal of the learner is to minimize the regret compared to
a given hypothesis class H , namely, the learner’s total number of correct predictions throughout
the learning process compared to that of the best fixed hypothesis from H . A central line of work
focused on studying the properties of H that allow for sublinear regret in this context, and on char38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

