Diffusion Models With Learned Adaptive Noise

Subham Sekhar Sahoo
Cornell Tech, NYC, USA.
ssahoo@cs.cornell.edu

Aaron Gokaslan
Cornell Tech, NYC, USA.
akg87@cs.cornell.edu

Chris De Sa
Cornell University, Ithaca, USA.
cdesa@cs.cornell.edu

Volodymyr Kuleshov
Cornell Tech, NYC, USA.
kuleshov@cornell.edu

Abstract
Diffusion models have gained traction as powerful algorithms for synthesizing highquality images. Central to these algorithms is the diffusion process, a set of equations which maps data to noise in a way that can significantly affect performance.
In this paper, we explore whether the diffusion process can be learned from data.
Our work is grounded in Bayesian inference and seeks to improve log-likelihood
estimation by casting the learned diffusion process as an approximate variational
posterior that yields a tighter lower bound (ELBO) on the likelihood. A widely held
assumption is that the ELBO is invariant to the noise process: our work dispels this
assumption and proposes multivariate learned adaptive noise (M U LAN), a learned
diffusion process that applies noise at different rates across an image. Specifically,
our method relies on a multivariate noise schedule that is a function of the data to
ensure that the ELBO is no longer invariant to the choice of the noise schedule as in
previous works. Empirically, M U LAN sets a new state-of-the-art in density estimation on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet and reduces the number of training steps by 50%.
We provide the code1 , along with a blog post and video tutorial on the project page:
https://s-sahoo.com/MuLAN

1

Introduction

Diffusion models, inspired by the physics of heat diffusion, have gained traction as powerful tools for
generative modeling, capable of synthesizing realistic, high-quality images [51, 16, 43, 14]. Central
to these algorithms is the diffusion process, a gradual mapping of clean images into white noise.
The reverse of this mapping defines the data-generating process we seek to learn—hence, its choice
can significantly impact performance [22]. The conventional approach involves adopting a diffusion
process derived from the laws of thermodynamics, which, albeit simple and principled, may be
suboptimal due to its lack of adaptability to the dataset.
In this study, we investigate whether the notion of diffusion can be instead learned from data. Our
motivating goal is to perform accurate log-likelihood estimation and probabilistic modelling, and
we take an approach grounded in Bayesian inference [23]. We view the diffusion process as an
approximate variational posterior: learning this process induces a tighter lower bound (ELBO) on
the marginal likelihood of the data. Although previous work argued that the ELBO objective of a
diffusion model is invariant to the choice of diffusion process [20, 22], we show that this claim is
only true for the simplest types of univariate Gaussian noise: we identify a broader class of noising
processes whose optimization yields significant performance gains.
1

https://github.com/s-sahoo/MuLAN

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

