MoEUT: Mixture-of-Experts Universal Transformers

Róbert Csordás1,2† Kazuki Irie3 Jürgen Schmidhuber2,4
Christopher Potts1 Christopher D. Manning1
1
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
2
The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA, USI & SUPSI, Lugano, Switzerland
3
Center for Brain Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
4
AI Initiative, KAUST, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
{rcsordas,cgpotts,manning}@stanford.edu
kirie@fas.harvard.edu, juergen@idsia.ch

Abstract
Previous work on Universal Transformers (UTs) has demonstrated the importance
of parameter sharing across layers. By allowing recurrence in depth, UTs have
advantages over standard Transformers in learning compositional generalizations,
but layer-sharing comes with a practical limitation of parameter-compute ratio: it
drastically reduces the parameter count compared to the non-shared model with the
same dimensionality. Naively scaling up the layer size to compensate for the loss of
parameters makes its computational resource requirements prohibitive. In practice,
no previous work has succeeded in proposing a shared-layer Transformer design
that is competitive in parameter count-dominated tasks such as language modeling.
Here we propose MoEUT (pronounced “moot”), an effective mixture-of-experts
(MoE)-based shared-layer Transformer architecture, which combines several recent
advances in MoEs for both feedforward and attention layers of standard Transformers together with novel layer-normalization and grouping schemes that are
specific and crucial to UTs. The resulting UT model, for the first time, slightly
outperforms standard Transformers on language modeling tasks such as BLiMP
and PIQA, while using significantly less compute and memory.1

1

Introduction

Transformers [1, 2] are ubiquitous neural architectures in modern machine learning. They power large
language models [3, 4, 5, 6, 7], modern image processors [8], offline reinforcement learning agents [9],
and many others. Despite these successes, we should ask whether more optimal architectures exist.
One important candidate is the Universal Transformer (UT, [10]). The core characteristic of UTs is
recurrence in depth via sharing parameters across layers. This reintroduces the expressive power of
recurrence provided by recurrent neural networks (RNNs, [11, 12, 13]). Layer sharing allows UTs to
outperform regular Transformers on compositional problems such as logical inference tasks, while
also yielding improvements on small-scale language modeling and translation tasks. In particular,
UTs have been shown to have better compositional generalization properties [14, 15] by being
able to decompose structured problems without supervision and generalize to longer sequences
[16].2 These empirical findings confirm that UTs are more general architectures with superior
†

Work started at IDSIA.
Our code is public: https://github.com/robertcsordas/moeut
2
Dehghani et al. [10] also augment UTs with an additional adaptive computation time (ACT, [17, 18])
mechanism. However, the benefits of UTs we discuss here are purely due to layer-sharing, which, in consequence,
is the focus of this work. Our models could also optionally be augmented with ACT but this is out of scope here.
1

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

