LIVE: Learnable In-Context Vector for Visual
Question Answering

Yingzhe Peng1,2 , Chenduo Hao1,2 , Xinting Hu3 , Jiawei Peng1 , 2, Xin Geng1,2 , Xu Yang1,2∗
1
Southeast University
2
Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and
Its Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
{yingzhe.peng, 213201447, pengjiawei, xgeng, xuyang_palm}@seu.edu.cn
3
Nanyang Technological University
xinting001@e.ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
As language models continue to scale, Large Language Models (LLMs) have
exhibited emerging capabilities in In-Context Learning (ICL), enabling them to
solve language tasks by prefixing a few in-context demonstrations (ICDs) as
context. Inspired by these advancements, researchers have extended these techniques to develop Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) with ICL capabilities. However, applying ICL usually faces two major challenges: 1) using more ICDs will
largely increase the inference time and 2) the performance is sensitive to the selection of ICDs. These challenges are further exacerbated in LMMs due to the
integration of multiple data types and the combinational complexity of multimodal ICDs. Recently, to address these challenges, some NLP studies introduce
non-learnable In-Context Vectors (ICVs) which extract useful task information
from ICDs into a single vector and then insert it into the LLM to help solve
the corresponding task. However, although useful in simple NLP tasks, these
non-learnable methods fail to handle complex multimodal tasks like Visual Question Answering (VQA). In this study, we propose Learnable In-Context Vector
(LIVE) to distill essential task information from demonstrations, improving ICL
performance in LMMs. Experiments show that LIVE can significantly reduce
computational costs while enhancing accuracy in VQA tasks compared to traditional ICL and other non-learnable ICV methods. The code is available at https:
//github.com/ForJadeForest/LIVE-Learnable-In-Context-Vector.

1

Introduction

As language models continue to scale up, Large Language Models (LLMs) [1–3] have demonstrated
emerging capabilities in In-Context Learning (ICL) [4]: these models can solve language tasks
when provided with a few similar examples, termed in-context demonstrations (ICDs), as context.
Unlike traditional task-specific fine-tuning, ICL, a efficient method to adapt LLM to downstream
task [5, 6], achieves comparable performance without necessitating updates to millions or trillions
of model parameters [7]. By prefixing just a handful of data samples to the query input, ICL
configures a model’s behavior to produce the corresponding output, thus facilitating rapid adaptation
across a wide range of downstream tasks. Inspired by these advancements in the language domain,
researchers have extended these techniques to develop Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) with ICL
capabilities [8–10].
1

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

