Qualitative Mechanism Independence

Oliver E. Richardson
Dept of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca NY 14853
oli@cs.cornell.edu

Spencer Peters
Dept of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca NY 14853
speters@cs.cornell.edu

Joseph Y. Halpern
Dept of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca NY 14853
halpern@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
We define what it means for a joint probability distribution to be (QIM-)compatible
with a set of independent causal mechanisms, at a qualitative level—or, more
precisely, with a directed hypergraph A, which is the qualitative structure of a probabilistic dependency graph (PDG). When A represents a qualitative Bayesian network, QIM-compatibility with A reduces to satisfying the appropriate conditional
independencies. But giving semantics to hypergraphs using QIM-compatibility
lets us do much more. For one thing, we can capture functional dependencies. For
another, QIM-compatibility captures important aspects of causality: we can use
compatibility to understand cyclic causal graphs, and to demonstrate compatibility
is essentially to produce a causal model. Finally, compatibility has deep connections to information theory. Applying compatibility to cyclic structures helps to
clarify a longstanding conceptual issue in information theory.

1

Introduction

The structure of a (standard) probabilistic graphical model (like a Bayesian Network or Markov
Random Field) encodes a set of conditional independencies among variables. This is useful because it
enables a compact description of probability distributions that have those independencies; it also lets
us use graphs as a visual language for describing important qualitative properties of a probabilistic
world. Yet these kinds of independencies are not the only important qualitative aspects of a probability
measure. In this paper, we study a natural generalization of standard graphical model structures that
can describe far more than conditional independence.
For example, another qualitative aspect of a probability distribution is that of functional dependence,
which is also exploited across computer science to enable compact representations and simplify
probabilistic analysis. Acyclic causal models, for instance, specify a distribution via a probability
over contexts (the values of variables whose causes are viewed as outside the model), and a collection
of equations (i.e., functional dependencies) [18]. And in deep learning, a popular class of models
called normalizing flows [25, 12] specify a distribution by composing a fixed distribution over some
latent space, say a standard normal distribution, with a function (i.e., a functional dependence) fit
to observational data. Functional dependence and independence are deeply related and interacting
notions. For instance, if B is a function of A (written A →
→ B) and A is independent of C (written
A⊥
⊥ C), then B and C are also independent (B ⊥⊥ C).1 Moreover, dependence can be written in
terms of independence: Y is a function of X if and only if Y is conditionally independent of itself
given X (i.e., X →
→ Y iff Y ⊥
⊥ Y | X). Traditional graph-based languages such as Bayesian
Networks (BNs) and Markov Random Fields (MRFs) cannot capture these relationships. Indeed, the
graphoid axioms (which describe BNs and MRFs) [21] and axioms for conditional independence
[17], do not even consider statements like A ⊥⊥ A to be syntactically valid. Yet such statements
1

This well-known fact (Lemma 10) is formalized and proved in Appendix A, where all proofs can be found.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

