Convergence of log(1/ϵ) for Gradient-Based
Algorithms in Zero-Sum Games without the Condition
Number: A Smoothed Analysis

Ioannis Anagnostides
Carnegie Mellon University
ianagnos@cs.cmu.edu

Tuomas Sandholm
Carnegie Mellon University
Strategic Machine, Inc.
Strategy Robot, Inc.
Optimized Markets, Inc.
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Gradient-based algorithms have shown great promise in solving large (two-player)
zero-sum games. However, their success has been mostly confined to the lowprecision regime since the number of iterations grows polynomially in 1/ϵ,
where ϵ > 0 is the duality gap. While it has been well-documented that linear convergence—an iteration complexity scaling as log(1/ϵ)—can be attained
even with gradient-based algorithms, that comes at the cost of introducing a dependency on certain condition number-like quantities which can be exponentially large
in the description of the game.
To address this shortcoming, we examine the iteration complexity of several
gradient-based algorithms in the celebrated framework of smoothed analysis, and
we show that they have polynomial smoothed complexity, in that their number of
iterations grows as a polynomial in the dimensions of the game, log(1/ϵ), and
1/σ, where σ measures the magnitude of the smoothing perturbation. Our result
applies to optimistic gradient and extra-gradient descent/ascent, as well as a certain
iterative variant of Nesterov’s smoothing technique. From a technical standpoint,
the proof proceeds by characterizing and performing a smoothed analysis of a
certain error bound, the key ingredient driving linear convergence in zero-sum
games. En route, our characterization also makes a natural connection between
the convergence rate of such algorithms and perturbation-stability properties of the
equilibrium, which is of interest beyond the model of smoothed complexity.

1

Introduction

We consider the fundamental problem of computing an equilibrium strategy for a (two-player)
zero-sum game
minn maxm ⟨x, Ay⟩,
(1)
x∈∆ y∈∆

:= {x ∈ Rd+1
≥0
n×m

d+1

⊤

where ∆
: x 1d+1 = 1} represents the d-dimensional probability simplex
and A ∈ R
is the payoff matrix of the game. Tracing all the way back to Von Neumann’s
celebrated minimax theorem [von Neumann, 1928], zero-sum games played a pivotal role in the early
development of game theory [von Neumann and Morgenstern, 1947] and the crystallization of linear
programming duality [Dantzig, 1951]. Indeed, in light of the equivalence between zero-sum games
and linear programming [Adler, 2013, von Stengel, 2023, Brooks and Reny, 2023], many central
optimization problems can be cast as (1).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

