Benchmarking Structural Inference Methods for
Interacting Dynamical Systems with Synthetic Data

Aoran Wang 1∗ Tsz Pan Tong 1∗ Andrzej Mizera 2 Jun Pang 1
University of Luxembourg 2 IDEAS-NCBR & University of Warsaw
{aoran.wang, tszpan.tong, jun.pang}@uni.lu andrzej.mizera@ideas-ncbr.pl
1

Abstract
Understanding complex dynamical systems begins with identifying their topological structures, which expose the organization of the systems. This requires robust
structural inference methods that can deduce structure from observed behavior.
However, existing methods are often domain-specific and lack a standardized, objective comparison framework. We address this gap by benchmarking 13 structural
inference methods from various disciplines on simulations representing two types
of dynamics and 11 interaction graph models, supplemented by a biological experimental dataset to mirror real-world application. We evaluated the methods for
accuracy, scalability, robustness, and sensitivity to graph properties. Our findings
indicate that deep learning methods excel with multi-dimensional data, while classical statistics and information theory based approaches are notably accurate and
robust. Additionally, performance correlates positively with the graph’s average
shortest path length. This benchmark should aid researchers in selecting suitable
methods for their specific needs and stimulate further methodological innovation.
Project website: https://structinfer.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Dynamical systems pervade various domains, from gravitational interactions among galaxies to
intricate chemical reactions. A common characteristic of these systems is their representation as
interaction graphs, where nodes symbolize agents, edges depict interactions, and the adjacency matrix
encapsulates the underlying structure. Examples of inherent interaction graphs are found in physical
systems [61, 42, 111], multi-agent systems [15, 62], and biological systems [102, 85]. Understanding
the structure of these interaction graphs is crucial as it enhances predictability and manipulability of
dynamical systems, despite the complexity of the task [28].
Often, only observable node attributes within a specific timeframe are available, partially or fully
obscuring the interaction graph’s underlying structure amid dynamic complexities. This necessitates
an approach to uncover the hidden structure of dynamical systems through observable features,
leading to the concept of structural inference. Here, the compilation of observed features over time,
termed a trajectory, is crucial for understanding dynamical systems. Unraveling the graph’s structure
simplifies interaction modeling, especially when the graph dimensions and interactions are known
and time-independent.
Structural inference, rooted in statistics, has evolved significantly within the Bayesian network
framework, prompting numerous algorithm proposals [70, 100, 101, 89, 25]. Notable advancements,
such as in genome sequencing [93], have enabled the study of gene expression and regulatory
mechanisms, fostering various structural inference methods for gene regulatory networks (GRNs) [71,
∗

Equal first contributions

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

