PaCE: Parsimonious Concept Engineering
for Large Language Models

Jinqi Luo∗ ♦ Tianjiao Ding∗♦ Kwan Ho Ryan Chan♦ Darshan Thaker♦
Aditya Chattopadhyay♣ Chris Callison-Burch♦ René Vidal♦
♦
University of Pennsylvania ♣ Johns Hopkins University
{jinqiluo,tjding}@upenn.edu

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) are being used for a wide variety of tasks. While
they are capable of generating human-like responses, they can also produce undesirable output including potentially harmful information, racist or sexist language, and
hallucinations. Alignment methods are designed to reduce such undesirable outputs
via techniques such as fine-tuning, prompt engineering, and representation engineering. However, existing methods face several challenges: some require costly
fine-tuning for every alignment task; some do not adequately remove undesirable
concepts, failing alignment; some remove benign concepts, lowering the linguistic
capabilities of LLMs. To address these issues, we propose Parsimonious Concept
Engineering (PaCE), a novel activation engineering framework for alignment. First,
to sufficiently model the concepts, we construct a large-scale concept dictionary
in the activation space, in which each atom corresponds to a semantic concept.
Given any alignment task, we instruct a concept partitioner to efficiently annotate
the concepts as benign or undesirable. Then, at inference time, we decompose
the LLM activations along the concept dictionary via sparse coding, to accurately
represent the activations as linear combinations of benign and undesirable components. By removing the latter ones from the activations, we reorient the behavior
of the LLM towards the alignment goal. We conduct experiments on tasks such
as response detoxification, faithfulness enhancement, and sentiment revising, and
show that PaCE achieves state-of-the-art alignment performance while maintaining
linguistic capabilities. Our collected dataset for concept representations is available
at https://github.com/peterljq/Parsimonious-Concept-Engineering.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) are useful for tasks as far ranging as question answering [65, 77],
symbolic reasoning [25, 56], multi-modal synthesis [40, 44, 86], and medical diagnosis [85]. LLMs
are typically pre-trained on a broad collection of textual corpora with the next-token prediction
objective [54, 70], enabling them to generate human-like text. An important aspect of deploying
pre-trained LLMs for real-world applications is preventing undesirable responses such as toxic
language, hallucinations, and biased information through alignment methods, which aim to make AI
systems behave in line with human intentions and values [28]. A common alignment approach is
tuning LLMs with human feedback [55, 62] for better instruction-following capabilities. However,
after such aligning, undesirable and harmful content can still be elicited from LLMs. For example,
jailbreaking can produce hate speech and aggression [22, 32], stress-testing shows hallucinatory
responses such as illogical statements [87], and various kinds of biases are not fully removed from
LLM responses [19]. This emphasizes the need for further development of aligned LLMs.
Overall, alignment methods can largely be categorized into: parameter fine-tuning, prompt engineering, and activation engineering. Parameter fine-tuning methods, such as low-rank adaptation
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

