Geometry of naturalistic object representations in
recurrent neural network models of working memory

Xiaoxuan Lei1,2

Takuya Ito3

Pouya Bashivan1,2

1

Department of Physiology, McGill University, Montreal, Canada
2
Mila, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Canada
3
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA

Abstract
Working memory is a central cognitive ability crucial for intelligent decisionmaking. Recent experimental and computational work studying working memory has primarily used categorical (i.e., one-hot) inputs, rather than ecologicallyrelevant, multidimensional naturalistic ones. Moreover, studies have primarily
investigated working memory during single or few number of cognitive tasks. As
a result, an understanding of how naturalistic object information is maintained
in working memory in neural networks is still lacking. To bridge this gap, we
developed sensory-cognitive models, comprising of a convolutional neural network (CNN) coupled with a recurrent neural network (RNN), and trained them
on nine distinct N-back tasks using naturalistic stimuli. By examining the RNN’s
latent space, we found that: 1) Multi-task RNNs represent both task-relevant and
irrelevant information simultaneously while performing tasks; 2) While the latent
subspaces used to maintain specific object properties in vanilla RNNs are largely
shared across tasks, they are highly task-specific in gated RNNs such as GRU and
LSTM; 3) Surprisingly, RNNs embed objects in new representational spaces in
which individual object features are less orthogonalized relative to the perceptual
space; 4) Interestingly, the transformation of WM encodings (i.e., embedding of
visual inputs in the RNN latent space) into memory was shared across stimuli, yet
the transformations governing the retention of a memory in the face of incoming
distractor stimuli were distinct across time. Our findings indicate that goal-driven
RNNs employ chronological memory subspaces to track information over short
time spans, enabling testable predictions with neural data.

1

Introduction

Working memory (WM) – the ability to store and manipulate information over short periods – is
a central cognitive capability that enables a wide spectrum of behaviors [Baddeley, 1992]. Over
the past few decades, various experimental, computational, and theoretical techniques have been
adopted to study WM from both cognitive and neural perspectives. However, several fundamental
issues remain unresolved, including the key question of how high-dimensional sensory information is
encoded, maintained, and modulated according to specific task demands.
A significant body of work has been dedicated to modelling the computations underlying WM. These
include many classic models from cognitive science [Meyer and Kieras, 1997a, Ritter et al., 2019,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

