CigTime: Corrective Instruction Generation Through
Inverse Motion Editing
Qihang Fang1 , Chengcheng Tang2 , Bugra Tekin2 , and Yanchao Yang1*
1

The University of Hong Kong
2
Meta Reality Labs
{qihfang}@gmail.com, {chengcheng.tang,bugratekin}@meta.com, {yanchaoy}@hku.hk

Abstract
Recent advancements in models linking natural language with human motions have
shown significant promise in motion generation and editing based on instructional
text. Motivated by applications in sports coaching and motor skill learning, we
investigate the inverse problem: generating corrective instructional text, leveraging
motion editing and generation models. We introduce a novel approach that, given
a user’s current motion (source) and the desired motion (target), generates text
instructions to guide the user towards achieving the target motion. We leverage large
language models to generate corrective texts and utilize existing motion generation
and editing frameworks to compile datasets of triplets (source motion, target motion,
and corrective text). Using this data, we propose a new motion-language model
for generating corrective instructions. We present both qualitative and quantitative
results across a diverse range of applications that largely improve upon baselines.
Our approach demonstrates its effectiveness in instructional scenarios, offering
text-based guidance to correct and enhance user performance.

1

Introduction

Corrective instructions are crucial for learning motor skills, such as sports. Without feedback,
people are at risk of developing improper, suboptimal, and injury-prone moves that hinder long-term
progress and health. With the growing popularity and immersion of motion-sensing sports games,
the increasing accuracy and accessibility of 3D pose estimation techniques, and the advancement of
fitness equipment and trackers with versatile sensing technologies, the need for intelligent coaching
systems that provide corrective feedback on user motion is becoming increasingly important.
In this work, we study the task of Motion Corrective Instruction Generation, which aims to create textbased guidance to help users correct and improve their physical movements. This task has significant
applications in sports coaching, rehabilitation, and general motor skill learning, providing users with
precise and actionable instructions to enhance their performance. By leveraging advancements in
human motion generation and editing, this task addresses the need for personalized and adaptive
feedback in various instructional scenarios.
Recent research in text-conditioned human motion generation has shown impressive progress. Methods like MotionCLIP [39] and TEMOS [34] have utilized neural networks and transformer-based
models to align text and motion into a joint embedding space, producing diverse and high-quality
motion sequences. These models, however, focus primarily on generating motions from text rather
than generating corrective instructions from motion pairs. Therefore they are not directly suitable for
analyzing and improving user movements based on a comparison of motion sequences.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

