First-Order Minimax Bilevel Optimization

Yifan Yang∗ , Zhaofeng Si∗ , Siwei Lyu and Kaiyi Ji
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University at Buffalo
Buffalo, NY 14260
{yyang99, zhaofeng, siweilyu, kaiyiji}@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Multi-block minimax bilevel optimization has been studied recently due to its great
potential in multi-task learning, robust machine learning, and few-shot learning.
However, due to the complex three-level optimization structure, existing algorithms
often suffer from issues such as high computing costs due to the second-order
model derivatives or high memory consumption in storing all blocks’ parameters.
In this paper, we tackle these challenges by proposing two novel fully first-order
algorithms named FOSL and MemCS. FOSL features a fully single-loop structure
by updating all three variables simultaneously, and MemCS is a memory-efficient
double-loop algorithm with cold-start initialization. We provide a comprehensive
convergence analysis for both algorithms under full and partial block participation,
and show that their sample complexities match or outperform those of the same
type of methods in standard bilevel optimization. We evaluate our methods in two
applications: the recently proposed multi-task deep AUC maximization and a novel
rank-based robust meta-learning. Our methods consistently improve over existing
methods with better performance over various datasets.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we study a general multi-block minimax bilevel optimization problem given by
n
n


1X
1X 
fi x, y, zi∗ (x) =
Eξ fi x, y, zi∗ (x); ξi
d
d
n i=1
n i=1
x∈R x y∈R y


∗
s.t. zi (x) = arg min gi (x, z) = Eζ gi (x, z; ζi )

min max F (x, y, z∗ ) :=

(1)

z∈Rdz

where the upper- and lower-level function fi and gi for block i take the expectation form
 w.r.t. the
random variables ξ, ζ, and are jointly continuously differentiable, z∗ = z1∗ (x), ..., zn∗ (x) ∈ Rdz ×n
contains all lower-level optimal solutions, and n is the number of blocks. The above problem has
various applications in machine learning, including deep AUC maximization [24, 23], meta-learning
[16, 3], hyperparameter optimization [17], and robust learning [17]. This paper focuses on the setting
with a nonconvex-strongly-concave minimax upper-level problem and a strongly-convex lower-level
problem.
To date, barring a few works on optimizing special cases of this problem [17, 24], the solution
algorithm to its general form has not been well studied. The primary obstacle lies in the significant
computational cost per iteration, arising from the inherent structure of multi-block minimax bilevel
optimization. To address this challenge, [17] considered a special case where y is the simplex variable,
and introduced a single-loop gradient descent-ascent algorithm, based on the two-timescale bilevel
*

These authors contributed equally to this work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

