QT-ViT: Improving Linear Attention in ViT with
Quadratic Taylor Expansion

Yixing Xu, Chao Li, Dong Li, Xiao Sheng, Fan Jiang, Lu Tian, Emad Barsoum
Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., Beijing, China
{yixing.xu, chao.li, d.li, xsheng, f.jiang, lu.tian, emad.barsoum}@amd.com

Abstract
Vision transformer model (ViT) is widely used and performs well in vision tasks
due to its ability to capture long-range dependencies. However, the time complexity
and memory consumption increase quadratically with the number of input patches
which limits the usage of ViT in real-world applications. Previous methods have
employed linear attention to mitigate the complexity of the original self-attention
mechanism at the expense of effectiveness. In this paper, we propose QT-ViT
models that improve the previous linear self-attention using quadratic Taylor expansion. Specifically, we substitute the softmax-based attention with second-order
Taylor expansion, and then accelerate the quadratic expansion by reducing the time
complexity with a fast approximation algorithm. The proposed method capitalizes
on the property of quadratic expansion to achieve superior performance while
employing linear approximation for fast inference. Compared to previous studies
of linear attention, our approach does not necessitate knowledge distillation or highorder attention residuals to facilitate the training process. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of the proposed QT-ViTs, showcasing
the state-of-the-art results. Particularly, the proposed QT-ViTs consistently surpass
the previous SOTA EfficientViTs under different model sizes, and achieve a new
Pareto-front in terms of accuracy and speed.

1

Introduction

Compared to convolutional neural networks (CNNs), vision transformers (ViTs) are getting more
and more attention due to their strong performance across various computer vision tasks, such as
image classification [33, 16, 8, 37, 38, 21], object detection [4, 13], semantic segmentation [36, 15]
and low-level vision [20, 32, 31, 30]. The effectiveness of ViT comes from the multi-head selfattention (MHSA) operation that allows the model to capture long-range information by calculating
the attention score between each pair of patches. However, this mechanism necessitates quadratic
time and storage complexity O(n2 ) related to the number of input patches n, and the original ViTs
require significant computational and storage resources when applied to real-world applications.
To overcome the aforementioned problem, previous researches focus on improving the original selfattention mechanism by using local attention such as window attention [23], dilated attention [10]
and random attention [27]. Another family of methods is to utilize linear attention [11, 2, 5, 3]
that decomposes the original softmax function into two non-linear kernels so that the order of
matrix multiplications in attention score calculation is changed to reduce the quadratic computational
complexity into a linear one. Many papers focus on designing non-linear kernels and novel linearattention architectures for better approximation, e.g., Hydra-attention [2] uses the hydra trick to their
multi-head attention by setting as many heads as features. Performer [5] uses fast attention via a
positive orthogonal random features approach to approximate the softmax attention. EfficientViT [3]
replaces softmax with ReLU non-linear activation and applies depthwise and group convolution to
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

