Exploiting the Replay Memory Before Exploring the
Environment: Enhancing Reinforcement Learning
Through Empirical MDP Iteration

Hongming Zhang1 , Chenjun Xiao2 , Chao Gao3 , Han Wang1 , Bo Xu4 , Martin Müller1
1
Department of Computing Science and Amii, University of Alberta
2
CUHK-Shenzhen
3
Edmonton Research Center, Huawei Canada
4
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
hongmin2@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms are typically based on optimizing a
Markov Decision Process (MDP) using the optimal Bellman equation. Recent
studies have revealed that focusing the optimization of Bellman equations solely
on in-sample actions tends to result in more stable optimization, especially in the
presence of function approximation. Upon on these findings, in this paper, we propose an Empirical MDP Iteration (EMIT) framework. EMIT constructs a sequence
of empirical MDPs using data from the growing replay memory. For each of these
b The key strength
empirical MDPs, it learns an estimated Q-function denoted as Q.
is that by restricting the Bellman update to in-sample bootstrapping, each empirical
b function. Furthermore, gradually expanding
MDP converges to a unique optimal Q
from the empirical MDPs to the original MDP induces a monotonic policy improvement. Instead of creating entirely new algorithms, we demonstrate that EMIT can
be seamlessly integrated with existing online RL algorithms, effectively acting as a
regularizer for contemporary Q-learning methods. We show this by implementing
EMIT for two representative RL algorithms, DQN and TD3. Experimental results
on Atari and MuJoCo benchmarks show that EMIT significantly reduces estimation
errors and substantially improves the performance of both algorithms.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remarkable success across various domains, such as games
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5], robotics [6, 7, 8] and industrial applications [9, 10], by modeling them as Markov
Decision Processes (MDPs). Most RL methods store transitions in a replay memory [11] and estimate
an action-value function from batches of that data. They apply the Bellman optimality equation as an
iterative update:
Q(s, a) ← r(s, a) + γ max
Q(s′ , a′ ).
(1)
′
a

Such value iteration converges to the optimal action value Q∗ given infinite state-action visitation and
updates [12, 13, 14, 15]. An optimal policy is derived by taking an action with maximum Q at each
state or approximated by a parameterized policy [16, 17, 18, 19]. In practice, data coverage in the
replay memory is limited to a potentially small subset of the whole state-action space, especially for
complex environments. Indeed, the Bellman update in Eq. (1) suffers from estimation errors due to the
combination of applying the max operator to out-of-sample actions and bootstrapping from a function
approximator. In the examples in Fig. 1a, the well-known double Q-learning method [20] cannot
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

