Latent Plan Transformer for Trajectory Abstraction:
Planning as Latent Space Inference

Deqian Kong1,⋆ , Dehong Xu1,⋆ , Minglu Zhao1,⋆ , Bo Pang2 , Jianwen Xie3 ,
Andrew Lizarraga1 , Yuhao Huang4 , Sirui Xie5,⋆ , Ying Nian Wu1
1

2

Department of Statistics and Data Science, UCLA
Salesforce Research 3 Akool Research 4 Xi’an Jiaotong University
5
Department of Computer Science, UCLA

Abstract
In tasks aiming for long-term returns, planning becomes essential. We study generative modeling for planning with datasets repurposed from offline reinforcement
learning. Specifically, we identify temporal consistency in the absence of step-wise
rewards as one key technical challenge. We introduce the Latent Plan Transformer
(LPT), a novel model that leverages a latent variable to connect a Transformerbased trajectory generator and the final return. LPT can be learned with maximum
likelihood estimation on trajectory-return pairs. In learning, posterior sampling of
the latent variable naturally integrates sub-trajectories to form a consistent abstraction despite the finite context. At test time, the latent variable is inferred from an
expected return before policy execution, realizing the idea of planning as inference.
Our experiments demonstrate that LPT can discover improved decisions from suboptimal trajectories, achieving competitive performance across several benchmarks,
including Gym-Mujoco, Franka Kitchen, Maze2D, and Connect Four. It exhibits
capabilities in nuanced credit assignments, trajectory stitching, and adaptation to
environmental contingencies. These results validate that latent variable inference
can be a strong alternative to step-wise reward prompting.

1

Introduction

Decision Transformer (DT) (Chen et al., 2021) and some concurrent work (Janner et al., 2021) have
popularized the research agenda of decision-making via generative modeling. The general idea is to
consider decision-making as a generative process that takes in a representation of the task objective,
e.g. the rewards or returns of a trajectory, and outputs a representation of the trajectory. Intuitively,
a purposeful decision-making process should shift the trajectory distribution towards regimes with
higher returns. In the classical decision-making literature, this is achieved by two interweaving
processes, policy evaluation and policy improvement (Sutton and Barto, 2018). Policy evaluation
promotes consistency in the estimated correlations between the trajectories and the returns. In DT,
this is realized by the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) of the joint distribution of sequences
consisting of states, actions, and return-to-gos (RTG). Policy improvement shifts the distribution to
improve the status quo expectation of the returns. In DT, this is naturally entailed since the policy is a
distribution of actions conditioned on step-wise RTGs.
In this work, we are interested in the problem of planning. Among various ways to identify planning
as a special class of decision-making problems, we pay particular attention to its data specification
⋆

Equal Contribution
Project page: https://sites.google.com/view/latent-plan-transformer.
Code: https://github.com/mingluzhao/Latent-Plan-Transformer.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

