Large Pre-trained time series models for cross-domain
Time series analysis tasks

Harshavardhan Kamarthi
College of Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
harsha.pk@gatech.edu

B. Aditya Prakash
College of Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
badityap@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Large pre-trained models have been vital in recent advancements in domains
like language and vision, making model training for individual downstream tasks
more efficient and provide superior performance. However, tackling time-series
analysis tasks usually involves designing and training a separate model from
scratch leveraging training data and domain expertise specific to the task. We tackle
a significant challenge for pre-training a foundational time-series model from multidomain time-series datasets: extracting semantically useful tokenized inputs to the
model across heterogenous time-series from different domains. We propose Large
Pre-trained Time-series Models (LPTM) that introduces a novel method of adaptive
segmentation that automatically identifies optimal dataset-specific segmentation
strategy during pre-training. This enables LPTM to perform similar to or better
than domain-specific state-of-art model when fine-tuned to different downstream
time-series analysis tasks and under zero-shot settings. LPTM achieves superior
forecasting and time-series classification results taking up to 40% less data and
50% less training time compared to state-of-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Time-series analysis tasks are important well-studied problems such as forecasting (Hyndman and
Athanasopoulos, 2018) and classification (Chowdhury et al., 2022) with applications in wide-ranging
domains such as retail, meteorology, economics, and health. Recent works (Chen et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2023) have shown the efficacy of purely data-driven deep learning models.
However, most state-of-art neural models are known to be data-hungry and require substantial training
data. Motivated by language and vision foundational models Bommasani et al. (2021), recent body of
works build pre-trained time-series models Das et al. (2023b); Ansari et al. (2024); Jin et al. (2024);
Rasul et al. (2023). These models are trained on diverse datasets from different domains during
pre-training. They require less training resources and data and produce superior performance. These
models can also be deployed without any training, in a zero-shot or few-shot setting.
These foundational models, however, require large amounts of data for pre-training, which is still a
challenge for time-series datasets. Moreover, they do not provide consistent performance improvement
across all the domains. We identify an important challenge to building a unified pre-trained model
for time-series that is pre-trained on and deployed to multiple domains: representation of diverse
time-series input into these models.
Most neural sequential models input time-series values for each time-step separately. However,
unlike text data, each individual time stamp may not provide enough semantic meaning about local
temporal patterns of the time series. To tackle this, Nie et al. (2022) proposed to segment the time
series and input each segment as individual tokens to their transformer-based model. This simple
segmentation method of tokenizing time-series has been used by recent pre-trained models Woo et al.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

