Efficient Federated Learning against Heterogeneous
and Non-stationary Client Unavailability

Ming Xiang1 Stratis Ioannidis1 Edmund Yeh1 Carlee Joe-Wong2 Lili Su1
1
Northeastern University, Boston, MA 2 Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA
{xiang.mi,l.su}@northeastern.edu
{ioannidis,eyeh}@ece.neu.edu
cjoewong@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Addressing intermittent client availability is critical for the real-world deployment
of federated learning algorithms. Most prior work either overlooks the potential
non-stationarity in the dynamics of client unavailability or requires substantial
memory/computation overhead. We study federated learning in the presence of
heterogeneous and non-stationary client availability, which may occur when the
deployment environments are uncertain, or the clients are mobile. The impacts of
heterogeneity and non-stationarity on client unavailability can be significant, as we
illustrate using FedAvg, the most widely adopted federated learning algorithm. We
propose FedAWE, which includes novel algorithmic structures that (i) compensate
for missed computations due to unavailability with only O(1) additional memory
and computation with respect to standard FedAvg, and (ii) evenly diffuse local
updates within the federated learning system through implicit gossiping, despite
being agnostic to non-stationary dynamics. We show that FedAWE converges to a
stationary point of even non-convex objectives while achieving the desired linear
speedup property. We corroborate our analysis with numerical experiments over
diversified client unavailability dynamics on real-world data sets.

1

Introduction

Federated learning is a distributed machine learning approach that enables training global models
without disclosing raw local data [32, 21]. It has been adopted in commercial applications such as
autonomous vehicles [6, 70, 41], the Internet of things [39], and natural language processing [63, 43].
Heterogeneous data and massive client populations are two of the defining characteristics of crossdevice federated learning systems [32, 21]. Despite intensive efforts [32, 29, 68, 45, 21], several key
challenges that arise from the involvement of large-scale client populations are often overlooked
in the existing literature [42]. One of the primary hurdles is the issue of client unavailability.
Intuitively, more active clients drive the global model to their local optima by overfitting their local
data, which biases the training. In addition, the higher the uncertainty in client unavailability, the
larger the performance degradation. Concrete examples that confirm these intuitions in the context
of FedAvg - the most widely adopted federated learning algorithm - can be found in Section 4.
Client unavailability issues can arise from internal factors such as different working schedules and
heterogeneous hardware/software constraints. External factors, such as poor network coverage
and frequent handovers of base stations due to fast movements, only exacerbate these problems
[50, 57, 64, 3, 21]. The intricate interplay of internal and external factors results in the non-stationarity
and heterogeneity of client unavailability.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

