VastTrack: Vast Category Visual Object Tracking
Liang Peng1∗ ,

Junyuan Gao1∗ , Xinran Liu1,3∗ , Weihong Li1,2,3∗ , Shaohua Dong4∗ ,
Zhipeng Zhang5 , Heng Fan4† , Libo Zhang1,2,3†♯
1
Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Hangzhou Institute for Advanced Study
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 University of North Texas 5 KargoBot
∗
Equal contribution † Equal advising and co-last authors ♯ Corresponding author

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel benchmark, named VastTrack, aiming to facilitate
the development of general visual tracking via encompassing abundant classes and
videos. VastTrack consists of a few attractive properties: (1) Vast Object Category.
In particular, it covers targets from 2,115 categories, significantly surpassing object
classes of existing popular benchmarks (e.g., GOT-10k with 563 classes and LaSOT
with 70 categories). Through providing such vast object classes, we expect to learn
more general object tracking. (2) Larger scale. Compared with current benchmarks,
VastTrack provides 50,610 videos with 4.2 million frames, which makes it to date
the largest dataset in term of the number of videos, and hence could benefit training
even more powerful visual trackers in the deep learning era. (3) Rich Annotation.
Besides conventional bounding box annotations, VastTrack also provides linguistic
descriptions with more than 50K sentences for the videos. Such rich annotations of
VastTrack enable the development of both vision-only and vision-language tracking.
In order to ensure precise annotation, each frame in the videos is manually labeled
with multi-stage of careful inspections and refinements. To understand performance
of existing trackers and to provide baselines for future comparison, we extensively
evaluate 25 representative trackers. The results, not surprisingly, display significant
drops compared to those on current datasets due to lack of abundant categories and
videos from diverse scenarios for training, and more efforts are urgently required to
improve general visual tracking. Our VastTrack, the toolkit, and evaluation results
are publicly available at https://github.com/HengLan/VastTrack.

1

Introduction

Visual tracking is a fundamental computer vision problem with many applications such as surveillance
and robotics. The ultimate goal for tacking is to localize the target of an arbitrary category in an
arbitrary scenario from a sequence, given its initial position, which we term universal visual object
tracking. For such goal, numerous trackers have been proposed in recent decades [58, 45, 34, 28, 39].
In particular, with the introduction of several large-scale tracking benchmarks (e.g., [43, 16, 27]) in
the deep learning era, considerable advancements (e.g., [7, 9, 57, 5, 38, 6, 51, 37]) have been seen in
the visual tracking community. Despite this, it remains challenging to achieve universal tracking.
One important reason is relatively restricted number of object categories in current tracking benchmarks. The objects in the real world are from countless categories. To achieve general visual tracking
like humans, the tracker is expected to “SEE” various sequences from an extremely large set of
object categories during training to acquire the generalization ability. Nevertheless, the categories in
existing large-scale benchmarks are rather limited. For example, the popular TrackingNet [43] and
LaSOT [16] comprise respectively 27 and 70 categories (see Fig. 1), which fall short for training universally generalizable trackers. Another popular dataset GOT-10k [27] aims to handle this by largely
expanding the number of object categories to 563. Despite its success in advancing generic-purpose
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

