S MALLT O L ARGE (S2L): Scalable Data Selection for
Fine-tuning Large Language Models by Summarizing
Training Loss Trajectories of Small Models

Yu Yang1 Siddhartha Mishra1 Jeffrey Chiang2 Baharan Mirzasoleiman1
1
Department of Computer Science, 2 Department of Computational Medicine
University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA)

Abstract
Despite the effectiveness of data selection for pretraining and instruction fine-tuning
large language models (LLMs), improving data efficiency in supervised fine-tuning
(SFT) for specialized domains poses significant challenges due to the complexity
of fine-tuning data. To bridge this gap, we introduce an effective and scalable
data selection method for SFT, S MALLT O L ARGE (S2L), which trains a small
model, clusters loss trajectories of the examples, and samples from these clusters to
guide data selection for larger models. We prove that during fine-tuning, samples
within the same loss trajectory cluster exhibit similar gradients. Then, we show
that S2L subsets have a bounded gradient error w.r.t. the full data, hence guarantee
convergence to the neighborhood of the optimal solution. We demonstrate through
extensive experiments that S2L significantly improves data efficiency in SFT for
mathematical problem-solving, reducing the training data requirement to just 11%
of the original MathInstruct dataset [64] to match full dataset performance while
outperforming state-of-the-art data selection algorithms by an average of 4.7%
across 6 in- and out-domain evaluation datasets. Remarkably, selecting only 50K
data for SFT, S2L achieves a 32.7% accuracy on the challenging MATH [19]
benchmark, improving Phi-2 [28] by 16.6%. In clinical text summarization on the
MIMIC-III dataset [21], S2L again outperforms training on the full dataset using
only 50% of the data. Notably, S2L can perform scalable data selection using a
reference model 100× smaller than the target model, proportionally reducing the
computational cost. 1

1

Introduction

In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have revolutionized artificial intelligence by demonstrating an unprecedented ability to understand and generate human language [7]. Among all the
contributing factors, the quality and selection of data is becoming increasingly recognized for its
importance in training LLMs effectively. Recent research indicates that LLMs benefit more from
training for additional epochs on carefully curated data rather than on larger, uncurated ones during
pretraining [48] and instruction fine-tuning [67], making data selection one of the most promising
means to unlock the next level of LLMs’ language capability. However, while generalist models
obtained through pre-training or instruction fine-tuning excel in general language tasks, they may
not deliver optimal outcomes in specialized domain, such as mathematics [3, 31, 63, 30, 64], code
[42, 32], medicine [43, 44, 9], or finance [57, 9]. These domains are not only critical for real-world
applications but also hold substantial economic and societal impacts.
1

Code is available at https://github.com/BigML-CS-UCLA/S2L.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

