TorchSpatial: A Location Encoding Framework and
Benchmark for Spatial Representation Learning

Nemin Wu1,3˚ , Qian Cao1,3˚ , Zhangyu Wang2,3 , Zeping Liu3 , Yanlin Qi3,4 ,
Jielu Zhang1,3 , Joshua Ni3,5 , Xiaobai Yao1 , Hongxu Ma6 , Lan Mu1 ,
Stefano Ermon7 , Tanuja Ganu8 , Akshay Nambi8 , Ni Lao6,3: , Gengchen Mai3,1:
1
University of Georgia, 2 UC Santa Barbara, 3 SEAI Lab, University of Texas at Austin,
4
UC Davis, 5 Basis Independent Fremont, 6 Google LLC,
7
Stanford University, 8 Microsoft Research,
{nemin.wu, qian.cao1, jielu.zhang, xyao, mulan}@uga.edu,
zhangyuwang@ucsb.edu,
zeping.liu@utexas.edu,
ylqi@ucdavis.edu,
nijoshua2025@gmail.com,
{hxma, nlao}@google.com, ermon@cs.stanford.edu,
{tanuja.ganu, akshay.nambi}@microsoft.com,
gengchen.mai@austin.utexas.edu
˚
Equal contribution. Author ordering is determined by coin flip. : Corresponding author.

Abstract
Spatial representation learning (SRL) aims at learning general-purpose neural
network representations from various types of spatial data (e.g., points, polylines,
polygons, networks, images, etc.) in their native formats. Learning good spatial
representations is a fundamental problem for various downstream applications
such as species distribution modeling, weather forecasting, trajectory generation,
geographic question answering, etc. Even though SRL has become the foundation
of almost all geospatial artificial intelligence (GeoAI) research, we have not yet seen
significant efforts to develop an extensive deep learning framework and benchmark
to support SRL model development and evaluation. To fill this gap, we propose
TorchSpatial, a learning framework and benchmark for location (point) encoding,
which is one of the most fundamental data types of spatial representation learning.
TorchSpatial contains three key components: 1) a unified location encoding
framework that consolidates 15 commonly recognized location encoders, ensuring
scalability and reproducibility of the implementations; 2) the LocBench benchmark
tasks encompassing 7 geo-aware image classification and 10 geo-aware image
regression datasets; 3) a comprehensive suite of evaluation metrics to quantify
geo-aware models’ overall performance as well as their geographic bias, with a
novel Geo-Bias Score metric. Finally, we provide a detailed analysis and insights
into the model performance and geographic bias of different location encoders.
We believe TorchSpatial will foster future advancement of spatial representation
learning and spatial fairness in GeoAI research. The TorchSpatial model framework
and LocBench benchmark are available at https://github.com/seai-lab/
TorchSpatial, and the Geo-Bias Score evaluation framework is available at
https://github.com/seai-lab/PyGBS.

1

Introduction

Spatial representation learning (SRL) aims at learning neural spatial representations from spatial
data (e.g., points, polylines, polygons, spatial networks, images, etc.) in their native formats while
avoiding manual feature engineering [82, 81, 85] or data conversion (e.g., point clouds to voxels
[58, 89, 14], polygons to raster images [6], or map vector files into raster image tiles [34, 24]).
Learning good spatial representations is a fundamental problem and the key to achieving end-to-end
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

