Least Squares Regression Can Exhibit
Under-Parameterized Double Descent
Xinyue Li
Applied Math, Yale University
xinyue.li.xl728@yale.edu

Rishi Sonthalia
Math, Boston College
rishi.sonthalia@bc.edu

Abstract
The relationship between the number of training data points, the number of parameters, and the generalization capabilities of models has been widely studied. Previous
work has shown that double descent can occur in the over-parameterized regime
and that the standard bias-variance trade-off holds in the under-parameterized
regime. These works provide multiple reasons for the existence of the peak. We
postulate that the location of the peak depends on the technical properties of both
the spectrum as well as the eigenvectors of the sample covariance. We present two
simple examples that provably exhibit double descent in the under-parameterized
regime and do not seem to occur for reasons provided in prior work.

1

Introduction

This paper demonstrates interesting new phenomena that suggest that our understanding of the
relationship between the number of data points, the number of parameters, and the generalization
error is incomplete, even for simple linear models. The classical bias-variance theory postulates that
the generalization risk versus the number of parameters for a fixed number of training data points is
U-shaped (Figure 1a1 ). However, modern machine learning has shown that if we keep increasing
the number of parameters, the generalization error eventually starts decreasing again [2, 3] (Figure
1b2 ). This second descent has been termed as double descent and occurs in the over-parameterized
regime, which is when the number of parameters exceeds the number of data points. Understanding
the location and the cause of such peaks in the generalization error is of significant importance.

(a) Classical Bias Variance Trade-off.

(b) Modern Double Descent.

Figure 1: Bias-variance trade-off and double descent.
Many different theories have been postulated for the appearance of the peak. The prevalent theory
is that when the model is under-parameterized, the learning is constrained. This constraint on the
1
2

Image source [1]
Image source [3]

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

