M OTION C RAFT:
Physics-based Zero-Shot Video Generation

Antonio Montanaro∗
Emanuele Aiello,

Luca Savant Aira∗
Diego Valsesia

Enrico Magli

Politecnico di Torino
{name.surname}@polito.it

Abstract
Generating videos with realistic and physically plausible motion is one of the
main recent challenges in computer vision. While diffusion models are achieving
compelling results in image generation, video diffusion models are limited by heavy
training and huge models, resulting in videos that are still biased to the training
dataset. In this work we propose MotionCraft, a new zero-shot video generator to
craft physics-based and realistic videos. MotionCraft is able to warp the noise latent
space of an image diffusion model, such as Stable Diffusion, by applying an optical
flow derived from a physics simulation. We show that warping the noise latent
space results in coherent application of the desired motion while allowing the model
to generate missing elements consistent with the scene evolution, which would
otherwise result in artefacts or missing content if the flow was applied in the pixel
space. We compare our method with the state-of-the-art Text2Video-Zero reporting
qualitative and quantitative improvements, demonstrating the effectiveness of our
approach to generate videos with finely-prescribed complex motion dynamics.

1

Introduction

As human beings, we have always exploited our creativity to generate art, in different forms such
as visual art, music or poetry. In vision, we are often inspired by the natural world since our visual
system continuously acquire images perceived as a video sequence. Indeed, videos or movies are one
of the best visual stimuli since they contain images, motion and audio.
Recent generative models for still images based on diffusion models [25, 28, 29] achieved remarkable
results with quality almost indistinguishable from real images. It is therefore clear that the next big
goal is video generation. However, it seems that including the dimension of time remains challenging.
Some works such as Sora [5] achieve astonishing temporal consistency and photorealism at the
expense of enormous computational and data requirements. Moreover, we argue that fine-grained
control over the motion dynamics is impossible with a simple text prompt. If one wants to synthesize
a video according to some precise physical dynamics, they would not be able to do it with current
models. Interestingly, explicitly controlling the motion dynamics also allows to decouple temporal
evolution from content generation. Indeed, explicitly injecting the physics of the real world as motion
dynamics allows to develop more parsimonious models, that do not need to brute-force learn them
from data.
*

indicates equal contribution.
Project page: https://mezzelfo.github.io/MotionCraft/.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

