Geometric Trajectory Diffusion Models

Jiaqi Han, Minkai Xu, Aaron Lou, Haotian Ye, Stefano Ermon
Stanford University

Abstract
Generative models have shown great promise in generating 3D geometric systems,
which is a fundamental problem in many natural science domains such as molecule
and protein design. However, existing approaches only operate on static structures,
neglecting the fact that physical systems are always dynamic in nature. In this
work, we propose geometric trajectory diffusion models (GeoTDM), the first
diffusion model for modeling the temporal distribution of 3D geometric trajectories.
Modeling such distribution is challenging as it requires capturing both the complex
spatial interactions with physical symmetries and temporal correspondence
encapsulated in the dynamics. We theoretically justify that diffusion models
with equivariant temporal kernels can lead to density with desired symmetry, and
develop a novel transition kernel leveraging SE(3)-equivariant spatial convolution
and temporal attention. Furthermore, to induce an expressive trajectory distribution
for conditional generation, we introduce a generalized learnable geometric prior
into the forward diffusion process to enhance temporal conditioning. We conduct
extensive experiments on both unconditional and conditional generation in various
scenarios, including physical simulation, molecular dynamics, and pedestrian
motion. Empirical results on a wide suite of metrics demonstrate that GeoTDM
can generate realistic geometric trajectories with significantly higher quality.1

1

Introduction

Machine learning for geometric structures is a fundamental task in many natural science problems
ranging from particle systems driven by physical laws [1, 26, 43, 2, 15] to molecular dynamics in
biochemistry [22, 16, 45, 10]. Modeling such geometric data is challenging due to the physical
symmetry constraint [56, 43], making it fundamentally different from common scalar non-geometric
data such as images and text. With the recent progress of generative models, many works have
been proposed in generating 3D geometric structures like small molecules [66, 42, 21, 64] and
proteins [59, 23], showing great promise in solving the equilibrium states of complex systems.
Despite this success, these existing methods are limited to synthesizing static structures and neglect
the fact that important real-world processes evolve through time. For example, molecules and
proteins are not static but always varying with molecular dynamics, which plays a vital role in
analyzing possible binding activities [8, 20]. In this paper, we aim to study the generative modeling of
geometric trajectories with the additional temporal dimension. While this problem is more practical
and important, it is highly non-trivial with several significant challenges. First, geometric dynamics
in 3D ubiquitously preserve physical symmetry. With global translation or rotation applied to a
trajectory of molecular dynamics, the entire trajectory still describes the same dynamics and the
generative model should estimate the same likelihood. Second, trajectories inherently contain the
correspondence between frames in different timesteps, requiring generative models to hold a high
capacity for capturing the temporal correlations. Last, moving from a single structure to a trajectory
1
Correspondence to Jiaqi Han: jiaqihan@stanford.edu. Code is available at https://github.com/
hanjq17/GeoTDM.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

