Mobility-LLM: Learning Visiting Intentions and
Travel Preferences from Human Mobility Data with
Large Language Models

Letian Gong1,2∗, Yan Lin3∗, Xinyue Zhang1,2 , Yiwen Lu1 , Xuedi Han1
Yichen Liu1,2 , Shengnan Guo1,2†, Youfang Lin1,2 , Huaiyu Wan1,2
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing, China
3
Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University, Denmark
{gonglt, zhangxinyue, luyiwen, hanxuedi, liuyichen, guoshn,
yflin, hywan}@bjtu.edu.cn, lyan@cs.aau.dk

Abstract
Location-based services (LBS) have accumulated extensive human mobility data
on diverse behaviors through check-in sequences. These sequences offer valuable
insights into users’ intentions and preferences. Yet, existing models analyzing
check-in sequences fail to consider the semantics contained in these sequences,
which closely reflect human visiting intentions and travel preferences, leading to
an incomplete comprehension. Drawing inspiration from the exceptional semantic
understanding and contextual information processing capabilities of large language
models (LLMs) across various domains, we present Mobility-LLM, a novel framework that leverages LLMs to analyze check-in sequences for multiple tasks. Since
LLMs cannot directly interpret check-ins, we reprogram these sequences to help
LLMs comprehensively understand the semantics of human visiting intentions and
travel preferences. Specifically, we introduce a visiting intention memory network
(VIMN) to capture the visiting intentions at each record, along with a shared pool
of human travel preference prompts (HTPP) to guide the LLM in understanding
users’ travel preferences. These components enhance the model’s ability to extract
and leverage semantic information from human mobility data effectively. Extensive
experiments on four benchmark datasets and three downstream tasks demonstrate
that our approach significantly outperforms existing models, underscoring the
effectiveness of Mobility-LLM in advancing our understanding of human mobility
data within LBS contexts.

1

Introduction

Location-based services (LBS) such as Gowalla, Weeplace, and Foursquare enable users to share and
discover location information and nearby services. This results in the collection of extensive human
mobility data, often presented in the form of check-in sequences. These sequences record users’
visits to different points of interest (POIs) like restaurants and hospitals at various times, reflecting
significant semantics about their intentions and preferences. Analyzing these check-in sequences
is crucial as it offers valuable information on human mobility data, which can positively impact
individuals, businesses, and urban management.
∗
†

Both authors contributed equally to this research.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

