Scalable Kernel Inverse Optimization

Youyuan Long
Delft Center for Systems and Control
Delft University of Technology
The Netherlands
longyouyuan432@gmail.com

Tolga Ok
Delft Center for Systems and Control
Delft University of Technology
The Netherlands
T.Ok@tudelft.nl

Pedro Zattoni Scroccaro
Delft Center for Systems and Control
Delft University of Technology
The Netherlands
P.ZattoniScroccaro@tudelft.nl

Peyman Mohajerin Esfahani
Delft Center for Systems and Control
Delft University of Technology
The Netherlands
P.MohajerinEsfahani@tudelft.nl

Abstract
Inverse Optimization (IO) is a framework for learning the unknown objective
function of an expert decision-maker from a past dataset. In this paper, we extend
the hypothesis class of IO objective functions to a reproducing kernel Hilbert space
(RKHS), thereby enhancing feature representation to an infinite-dimensional space.
We demonstrate that a variant of the representer theorem holds for a specific training
loss, allowing the reformulation of the problem as a finite-dimensional convex
optimization program. To address scalability issues commonly associated with
kernel methods, we propose the Sequential Selection Optimization (SSO) algorithm
to efficiently train the proposed Kernel Inverse Optimization (KIO) model. Finally,
we validate the generalization capabilities of the proposed KIO model and the
effectiveness of the SSO algorithm through learning-from-demonstration tasks on
the MuJoCo benchmark.

1

Introduction

Inverse Optimization (IO) is distinct from traditional optimization problems, where we typically
seek the optimal decision variables by optimizing an objective function over a set of constraints. In
contrast, inverse optimization works “in reverse” by inferring the optimization objective given the
optimal solution. The inherent assumption in IO is that an agent generates its decision by solving
an optimization problem. The assumed optimization problem is called the Forward Optimization
Problem (FOP), which is parametric in the exogenous signal ŝ with the corresponding optimal solution
û. Therefore, IO aims to deduce the objective function of the FOP from a dataset of exogenous
signal and decision pairs, {(ŝi , ûi )}N
i=1 . In this work, we assume the constraints are known a priori.
Consequently, we can leverage the FOP derived from the expert’s dataset by solving it to mimic the
expert’s behavior when encountering new exogenous signals. IO has garnered widespread attention
within several fields, giving rise to numerous studies encompassing both theoretical and applied
research. Application domains include vehicle routing [11, 31, 41], transportation system modeling
[29, 8], portfolio optimization [25, 39, 23], power systems [9, 16, 32], electric vehicle charging
problems [17], network design [15], healthcare problems [5], as well as controller design [2, 14]. For
a more detailed discussion on different applications of IO, we refer the readers to the recent survey
paper [10].
IO can be categorized into classic IO and data-driven IO. In classic IO, only a single signal-decision
pair is considered, where the decision is assumed to be the optimal solution of the FOP (i.e., there is
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

