Flow Snapshot Neurons in Action: Deep Neural
Networks Generalize to Biological Motion Perception

Shuangpeng Han1,2 , Ziyu Wang1,2,3 , Mengmi Zhang1,2
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Deep NeuroCognition Lab, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR)
3
Show Lab, National University of Singapore, Singapore
Address correspondence to mengmi.zhang@ntu.edu.sg

1

Abstract
Biological motion perception (BMP) refers to humans’ ability to perceive and
recognize the actions of living beings solely from their motion patterns, sometimes
as minimal as those depicted on point-light displays. While humans excel at
these tasks without any prior training, current AI models struggle with poor
generalization performance. To close this research gap, we propose the Motion
Perceiver (MP). MP solely relies on patch-level optical flows from video clips as
inputs. During training, it learns prototypical flow snapshots through a competitive
binding mechanism and integrates invariant motion representations to predict
action labels for the given video. During inference, we evaluate the generalization
ability of all AI models and humans on 62,656 video stimuli spanning 24 BMP
conditions using point-light displays in neuroscience. Remarkably, MP outperforms
all existing AI models with a maximum improvement of 29% in top-1 action
recognition accuracy on these conditions. Moreover, we benchmark all AI models
in point-light displays of two standard video datasets in computer vision. MP
also demonstrates superior performance in these cases. More interestingly, via
psychophysics experiments, we found that MP recognizes biological movements in
a way that aligns with human behaviors. Our data and code are available at link.

1

Introduction
Testing

Training

Temporal order

Temporal resol.
180!

RGB videos

Joint videos

SP videos

Amount/lifetime
of visual info.

Invariance
to camera view

Figure 1: Humans excel at biological motion perception (BMP) tasks with zero training, while
current AI models struggle with poor generalization performance. AI models are trained to
recognize actions from natural RGB videos and tested using BMP stimuli on point-light displays,
which come in two forms: Joint videos, which display only the detected joints of actors in white
dots, and Sequential position actor videos (SP), where light points in white are randomly positioned
between joints and reallocated to other random positions on the limb in subsequent frames (Sec. 3.1).
Note that skeletons, shown in gray in the example video, are not visible to humans or AI models
during testing. The generalization performance of both humans and models is assessed after varying
five properties in temporal and visual dimensions. See Appendix, Sec. A.1 for example videos.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

