Sequence-Augmented SE(3)-Flow Matching For
Conditional Protein Backbone Generation
Guillaume Huguet1,2,3∗, James Vuckovic1∗, Kilian Fatras1†, Eric Thibodeau-Laufer1†,
Pablo Lemos1 , Riashat Islam1 , Cheng-Hao Liu1,3,4 , Jarrid Rector-Brooks1,2,3 ,
Tara Akhound-Sadegh1,2,4 , Michael Bronstein1,5,6 , Alexander Tong1,2,3‡, Avishek Joey Bose1,5‡
1
Dreamfold, 2 Université de Montréal, 3 Mila, 4 McGill University, 5 University of Oxford, 6 Aithyra

Abstract
Proteins are essential for almost all biological processes and derive their
diverse functions from complex 3D structures, which are in turn determined
by their amino acid sequences. In this paper, we exploit the rich biological
inductive bias of amino acid sequences and introduce F OLD F LOW-24 , a novel
sequence-conditioned SE(3)-equivariant flow matching model for protein structure
generation. F OLD F LOW-2 presents substantial new architectural features over the
previous F OLD F LOW family of models including a protein large language model
to encode sequence, a new multi-modal fusion trunk that combines structure and
sequence representations, and a geometric transformer based decoder. To increase
diversity and novelty of generated samples—crucial for de-novo drug design—we
train F OLD F LOW-2 at scale on a new dataset that is an order of magnitude larger
than PDB datasets of prior works, containing both known proteins in PDB and
high-quality synthetic structures achieved through filtering. We further demonstrate
the ability to align F OLD F LOW-2 to arbitrary rewards, e.g. increasing secondary
structures diversity, by introducing a Reinforced Finetuning (ReFT) objective.
We empirically observe that F OLD F LOW-2 outperforms previous state-of-the-art
protein structure-based generative models, improving over RFDiffusion in terms of
unconditional generation across all metrics including designability, diversity, and
novelty across all protein lengths, as well as exhibiting generalization on the task
of equilibrium conformation sampling. Finally, we demonstrate that a fine-tuned
F OLD F LOW-2 makes progress on challenging conditional design tasks such as
designing scaffolds for the VHH nanobody.

1

Introduction

Rational design of novel protein structures via generative modeling holds significant promise for
accelerating computational drug discovery [Chevalier et al., 2017, Ebrahimi and Samanta, 2023]. In
particular, the ability to design proteins with a pre-specified functional property is arguably one of the
principal tools in addressing global health challenges such as COVID-19 [Cao et al., 2020, Gainza
et al., 2023], influenza [Strauch et al., 2017], and cancer [Silva et al., 2019]. In many instances,
designing function involves the design of both the 3D geometric structure of the protein as well as
its specific chemical interactions. In proteins, the amino-acid sequences determine the interaction
between protein backbones and side chains, which fold into a distribution of protein structures.
Consequently, the functional properties of protein structures can be inferred from its sequence.
∗

Co-first and corresponding authors: {guillaume.huguet,james}@dreamfold.ai
Core contributor
‡
Equal advising
4
Our code can be found at https://github.com/DreamFold/FoldFlow
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

