Logarithmic Smoothing for Pessimistic Off-Policy
Evaluation, Selection and Learning

Otmane Sakhi
Criteo AI Lab, Paris, France
o.sakhi@criteo.com

Imad Aouali
CREST, ENSAE
Criteo AI Lab, Paris, France
i.aouali@criteo.com

Pierre Alquier
ESSEC Business School, Singapore
alquier@essec.edu

Nicolas Chopin
CREST, ENSAE
nicolas.chopin@ensae.fr

Abstract
This work investigates the offline formulation of the contextual bandit problem,
where the goal is to leverage past interactions collected under a behavior policy to
evaluate, select, and learn new, potentially better-performing, policies. Motivated
by critical applications, we move beyond point estimators. Instead, we adopt the
principle of pessimism where we construct upper bounds that assess a policy’s worstcase performance, enabling us to confidently select and learn improved policies.
Precisely, we introduce novel, fully empirical concentration bounds for a broad
class of importance weighting risk estimators. These bounds are general enough to
cover most existing estimators and pave the way for the development of new ones.
In particular, our pursuit of the tightest bound within this class motivates a novel
estimator (LS), that logarithmically smooths large importance weights. The bound
for LS is provably tighter than its competitors, and naturally results in improved
policy selection and learning strategies. Extensive policy evaluation, selection, and
learning experiments highlight the versatility and favorable performance of LS.

1

Introduction

In decision-making under uncertainty, offline contextual bandit [16] presents a practical framework
for leveraging past interactions with an environment to optimize future decisions. This comes into
play when we possess logged data summarizing an agent’s past interactions [10]. These interactions,
typically captured as context-action-reward tuples, hold valuable insights into the underlying dynamics
of the environment. Each tuple represents a single round of interaction, where the agent observes
a context (including relevant features), takes an action according to its current policy, often called
behavior policy, and receives a reward that depends on both the observed context and the taken
action. This framework is prevalent in interactive systems like online advertising, music streaming,
and video recommendation. In online advertising, for instance, the user’s profile is the context, the
recommended product is the action, and the click-through rate (CTR) is the expected reward. By
learning from past interactions, the recommender system tailors product suggestions to individual
preferences, maximizing engagement and ultimately, business success.
To optimize future decisions without requiring real-time deployments, this framework presents us
with three tasks: off-policy evaluation (OPE) [16], off-policy selection (OPS) [32], and off-policy
learning (OPL) [55]. OPE estimates the risk: the negative of expected reward that a target policy
would achieve, essentially predicting its performance if deployed. OPS selects the best-performing
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

