Moving Off-the-Grid: Scene-Grounded Video
Representations

Sjoerd van Steenkiste∗,1 , Daniel Zoran∗,2 , Yi Yang2 , Yulia Rubanova2 ,
Rishabh Kabra2 , Carl Doersch2 , Dilara Gokay2 , Joseph Heyward2 ,
Etienne Pot2 , Klaus Greff2 , Drew A. Hudson2 , Thomas Albert Keck2 ,
Joao Carreira2 , Alexey Dosovitskiy†,3 , Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi2 , Thomas Kipf ∗,2
1
Google Research, 2 Google DeepMind, 3 Inceptive

Abstract
Current vision models typically maintain a fixed correspondence between their
representation structure and image space. Each layer comprises a set of tokens
arranged “on-the-grid,” which biases patches or tokens to encode information at
a specific spatio(-temporal) location. In this work we present Moving Off-the-Grid
(MooG), a self-supervised video representation model that offers an alternative
approach, allowing tokens to move “off-the-grid” to better enable them to represent
scene elements consistently, even as they move across the image plane through
time. By using a combination of cross-attention and positional embeddings we
disentangle the representation structure and image structure. We find that a simple
self-supervised objective—next frame prediction—trained on video data, results
in a set of latent tokens which bind to specific scene structures and track them as
they move. We demonstrate the usefulness of MooG’s learned representation both
qualitatively and quantitatively by training readouts on top of the learned representation on a variety of downstream tasks. We show that MooG can provide a strong
foundation for different vision tasks when compared to “on-the-grid” baselines1 .

1

Introduction

Learning visual representations of the physical world is at the core of computer vision. Recent years
have seen a surge of vision models that address this problem via self-supervised learning [5, 8, 23, 40].
By leveraging objectives such as contrastive learning [5, 8] and masked image modelling [23], great
strides have been made towards learning useful representations from image data. The vast majority
of these methods use convolutional networks [35], vision transformers [14, 54] or a combination
thereof [4]. This choice of architecture comes to no surprise, as it inherently reflects the structure of the
underlying datasets: images are (typically) represented as grids of pixels, which are conveniently and
efficiently processed using 2D convolutions and patch-based heuristics. This grid-based processing,
however, leads to an inherent entanglement between the representation structure and image structure.
In other words, specific tokens or feature vectors of the representation are encouraged to capture the
contents of a specific image location, instead of binding to the underlying content of the physical scene.
This issue is particularly apparent when processing video: when there is motion in the scene, either
by ego-motion or object motion, the contents of the scene will move across the image plane and as
such the representation (i.e. in terms of what is encoded where) will change accordingly. However,
1

∗

Project page: https://moog-paper.github.io/.
Equal contribution, † Work done while at Google.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

