FUG: Feature-Universal Graph Contrastive
Pre-training for Graphs with Diverse Node Features

Jitao Zhao1 , Di Jin1∗, Meng Ge2 , Lianze Shan1 , Xin Wang1 , Dongxiao He1 , Zhiyong Feng1
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore
1
{zjtao, jindi, shanlz2119, wangx, hedongxiao, zyfeng}@tju.edu.cn, 2 gemeng@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), known for their effective graph encoding, are
extensively used across various fields. Graph self-supervised pre-training, which
trains GNN encoders without manual labels to generate high-quality graph representations, has garnered widespread attention. However, due to the inherent
complex characteristics in graphs, GNNs encoders pre-trained on one dataset
struggle to directly adapt to others that have different node feature shapes. This
typically necessitates either model rebuilding or data alignment. The former results
in non-transferability as each dataset need to rebuild a new model, while the latter
brings serious knowledge loss since it forces features into a uniform shape by
preprocessing such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA). To address this challenge, we propose a new Feature-Universal Graph contrastive pre-training strategy
(FUG) that naturally avoids the need for model rebuilding and data reshaping.
Specifically, inspired by discussions in existing work on the relationship between
contrastive Learning and PCA, we conducted a theoretical analysis and discovered
that PCA’s optimization objective is a special case of that in contrastive Learning.
We designed an encoder with contrastive constraints to emulate PCA’s generation
of basis transformation matrix, which is utilized to losslessly adapt features in
different datasets. Furthermore, we introduced a global uniformity constraint to
replace negative sampling, reducing the time complexity from O(n2 ) to O(n),
and by explicitly defining positive samples, FUG avoids the substantial memory
requirements of data augmentation. In cross domain experiments, FUG has a
performance close to the re-trained new models. The source code is available at:
https://github.com/hedongxiao-tju/FUG.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [1], renowned for their effectiveness in encoding both graph topology
and feature information, have emerged as the mainstream methods in graph representation learning.
They are extensively applied in various scenarios such as protein molecule prediction [2], e-commerce
recommendation systems [3], and community detection [4]. Training high-quality GNNs typically
relies on extensive manually labeled data [5], which is costly and limits their applications. To address
this challenge, graph self-supervised pre-trainings have gained significant attentions [6, 7, 5]. These
approaches leverage self-supervised signals mined from the graph data themselves and design proxy
tasks to train models without manually labeled data.
Unfortunately, due to the inherent complexity of graph data, models trained on one graph dataset
often fail to perform well on another. This complexity arises from two main aspects: 1). topological
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

