StepbaQ: Stepping backward as Correction for
Quantized Diffusion Models
Yi-Chung Chen∗
MediaTek, Purdue University
chen5262@purdue.edu

Zhi-Kai Huang
MediaTek
brent5481@gmail.com

Jing-Ren Chen
MediaTek
jingren.chen@mediatek.com

Abstract
Quantization of diffusion models has attracted considerable attention due to its
potential to enable various applications on resource-constrained mobile devices.
However, given the cumulative nature of quantization errors in quantized diffusion
models, overall performance may still decline even with efforts to minimize quantization error at each sampling step. Recent studies have proposed several methods
to address accumulated quantization error, yet these solutions often suffer from
limited applicability due to their underlying assumptions or only partially resolve
the issue due to an incomplete understanding. In this work, we introduce a novel
perspective by conceptualizing quantization error as a "stepback" in the denoising
process. We investigate how the accumulation of quantization error can distort
the sampling trajectory, resulting in a notable decrease in model performance. To
address this challenge, we introduce StepbaQ, a method that calibrates the sampling
trajectory and counteracts the adverse effects of accumulated quantization error
through a sampling step correction mechanism. Notably, StepbaQ relies solely on
statistics of quantization error derived from a small calibration dataset, highlighting
its strong applicability. Our experimental results demonstrate that StepbaQ can
serve as a plug-and-play technique to enhance the performance of diffusion models
quantized by off-the-shelf tools without modifying the quantization settings. For
example, StepbaQ significantly improves the performance of the quantized SD v1.5
model by 7.30 in terms of FID on SDprompts dataset under the common W8A8
setting, and it enhances the performance of the quantized SDXL-Turbo model by
17.31 in terms of FID on SDprompts dataset under the challenging W4A8 setting.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [11, 44, 23, 49] have demonstrated its power of generating high quality samples in
a wide variety of applications including super resolution [53, 58], image enhancement [37, 54], image
inpainting [56], image editing [28] and image-to-image translation [32]. In contrast to GAN [18]
and VAE [30], which are prone to issues such as mode and posterior collapse, diffusion models
consistently produce diverse, high-quality samples, thus emerging as the predominant technique in
the field of image generation. However, the deployment of diffusion models on computationally
constrained devices, such as smartphones, is impeded by their extensive computational demands,
which stem from the complex network structures and the multitude of denoising steps required during
the sampling phase. To enhance the computational efficiency of diffusion models, a body of research
∗

This work was conducted during Yi-Chung’s time at MediaTek.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

