Bias Detection via Signaling

Yiling Chen
Harvard University

Tao Lin
Harvard University

Ariel D. Procaccia
Harvard University

yiling@seas.harvard.edu

tlin@g.harvard.edu

arielpro@g.harvard.edu

Aaditya Ramdas
Carnegie Mellon University

Itai Shapira
Harvard University

aramdas@cmu.edu

itaishapira@g.harvard.edu

Abstract
We introduce and study the problem of detecting whether an agent is updating
their prior beliefs given new evidence in an optimal way that is Bayesian, or
whether they are biased towards their own prior. In our model, biased agents form
posterior beliefs that are a convex combination of their prior and the Bayesian
posterior, where the more biased an agent is, the closer their posterior is to the
prior. Since we often cannot observe the agent’s beliefs directly, we take an approach inspired by information design. Specifically, we measure an agent’s bias
by designing a signaling scheme and observing the actions the agent takes in response to different signals, assuming that the agent maximizes their own expected
utility. Our goal is to detect bias with a minimum number of signals. Our main
results include a characterization of scenarios where a single signal suffices and a
computationally efficient algorithm to compute optimal signaling schemes.

1

Introduction

A bag contains two coins that look and feel identical, but one is a fair coin that, on a flip, comes up
heads with probability 0.5, and the other is an unfair coin with probability 0.9 of heads. You reach
into the bag, grab one of the coins and flip it once; it lands on heads. Since you are (hopefully)
familiar with Bayes’ rule, you conclude that the probability you are holding the fair coin is ≈ 0.36.
Now suppose you are offered the following deal: if you pay $1, you get to flip the same coin again,
and if it comes up heads, you will receive $1.4. Since you now believe that the probability of heads
is 0.76, you take the deal (assuming you are risk neutral) and earn 6 cents in expectation.
If, by contrast, another risk-neutral person in the same situation decides to decline the same deal,
they must believe that the probability they are holding the fair coin is greater than 0.47. That is, their
belief is still very close to the prior of 0.5. We think of such a person as being biased, in the sense
that they are unwilling to significantly update their beliefs, despite evidence to the contrary.
Of course, failing to update one’s beliefs about coin flips is not the end of the world. But this example
serves to illustrate a broader phenomenon that, in our view, is both important and ubiquitous. In
particular, the “stickiness” of prior beliefs in the face of evidence plays a role in politics — think
of the controversy over Russian collusion in the 2016 US presidential election or the existence of
weapons of mass destruction in Iraq in 2003. It is also prevalent in science, as exemplified by the
polarized debate over the origins of the Covid pandemic [3].
Our goal in this paper is to develop algorithms that are able to detect bias in the form of non-Bayesian
updating of beliefs. To our knowledge, we are the first to formalize and analytically address this
problem, and we aim to build an initial framework that future work would build on. In the long
term, we believe such algorithms could have many applications, including understanding to what
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

