Mean-Field Langevin Dynamics for Signed Measures
via a Bilevel Approach

Guillaume Wang∗1
1

Alireza Mousavi-Hosseini∗2

Lénaïc Chizat1

École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne
University of Toronto and Vector Institute

2

guillaume.wang@epfl.ch,

mousavi@cs.toronto.edu,

lenaic.chizat@epfl.ch

Abstract
Mean-field Langevin dynamics (MLFD) is a class of interacting particle methods
that tackle convex optimization over probability measures on a manifold, which are
scalable, versatile, and enjoy computational guarantees. However, some important
problems – such as risk minimization for infinite width two-layer neural networks,
or sparse deconvolution – are originally defined over the set of signed, rather than
probability, measures. In this paper, we investigate how to extend the MFLD
framework to convex optimization problems over signed measures. Among two
known reductions from signed to probability measures – the lifting and the bilevel
approaches – we show that the bilevel reduction leads to stronger guarantees and
faster rates (at the price of a higher per-iteration complexity). In particular, we
investigate the convergence rate of MFLD applied to the bilevel reduction in the
low-noise regime and obtain two results. First, this dynamics is amenable to an
annealing schedule, adapted from [SWON23], that results in improved convergence
rates to a fixed multiplicative accuracy. Second, we investigate the problem of
learning a single neuron with the bilevel approach and obtain local exponential
convergence rates that depend polynomially on the dimension and noise level (to
compare with the exponential dependence that would result from prior analyses).

1

Introduction

Let M(W) be the set of finite signed measures on a compact Riemannian manifold without boundaries W and let G : M(W) → R be a convex function, assumed smooth in the sense of Assumption 1
below. In this paper, we investigate optimization methods to solve
min

ν∈M(W)

Gλ (ν),

Gλ (ν) := G(ν) +

λ
∥ν∥2T V ,
2

(1.1)

where ∥ · ∥T V is the total variation norm and λ > 0 the regularization level.1 This covers for instance
risk minimization for infinite-width 2-layer neural networks (2NN) [BRVDM05; Bac17] by taking
W = Sd the unit sphere in Rd+1 or W = Rd+1 and
Z
h
i
G(ν) = E(x,y)∼ρ ℓ(h(ν, x), y)
where
h(ν, x) =
φ(⟨x, w⟩)dν(w). (1.2)
W

Here φ : R → R is the activation function, h(ν, ·) is the predictor parameterized by ν, G is the
(population or empirical) risk under the data distribution ρ ∈ P(Rd+1 ×R), and ℓ is smooth (uniformly
∗

Equal contributions, authors ordered randomly.
The square exponent on ∥ · ∥T V might appear unusual, but it is convenient for our subsequent developments.
We show in App. A that the regularization path is the same with or without the square.
1

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

