OPEL: Optimal Transport Guided ProcedurE
Learning

Sayeed Shafayet Chowdhury, Soumyadeep Chandra, and Kaushik Roy
Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
{chowdh23, chand133, kaushik}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Procedure learning refers to the task of identifying the key-steps and determining
their logical order, given several videos of the same task. For both third-person
and first-person (egocentric) videos, state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods aim at
finding correspondences across videos in time to accomplish procedure learning.
However, to establish temporal relationships within the sequences, these methods
often rely on frame-to-frame mapping, or assume monotonic alignment of video
pairs, leading to sub-optimal results. To this end, we propose to treat the video
frames as samples from an unknown distribution, enabling us to frame their
distance calculation as an optimal transport (OT) problem. Notably, the OTbased formulation allows us to relax the previously mentioned assumptions. To
further improve performance, we enhance the OT formulation by introducing
two regularization terms. The first, inverse difference moment regularization,
promotes transportation between instances that are homogeneous in the embedding
space as well as being temporally closer. The second, regularization based on
the KL-divergence with an exponentially decaying prior smooths the alignment
while enforcing conformity to the optimality (alignment obtained from vanilla
OT optimization) and temporal priors. The resultant optimal transport guided
procedure learning framework (‘OPEL’) significantly outperforms the SOTA on
benchmark datasets. Specifically, we achieve 22.4% (IoU) and 26.9% (F1) average
improvement compared to the current SOTA on large scale egocentric benchmark,
EgoProceL. Furthermore, for the third person benchmarks (ProCeL and CrossTask),
the proposed approach obtains 46.2% (F1) average enhancement over SOTA.

1

Introduction

The development of autonomous agents capable of reliably replicating human actions to accomplish
certain end goals presents significant challenges. Traditional approaches would necessitate hardcoding tedious explicit instructions for each sub-task of the process (thus difficult to scale and
generalize). A more efficient solution would involve the agent learning directly from observing
multiple demonstrations of the assembly, without the need of any label. This motivates us to explore
unsupervised procedure learning from videos. In the context of this work, procedure learning (PL)
is conceptualized as the process of determining the key-steps and their correct sequential order to
accomplish an overall task, as demonstrated across multiple video demonstrations [1, 2, 3].
PL analyzes multiple videos of a task as illustrated in Figure 1, in contrast to action-based tasks [4],
which focus on a single video. The single-video approach is inapplicable to the identification of
repetitive key-steps across videos. Moreover, action-based tasks typically neglect the sequencing of
events, crucial for discerning an overall expected procedure composed of the sub-tasks. For instance,
they fail to capture variations in the sequence of key-steps between videos V1 and V2 (Fig. 1). Other
research efforts in video understanding that employ instructional videos include procedure planning
[5], verifying sequences of procedures [6], and summarizing instructional content [7]. Additionally,
unlike video alignment tasks [8], PL specifically aims to localize these essential steps within videos.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

