Exploration by Learning Diverse Skills through
Successor State Representations

Paul-Antoine Le Tolguenec
ISAE-Supaero, Airbus
paul-antoine.le-tolguenec@airbus.com
Florent Teichteil-Konigsbuch
Airbus
florent.teichteil-konigsbuch@airbus.com

Yann Besse
Airbus
yann.besse@airbus.com
Dennis G. Wilson
ISAE-Supaero, Université de Toulouse
dennis.wilson@isae-supaero.fr

Emmanuel Rachelson
ISAE-Supaero, Université de Toulouse
emmanuel.rachelson@isae-supaero.fr

Abstract
The ability to perform different skills can encourage agents to explore. In this
work, we aim to construct a set of diverse skills that uniformly cover the state
space. We propose a formalization of this search for diverse skills, building on a
previous definition based on the mutual information between states and skills. We
consider the distribution of states reached by a policy conditioned on each skill
and leverage the successor state representation to maximize the difference between
these skill distributions. We call this approach LEADS: Learning Diverse Skills
through Successor State Representations. We demonstrate our approach on a set of
maze navigation and robotic control tasks which show that our method is capable of
constructing a diverse set of skills which exhaustively cover the state space without
relying on reward or exploration bonuses. Our findings demonstrate that this new
formalization promotes more robust and efficient exploration by combining mutual
information maximization and exploration bonuses.

1

Introduction

Humans demonstrate an outstanding ability to elaborate a repertoire of varied skills and behaviors,
without extrinsic motivation and supervision. This ability is currently captured through the problem
of unsupervised skill discovery in reinforcement learning [41], where one seeks to learn a finite set of
policies in a given environment whose behaviors are notably different from each other. Implicitly,
seeking behavioral diversity is also related to the question of efficient exploration, as a set of skills
that better covers the state space is often preferable. Seeking diversity has recently been successfully
studied through the prism of mutual information maximization [17, 13, 8]. In this article, we
argue maximizing mutual information might be ambiguous when seeking exploratory behaviors
and propose an alternative, motivated variant. The key intuition underpinning this formulation is
that a good set of exploratory skills should maximize state coverage, while preserving the ability to
distinguish a skill from another. Then, we propose a new algorithm which implements this generalized
objective, leveraging neural networks as estimators of the state occupancy measure. This algorithm
demonstrates better exploration properties than state of the art methods, both those designed for
reward-free exploration and those seeking skill diversity.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

