The Implicit Bias of Gradient Descent on Separable
Multiclass Data
Hrithik Ravi1 Clayton Scott1 Daniel Soudry2 Yutong Wang3
1
University of Michigan 2 Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
3
Illinois Institute of Technology
{hrithikr, clayscot}@umich.edu
daniel.soudry@gmail.com
ywang562@iit.edu

Abstract
Implicit bias describes the phenomenon where optimization-based training algorithms, without explicit regularization, show a preference for simple estimators
even when more complex estimators have equal objective values. Multiple works
have developed the theory of implicit bias for binary classification under the assumption that the loss satisfies an exponential tail property. However, there is
a noticeable gap in analysis for multiclass classification, with only a handful of
results which themselves are restricted to the cross-entropy loss. In this work,
we employ the framework of Permutation Equivariant and Relative Margin-based
(PERM) losses [Wang and Scott, 2024] to introduce a multiclass extension of
the exponential tail property. This class of losses includes not only cross-entropy
but also other losses. Using this framework, we extend the implicit bias result of
Soudry et al. [2018] to multiclass classification. Furthermore, our proof techniques
closely mirror those of the binary case, thus illustrating the power of the PERM
framework for bridging the binary-multiclass gap.

1

Introduction

Overparameterized models such as neural networks have shown state-of-the-art performance in many
applications, despite having the potential to overfit. Zhang et al. [2021] demonstrate that this potential
is indeed realizable by training real-world models to fit random noise. In recent years, there have
been several research efforts that aim to understand the impressive performance of overparametrized
models despite this ability to overfit. Both the model architecture and the training algorithms for
selecting the weights have been investigated in this regard.
Work on implicit bias [Soudry et al., 2018, Ji et al., 2020, Vardi, 2022] has focused on the latter factor.
Implicit bias is the hypothesis that gradient-based methods have a built-in preference for models
with low-complexity. This hypothesis is perhaps best understood in the setting of (unregularized)
empirical risk minimization for learning a linear model under the assumption of linearly separable
data. Soudry et al. [2018] showed that in binary classification, implicit bias holds when the loss has
the exponential tail property [Soudry et al., 2018, Theorem 3]. The same work also demonstrated
implicit bias in the multiclass setting for the cross-entropy loss, but implicit bias for a more broadly
defined class of losses in the multiclass case is left open. In this work, we extend the notion of the
exponential tail property to multiclass losses and prove that the property is sufficient for implicit
bias to occur in the multiclass setting. Toward this end, we employ the framework of permutation
equivariant and relative margin-based (PERM) losses [Wang and Scott, 2024].

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

