MambaLLIE: Implicit Retinex-Aware Low Light
Enhancement with Global-then-Local State Space

Jiangwei Weng1 , Zhiqiang Yan1 , Ying Tai2 , Jianjun Qian1 , Jian Yang1 , Jun Li1∗
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, 210094, China
2
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, Suzhou, 215163, China
{wengjiangwei,yanzq,csjqian,csjyang,junli}@njust.edu.cn

yingtai@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent advances in low light image enhancement have been dominated by Retinexbased learning framework, leveraging convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and
Transformers. However, the vanilla Retinex theory primarily addresses global
illumination degradation and neglects local issues such as noise and blur in dark
conditions. Moreover, CNNs and Transformers struggle to capture global degradation due to their limited receptive fields. While state space models (SSMs) have
shown promise in the long-sequence modeling, they face challenges in combining
local invariants and global context in visual data. In this paper, we introduce
MambaLLIE, an implicit Retinex-aware low light enhancer featuring a globalthen-local state space design. We first propose a Local-Enhanced State Space
Module (LESSM) that incorporates an augmented local bias within a 2D selective
scan mechanism, enhancing the original SSMs by preserving local 2D dependencies. Additionally, an Implicit Retinex-aware Selective Kernel module (IRSK)
dynamically selects features using spatially-varying operations, adapting to varying
inputs through an adaptive kernel selection process. Our Global-then-Local State
Space Block (GLSSB) integrates LESSM and IRSK with layer normalization (LN)
as its core. This design enables MambaLLIE to achieve comprehensive global
long-range modeling and flexible local feature aggregation. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that MambaLLIE significantly outperforms state-of-the-art CNN and
Transformer-based methods. Our code is available at Project Page.

1

Introduction

Low light image enhancement is a challenging task in computer vision due to insufficient lighting and
sensor degradation. Consequently, images often suffer from poor global visibility and local issues
such as color distortion and noise. These degraded images can adversely affect human perception
and related vision tasks, such as object detection [5] and depth estimation [57].
Traditional techniques, such as histogram equalization [1] and gamma correction [7], enhance images
through global mapping operations. However, these global operations often struggle to address
local degradation effectively. In recent years, many methods based on CNNs and Transformers
have gradually come to dominate this field [53, 64, 15, 38, 56, 3]. CNN-based methods [53, 64, 15,
38, 55] have achieved significant advancements by effectively aggregating local information, thus
substantially improving performance in low light enhancement. Nevertheless, the limited receptive
field and weight-sharing strategy of CNNs result in a local reductive bias, making the models less
adaptive to varying inputs. On the other hand, Transformer-based methods [56, 3, 62] achieve a
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

