Resource-Aware Federated Self-Supervised Learning
with Global Class Representations

Mingyi Li
Shandong University
Tengfei Liu
Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology
Fuzhen Zhuang
Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
Beihang University
Zhongguancun Laboratory

Xiao Zhang∗
Shandong University
Ruofan Wu
Coupang

Qi Wang
Shandong University
Weiqiang Wang
Shanghai Jiaotong University

Hui Xiong
Thrust of AI, HKUST(Guangzhou)
Dep. of Com. Sci. and Eng.,
HKUST

Dongxiao Yu∗
Shandong University

Abstract
Due to the heterogeneous architectures and class skew, the global representation
models training in resource-adaptive federated self-supervised learning face with
tricky challenges: deviated representation abilities and inconsistent representation
spaces. In this work, we are the first to propose a multi-teacher knowledge distillation framework, namely FedMKD, to learn global representations with whole
class knowledge from heterogeneous clients even under extreme class skew. Firstly,
the adaptive knowledge integration mechanism is designed to learn better representations from all heterogeneous models with deviated representation abilities.
Then the weighted combination of the self-supervised loss and the distillation
loss can support the global model to encode all classes from clients into a unified
space. Besides, the global knowledge anchored alignment module can make the
local representation spaces close to the global spaces, which further improves the
representation abilities of local ones. Finally, extensive experiments conducted
on two datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of FedMKD which outperforms
state-of-the-art baselines 4.78% under linear evaluation on average.

1

Introduction

The federated self-supervised learning (Fed-SSL) has emerged as a highly promising paradigm due
to the extremely limited labeled data in real-world scenarios [4, 25, 30]. The Fed-SSL mechanism
can learn common representations collaboratively across all the clients without labeled data [7, 8],
which could enable the aggregation of knowledge from diverse unlabeled data sources and overcome
the limitations caused by the high cost and scarcity of labeled data [24, 28, 31].
Traditional Fed-SSL methods usually assume that each client should train the identical architecture
model, such as FedU [33], FedEMA [34], FedCA [30]. But it would not be easy in resource-limited
scenarios, especially for the existing arsing large-scale models [1, 26]. As shown in Fig.1, client A,
client B and client C might train heterogeneous representation models due to the varying system
resources. In addition, real-world data often exhibits skewed class distributions across clients.
∗

Xiao Zhang and Dongxiao Yu are corresponding authors. Email:{xiaozhang, dxyu}@sdu.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

