ϵ-Softmax: Approximating One-Hot Vectors for
Mitigating Label Noise

Jialiang Wang1∗
Xiong Zhou1∗
Deming Zhai1
1
2
Junjun Jiang
Xiangyang Ji
Xianming Liu1†
1
Faculty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
cswjl@stu.hit.edu.cn∗ , cszx@hit.edu.cn∗ , csxm@hit.edu.cn†

Abstract
Noisy labels pose a common challenge for training accurate deep neural networks.
To mitigate label noise, prior studies have proposed various robust loss functions to
achieve noise tolerance in the presence of label noise, particularly symmetric losses.
However, they usually suffer from the underfitting issue due to the overly strict
symmetric condition. In this work, we propose a simple yet effective approach for
relaxing the symmetric condition, namely ϵ-softmax, which simply modifies the
outputs of the softmax layer to approximate one-hot vectors with a controllable
error ϵ. Essentially, ϵ-softmax not only acts as an alternative for the softmax layer,
but also implicitly plays the crucial role in modifying the loss function. We prove
theoretically that ϵ-softmax can achieve noise-tolerant learning with controllable
excess risk bound for almost any loss function. Recognizing that ϵ-softmaxenhanced losses may slightly reduce fitting ability on clean datasets, we further
incorporate them with one symmetric loss, thereby achieving a better trade-off
between robustness and effective learning. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
superiority of our method in mitigating synthetic and real-world label noise. The
code is available at https://github.com/cswjl/eps-softmax.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable advancements across various
machine learning tasks [1, 2]. Despite its significant success, the prevalence of noisy labels in realworld datasets is a pervasive issue, often stemming from human bias or a lack of relevant professional
knowledge [2]. The application of supervised learning methods directly to data with noisy labels
consistently results in a decline in model performance [3]. Moreover, the ability to generalize from
weak learners plays a pivotal role in the alignment of large language models [4]. Consequently, the
pursuit of noise-tolerant learning has emerged as a compelling and significant challenge within the
domain of weakly supervised learning, garnering increased attention in recent years [5, 6, 7, 8].
The literature presents several strategies for remedying this issue, with the design of robust loss
functions standing out as a particularly popular approach due to its simplicity and broad applicability.
Some previous works [9, 10, 5] theoretically proved that a loss function is noise-tolerant to label
noise under mild conditions if it is symmetric:
K
X

L(f (x), k) = C,

∀x ∈ X , ∀f ∈ H

(1.1)

k=1

where k ∈ [K] is the label corresponding to each class, C is a constant, and H is the hypothesis class.
Furthermore, Asymmetric Loss Functions (ALFs) [7] are proposed as an extension of symmetric
losses, which are designed for clean-label-dominant noise. However, both symmetric and asymmetric
∗

Equal contribution

†

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

