Conformal Alignment: Knowing When to Trust
Foundation Models with Guarantees
Yu Gui1∗ Ying Jin2∗

Zhimei Ren3∗

1

Department of Statistics, University of Chicago
2
Data Science Initiative, Harvard University
3
Department of Statistics and Data Science, University of Pennsylvania
yugui@uchicago.edu, yjin@hcp.med.harvard.edu,
zren@wharton.upenn.edu

Abstract
Before deploying outputs from foundation models in high-stakes tasks, it is imperative to ensure that they align with human values. For instance, in radiology
report generation, reports generated by a vision-language model must align with human evaluations before their use in medical decision-making. This paper presents
Conformal Alignment,2 a general framework for identifying units whose outputs
meet a user-specified alignment criterion. It is guaranteed that on average, a prescribed fraction of selected units indeed meet the alignment criterion, regardless
of the foundation model or the data distribution. Given any pre-trained model
and new units with model-generated outputs, Conformal Alignment leverages
a set of reference data with ground-truth alignment status to train an alignment
predictor. It then selects new units whose predicted alignment scores surpass a
data-dependent threshold, certifying their corresponding outputs as trustworthy.
Through applications to question answering and radiology report generation, we
demonstrate that our method is able to accurately identify units with trustworthy
outputs via lightweight training over a moderate amount of reference data. En route,
we investigate the informativeness of various features in alignment prediction and
combine them with standard models to construct the alignment predictor.

1

Introduction

Large-scale, pre-trained foundation models are remarkably powerful in generating relevant and
informative outputs of various forms for diverse downstream tasks, marking a new era of artificial
intelligence [34, 57, 47]. However, it has been recognized that they can be prone to factual errors [43],
hallucinations [15, 51], and bias [4], among others. These issues raise prevalent societal concerns
regarding the reliable use of foundation models in high-stakes scenarios [7, 6]. It remains a significant
challenge to ensure that outputs from these highly complex models align with human values [36].
Towards uncertainty quantification of black-box models, conformal prediction [50, CP] offers a
versatile, distribution-free solution. While CP has been applied to classification and regression
tasks addressed by foundation models [25, 27, 46, 48, 54, 2], its use to ensure the alignment of
general-form outputs remains largely unexplored. Recently, [36] propose to generate multiple outputs
for one input until it is guaranteed that at least one output meets a specific alignment criterion. Such
a guarantee, however, may not be immediately practical, as users must still determine (manually)
which output(s) is aligned. [32] modify the machine-generated outputs to ensure factuality with
∗
2

Alphabetical ordering.
The code is available at https://github.com/yugjerry/conformal-alignment.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

