Posture-Informed Muscular Force Learning
for Robust Hand Pressure Estimation
Kyungjin Seo1∗ , Junghoon Seo1∗ , Hanseok Jeong2 , Sangpil Kim3 , Sang Ho Yoon1,2
1
Graduate School of Culture Technology, KAIST, South Korea
2
Graduate School of Metaverse, KAIST, South Korea
3
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, South Korea

Abstract
We present PiMForce, a novel framework that enhances hand pressure estimation
by leveraging 3D hand posture information to augment forearm surface electromyography (sEMG) signals. Our approach utilizes detailed spatial information from
3D hand poses in conjunction with dynamic muscle activity from sEMG to enable
accurate and robust whole-hand pressure measurements under diverse hand-object
interactions. We also developed a multimodal data collection system that combines
a pressure glove, an sEMG armband, and a markerless finger-tracking module. We
created a comprehensive dataset from 21 participants, capturing synchronized data
of hand posture, sEMG signals, and exerted hand pressure across various hand
postures and hand-object interaction scenarios using our collection system. Our
framework enables precise hand pressure estimation in complex and natural interaction scenarios. Our approach substantially mitigates the limitations of traditional
sEMG-based or vision-based methods by integrating 3D hand posture information
with sEMG signals. Video demos, data, and code are available online.1

1

Introduction

Hands are a central tool for humans to interact with the surrounding environment. With the advancement in hand tracking technology, hand inputs, including position, orientation, gesture, and
motion, are increasingly used as a primary means of control, especially for emerging interfaces (e.g.,
augmented/virtual reality and wearables). Using hands as the main interaction medium offers a high
level of versatility and flexibility to achieve natural and intuitive interactions.
Recent studies have started to utilize hand pressure information to support hand-based interactions
such as touching [1], grasping [2, 3], and pressing [4]. Researchers also utilized hand pressure to
provide effective haptic feedback [5] for a more immersive user experience. Furthermore, precise
hand pressure measurement becomes essential for real-world applications, including ergonomic
evaluation [6], hand rehabilitation [7], and prosthetic hand control [8]. To this end, previous works
focus on obtaining real-time and accurate hand pressure information with direct measurement
approaches utilizing gloves [9–11] or load cells [12]. However, these approaches require users to be
in physical contact by either wearing or holding the device, which hinders natural hand movements
or reduces user comfort. Thus, the necessity of direct contact limits the users from performing
hand-based interactions in a natural and unrestricted manner.
To this end, non-invasive sensing techniques to estimate exerted hand pressure without embedding
sensors on the user’s hand have been highlighted. These methods include profiling wrist topography
with capacitive sensing [13], multiple pressure sensing from the wrist [14], and electromyography
*
1

Both authors contributed equally to this research.
Project Page: https://hci-tech-lab.github.io/PiMForce/

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

