A Taxonomy of Challenges to Curating Fair Datasets

Dora Zhao∗
Stanford University
Jerone T. A. Andrews†
Sony AI

Morgan Klaus Scheuerman∗
Sony AI

Pooja Chitre†
Arizona State University

Georgia Panagiotidou
King’s College London

Shawn Walker‡
Arizona State University

Kathleen H. Pine‡
Arizona State University

Alice Xiang‡
Sony AI

Abstract
Despite extensive efforts to create fairer machine learning (ML) datasets, there remains a limited understanding of the practical aspects of dataset curation. Drawing
from interviews with 30 ML dataset curators, we present a comprehensive taxonomy of the challenges and trade-offs encountered throughout the dataset curation
lifecycle. Our findings underscore overarching issues within the broader fairness
landscape that impact data curation. We conclude with recommendations aimed at
fostering systemic changes to better facilitate fair dataset curation practices.

1

Introduction

Persistent concerns from academia, government, industry, and the public sphere center on the disparate
impact and unfairness in machine learning (ML) [22, 28, 32, 69–71, 74, 77, 94, 143, 159]. Data is
often viewed as a primary culprit, perpetuating biases and compromising fairness [36, 52, 88, 164].
In response, substantial attention has been directed towards fair dataset collection practices [43, 46,
62, 65, 114, 121, 135, 161, 164]. However, there remains a significant gap in understanding both the
practices and practicalities of fair dataset curation.
To address this gap, we shift from theoretical, guideline-focused scholarship [3, 41, 42, 51, 63, 78, 80,
103, 117] to empirical inquiry, exploring the grounded practices of fair dataset curation. Following
a well-established tradition in human-computer interaction (HCI) [67, 75, 97, 107, 125, 149], we
conducted interviews with 30 dataset curators from both academia and industry who have experience
curating fair vision, language, or multi-modal datasets. Through these interviews, we uncover
practical challenges and trade-offs to ensuring fairness in dataset curation. Our use of qualitative
methodology allowed us to surface nuanced challenges and trade-offs that regularly appear throughout
the curation process and gain insights into considerations that may otherwise remain undisclosed.
We first provide three dimensions of fairness—composition, process, and release—that participants
considered during curation. Fairness is not only a property of the final artifact—the dataset—but also
a constant consideration curators must account for throughout the curation process. Through our
empirical findings, we identify various challenges that obstruct different fairness goals. Building on
Hutchinson et al. [78]’s conception of the dataset lifecycle, we contribute a taxonomy of challenges
dataset curators encounter, addressing both dataset lifecycle-specific challenges (Section 3) and those
within the broader landscape of fairness in ML (Section 4). By conducting in-depth interviews
∗

Joint first author
Joint second author
‡
Joint last author
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

