Amortized Planning with Large-Scale Transformers:
A Case Study on Chess

Anian Ruoss∗1
Li Kevin Wenliang1

Grégoire Delétang∗1
Elliot Catt1

Sourabh Medapati1

John Reid1

Jordi Grau-Moya1

Cannada A. Lewis2

Joel Veness1

Tim Genewein1

Abstract
This paper uses chess, a landmark planning problem in AI, to assess transformers’
performance on a planning task where memorization is futile — even at a large
scale. To this end, we release ChessBench, a large-scale benchmark dataset of
10 million chess games with legal move and value annotations (15 billion data
points) provided by Stockfish 16, the state-of-the-art chess engine. We train
transformers with up to 270 million parameters on ChessBench via supervised
learning and perform extensive ablations to assess the impact of dataset size, model
size, architecture type, and different prediction targets (state-values, action-values,
and behavioral cloning). Our largest models learn to predict action-values for
novel boards quite accurately, implying highly non-trivial generalization. Despite
performing no explicit search, our resulting chess policy solves challenging chess
puzzles and achieves a surprisingly strong Lichess blitz Elo of 2895 against humans
(grandmaster level). We also compare to Leela Chess Zero and AlphaZero (trained
without supervision via self-play) with and without search. We show that, although
a remarkably good approximation of Stockfish’s search-based algorithm can be
distilled into large-scale transformers via supervised learning, perfect distillation is
still beyond reach, thus making ChessBench well-suited for future research.

1

Introduction

The ability to plan ahead and reason about long-term consequences of actions is a hallmark of
rationality and human intelligence. Its replication in artificial systems has been a central goal of
AI research since the field’s inception. Perhaps the historically most famous planning problem
in AI is chess, where naive search is computationally intractable and brute-force memorization is
futile — even at scale. Conceptually, the ability to plan and reason about consequences of actions is
implemented via search algorithms and value computation [1, 2]. To implement such algorithms at
scale, feed-forward neural networks have been playing an increasingly important role. For instance,
DQN [3] and AlphaGo [4] popularized the use of neural value estimators to scale RL and (Monte
Carlo) tree search. Similarly, today’s strongest chess engines also employ a combination of search
and amortized neural value estimation. For example, the state-of-the-art Leela Chess Zero [5, 6],
which builds upon AlphaZero [7], augments Monte Carlo tree search with neural value predictions.
Likewise, Stockfish 16, currently the strongest chess engine, uses efficiently updatable neural network
evaluation [8], a highly specialized neural architecture to obtain fast evaluations. It is trained on
value estimates of an earlier Stockfish version that uses human chess heuristics. All these chess
engines tweak value-estimation networks towards fast evaluations that are to be combined with search
*

Equal contribution. 1 Google DeepMind. 2 Google. Correspondence to {anianr, timgen}@google.com.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

