Membership Inference Attacks against Fine-tuned
Large Language Models via Self-prompt Calibration

Wenjie Fu
Huazhong University of
Science and Technology
wjfu99@outlook.com
Guanghua Liu
Huazhong University of
Science and Technology
guanghualiu@hust.edu.cn

Huandong Wang∗
Tsinghua University
wanghuandong@tsinghua.edu.cn

Chen Gao
Tsinghua University
chgao96@gmail.com

Yong Li
Tsinghua University
liyong07@tsinghua.edu.cn

Tao Jiang
Huazhong University of
Science and Technology
taojiang@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Membership Inference Attacks (MIA) aim to infer whether a target data record
has been utilized for model training or not. Existing MIAs designed for large
language models (LLMs) can be bifurcated into two types: reference-free and
reference-based attacks. Although reference-based attacks appear promising performance by calibrating the probability measured on the target model with reference
models, this illusion of privacy risk heavily depends on a reference dataset that
closely resembles the training set. Both two types of attacks are predicated on
the hypothesis that training records consistently maintain a higher probability of
being sampled. However, this hypothesis heavily relies on the overfitting of target models, which will be mitigated by multiple regularization methods and the
generalization of LLMs. Thus, these reasons lead to high false-positive rates of
MIAs in practical scenarios. We propose a Membership Inference Attack based
on Self-calibrated Probabilistic Variation (SPV-MIA). Specifically, we introduce
a self-prompt approach, which constructs the dataset to fine-tune the reference
model by prompting the target LLM itself. In this manner, the adversary can
collect a dataset with a similar distribution from public APIs. Furthermore, we
introduce probabilistic variation, a more reliable membership signal based on LLM
memorization rather than overfitting, from which we rediscover the neighbour
attack with theoretical grounding. Comprehensive evaluation conducted on three
datasets and four exemplary LLMs shows that SPV-MIA raises the AUC of MIAs
from 0.7 to a significantly high level of 0.9. Our code and dataset are available at:
https://github.com/tsinghua-fib-lab/NeurIPS2024_SPV-MIA.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have been validated to have the ability to generate extensive, creative,
and human-like responses when provided with suitable input prompts. Both commercial LLMs
(e.g., ChatGPT [51]) and open-source LLMs (e.g., LLaMA [65]) can easily handle various complex
application scenarios, including but not limited to chatbots [20], code generation [66], article cowriting [28]. Moreover, as the pretraining-finetuning paradigm becomes the mainstream pipeline in
of LLM field, small-scale organizations and individuals can fine-tune pre-trained models over their
private datasets for downstream applications [44], which further enhances the influence of LLMs.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

