Multi-language Diversity Benefits Autoformalization

Albert Q. Jiang
University of Cambridge
qj213@cam.ac.uk

Wenda Li
University of Edinburgh
wenda.li@ed.ac.uk

Mateja Jamnik
University of Cambridge
mateja.jamnik@cl.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Autoformalization is the task of translating natural language materials into machineverifiable formalisations. Progress in autoformalization research is hindered by
the lack of a sizeable dataset consisting of informal-formal pairs expressing the
same essence. Existing methods tend to circumvent this challenge by manually
curating small corpora or using few-shot learning with large language models. But
these methods suffer from data scarcity and formal language acquisition difficulty.
In this work, we create MMA, a large, flexible, multi-language, and multi-domain
dataset of informal-formal pairs, by using a language model to translate in the
reverse direction, that is, from formal mathematical statements into corresponding
informal ones. Experiments show that language models fine-tuned on MMA can
produce up to 29 − 31% of statements acceptable with minimal corrections on
the miniF2F and ProofNet benchmarks, up from 0% with the base model. We
demonstrate that fine-tuning on multi-language formal data results in more capable
autoformalization models even on single-language tasks.

1

Introduction

Formal mathematics refers to mathematical content that is represented in a formal language that can
be mechanically checked by a computer. Practitioners express mathematics in formal languages
integrated into proof assistants like HOL Light [Harrison, 1996], Isabelle [Paulson, 1994], Coq [Barras
et al., 1999], and Lean [de Moura et al., 2015]. Autoformalization is the task of translating natural
language materials into verifiable formalisations. An ideal autoformalization engine can reduce the
excessive cost for modern mathematical results to be verified [Ball, 2012, Scholze and Stix, 2018].
It opens up the vast amount of mathematics expressed in natural language to automated reasoning
research fields that rely on formal languages, like automated theorem proving [Wu et al., 2022].
The hope of automatically translating informal mathematics into formally verifiable content is as
old as formal mathematics [Whitehead and Russell, 1925–1927]. Only very recently, the breakthroughs in neural networks and Neural Machine Translation (NMT) enabled autoformalization to be
learned [Wang et al., 2020, Wu et al., 2022, Jiang et al., 2023b]. NMT methods typically require a
large parallel dataset, that is, a dataset consisting of pairs of sequences expressing the same meaning
in both the source and the target language. The most challenging part of autoformalization research
is constructing such a parallel dataset in a natural and a formal language, satisfying two conditions
simultaneously: (1) the natural language component is close to how mathematics is actually written;
and (2) the number of datapoints is large enough for the data-hungry machine learning methods. This
is hard, because manually translating informal mathematical content into a formal language is only
doable by highly trained experts in both mathematics and computer science, hence costly.
In this work, we address the lack of a parallel dataset by leveraging a state-of-the-art Large Language
Model (LLM), GPT-4 [OpenAI, 2023]: we used it to translate the two largest formal corpora, Archive
of Formal Proofs in the language of Isabelle, and mathlib4 in the language of Lean4, into natural
language. This process was enabled by the key observations that informalisation is much easier than
formalisation, and a powerful LLM can produce diverse natural language outputs. As a result, we
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

