Learning-Augmented Approximation Algorithms for
Maximum Cut and Related Problems
Vincent Cohen-Addad
Google Research
France
coheaddad@google.com

Tommaso d’Orsi∗
Bocconi University
Italy
tommaso.dorsi@unibocconi.it

Euiwoong Lee
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor MI 48105
euiwoong@umich.edu

Anupam Gupta†
New York University
New York NY 10012
anupam.g@nyu.edu

Debmalya Panigrahi
Duke University
Durham NC 27708
debmalya@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
In recent years, there has been a surge of interest in the use of machine-learned
predictions to bypass worst-case lower bounds for classical problems in combinatorial optimization. So far, the focus has mostly been on online algorithms, where
information-theoretic barriers are overcome using predictions about the unknown
future. In this paper, we consider the complementary question of using learned
information to overcome computational barriers in the form of approximation
hardness of polynomial-time algorithms for NP-hard (offline) problems. We show
that noisy predictions about the optimal solution can be used to break classical
hardness results for maximization problems such as the max-cut problem and more
generally, maximization versions of constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs).

1

Introduction

The design and analysis of algorithms beyond the classical worst-case paradigm has been an active
area of research (see, e.g., the collection of surveys by Roughgarden [2020]). In recent years, this
has been accelerated by the success and widespread adoption of machine learning models across
application domains, leading researchers to ask: can we use machine-learned information to solve
typical instances of a problem better than what we can hope for in the worst case? This meta-question
has been particularly influential in the realm of online optimization, where the goal is to design
algorithms for inputs that are revealed sequentially over time. Indeed, assuming that the future unfolds
in a typical rather than worst-case manner, we can compensate for the information deficit of the online
algorithm with predictions learned based on past data, thereby helping it bypass information-theoretic
lower bounds. This principle has been successfully applied to a broad range of online problems, such
as caching [Lykouris and Vassilvitskii, 2021], rent-or-buy [Purohit et al., 2018], covering Bamas
et al. [2020b], network design Azar et al. [2022], scheduling Azar et al. [2021], matching Dinitz et al.
[2021], and many others (see related work for more references).
In this paper, we study the role of machine-learned predictions in offline NP-hard problems. For
offline problems, an algorithm has no information disadvantage compared to an optimal solution:
the disadvantage is computational. The NP-hardness of problems makes exact algorithms that run
in polynomial time unlikely. This has led to the field of approximation algorithms, where the goal
is to obtain polynomial-time algorithms that output solutions that are approximately optimal. In
∗
†

Part of this work was done when the author was at ETH Zurich.
Part of this work was done when the author was at Carnegie Mellon University.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

