Proportional Fairness in Clustering:
A Social Choice Perspective

Leon Kellerhals
Technische Universität Clausthal
leon.kellerhals@tu-clausthal.de

Jannik Peters
National University of Singapore
peters@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
We study the proportional clustering problem of Chen et al. (ICML’19) and relate
it to the area of multiwinner voting in computational social choice. We show that
any clustering satisfying a weak proportionality notion of Brill and Peters (EC’23)
simultaneously obtains the best known approximations to the proportional fairness
notion of Chen et al., but also to individual fairness (Jung et al., FORC’20) and the
“core” (Li et al., ICML’21). In fact, we show that any approximation to proportional
fairness is also an approximation to individual fairness and vice versa. Finally, we
also study stronger notions of proportional representation, in which deviations do
not only happen to single, but multiple candidate centers, and show that stronger
proportionality notions of Brill and Peters imply approximations to these stronger
guarantees.

1

Fair clustering

Fair decision-making is a crucial research area in artificial intelligence and machine learning. To
ensure fairness, a plethora of different fairness notions, algorithms and settings have been introduced,
studied, and implemented. One area in which fairness has been applied extensively is (centroid)
clustering: We are given a set of n data points which we want to partition into k clusters by choosing
k “centers” and assigning each point to a center by which it is represented well. Fairness now comes
into play when, e.g., the data points correspond to human individuals.
Fairness notions in clustering usually depend on one decision: whether one takes demographic
information (such as gender, income, etc.) into account or whether one is agnostic to it. A large part
of work on fair clustering has focused on incorporating such demographic information, starting with
the seminal work of Chierichetti et al. [2017] who aimed to proportionally balance the number of
people of a certain type in each cluster center. However, not all work on fair clustering relies on
demographic information. Independently, and in different contexts, Jung, Kannan, and Lutz [2020]
and Chen, Fain, Lyu, and Munagala [2019] instead tried to derive fairness notions from the instance
itself. For Jung et al. this lead to their notion of individual fairness: Given a population of size n,
with k cluster centers to be opened, every agent should be entitled to a cluster center not further away
than their nk -th neighbor. While this is not always achievable, Jung et al. gave a simple algorithm
achieving a 2-approximation to this notion. Chen et al. were motivated not by being fair towards
individual members of the population (or agents), but towards groups of agents, defining their notion
of proportional fairness: no group of size at least nk should be able to suggest a cluster center they all
would√bebetter off with. This notion is also not always achievable, and Chen et al. gave a simple
1 + 2 -approximation for it.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

