Random Cycle Coding: Lossless Compression of
Cluster Assignments via Bits-Back Coding

Daniel Severo

Ashish Khisti

Alireza Makhzani

University of Toronto
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
{d.severo@mail, akhisti@, a.makhzani@}.utoronto.ca

Abstract
We present an optimal method for encoding cluster assignments of arbitrary data
sets. Our method, Random Cycle Coding (RCC), encodes data sequentially and
sends assignment information as cycles of the permutation defined by the order of
encoded elements. RCC does not require any training and its worst-case complexity
scales quasi-linearly with the size of the largest cluster. We characterize the
achievable bit rates as a function of cluster sizes and number of elements, showing
RCC consistently outperforms previous methods while requiring less compute and
memory resources. Experiments show RCC can save up to 2 bytes per element
when applied to vector databases, and removes the need for assigning integer ids to
identify vectors, translating to savings of up to 70% in vector database systems for
similarity search applications.

1

Introduction

A clustering is a collection of pairwise disjoint sets, called clusters, used throughout science and
engineering to group data under context-specific criteria. A clustering can be decomposed conceptually into two parts of differing nature. The data set, created by the set union of all clusters, and the
assignments, indicating which elements belong to which cluster. This work is concerned with the
lossless communication and storage of the assignment information, for arbitrary data sets, from an
information theoretic and algorithmic viewpoint.
Communicating clusters appears as a fundamental problem in modern vector similarity databases such
as FAISS [Johnson et al., 2019]. FAISS is a database designed to store vectors of large dimensionality,
usually representing pre-trained embeddings, for similarity search. Given a query vector, FAISS
returns a set of the k-nearest neighbors [Lloyd, 1982] available in the database under some pre-defined
distance metric (usually the L2 distance). Returning the exact set requires an exhaustive search over
the entire database for each query vector which quickly becomes intractable in practice. FAISS can
instead return an approximate solution by performing a two-stage search on a coarse and fine grained
set of database vectors. The database undergoes a training phase where vectors are clustered into
sets and assigned a representative (i.e., a centroid). FAISS first selects the k ′ -nearest clusters, k ′ < k,
based on the distance of the query to the centroids, and then performs an exhaustive search within
them to return the approximate k-nearest neighbors.
The cluster assignments must be stored to enable cluster-based approximate searching. In contrast
to a class, a cluster is distinguishable only by the elements it contains, and is void of any labelling.
However, cluster assignments are often stored alongside the data set in the form of artificially
generated labels. Lossy compression techniques for storing the vectors themselves is an active area of
research [Chen et al., 2010, Martinez et al., 2016, Babenko and Lempitsky, 2014, Jegou et al., 2010,
Huijben et al., 2024]. In this literature, the number of bits used to store the vector embedding ranges
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

