Domain Adaptation for Large-Vocabulary
Object Detectors

Kai Jiang1,† , Jiaxing Huang2,† , Weiying Xie1 , Jie Lei3 , Yunsong Li1 , Ling Shao4 , Shijian Lu2,∗
1
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
2
S-lab, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
3
School of Electrical and Data Engineering at the University of Technology Sydney
4
UCAS-Terminus AI Lab, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China

Abstract
Large-vocabulary object detectors (LVDs) aim to detect objects of many categories, which learn super objectness features and can locate objects accurately
while applied to various downstream data. However, LVDs often struggle in recognizing the located objects due to domain discrepancy in data distribution and
object vocabulary. At the other end, recent vision-language foundation models
such as CLIP demonstrate superior open-vocabulary recognition capability. This
paper presents KGD, a Knowledge Graph Distillation technique that exploits the
implicit knowledge graphs (KG) in CLIP for effectively adapting LVDs to various
downstream domains. KGD consists of two consecutive stages: 1) KG extraction
that employs CLIP to encode downstream domain data as nodes and their feature
distances as edges, constructing KG that inherits the rich semantic relations in
CLIP explicitly; and 2) KG encapsulation that transfers the extracted KG into LVDs
to enable accurate cross-domain object classification. In addition, KGD can extract
both visual and textual KG independently, providing complementary vision and
language knowledge for object localization and object classification in detection
tasks over various downstream domains. Experiments over multiple widely adopted
detection benchmarks show that KGD outperforms the state-of-the-art consistently
by large margins.

1

Introduction

Object detection aims to locate and classify objects in images, which conveys critical information
about “what and where objects are” in scenes. It is very important in various visual perception
tasks in autonomous driving, visual surveillance, object tracking, etc. Unlike traditional object
detection, large-vocabulary object detection [1, 2, 3] aims to detect objects of a much larger number
of categories, e.g., 20k object categories in [3]. It has achieved very impressive progress recently
thanks to the availability of large-scale training data. On the other hand, large-vocabulary object
detectors (LVDs) often struggle while applied to various downstream tasks as their training data
often have different distributions and vocabularies as compared with the downstream data, i.e., due to
domain discrepancies.
In this work, we study unsupervised domain adaptation of LVDs, i.e., how to adapt LVDs towards
various downstream tasks with abundant unlabelled data available. Specifically, we observe that
LVDs learn superb generalizable objectness knowledge from massive object boxes, being able to
locate objects in various downstream images accurately [3]. However, LVDs often fail to classify
†
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

