Neural Pose Representation Learning for Generating
and Transferring Non-Rigid Object Poses

Seungwoo Yoo

Juil Koo

Kyeongmin Yeo Minhyuk Sung
KAIST
{dreamy1534,63days,aaaaa,mhsung}@kaist.ac.kr

Figure 1: Results of motion sequence transfer (left) and shape variation generation (right) using
the proposed neural pose representation. On the left, poses from source shapes (first and third rows)
are transferred to target shapes (second and fourth rows), preserving intricate details like horns
and antlers. On the right, new poses sampled from a cascaded diffusion model, trained with shape
variations of the bunny (last column), are transferred to other animal shapes.

Abstract
We propose a novel method for learning representations of poses for 3D deformable
objects, which specializes in 1) disentangling pose information from the object’s
identity, 2) facilitating the learning of pose variations, and 3) transferring pose
information to other object identities. Based on these properties, our method enables the generation of 3D deformable objects with diversity in both identities and
poses, using variations of a single object. It does not require explicit shape parameterization such as skeletons or joints, point-level or shape-level correspondence
supervision, or variations of the target object for pose transfer. We first design
the pose extractor to represent the pose as a keypoint-based hybrid representation
and the pose applier to learn an implicit deformation field. To better distill pose
information from the object’s geometry, we propose the implicit pose applier to
output an intrinsic mesh property, the face Jacobian. Once the extracted pose
information is transferred to the target object, the pose applier is fine-tuned in
a self-supervised manner to better describe the target object’s shapes with pose
variations. The extracted poses are also used to train a cascaded diffusion model to
enable the generation of novel poses. Our experiments with the DeformThings4D
and Human datasets demonstrate state-of-the-art performance in pose transfer and
the ability to generate diverse deformed shapes with various objects and poses.

1

Introduction

The recent great success of generative models [17, 39, 40, 38] has been made possible not only
due to advances in techniques but also due to the enormous scale of data that has become available,
such as LAION [35] for 2D image generation. For 3D data, the scale has been rapidly increasing,
as exemplified by ObjaverseXL [10]. However, it is still far from sufficient to cover all possible
3D shapes, particularly deformable, non-rigid 3D shapes such as humans, animals, and characters.
The challenge with deformable 3D shapes is especially pronounced due to the diversity in both
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

