Representation Noising:
A Defence Mechanism Against Harmful Finetuning

Domenic Rosati1,7∗ Jan Wehner2 Kai Williams3
Łukasz Bartoszcze4 David Atanasov5 Robie Gonzales1
Subhabrata Majumdar6 Carsten Maple4 Hassan Sajjad1 Frank Rudzicz1,7
1
Dalhousie University 2 CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
3
Swarthmore College 4 University of Warwick 5 University of Toronto 6 Vijil
7
Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
Releasing open-source large language models (LLMs) presents a dual-use risk
since bad actors can easily fine-tune these models for harmful purposes. Even
without the open release of weights, weight stealing and fine-tuning APIs make
closed models vulnerable to harmful fine-tuning attacks (HFAs). While safety
measures like preventing jailbreaks and improving safety guardrails are important,
such measures can easily be reversed through fine-tuning. In this work, we propose
Representation Noising (RepNoise), a defence mechanism that operates even when
attackers have access to the weights. RepNoise works by removing information
about harmful representations such that it is difficult to recover them during finetuning. Importantly, our defence is also able to generalize across different subsets
of harm that have not been seen during the defence process as long as they are
drawn from the same distribution of the attack set. Our method does not degrade
the general capability of LLMs and retains the ability to train the model on harmless
tasks. We provide empirical evidence that the efficacy of our defence lies in its
“depth”: the degree to which information about harmful representations is removed
across all layers of the LLM. We also find areas where RepNoise still remains
ineffective and highlight how those limitations can inform future research.

1

Introduction

Despite the benefits to both research and commercial development, open-sourcing large language
models (LLMs) poses several risks [12] such as facilitating the development of weapons [21]. Such
risks are not isolated to only open-source models, weights of proprietary models expose fine-tuning
APIs [49] which can be used for constructing harmful models and for reconstructing weights at
inference time [10]. The risk of LLMs assisting in harmful tasks is exacerbated by their increasing
ability to follow instructions, carry out sophisticated tasks, and the ease with which they can be
trained and run. Developers attempt to mitigate these risks [55] by developing safety guardrails that
prevent LLMs from performing harmful tasks at inference time. However, these guardrails are easily
circumvented either through back doors [33], adversarial attacks [45], or harmful fine-tuning [51].
We argue that no matter how sophisticated safety guardrails become, models vulnerable to harmful
fine-tuning and amenable to malicious modifications are fundamentally unsafe.
We propose Representation Noising (RepNoise) as the first defence to mitigate in-distribution harmful
fine-tuning attacks (HFAs) for LLMs in the natural language generation setting where the defender has
no control of the model after the attacker attains its weights. Our work is inspired by the observation
∗

Code available at https://github.com/domenicrosati/representation-noising

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

