Full-Distance Evasion of Pedestrian Detectors in the
Physical World
Zhi Cheng1 , Zhanhao Hu2 , Yuqiu Liu3 , Jianmin Li1 , Hang Su1 , Xiaolin Hu1*
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, UC Berkeley
3
Department of Technology, Beijing Forestry University, Beijing, China
zhicheng_mail@126.com, huzhanhao@berkeley.edu, yuqiu99@bjfu.edu.cn, {lijianmin, suhangss,
xlhu}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Many studies have proposed attack methods to generate adversarial patterns for
evading pedestrian detection, alarming the computer vision community about the
need for more attention to the robustness of detectors. However, adversarial patterns optimized by these methods commonly have limited performance at medium
to long distances in the physical world. To overcome this limitation, we identify
two main challenges. First, in existing methods, there is commonly an appearance
gap between simulated distant adversarial patterns and their physical world counterparts, leading to incorrect optimization. Second, there exists a conflict between
adversarial losses at different distances, which causes difficulties in optimization. To overcome these challenges, we introduce a Full Distance Attack (FDA)
method. Our physical world experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our FDA
patterns across various detection models like YOLOv5, Deformable-DETR, and
Mask RCNN. Codes available at https://github.com/zhicheng2T0/Full-DistanceAttack.git

1

Introduction

Currently, various adversarial attack methods have been proposed to evade deep-neural-network-based
pedestrian detectors in the physical world [34, 17, 42] by crafting patches or clothes covered with
adversarial patterns. These works have alarmed the computer vision community on the robustness of
the existing Deep Nerual Network based detectors [37, 26, 14, 8, 43]. However, as shown in previous
works [17, 23], a common limitation of the existing attack methods is that the generated adversarial
patterns are not adversarially effective at medium to long distances (see also Figure 1(a)). This
limitation might brings a false impression to the computer vision community that existing pedestrian
detectors are robust to physical world attacks at such distances.
In this study, we find that the major cause of the aforementioned limitation is the naive distant
image simulation technique used when optimizing the adversarial patterns. More specifically, as
demonstrated in Figure 1(b), to simulate the appearance of a distant adversarial pattern during
optimization, the existing attack algorithms usually naively downscale and apply the adversarial
patterns according to the size of the pedestrians [34, 42, 17]. Such a naive technique creates a
widening appearance gap between the simulated patterns and their real-world counterparts as distance
increases. This leads to the optimization of incorrect adversarial patterns.
* Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

