F UGAL:
Feature-fortified Unrestricted Graph Alignment

Aditya Bommakanti
IIT Delhi
adityabommakanti2002@gmail.com
Konstantinos Skitsas
Aarhus University
skitsas@cs.au.dk

Harshith Reddy Vonteri
IIT Delhi
harshithreddyvonteri@gmail.com

Sayan Ranu
IIT Delhi
sayanranu@cse.iitd.ac.in

Davide Mottin
Aarhus University
davide@cs.au.dk

Panagiotis Karras
University of Copenhagen & Aarhus University
piekarras@gmail.com

Abstract
The necessity to align two graphs, minimizing a structural distance metric, is
prevalent in biology, chemistry, recommender systems, and social network analysis.
Due to the problem’s NP-hardness, prevailing graph alignment methods follow a
modular and mediated approach, solving the problem restricted to the domain of
intermediary graph representations or products like embeddings, spectra, and graph
signals. Restricting the problem to this intermediate space may distort the original
problem and are hence predisposed to miss high-quality solutions. In this paper,
we propose an unrestricted method, F UGAL, which finds a permutation matrix
that maps one graph to another by directly operating on their adjacency matrices
with judicious constraint relaxation. Extensive experimentation demonstrates that
F UGAL consistently surpasses state-of-the-art graph alignment methods in accuracy
across all benchmark datasets without encumbering efficiency.

1

Introduction and Related Work

Graph alignment seeks to match a pair of graphs to each other, i.e., to correlate nodes of one graph to
those of the other. For instance, biological systems such as protein-protein interaction networks and
gene regulatory networks can be represented as graphs. The alignment of such biological networks
across species reveals orthologous proteins or genes (i.e., homologous genes that evolved from a
common ancestor) and thereby conveys the biological function of uncharted genes in one species
through their better-studied counterparts in another species [37, 36]. The same problem also arises
in other high-impact network science tasks [11], such as identifying users in social networks [22]
and feature matching in computer vision [5, 6]. The problem can be formulated as an instance of
the quadratic assignment problem (QAP) [13, 24] between nodes of the two graphs, which treats the
edges in one graph as units of flow and the edges in the other graph as distances between nodes. This
relation renders the problem APX-hard to approximate even within an approximation factor that
grows linearly with the number of nodes [30, 13].

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

