EASI: Evolutionary Adversarial Simulator
Identification for Sim-to-Real Transfer
Haoyu Dong, Huiqiao Fu, Wentao Xu, Zhehao Zhou, Chunlin Chen∗
Department of Control Science and Intelligent Engineering,
School of Management and Engineering, Nanjing University, China
{haoyudong,hqfu, wtxu, zhzhou}@smail.nju.edu.cn,
clchen@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning (RL) controllers have demonstrated remarkable performance in complex robot control tasks. However, the presence of reality gap often
leads to poor performance when deploying policies trained in simulation directly
onto real robots. Previous sim-to-real algorithms like Domain Randomization
(DR) requires domain-specific expertise and suffers from issues such as reduced
control performance and high training costs. In this work, we introduce Evolutionary Adversarial Simulator Identification (EASI), a novel approach that combines
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) and Evolutionary Strategy (ES) to address
sim-to-real challenges. Specifically, we consider the problem of sim-to-real as a
search problem, where ES acts as a generator in adversarial competition with a
neural network discriminator, aiming to find physical parameter distributions that
make the state transitions between simulation and reality as similar as possible.
The discriminator serves as the fitness function, guiding the evolution of the physical parameter distributions. EASI features simplicity, low cost, and high fidelity,
enabling the construction of a more realistic simulator with minimal requirements
for real-world data, thus aiding in transferring simulated-trained policies to the
real world. We demonstrate the performance of EASI in both sim-to-sim and
sim-to-real tasks, showing superior performance compared to existing sim-to-real
algorithms.

1

Introduction

With the development of Reinforcement Learning (RL) , an increasing number of RL controllers have
demonstrated remarkable performance in complex, high-dimensional robot control tasks[1, 2]. Such
RL algorithms require minimal domain-specific knowledge, offering superior control performance
and more natural robot locomotion compared to traditional control methods. However, training these
RL controllers requires plenty of trial and error processes, it’s unsafe and costly to complete training
tasks in the real world. On the other hand, simulation provides a cheaper and safer way to obtain a
vast amount of trial data which is more suitable for RL training. Yet, due to simulation inaccuracies,
disparities between simulation and reality inevitably exist and simulated-trained policies transferring
directly to the real environment often result in poor performance, which is also known as ‘reality
gap’.
To bridge the gap between simulation and reality, many studies focus on sim-to-real transfers to
translate simulated-trained policy to reality. As one of the most popular sim-to-real methods, Domain
Randomization (DR) [3–6] injects random noise into observations, actions, and physical parameters
during simulated training, which helps agents adapt to different environments, making the policies
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

