GTSinger: A Global Multi-Technique Singing Corpus
with Realistic Music Scores for All Singing Tasks

Yu Zhang† Changhao Pan† Wenxiang Guo† Ruiqi Li Zhiyuan Zhu Jialei Wang
Wenhao Xu Jingyu Lu Zhiqing Hong Chuxin Wang LiChao Zhang Jinzheng He
Ziyue Jiang Yuxin Chen Chen Yang Jiecheng Zhou Xinyu Cheng Zhou Zhao∗
Zhejiang University
{yuzhang34,panch,guowx314,zhaozhou}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
The scarcity of high-quality and multi-task singing datasets significantly hinders
the development of diverse controllable and personalized singing tasks, as existing singing datasets suffer from low quality, limited diversity of languages
and singers, absence of multi-technique information and realistic music scores,
and poor task suitability. To tackle these problems, we present GTSinger, a
large Global, multi-Technique, free-to-use, high-quality singing corpus with
realistic music scores, designed for all singing tasks, along with its benchmarks. Particularly, (1) we collect 80.59 hours of high-quality singing voices,
forming the largest recorded singing dataset; (2) 20 professional singers across
nine widely spoken languages offer diverse timbres and styles; (3) we provide
controlled comparison and phoneme-level annotations of six commonly used
singing techniques, helping technique modeling and control; (4) GTSinger offers realistic music scores, assisting real-world musical composition; (5) singing
voices are accompanied by manual phoneme-to-audio alignments, global style
labels, and 16.16 hours of paired speech for various singing tasks. Moreover,
to facilitate the use of GTSinger, we conduct four benchmark experiments:
technique-controllable singing voice synthesis, technique recognition, style transfer, and speech-to-singing conversion. The corpus and demos can be found at
http://gtsinger.github.io. We provide the dataset and the code for processing data
and conducting benchmarks at https://huggingface.co/datasets/GTSinger/GTSinger
and https://github.com/GTSinger/GTSinger.

1

Introduction

Traditional singing tasks, typically singing voice synthesis (SVS) [11, 29], aim to generate highquality singing voices using lyrics and musical notations, attracting broad interest in the industry
and academic communities. As deep learning technology advances, there is a growing demand for
more controllable and personalized singing experiences. This burgeoning demand has catalyzed
the emergence of various new singing tasks like technique-controllable SVS, technique recognition,
style transfer, and speech-to-singing (STS) conversion [1, 13]. These tasks have been progressively
developed and applied in real life, like short videos and professional composition [28].
Despite the significant progress made in multiple singing tasks, the scarcity of publicly available
high-quality and multi-task singing datasets has become a major bottleneck in their development
due to the high cost of recording songs and manual annotations. The primary limitations of existing
open-source singing datasets are as follows: 1) The low quality [19] may lead to singing models
†
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

