FedAvP: Augment Local Data via Shared Policy in
Federated Learning

Minui Hong∗ Junhyeog Yun∗ Insu Jeon† Gunhee Kim∗
Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea
∗
{alsdml123,junhyeog,gunhee}@snu.ac.kr
†
{insuj3on}@gmail.com

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) allows multiple clients to collaboratively train models
without directly sharing their private data. While various data augmentation techniques have been actively studied in the FL environment, most of these methods
share input-level or feature-level data information over communication, posing
potential privacy leakage. In response to this challenge, we introduce a federated
data augmentation algorithm named FedAvP that shares only the augmentation policies, not the data-related information. For data security and efficient policy search,
we interpret the policy loss as a meta update loss in standard FL algorithms and
utilize the first-order gradient information to further enhance privacy and reduce
communication costs. Moreover, we propose a meta-learning method to search
for adaptive personalized policies tailored to heterogeneous clients. Our approach
outperforms existing best performing augmentation policy search methods and
federated data augmentation methods, in the benchmarks for heterogeneous FL.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) is a collaborative learning approach that allows multiple clients to learn
without sharing their private information [1–6]. A central server coordinates the training process
across multiple devices and aggregates the locally trained models into a global one; thus reducing the
communication cost of exchanging raw data and mitigating the risk of privacy leakage associated
with data sharing [7].
However, the limited accessibility of data in FL still poses many challenges, such as insufficient
training data and local data bias. To address these challenges, there has been a growing interest in
federated data augmentation techniques [8–12]. They aim to increase the diversity and volume of data
available at each client, thereby improving the overall robustness and performance of the federated
models. For example, FedMix [8] improves performance and privacy by averaging multiple images
to facilitate data mixup among clients. Similarly, FedFA [11] utilizes feature statistics to mitigate
local data biases, to improve model generalization. Despite their benefits, these methods often apply
the sharing of input-level [8, 10, 12] or feature-level [13, 11] information. Such information sharing
poses additional privacy concerns since malicious attackers could potentially reconstruct original data
by applying gradient matching loss [14] on the additional input and feature information.
We propose a novel federated data augmentation algorithm named FedAvP (Augmet Local Data via
Shared Policy in Federated Learning), which shares only the augmentation policies during training.
Thus, each client does not need to share its own data or data-related information directly but obtains
collective knowledge on how to augment the dataset at local learning. Previously, AutoAugment [15]
utilizes reinforcement learning (RL) to automatically find the optimal data augmentation policy for a
target dataset. While AutoAugment requires extensive GPU resources, more efficient and faster policy
search has been studied [16–20]. However, these methods are not designed for FL environments but
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

