Mitigating Reward Overoptimization via Lightweight
Uncertainty Estimation

Xiaoying Zhang∗
ByteDance Research
zhangxiaoying.xy@bytedance.com
Wei Shen †
Fudan University
wshen21@m.fudan.edu.cn

Jean-François Ton∗
ByteDance Research
jeanfrancois@bytedance.com

Hongning Wang
Tsinghua University
wang.hongn@gmail.com

Yang Liu
UC Santa Cruz
yangliu@ucsc.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) has been pivotal in aligning Large Language Models with human values but often suffers from overoptimization due to its reliance on a proxy reward model. To mitigate this limitation,
we first propose a lightweight uncertainty quantification method that assesses the
reliability of the proxy reward using only the last layer embeddings of the reward
model. Enabled by this efficient uncertainty quantification method, we formulate
A DV PO, a distributionally robust optimization procedure to tackle the reward
overoptimization problem in RLHF. Through extensive experiments on the Anthropic HH and TL;DR summarization datasets, we verify the effectiveness of
A DV PO in mitigating the overoptimization problem, resulting in enhanced RLHF
performance as evaluated through human-assisted evaluation.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) is proven to be effective for aligning Large
Language Models (LLMs) with human preferences [26, 2]. RLHF typically involves three main
steps: 1) Supervised Fine Tuning (SFT) of a pretrained LLM using high-quality data, 2) Reward
Modelling to capture human preferences that the LLM should follow, and 3) Reinforcement Learning
(RL) based policy optimization (e.g., PPO [32]) where a policy initialized from the SFT model is
further improved, guided by the reward model as a proxy for human feedback.
However, a critical issue arises in this process: the reward model, built from a finite dataset of human
preferences, often fails to accurately represent the underlying human preferences. This approximation
error, worsened by the distribution shifts during policy updates [38], leads to unreliable rewards
during the RL stage. This directly causes the phenomenon of reward ‘overoptimization’, wherein the
LLM exploits erroneous high-reward states, artificially inflating the estimated proxy reward, while
the ground-truth reward decreases [12, 9, 11].
Current mitigation strategies against reward overoptimization, as proposed in [9, 11, 45], focus on
penalizing samples with high reward uncertainty during RL-based policy training. Specifically, [9, 11]
quantify reward uncertainty by training an ensemble of reward models with different seeds during
either the pre-training or fine-tuning phases. They then measure the variance in estimated rewards
across the ensemble to assess uncertainty in the reward prediction. However, RL policy optimization
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work done during internship at Bytedance Research

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

