Uncovering Safety Risks of Large Language Models
through Concept Activation Vector
Zhihao Xu1∗, Ruixuan Huang2∗ , Changyu Chen1 , Xiting Wang1†
2

1
Renmin University of China
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Warning: This paper contains text examples that are offensive or harmful in nature.
Despite careful safety alignment, current large language models (LLMs) remain
vulnerable to various attacks. To further unveil the safety risks of LLMs, we
introduce a Safety Concept Activation Vector (SCAV) framework, which effectively guides the attacks by accurately interpreting LLMs’ safety mechanisms.
We then develop an SCAV-guided attack method that can generate both attack
prompts and embedding-level attacks with automatically selected perturbation
hyperparameters. Both automatic and human evaluations demonstrate that our
attack method significantly improves the attack success rate and response quality while requiring less training data. Additionally, we find that our generated
attack prompts may be transferable to GPT-4, and the embedding-level attacks
may also be transferred to other white-box LLMs whose parameters are known.
Our experiments further uncover the safety risks present in current LLMs. For
example, in our evaluation of seven open-source LLMs, we observe an average
attack success rate of 99.14%, based on the classic keyword-matching criterion.
Finally, we provide insights into the safety mechanism of LLMs. The code is
available at https://github.com/SproutNan/AI-Safety_SCAV.

1

Introduction

The rapid advancement in large language models (LLMs) has raised significant concerns about their
potential misuse [1, 2, 3, 4]. Developers usually conduct intensive alignment work [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12] to prevent powerful LLMs from being exploited for harmful activities. However, researchers
have discovered that these time-consuming safety alignment efforts can be reversed by various attack
methods [13, 14, 15, 16]. These methods can identify vulnerabilities in safety alignment technologies
and enable developers to fix them promptly, reducing the societal safety risks of LLMs.
Existing attack methods utilize different levels of information from LLMs to achieve varying degrees of model understanding and control. Pioneering attack methods manually design prompt templates [15, 17] or learn attack prompts without information about intermediate layers of LLMs [13, 14].
The attack prompts may be applied to various LLMs, supporting both black-box attacks on APIs
and white-box scenarios where model parameters are released. However, their attack success rates
(ASR) [14] are constrained by an insufficient understanding of LLMs’ internal working mechanisms.
Some recent attack works further utilize model embeddings at intermediate layers [16, 18]. By better
understanding models’ safety mechanisms and perturbing relevant dimensions in the embeddings,
these methods achieve significantly higher ASR on white-box LLMs. However, they cannot be applied to black-box APIs. Moreover, existing methods perturb LLM embeddings based on potentially
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding to xitingwang@ruc.edu.cn

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

