Reconstructing the Image Stitching Pipeline:
Integrating Fusion and Rectangling into a Unified
Inpainting Model

Ziqi Xie1 , Weidong Zhao1,2∗ , Xianhui Liu1,2 , Jian Zhao1 , Ning Jia1,2
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University
College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Tongji University
{xieziqi, wd, lxh, zjtju1919, jianing7072}@tongji.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Deep learning-based image stitching pipelines are typically divided into three
cascading stages: registration, fusion, and rectangling. Each stage requires its own
network training and is tightly coupled to the others, leading to error propagation
and posing significant challenges to parameter tuning and system stability. This
paper proposes the Simple and Robust Stitcher (SRStitcher), which revolutionizes
the image stitching pipeline by simplifying the fusion and rectangling stages into a
unified inpainting model, requiring no model training or fine-tuning. We reformulate the problem definitions of the fusion and rectangling stages and demonstrate
that they can be effectively integrated into an inpainting task. Furthermore, we
design the weighted masks to guide the reverse process in a pre-trained largescale diffusion model, implementing this integrated inpainting task in a single
inference. Through extensive experimentation, we verify the interpretability and
generalization capabilities of this unified model, demonstrating that SRStitcher
outperforms state-of-the-art methods in both performance and stability. Code:
https://github.com/yayoyo66/SRStitcher

1

Introduction

Image stitching is a fundamental problem in computer vision, which aims to obtain a larger field
of view by merging multiple overlapping images [5]. As illustrated in Figure 1(a), the current
deep learning-based image stitching pipeline is typically structured into three sequential stages: (1)
Registration Stage. The first stage takes the original image pairs to estimate warping matrices, which
are then used to align images. Current learning-based methods focus on designing the homography
estimation networks to address the registration problem [22, 21, 7]. (2) Fusion Stage. The second
stage merges the aligned images into a single fusion image. Present research in this domain is
generally classified into reconstruction-based (recon-based) and seam-based methods. Recon-based
methods [32, 36, 33] typically use the encoder-decoder networks to perform pixel-wise reconstruction
of the fusion image. While seam-based methods [35, 11] focus on identifying the optimal seams
to eliminate the fusion ghosting. (3) Rectangling Stage. The final stage transforms the irregularly
shaped fusion image into a standard rectangular format. There are only a few deep learning-based
studies for this stage [34, 56], and they are all supervised methods with requirements for labeling
data.
Annoyingly, the cascaded structure of current image stitching pipelines poses significant challenges for
training optimization and parameter tuning. Furthermore, errors from early stages tend to propagate
to later stages, significantly degrading the performance of later processes. The representative
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

