Optical Diffusion Models for Image Generation

Ilker Oguz1 Niyazi Ulas Dinc1 Mustafa Yildirim1 Junjie Ke2 Innfarn Yoo2
Qifei Wang3 Feng Yang2∗ Christophe Moser1∗ Demetri Psaltis1∗
1
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne 2 Google Research 3 Google
{ilker.oguz,niyazi.dinc,mustafa.yildirim,christophe.moser,demetri.psaltis}@epfl.ch
{junjiek,innfarn,qfwang,fengyang}@google.com

Abstract
Diffusion models generate new samples by progressively decreasing the noise
from the initially provided random distribution. This inference procedure generally
utilizes a trained neural network numerous times to obtain the final output, creating
significant latency and energy consumption on digital electronic hardware such as
GPUs. In this study, we demonstrate that the propagation of a light beam through a
semi-transparent medium can be programmed to implement a denoising diffusion
model on image samples. This framework projects noisy image patterns through
passive diffractive optical layers, which collectively only transmit the predicted
noise term in the image. The optical transparent layers, which are trained with
an online training approach, backpropagating the error to the analytical model
of the system, are passive and kept the same across different steps of denoising.
Hence this method enables high-speed image generation with minimal power
consumption, benefiting from the bandwidth and energy efficiency of optical
information processing.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models create new samples that resemble their training sets by gradually undoing the
diffusion process, which requires the learned reverse process to be applied numerous times [1]. While
this method demonstrated unprecedented capabilities by producing highly realistic samples [2–8], it is
also highly time-consuming and expensive in terms of energy consumption and computing resources
since a large number of steps are required for generating each sample [2]. This prolonged processing
time not only limits accessibility but also contributes to a significant environmental footprint.
Currently, generating new samples with diffusion models relies on electronic, general-purpose
computing hardware such as GPUs or TPUs. However, due to the repetitive nature of the reversal
process required in this task, deploying specialized hardware instead of general-purpose ones could
significantly enhance the efficiency of sampling. For instance, the use of ASICs in cryptocurrency
mining for hashing algorithms has demonstrated substantial improvements in computational speed and
energy efficiency [9]. However, both GPUs and ASICs, among other electronic digital computers, face
the same challenges like heat dissipation, energy consumption, and the diminishing returns of Moore’s
Law, as transistors shrink and encounter quantum effects and physical limits that hinder further gains
[10]. Therefore, exploring alternative computing modalities, such as optical computing—which
offers high bandwidth and low loss—is increasingly important [11]. Optical computing has already
shown promise in various applications, including high-speed data transmission and real-time signal
processing. Optical computing addresses the inefficiencies of electronic hardware by leveraging
the inherent parallelism that light allows for the simultaneous processing of multiple data channels,
significantly speeding up the computational process. Several optical neural networks have been
* Equal advising.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

