DU-Shapley: A Shapley Value Proxy for
Efficient Dataset Valuation
Benjamin Heymann*
Criteo AI Lab
Paris, France
b.heymann@criteo.com
* Equal contribution

Felipe Garrido-Lucero*
Inria, Fairplay joint team
Palaiseau, France
felipe.garrido-lucero@irit.fr
* Equal contribution
Patrick Loiseau
Inria, Fairplay joint team
Palaiseau, France
patrick.loiseau@inria.fr

Maxime Vono*
Criteo AI Lab
Paris, France
m.vono@criteo.com
* Equal contribution

Vianney Perchet
ENSAE, FairPlay joint team
Palaiseau, France
vianney@ensae.fr

Abstract
We consider the dataset valuation problem, that is, the problem of quantifying the
incremental gain, to some relevant pre-defined utility of a machine learning task,
of aggregating an individual dataset to others. The Shapley value is a natural tool
to perform dataset valuation due to its formal axiomatic justification, which can be
combined with Monte Carlo integration to overcome the computational tractability
challenges. Such generic approximation methods, however, remain expensive in
some cases. In this paper, we exploit the knowledge about the structure of the
dataset valuation problem to devise more efficient Shapley value estimators. We
propose a novel approximation, referred to as discrete uniform Shapley, which is
expressed as an expectation under a discrete uniform distribution with support of
reasonable size. We justify the relevancy of the proposed framework via asymptotic
and non-asymptotic theoretical guarantees and illustrate its benefits via an extensive
set of numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

One of the main challenges for training machine learning (ML) models with enough generalization
capabilities is to access a sufficiently large set of labeled training data. These data often exist but are
commonly spread across many parties, impairing their usage in a direct and simple way. Real world
examples range from the advertising industry, where different retailers hold sets of observations with
either similar or complementary features from consented data about browsing and shopping habits of
individual users; to the medical sector where hospitals may improve their diagnostics accuracy by
sharing their data. By collaborating with each other and pooling their individual datasets together,
these dataset owners could learn better ML models for their applications. Naturally, many questions
raise from such collaborations. Federated learning [8, 9], for example, addresses the issues related to
the practical ways that dataset owners can share their data. We consider a complementary problem to
the one in federated learning: measuring the additional value each party would obtain by participating
in the joint ML effort. In order to compute or estimate compensating rewards allowing to incentivize
parties to share their data, a first stage that is commonly considered in the literature is to perform
so-called dataset valuation [1, 42, 44].
Motivated by natural properties expected for fair valuation, different solution concepts from cooperative game theory [3] have been considered, the Shapley value [40] being arguably the most broadly
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

