ReLIZO: Sample Reusable Linear Interpolation-based
Zeroth-order Optimization

Xiaoxing Wang∗ , Xiaohan Qin∗ , Xiaokang Yang, Junchi Yan‡
Dept. of CSE & School of AI & Moe Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{figure1_wxx, galaxy-1, xkyang, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Gradient estimation is critical in zeroth-order optimization methods, which aims to
obtain the descent direction by sampling update directions and querying function
evaluations. Extensive research has been conducted including smoothing and linear
interpolation. The former methods smooth the objective function, causing a biased
gradient estimation, while the latter often enjoys more accurate estimates, at the
cost of large amounts of samples and queries at each iteration to update variables.
This paper resorts to the linear interpolation strategy and proposes to reduce the
complexity of gradient estimation by reusing queries in the prior iterations while
maintaining the sample size unchanged. Specifically, we model the gradient estimation as a quadratically constrained linear program problem and manage to derive
the analytical solution. It innovatively decouples the required sample size from the
variable dimension without extra conditions required, making it able to leverage
the queries in the prior iterations. Moreover, part of the intermediate variables that
contribute to the gradient estimation can be directly indexed, significantly reducing
the computation complexity. Experiments on both simulation functions and real
scenarios (black-box adversarial attacks neural architecture search, and parameterefficient fine-tuning for large language models), show its efficacy and efficiency.
Our code is available at https://github.com/Thinklab-SJTU/ReLIZO.git.

1

Introduction

Zeroth-order optimization (ZO) aims to estimate the gradients by only function evaluations and
solve optimization problems by the descent method. It has been successfully applied to many fields,
including science [41, 25], finance [35], and artificial intelligence [37, 45, 47], where the optimization
functions are usually black-box without available gradients w.r.t. the variables. Typical ZO methods
iteratively perform three major steps [35]: 1) estimate the gradient by sampling directions to update
the variable and querying the function evaluation, 2) rectify the descent direction through momentum,
element-wise sign operation, stochastic variance reduced algorithms, etc., and 3) update the variables
according to the descent direction. Wherein, the first step, i.e. gradient estimation, is critical since
it provides the essential direction to update variables, which have been explored by many recent
works [5, 30].
Gradient estimation methods in ZO can be roughly categorized into two groups [5]: linear interpolation technique [4, 30] and smoothing strategy [39, 12]. The former proposes to sample a set of
linearly independent directions to form an invertible matrix and compute the gradient through linear
interpolation. Though such methods can get better descent directions, the sample size of directions
should be the same as the dimension of variables, leading to an intractable complexity of building an
invertible matrix and computing the matrix inversion as the dimension increases. A recent work [30]
* Equal contribution; ‡ Corresponding author. This work was partly supported by NSFC (92370201,
62222607) and Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Major Project under Grant 2021SHZDZX0102.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

