Taming the Long Tail in Human Mobility Prediction

Xiaohang Xu1 , Renhe Jiang1∗ , Chuang Yang1 , Zipei Fan1 , Kaoru Sezaki1
1
The University of Tokyo
xhxu@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
{jiangrh, chuang.yang}@csis.u-tokyo.ac.jp
{fanzipei, sezaki}@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
With the popularity of location-based services, human mobility prediction plays
a key role in enhancing personalized navigation, optimizing recommendation
systems, and facilitating urban mobility and planning. This involves predicting a
user’s next POI (point-of-interest) visit using their past visit history. However, the
uneven distribution of visitations over time and space, namely the long-tail problem
in spatial distribution, makes it difficult for AI models to predict those POIs that are
less visited by humans. In light of this issue, we propose the Long-Tail Adjusted
Next POI Prediction (LoTNext) framework for mobility prediction, combining
a Long-Tailed Graph Adjustment module to reduce the impact of the long-tailed
nodes in the user-POI interaction graph and a novel Long-Tailed Loss Adjustment
module to adjust loss by logit score and sample weight adjustment strategy. Also,
we employ the auxiliary prediction task to enhance generalization and accuracy.
Our experiments with two real-world trajectory datasets demonstrate that LoTNext
significantly surpasses existing state-of-the-art works.

1

Introduction

Human mobility prediction is essential in various applications, aiming to forecast the next Point of
Interest (POI) a user may visit based on their historical location data, preferences, and patterns [10,
8, 53, 33]. By predicting user movements, it supports urban planning, traffic management, and
environmental protection, and provides intelligent personalized Location-Based Social Networking
(LBSN) services [7, 37], enhancing people’s life quality.
The growth of POI prediction tasks is closely linked to the development of LBSN platforms, where
users frequently share their itineraries and reviews, leading to a substantial accumulation of geographical visitation data. However, data collection faces challenges due to network and privacy constraints
on mobile devices and the requirement for user authorization to record check-ins. This often results in
data being sparse and biased towards popular locations, exhibiting a severe long-tail effect. Currently,
these methods fall into two primary categories: Sequence-based and Graph-based models.
• Sequence-based models treat users’ trajectories as independent visitation sequences. Existing
methods include Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [6, 12, 11], Long Short Term Memory
(LSTM) [2, 20, 14, 13] and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) [4, 5] for modeling the rich spatialtemporal information implied in the visitation sequence.
• Graph-based models focus on building models and data structures to capture trend information in
the data to enhance the prediction performance, such as the movement trends among all users [45,
39, 34, 35, 41], geographic adjacency [27, 22, 26], and category transition between POIs [49, 48].
This helps in modeling complex global visitation preferences and the semantic context of locations.
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

