Reciprocal Reward Influence Encourages Cooperation
From Self-Interested Agents

John L. Zhou Weizhe Hong Jonathan C. Kao
University of California, Los Angeles
john.ly.zhou@gmail.com

Abstract
Cooperation between self-interested individuals is a widespread phenomenon in
the natural world, but remains elusive in interactions between artificially intelligent
agents. Instead, naïve reinforcement learning algorithms typically converge to
Pareto-dominated outcomes in even the simplest of social dilemmas. An emerging
literature on opponent shaping has demonstrated the ability to reach prosocial
outcomes by influencing the learning of other agents. However, such methods
differentiate through the learning step of other agents or optimize for meta-game
dynamics, which rely on privileged access to opponents’ learning algorithms or exponential sample complexity, respectively. To provide a learning rule-agnostic and
sample-efficient alternative, we introduce Reciprocators, reinforcement learning
agents which are intrinsically motivated to reciprocate the influence of opponents’
actions on their returns. This approach seeks to modify other agents’ Q-values by
increasing their return following beneficial actions (with respect to the Reciprocator) and decreasing it after detrimental actions, guiding them towards mutually
beneficial actions without directly differentiating through a model of their policy.
We show that Reciprocators can be used to promote cooperation in temporally
extended social dilemmas during simultaneous learning. Our code is available at
https://github.com/johnlyzhou/reciprocator/.

1

Introduction

Many species exhibit cooperative behaviors of remarkable variety and complexity. Even among
prosocial animals, however, humans are especially notable for their ability to cooperate with unrelated
individuals and maintain that cooperation even in highly adversarial environments (Melis & Semmann,
2010). These qualities are often credited with the development of human technology, culture, and
advanced cognition (Burkart et al., 2014). As artificially intelligent (AI) agents become more
commonplace in human society, it is increasingly important to ensure that they share similar prosocial
qualities so that interactions between AI agents, as well as between AI agents and humans, may
converge to mutually beneficial outcomes.
However, state-of-the-art reinforcement learning (RL) methods are typically designed for the single
agent setting and are ill-suited for the nonstationarities introduced by multiple agents learning
simultaneously. Treating other agents as fixed elements of the environment, referred to as the “naïve”
learning (NL) approach, can destabilize training and produce collectively suboptimal outcomes.
This is particularly evident in a class of games known as sequential social dilemmas (SSDs), which
contain tradeoffs between collective and individual return (Leibo et al., 2017). SSDs present a
particularly challenging problem for multi-agent RL (MARL) because of this mixed motivational
structure, which precludes the use of common centralized training algorithms designed for cooperative
settings (Kraemer & Banerjee, 2016; Sunehag et al., 2017; Gupta et al., 2017; Rashid et al., 2018).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

