Ensemble Learning for Heterogeneous Large
Language Models with Deep Parallel Collaboration

Yichong Huang† , Xiaocheng Feng†‡B , Baohang Li† , Yang Xiang‡ , Hui Wang‡
Ting Liu† , Bing Qin†‡
†
‡
Harbin Institute of Technology
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{ychuang,xcfeng,baohangli,tliu,qinb}@ir.hit.edu.cn
{xiangy,wangh06}@ir.hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) exhibit complementary strengths in various tasks,
motivating the research of LLM ensembling. However, existing work focuses on
training an extra reward model or fusion model to select or combine all candidate
answers, posing a great challenge to the generalization on unseen data distributions.
Besides, prior methods use textual responses as communication media, ignoring
the valuable information in the internal representations. In this work, we propose
a training-free ensemble framework D EE PE N, fusing the informative probability
distributions yielded by different LLMs at each decoding step. Unfortunately, the
vocabulary discrepancy between heterogeneous LLMs directly makes averaging the
distributions unfeasible due to the token misalignment. To address this challenge,
D EE PE N maps the probability distribution of each model from its own probability
space to a universal relative space based on the relative representation theory,
and performs aggregation. Next, we devise a search-based inverse transformation
to transform the aggregated result back to the probability space of one of the
ensembling LLMs (main model), in order to determine the next token. We conduct
extensive experiments on ensembles of different number of LLMs, ensembles
of LLMs with different architectures, and ensembles between the LLM and the
specialist model. Experimental results show that (i) D EE PE N achieves consistent
improvements across six benchmarks covering subject examination, reasoning, and
knowledge, (ii) a well-performing specialist model can benefit from a less effective
LLM through distribution fusion, and (iii) D EE PE N has complementary strengths
with other ensemble methods such as voting1 .

1

Introduction

With the scaling of model capacities and data volumes, generative large language models (LLMs)
have shown impressive language understanding and generation abilities, shedding light for artificial
general intelligence [35, 22, 13, 28]. Due to diversities of data sources, model architectures, and
training recipes, LLMs have different strengths and weaknesses in various tasks and cases. Therefore,
recent research has explored the ensemble of LLMs to exploit the complementary potential [15, 19].
Existing methods can be categorized into selection-based and fusion-based ensembling. Selectionbased ensembling selects the best candidate answer from all individual LLMs’ answers using an
additionally trained reward model [15, 31, 25, 19]. Fusion-based ensembling combines all candidate
answers using a trained fusion model [15]. However, these approaches inevitably face significant
1

Our code is available at: https://github.com/OrangeInSouth/DeePEn
B means corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

