MatrixNet: Learning over symmetry groups using
learned group representations

Lucas Laird
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115
laird.l@northeastern.edu
Asilata Bapat
Mathematical Sciences Institute
Australian National University
Canberra, Australia
asilata.bapat@anu.edu.au

Circe Hsu
Department of Mathematics
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115
hsu.circe@northeastern.edu
Robin Walters
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115
r.walters@northeastern.edu

Abstract
Group theory has been used in machine learning to provide a theoretically grounded
approach for incorporating known symmetry transformations in tasks from robotics
to protein modeling. In these applications, equivariant neural networks use known
symmetry groups with predefined representations to learn over geometric input
data. We propose MatrixNet, a neural network architecture that learns matrix
representations of group element inputs instead of using predefined representations.
MatrixNet achieves higher sample efficiency and generalization over several standard baselines in prediction tasks over the several finite groups and the Artin braid
group. We also show that MatrixNet respects group relations allowing generalization to group elements of greater word length than in the training set. Our code is
available at https://github.com/lucas-laird/MatrixNet.

1

Introduction

The choice of representation for input features is a key design aspect for deep learning. While a
wide variety of data types are considered in learning tasks, for example, sequences, sets, images,
time series, and graphs, neural network architectures admit only tensors as input. Various methods
exist for mapping different input types to tensors such as one-hot embeddings, discretization of
continuous signals, learned token embeddings of image patches or words [1, 2], adjacency matrices
[3], positional encodings [1], or spectral embeddings [4].
In this paper we consider the question of what feature representations to use for learning tasks with
inputs coming from a symmetry group. There are many examples of tasks defined over symmetry
groups, such as policy learning in robotics [5], reinforcement learning [6], pose estimation in computer
vision [7], sampling states of quantum systems [8], inference over orderings of a set [9], and grouptheoretic invariants in pure mathematics. Past work has typically employed fixed representations
chosen from among the known representation theory of the group. Representation theory is the
branch of mathematics concerned with classifying the set of representations of a group G which, in
this context, refers to homomorphic realizations of a group in terms of n × n matrices. For groups
with well understood representation theory, for example, the symmetric group Sn or SO(n), this
provides a ready set of embeddings for converting group elements into tensors for use in downstream
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

