LLM-AutoDA:
Large Language Model-Driven Automatic Data
Augmentation for Long-tailed Problems

Pengkun Wang1,2∗, Zhe Zhao1,3∗ Haibin Wen5 ,
Fanfu Wang6 , Binwu Wang1 , Qingfu Zhang3†, Yang Wang1,2†
1
University of Science and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei, China
2
Suzhou Institute for Advanced Research, USTC, Suzhou, China
3
City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
5
MorongAI, Suzhou, China
6
Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China
{pengkun@ustc.edu.cn, zz4543@mail.ustc.edu.cn, haibin65535@gmail.com,
wangff21@lzu.edu.cn, wbw2024@ustc.edu.cn, qingfu.zhang@cityu.edu.hk,
angyan@ustc.edu.cn}

Abstract
The long-tailed distribution is the underlying nature of real-world data, and it
presents unprecedented challenges for training deep learning models. Existing
long-tailed learning paradigms based on re-balancing or data augmentation have
partially alleviated the long-tailed problem. However, they still have limitations,
such as relying on manually designed augmentation strategies, having a limited
search space, and using fixed augmentation strategies. To address these limitations, this paper proposes a novel LLM-based long-tailed data augmentation
framework called LLM-AutoDA, which leverages large-scale pretrained models to automatically search for the optimal augmentation strategies suitable for
long-tailed data distributions. In addition, it applies this strategy to the original
imbalanced data to create an augmented dataset and fine-tune the underlying longtailed learning model. The performance improvement on the validation set serves
as a reward signal to update the generation model, enabling the generation of
more effective augmentation strategies in the next iteration. We conducted extensive experiments on multiple mainstream long-tailed learning benchmarks. The
results show that LLM-AutoDA outperforms state-of-the-art data augmentation
methods and other re-balancing methods significantly. The code is available in
https://github.com/DataLab-atom/LLM-LT-AUG.

1

Introduction

As a revolutionary technology, deep learning has shown a broad and significant impact on various
tasks, including image classification [21], object detection [34], natural language processing [19],
and many interdisciplinary research problems [40, 47]. The success of these endeavors relies heavily
on the support of large-scale manually curated datasets, e.g., ImageNet [35]. However, for the
convenience of training and evaluating models, most artificially constructed datasets typically follow
the assumption of uniform distribution, which contradicts the real-world data distribution, i.e., longtailed distribution. This deviation between the ideal and real distributions has resulted in many deep
∗
†

Pengkun Wang and Zhe Zhao contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding authors: Qingfu Zhang and Yang Wang.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

