Test-time Adaptation in Non-stationary Environments
via Adaptive Representation Alignment

Zhen-Yu Zhang
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN
zhen-yu.zhang@riken.jp
Huaxiu Yao
UNC-Chapel Hill
huaxiu@cs.unc.edu

Zhiyu Xie
Stanford University
zhiyuxie@stanford.edu

Masashi Sugiyama
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN
Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo
sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Adapting to distribution shifts is a critical challenge in modern machine learning,
especially as data in many real-world applications accumulate continuously in the
form of streams. We investigate the problem of sequentially adapting a model to
non-stationary environments, where the data distribution is continuously shifting
and only a small amount of unlabeled data are available each time. Continual testtime adaptation methods have shown promising results by using reliable pseudolabels, but they still fall short in exploring representation alignment with the
source domain in non-stationary environments. In this paper, we propose to
leverage non-stationary representation learning to adaptively align the unlabeled
data stream, with its changing distributions, to the source data representation
using a sketch of the source data. To alleviate the data scarcity in non-stationary
representation learning, we propose a novel adaptive representation alignment
algorithm called Ada-ReAlign. This approach employs a group of base learners
to explore different lengths of the unlabeled data stream, which are adaptively
combined by a meta learner to handle unknown and continuously evolving data
distributions. The proposed method comes with nice theoretical guarantees under
convexity assumptions. Experiments on both benchmark datasets and a real-world
application validate the effectiveness and adaptability of our proposed algorithm.

1

Introduction

Machine learning algorithms, particularly deep learning models, have achieved remarkable success
when the test data share the same distribution of the training data. However, in many real-world
applications, the learning environment is changing over time, resulting in the test data inevitably
encountering natural variations. For example, once an autonomous driving model is deployed,
external factors such as weather changes (e.g., snow, frost, or fog) and internal factors like sensor
degradation (e.g., causing Gaussian noise, defocus, or blur) can negatively impact its performance.
Unfortunately, many well-trained models are highly sensitive to such distribution shifts and may
suffer significant performance degradation, even when the shifts are minor [12]. Moreover, once
deployed, models often lack access to the original training data, making it essential to equip the
learning system with the ability to adapt to non-stationary environments in test time [29, 45].
A promising line of research is known as test-time adaptation (TTA), which focuses on adapting models to new environments using only unlabeled data. Pioneering approaches consider adaptation to a
fixed distribution, including introducing auxiliary self-supervised learning tasks [30, 28] or employing
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

