Neural Characteristic Activation Analysis and
Geometric Parameterization for ReLU Networks
Hong Ge
University of Cambridge
hg344@cam.ac.uk

Wenlin Chen
University of Cambridge
MPI for Intelligent Systems
wc337@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
We introduce a novel approach for analyzing the training dynamics of ReLU networks by examining the characteristic activation boundaries of individual ReLU
neurons. Our proposed analysis reveals a critical instability in common neural network parameterizations and normalizations during stochastic optimization, which
impedes fast convergence and hurts generalization performance. Addressing this,
we propose Geometric Parameterization (GmP), a novel neural network parameterization technique that effectively separates the radial and angular components
of weights in the hyperspherical coordinate system. We show theoretically that
GmP resolves the aforementioned instability issue. We report empirical results
on various models and benchmarks to verify GmP’s advantages of optimization
stability, convergence speed and generalization performance.

1

Introduction

In standard neural networks, each neuron performs an affine transformation on its input x ∈ Rn
followed by an element-wise nonlinear activation function g:
z = g(wT x +b),

(1)
n

where the affine transformation is parameterized by a weight vector w ∈ R and a bias scalar b ∈ R.
Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) [17] is arguably the most popular activation function in modern deep
learning architectures due to its simplicity and effectiveness:
g(s) = ReLU(s) = max(0, s).

(2)

We introduce a novel concept for ReLU networks, called characteristic activation boundary, which is
defined as the set of input locations with zero pre-activations. By definition, such boundaries separate
the active and inactive regions of ReLU neurons in the input space, which play a critical role in ReLU
networks since they serve as the fundamental building blocks for the decision boundaries.
In this work, we analyze the evolution dynamics of the characteristic activation boundaries in ReLU
networks. Our novel analysis identifies a critical instability in many common parameterizations and
normalizations that operate in the Cartisian coordinate, including Standard Parameterization, Weight
Normalization [56], Batch Normalization [24] and Layer Normalization [2]. We show theoretically
that this issue destabilizes the evolution of the characteristic boundaries in the presence of stochastic
gradient noise, and empirically that it impedes fast convergence and hurts generalization performance.
To address this, we introduce a novel neural network parameterization, named Geometric Parameterization (GmP). As opposed to traditional parameterizations and normalizations which operate in the
Cartesian coordinate, GmP operates in the hyperspherical coordinate which automatically decouples
the radial and angular components of the weights. Our theoretical results show that GmP stabilizes
the evolution of characteristic activation boundaries during stochastic optimization. Our empirical
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

