Wormhole Loss for Partial Shape Matching

Amit Bracha∗ Thomas Dagès∗ Ron Kimmel
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Haifa, Israel
{amit.bracha,thomas.dages}@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
When matching parts of a surface to its whole, a fundamental question arises:
Which points should be included in the matching process? The issue is intensified
when using isometry to measure similarity, as it requires the validation of whether
distances measured between pairs of surface points should influence the matching
process. The approach we propose treats surfaces as manifolds equipped with
geodesic distances, and addresses the partial shape matching challenge by introducing a novel criterion to meticulously search for consistent distances between
pairs of points. The new criterion explores the relation between intrinsic geodesic
distances between the points, geodesic distances between the points and surface
boundaries, and extrinsic distances between boundary points measured in the embedding space. It is shown to be less restrictive compared to previous measures and
achieves state-of-the-art results when used as a loss function in training networks
for partial shape matching.

1

Introduction

Shape correspondence is a core challenge in computer graphics and computer vision, distinguished
by its wide array of applications extending from 3D modeling and animation to object recognition
and beyond. The task involves establishing mappings between corresponding points across different
surfaces that undergo non-rigid transformations. Shape correspondence grows particularly intricate
when it involves partial surfaces, where the objective is to find correspondences between parts of
surfaces or between a complete surface and a part of another. This sub-task is particularly difficult as
it involves incomplete data and possible different topology of the matched surfaces. Consequently,
training neural networks for the partial matching task is challenging, especially for unsupervised
methods, as there is no information about which parts are missing and which should be matched.
The state of the art in partial shape matching is performed with Functional Maps (FM), a popular
framework for relating functions defined on surfaces via basis functions defined on the surfaces
[2, 18, 22, 25, 36, 45, 34]. Recently, it was argued that the unused information from the full surface
impairs the learning process when FM is incorporated in the learning pipeline [10], with better results
obtained when bypassing FM altogether by direct estimation of correspondences. This method is
primarily guided by a loss function preserving the pairwise geodesic distances [25], which relies on
the fact that such distances are preserved under isometric transformations. When dealing with partial
surfaces, not all distances are preserved, as minimal geodesics on the full surface may go through
a region which is missing in the partial surface. Therefore, undesired biases are integrated into the
learning procedure, which can impair the quality of the learned correspondence. This applies to both
FM-based unsupervised loss functions [48] and geodesic-based ones [25], where isometry between
the surfaces is assumed.
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

