Improving Generalization in Federated Learning
with Model-Data Mutual Information Regularization:
A Posterior Inference Approach

Hao Zhang, Chenglin Li∗, Nuowen Kan, Ziyang Zheng, Wenrui Dai, Junni Zou, Hongkai Xiong
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Most of existing federated learning (FL) formulation is treated as a point-estimate of
models, inherently prone to overfitting on scarce client-side data with overconfident
decisions. Though Bayesian inference can alleviate this issue, a direct posterior
inference at clients may result in biased local posterior estimates due to data heterogeneity, leading to a sub-optimal global posterior. From an information-theoretic
perspective, we propose FedMDMI, a federated posterior inference framework
based on model-data mutual information (MI). Specifically, a global model-data
MI term is introduced as regularization to enforce the global model to learn essential information from the heterogeneous local data, alleviating the bias caused by
data heterogeneity and hence enhancing generalization. To make this global MI
tractable, we decompose it into local MI terms at the clients, converting the global
objective with MI regularization into several locally optimizable objectives based
on local data. For these local objectives, we further show that the optimal local
posterior is a Gibbs posterior, which can be efficiently sampled with stochastic
gradient Langevin dynamics methods. Finally, at the server, we approximate sampling from the global Gibbs posterior by simply averaging samples from the local
posteriors. Theoretical analysis provides a generalization bound for FL w.r.t. the
model-data MI, which, at different levels of regularization, represents a federated
version of the bias-variance trade-off. Experimental results demonstrate a better
generalization behavior with better calibrated uncertainty estimates of FedMDMI.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL), as an emerging distributed learning framework, has garnered considerable
attention [McMahan et al., 2017]. In this paradigm, clients collaborate to train a single global model,
under the central coordination of a server. Notably, such a collaborative training proceeds without
the necessity of sharing or exchanging the raw data of clients, thus providing a basic level of privacy
protection. However, two primary challenges arise, specifically revolving around the intra-client
data scarcity and inter-client data heterogeneity, since client models locally trained on these scarce
and heterogeneous data are prone to overfitting and bias, leading to a diminished generalization
performance for the globally aggregated model at the server.
A multitude of efforts have been made to address this issue from various perspectives, including
federated optimization [Acar et al., 2021, Karimireddy et al., 2020], federated domain generalization [Nguyen et al., 2022, de Luca et al., 2022], federated knowledge distillation [Zhu et al., 2021,
Afonin and Karimireddy, 2021], etc. Despite their progress, a majority of the existing FL formulations
consistently treat it as a point-estimate (i.e., a single value estimated for each model weight) based
∗

Correspondence to: Chenglin Li <LCL1985@sjtu.edu.cn>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

