VCR-GauS: View Consistent Depth-Normal
Regularizer for Gaussian Surface Reconstruction

Hanlin Chen1 Fangyin Wei2 Chen Li1 Tianxin Huang1 Yunsong Wang1 Gim Hee Lee1
1
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
2
Princeton University
hanlin.chen@u.nus.edu gimhee.lee@nus.edu.sg
https://hlinchen.github.io/projects/VCR-GauS/

View 1

High Confidence
Low Confidence

View 2

=
Reconstructed Scene Geometry

View 3

≠

Reconstructed Scene Texture

Inconsistent Pseudo Normal Predicted Confidence

Figure 1: View-Consistent D-Normal Regularizer. Pseudo normals predicted from pretrained
monocular normal estimators tend to be inconsistent across different views (left). Our method
calculates a confidence map indicating the confidence of the pseudo normals (middle). The confidence
is used to weigh the loss imposed on our proposed D-Normals. Our method achieves new state-ofthe-art surface reconstruction results and rendering quality comparable with prior work.

Abstract
Although 3D Gaussian Splatting has been widely studied because of its realistic
and efficient novel-view synthesis, it is still challenging to extract a high-quality
surface from the point-based representation. Previous works improve the surface by
incorporating geometric priors from the off-the-shelf normal estimator. However,
there are two main limitations: 1) Supervising normals rendered from 3D Gaussians
effectively updates the rotation parameter but is less effective for other geometric
parameters; 2) The inconsistency of predicted normal maps across multiple views
may lead to severe reconstruction artifacts. In this paper, we propose a DepthNormal regularizer that directly couples normal with other geometric parameters,
leading to full updates of the geometric parameters from normal regularization. We
further propose a confidence term to mitigate inconsistencies of normal predictions
across multiple views. Moreover, we also introduce a densification and splitting
strategy to regularize the size and distribution of 3D Gaussians for more accurate
surface modeling. Compared with Gaussian-based baselines, experiments show
that our approach obtains better reconstruction quality and maintains competitive
appearance quality at faster training speed and 100+ FPS rendering.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

