SuperVLAD: Compact and Robust Image Descriptors
for Visual Place Recognition

Feng Lu1,2∗
Xinyao Zhang1∗
Canming Ye1∗
Shuting Dong1,2
3
2,4†
Lijun Zhang
Xiangyuan Lan
Chun Yuan1†
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Pengcheng Laboratory 3 CIGIT, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Pazhou Laboratory (Huangpu)
{lf22@mails,yuanc@sz}.tsinghua.edu.cn lanxy@pcl.ac.cn

Abstract
Visual place recognition (VPR) is an essential task for multiple applications such
as augmented reality and robot localization. Over the past decade, mainstream
methods in the VPR area have been to use feature representation based on global
aggregation, as exemplified by NetVLAD. These features are suitable for largescale VPR and robust against viewpoint changes. However, the VLAD-based
aggregation methods usually learn a large number of (e.g., 64) clusters and their
corresponding cluster centers, which directly leads to a high dimension of the
yielded global features. More importantly, when there is a domain gap between
the data in training and inference, the cluster centers determined on the training
set are usually improper for inference, resulting in a performance drop. To this
end, we first attempt to improve NetVLAD by removing the cluster center and
setting only a small number of (e.g., only 4) clusters. The proposed method not
only simplifies NetVLAD but also enhances the generalizability across different
domains. We name this method SuperVLAD. In addition, by introducing ghost
clusters that will not be retained in the final output, we further propose a very lowdimensional 1-Cluster VLAD descriptor, which has the same dimension as the
output of GeM pooling but performs notably better. Experimental results suggest
that, when paired with a transformer-based backbone, our SuperVLAD shows
better domain generalization performance than NetVLAD with significantly fewer
parameters. The proposed method also surpasses state-of-the-art methods with
lower feature dimensions on several benchmark datasets. The code is available at
https://github.com/lu-feng/SuperVLAD.

1

Introduction

Visual Place Recognition (VPR) is a task that aims at quickly estimating the coarse geographical
location of a place image (i.e., query) by retrieving the most similar images from a geo-tagged database
[10, 41]. It has garnered significant attention in both computer vision and robotics communities,
driven by its wide applications in augmented reality [42] and robot localization [59], etc. However,
VPR still faces some challenges: On the one hand, images captured at the same place may vary
dramatically due to the changes in conditions (e.g., lighting and weather) and viewpoints. On the
other hand, multiple different places can show high similarity, which may lead to perceptual aliasing
[36]. It is quite challenging to address these issues simultaneously, especially for VPR methods that
use compact global descriptors to represent the place images.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

