AHA: Human-Assisted Out-of-Distribution
Generalization and Detection
Haoyue Bai, Jifan Zhang, Robert Nowak
University of Wisconsin-Madison
{baihaoyue, jifan}@cs.wisc.edu, rdnowak@wisc.edu

Abstract
Modern machine learning models deployed often encounter distribution shifts in
real-world applications, manifesting as covariate or semantic out-of-distribution
(OOD) shifts. These shifts give rise to challenges in OOD generalization and OOD
detection. This paper introduces a novel, integrated approach AHA (Adaptive
Human-Assisted OOD learning) to simultaneously address both OOD generalization and detection through a human-assisted framework by labeling data in
the wild. Our approach strategically labels examples within a novel maximum
disambiguation region, where the number of semantic and covariate OOD data
roughly equalizes. By labeling within this region, we can maximally disambiguate
the two types of OOD data, thereby maximizing the utility of the fixed labeling
budget. Our algorithm first utilizes a noisy binary search algorithm that identifies
the maximal disambiguation region with high probability. The algorithm then
continues with annotating inside the identified labeling region, reaping the full
benefit of human feedback. Extensive experiments validate the efficacy of our
framework. We observed that with only a few hundred human annotations, our
method significantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods that do not
involve human assistance, in both OOD generalization and OOD detection. Code
is publicly available at https://github.com/HaoyueBaiZJU/aha.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning models deployed in the real world often encounter various types of
distribution shifts. For example, out-of-distribution (OOD) covariate shifts arise when the domain
and environment of the test data differ from the training data. OOD semantic shifts occur when the
model encounters novel classes during testing. This gives rise to two important challenges: OOD
generalization [2, 1, 102], which addresses distribution mismatches between training and test data
related to covariate shifts, and OOD detection [46, 62, 90], which aims to identify examples from
semantically unknown categories that should not be predicted by the classifier, relating to semantic
shifts. The natural coexistence of these different distribution shifts in real-world scenarios motivates
the simultaneous handling of both tasks, a direction that has not been largely explored previously, as
most existing approaches are highly specialized in one task.
Specifically, we consider a generalized characterization of the wild data setting [6] that naturally
arises in the model’s operational environment:
Pwild := (1 − πs − πc )Pin + πc Pcovariate
+ πs Psemantic
,
out
out
where Pin denotes the marginal distributions of in-distribution (ID) data, Pcovariate
represents covariateout
shifted OOD data, and Psemantic
indicates semantic-shifted OOD data. This is challenging as we lack
out
access to both the category labels and distribution types of this wild mixture data, which is crucial
for OOD learning. To tackle this challenge, it is natural to develop a human-assisted framework and
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

