Geometric Analysis of Nonlinear Manifold Clustering

Nimita Shinde∗
Lehigh University
nis623@lehigh.edu

Tianjiao Ding∗
University of Pennsylvania
tjding@upenn.edu

Daniel P. Robinson
Lehigh University
daniel.p.robinson@lehigh.edu

René Vidal
University of Pennsylvania
vidalr@upenn.edu

Abstract
Manifold clustering is an important problem in motion and video segmentation,
natural image clustering, and other applications where high-dimensional data
lie on multiple, low-dimensional, nonlinear manifolds. While current state-ofthe-art methods on large-scale datasets such as CIFAR provide good empirical
performance, they do not have any proof of theoretical correctness. In this work,
we propose a method that clusters data belonging to a union of nonlinear manifolds.
Furthermore, for a given input data sample y belonging to the lth manifold Ml , we
provide geometric conditions that guarantee a manifold-preserving representation
of y can be recovered from the solution to the proposed model. The geometric
conditions require that (i) Ml is well-sampled in the neighborhood of y, with the
sampling density given as a function of the curvature, and (ii) Ml is sufficiently
separated from the other manifolds. In addition to providing proof of correctness
in this setting, a numerical comparison with state-of-the-art methods on CIFAR
datasets shows that our method performs competitively although marginally worse
than methods without theoretical guarantees.

1

Introduction

Manifold clustering is a fundamental problem in data science, in which one seeks to cluster data
lying close to a union of low-dimensional manifolds. It has a vast number of applications, such as
clustering i) image pixels [1–3], ii) video frames [4, 5], iii) images of faces [6], hand-written digits [7]
or other natural objects [8], iv) rigid-body motions [9], v) human actions [10–12], and vi) searching
policies for robots [13], to name a few.
Over the past two decades, there has been a considerable amount of work on subspace clustering,
the special case where each manifold is a linear or affine subspace. A key to the success of many of
these works can be attributed to the idea of self-expressiveness [14]: one can write a data point as
linear (or affine) combinations of other points, i.e., given a data point y and matrix of data points X,
it holds that y = Xc for some vector c. The observation that the support of the sparsest such c should
correspond to data points in the same subspace as y prompted the study of the optimization problem
λ
∥e∥22 subject to (s.t.) e = y − Xc,
(SC)
c
2
where r(·) is a regularizer on c (e.g., ∥ · ∥1 to promote sparsity [6]) and λ > 0 is a parameter that
balances the two terms in the objective. By solving an instance of (SC) for each point in the dataset,
one obtains one coefficient vector c per point, and the matrix of all coefficients for all points can be
min r(c) +

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

