ECLipsE: Efﬁcient Compositional Lipschitz Constant
Estimation for Deep Neural Networks

Yuezhu Xu
Edwardson School of Industrial Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA
xu1732@purdue.edu

S. Sivaranjani
Edwardson School of Industrial Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA
sseetha@purdue.edu

Abstract
The Lipschitz constant plays a crucial role in certifying the robustness of neural
networks to input perturbations. Since calculating the exact Lipschitz constant is
NP-hard, efforts have been made to obtain tight upper bounds on the Lipschitz
constant. Typically, this involves solving a large matrix veriﬁcation problem, the
computational cost of which grows signiﬁcantly for both deeper and wider networks. In this paper, we provide a compositional approach to estimate Lipschitz
constants for deep feed-forward neural networks. We ﬁrst obtain an exact decomposition of the large matrix veriﬁcation problem into smaller sub-problems. Then,
leveraging the underlying cascade structure of the network, we develop two algorithms. The ﬁrst algorithm explores the geometric features of the problem and
enables us to provide Lipschitz estimates that are comparable to existing methods
by solving small semideﬁnite programs (SDPs) that are only as large as the size
of each layer. The second algorithm relaxes these sub-problems and provides a
closed-form solution to each sub-problem for extremely fast estimation, altogether
eliminating the need to solve SDPs. The two algorithms represent different levels
of trade-offs between efﬁciency and accuracy. Finally, we demonstrate that our
approach provides a steep reduction in computation time (as much as several thousand times faster, depending on the algorithm for deeper networks) while yielding
Lipschitz bounds that are very close to or even better than those achieved by stateof-the-art approaches in a broad range of experiments* . In summary, our approach
considerably advances the scalability and efﬁciency of certifying neural network
robustness, making it particularly attractive for online learning tasks.

1

Introduction

The Lipschitz constant, which quantiﬁes how a neural networks output varies in response to changes
in its inputs, is a crucial measure in providing robustness certiﬁcates [1, 2] on downstream tasks
such as ensuring resilience against adversarial attacks [3, 4], stability of learning-based models or
systems with neural network controllers [5–9], enhancing generalizability [10], improving gradientbased optimization methods and controlling the rate of learning [11][12]. The problem of calculating the exact Lipschitz constant is NP-hard [13]. Therefore, efforts have been made to estimate
tight upper bounds for the Lipschitz constant of feed-forward neural networks (FNNs) [14–18] and
other architectures such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [19–21]. Typical approaches include formulating a polynomial optimization problem [22] or bounding the Lipschitz constant via
quadratic constraints and semideﬁnite programming (SDP) [14], which in turn requires solving a
large-scale matrix veriﬁcation problem whose computational complexity grows signiﬁcantly with
* https://github.com/YuezhuXu/ECLipsE

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

