QTIP: Quantization with Trellises and Incoherence
Processing

Albert Tseng
Cornell University
albert@cs.cornell.edu

Qingyao Sun
Cornell University
qs234@cornell.edu

David Hou
dhou@alumni.caltech.edu

Christopher De Sa
Cornell University
cdesa@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Post-training quantization (PTQ) reduces the memory footprint of LLMs by quantizing weights to low-precision datatypes. Since LLM inference is usually memorybound, PTQ methods can improve inference throughput. Recent state-of-the-art
PTQ approaches use vector quantization (VQ) to quantize multiple weights at once,
which improves information utilization through better shaping. However, VQ requires a codebook with size exponential in the dimension. This limits current VQbased PTQ works to low VQ dimensions (≤ 8) that in turn limit quantization quality. Here, we introduce QTIP, which instead uses trellis coded quantization (TCQ)
to achieve ultra-high-dimensional quantization. TCQ uses a stateful decoder that
separates the codebook size from the bitrate and effective dimension. QTIP introduces a spectrum of lookup-only to computed lookup-free trellis codes designed
for a hardware-efficient “bitshift” trellis structure; these codes achieve state-of-theart results in both quantization quality and inference speed.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have accelerated advancements in fields ranging from natural
language processing [34] to scientific modeling [28]. However, the largest LLMs have hundreds of
billions of parameters that can take over a terabyte of memory to load in half-precision; this size
poses significant challenges for the practical deployment of LLMs [33, 17, 2]. For example, smallbatch autoregressive decoding, a common form of inference for LLMs, is memory bound [35]. Even
on a modern datacenter GPU with ≈ 3TB/s memory bandwidth, a large LLM (> 200GB) can only be
directly run at < 20 tokens per second and may require multiple devices [35]. One way to accelerate
inference is by compressing LLMs. This directly reduces the memory footprint of the model and
increases the theoretical maximum inference throughput on any given machine.
One form of compression, weight-only post-training quantization (PTQ), quantizes trained model
weights to lower precision datatypes [9, 35, 5]. The latest state-of-the-art weight-only PTQ methods,
QuIP# and AQLM, use vector quantization (VQ) to achieve high-quality 2-bit models [35, 11]. In VQ,
kd
a vector x ∈ Rd is quantized to one of 2kd vectors in Rd that form a codebook C ∈ R2 ×d . A higher
vector dimension d allows for better codebook shaping and packing density, improving information
utilization [19]. However, unstructured VQ requires exponential time and space in both the bitrate and
dimension, limiting its practicality. During quantization, VQ costs O(2kd d) time to perform nearestneighbor rounding to C, and during inference, C must fit in hardware cache for fast lookups. This
exponential scaling limits how high d can be and thus the advantages of VQ over scalar quantization.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

