Referring Human Pose and Mask Estimation
in the Wild
Bo Miao1

Mingtao Feng2 Zijie Wu3 Mohammed Bennamoun1
Yongsheng Gao4 Ajmal Mian1
1
University of Western Australia 2 Xidian University 3 Hunan University 4 Griffith University
https://github.com/bo-miao/RefHuman

Abstract
We introduce Referring Human Pose and Mask Estimation (R-HPM) in the wild,
where either a text or positional prompt specifies the person of interest in an image.
This new task holds significant potential for human-centric applications such as
assistive robotics and sports analysis. In contrast to previous works, R-HPM (i)
ensures high-quality, identity-aware results corresponding to the referred person,
and (ii) simultaneously predicts human pose and mask for a comprehensive representation. To achieve this, we introduce a large-scale dataset named RefHuman,
which substantially extends the MS COCO dataset with additional text and positional prompt annotations. RefHuman includes over 50,000 annotated instances
in the wild, each equipped with keypoint, mask, and prompt annotations. To enable prompt-conditioned estimation, we propose the first end-to-end promptable
approach named UniPHD for R-HPM. UniPHD extracts multimodal representations and employs a proposed pose-centric hierarchical decoder to process (text
or positional) instance queries and keypoint queries, producing results specific to
the referred person. Extensive experiments demonstrate that UniPHD produces
quality results based on user-friendly prompts and achieves top-tier performance
on RefHuman val and MS COCO val2017.

Model

Selection,
e.g. NMS
Pose ?
Mask 

(a) Multi-person Pose Estimation

?

Model
Prompts: Scribble OR Point
OR Text: A girl in a blue cap

Pose ✓
Mask ✓

(b) Referring Human Pose and Mask Estimation

Figure 1: Task illustration of (a) multi-person pose estimation predicts numerous outcomes and
requires selection strategies during deployment, potentially leading to false negatives or suboptimal
target results, and (b) our referring human pose and mask estimation requires a unified promptable
model to simultaneously predict accurate pose and mask for the person of interest, providing comprehensive and identity-aware human representations to benefit human-AI interaction.

1

Introduction

Human pose estimation in the wild is a fundamental yet challenging problem in the vision community,
fueling advancements in various applications like human-AI interaction, activity analysis, video
surveillance, assistive robotics, and sports analysis. This task aims to locate keypoints (joint locations)
of humans within images in unconstrained environments.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

