Fast Graph Sharpness-Aware Minimization for
Enhancing and Accelerating Few-Shot Node
Classification

1,2

Siya Qiu

Yihong Luo1,2∗ & Yuhan Chen3∗ ,
, Yiwei Wang , Chen Zhang6 , Yan Zhou6 , Xiaochun Cao7† , Jing Tang1,2†
4,5

1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
4
University of California, Merced 5 University of California, Los Angeles
6
Createlink Technology
7
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
2

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown superior performance in node classification. However, GNNs perform poorly in the Few-Shot Node Classification
(FSNC) task that requires robust generalization to make accurate predictions for
unseen classes with limited labels. To tackle the challenge, we propose the integration of Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM)—a technique designed to enhance
model generalization by finding a flat minimum of the loss landscape—into GNN
training. The standard SAM approach, however, consists of two forward-backward
steps in each training iteration, doubling the computational cost compared to the
base optimizer (e.g., Adam). To mitigate this drawback, we introduce a novel
algorithm, Fast Graph Sharpness-Aware Minimization (FGSAM), that integrates
the rapid training of Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) with the superior performance of GNNs. Specifically, we utilize GNNs for parameter perturbation while
employing MLPs to minimize the perturbed loss so that we can find a flat minimum with good generalization more efficiently. Moreover, our method reutilizes
the gradient from the perturbation phase to incorporate graph topology into the
minimization process at almost zero additional cost. To further enhance training efficiency, we develop FGSAM+ that executes exact perturbations periodically. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed algorithm outperforms
the standard SAM with lower computational costs in FSNC tasks. In particular, our FGSAM+ as a SAM variant offers a faster optimization than the base
optimizer in most cases. In addition to FSNC, our proposed methods also demonstrate competitive performance in the standard node classification task for heterophilic graphs, highlighting the broad applicability. The code is available at
https://github.com/draym28/FGSAM_NeurIPS24

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have received significant interest in recent years due to their powerful
ability in various graph learning tasks, e.g., node classification. Numerous GNNs have been developed
accordingly [20, 35, 6, 15]. Despite their successes, GNNs, like traditional neural networks, tend to
be over-parameterized, often requiring extensive labeled data for training to ensure generalization.
However, in real-world networks, many node classes have few labeled instances, which can lead
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author: Xiaochun Cao and Jing Tang.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

