Efficient and Sharp Off-Policy Evaluation
in Robust Markov Decision Processes
Andrew Bennett∗
Morgan Stanley
andrew.bennett@morganstanley.com
Miruna Oprescu∗
Cornell University
amo78@cornell.edu

Nathan Kallus∗
Cornell University
kallus@cornell.edu

Wen Sun∗
Cornell University
ws455@cornell.edu

Kaiwen Wang∗
Cornell University
kw437@cornell.edu

Abstract
We study the evaluation of a policy under best- and worst-case perturbations to a
Markov decision process (MDP), using transition observations from the original
MDP, whether they are generated under the same or a different policy. This is
an important problem when there is the possibility of a shift between historical
and future environments, e.g. due to unmeasured confounding, distributional
shift, or an adversarial environment. We propose a perturbation model that allows
changes in the transition kernel densities up to a given multiplicative factor or its
reciprocal, extending the classic marginal sensitivity model (MSM) for single timestep decision-making to infinite-horizon RL. We characterize the sharp bounds
on policy value under this model – i.e., the tightest possible bounds based on
transition observations from the original MDP – and we study the estimation of
these bounds from such transition observations. We develop an estimator with
several important guarantees: it is semiparametrically efficient, and remains so even
when certain necessary nuisance functions, such as worst-case Q-functions, are
estimated at slow, nonparametric rates. Our estimator is also asymptotically normal,
enabling straightforward statistical inference using Wald confidence intervals.
Moreover, when certain nuisances are estimated inconsistently, the estimator still
provides valid, albeit possibly not sharp, bounds on the policy value. We validate
these properties in numerical simulations. The combination of accounting for
environment shifts from train to test (robustness), being insensitive to nuisancefunction estimation (orthogonality), and addressing the challenge of learning from
finite samples (inference) together leads to credible and reliable policy evaluation.

1

Introduction

Offline policy evaluation (OPE) from historical data is crucial in domains where active, on-policy
experimentation is costly, risky, unethical, or otherwise operationally infeasible. Relevant domains
range from medicine to finance and recommendation systems. However, whenever historical data is
used to study future behavior, there is a concern of non-stationarity – shift between the environment
generating the data (training environment) and the environment in which a policy will be deployed
(test environment). This may occur, e.g., due to general distributional shifts in the environment
over time, unobserved confounding in the observed historical data, or adversarial elements of the
environment (such as other agents) that may react when the agent is deployed. While standard OPE
in offline reinforcement learning (ORL) accounts for the change between the logging and evaluation
policies, it may overlook the fact that the Markov decision process (MDP) too has changed. While
∗

Alphabetical order.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

