Learning from Offline Foundation Features with
Tensor Augmentations

Emir Konuk1,2 , Christos Matsoukas 1,2 , Moein Sorkhei 1,2 , Phitchapha Lertsiravaramet 1,2
Kevin Smith 1,2
1 KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
2 Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden

{ekonuk, ksmith}@kth.se

Abstract
We introduce Learning from Offline Foundation Features with Tensor
Augmentations (LOFF-TA), an efficient training scheme designed to harness
the capabilities of foundation models in limited resource settings where
their direct development is not feasible. LOFF-TA involves training a
compact classifier on cached feature embeddings from a frozen foundation
model, resulting in up to 37× faster training and up to 26× reduced GPU
memory usage. Because the embeddings of augmented images would be
too numerous to store, yet the augmentation process is essential for training,
we propose to apply tensor augmentations to the cached embeddings of
the original non-augmented images. LOFF-TA makes it possible to leverage
the power of foundation models, regardless of their size, in settings with
limited computational capacity. Moreover, LOFF-TA can be used to apply
foundation models to high-resolution images without increasing compute.
In certain scenarios, we find that training with LOFF-TA yields better results
than directly fine-tuning the foundation model.

1

Introduction

Large and expensive foundation models, designed to capture general-purpose knowledge,
have become a significant focus in machine learning and computer vision research [3]. These
models excel in zero- and few-shot learning [4, 23] and adapt to various domains, especially
in data-scarce scenarios, through transfer learning. But adapting these models for a specific
task is a resource-intensive process [35]. The cost of fine-tuning large foundation models
today is already prohibitive to most individuals and organizations. As they continue to
grow in size, the rising costs of foundation models risk excluding all but the wealthiest
organizations. To mitigate this, parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods have been proposed.
These methods incorporate rank-deficient [18] and simple affine modules [31] or learnable
prompt parameters injected at the input stage [20]. Their core principle is to limit the number
of parameters that need to be trained. We extend this principle to its logical conclusion by
introducing no intermediate parameters or prompts, and investigate whether it is possible
to completely separate the foundation model from the training process.
In this study, we explore this complete separation of the resource-intensive foundation
model from the training process. As seen in Figure 1, training data is passed through the
foundation model at a one-time cost, and then cached. The cached feature embeddings are
later loaded and used to train a lightweight classifier. By adopting this caching strategy
we can train at a significantly faster rate using less memory resources and achieve similar,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

