High Rank Path Development: an approach to
learning the filtration of stochastic processes

Jiajie Tao
Department of Mathematics
University College London
ucahjta@ucl.ac.uk

Hao Ni
Department of Mathematics
University College London
h.ni@ucl.ac.uk

Chong Liu∗
Institute of Mathematical Sciences
ShanghaiTech University
liuchong@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Since the weak convergence for stochastic processes does not account for the
growth of information over time which is represented by the underlying filtration,
a slightly erroneous stochastic model in weak topology may cause huge loss in
multi-periods decision making problems. To address such discontinuities Aldous introduced the extended weak convergence, which can fully characterise all essential
properties, including the filtration, of stochastic processes; however was considered
to be hard to find efficient numerical implementations. In this paper, we introduce
a novel metric called High Rank PCF Distance (HRPCFD) for extended weak convergence based on the high rank path development method from rough path theory,
which also defines the characteristic function for measure-valued processes. We
then show that such HRPCFD admits many favourable analytic properties which
allows us to design an efficient algorithm for training HRPCFD from data and construct the HRPCF-GAN by using HRPCFD as the discriminator for conditional time
series generation. Our numerical experiments on both hypothesis testing and generative modelling validate the out-performance of our approach compared with several
state-of-the-art methods, highlighting its potential in broad applications of synthetic
time series generation and in addressing classic financial and economic challenges,
such as optimal stopping or utility maximisation problems. Code is available at
https://github.com/DeepIntoStreams/High-Rank-PCF-GAN.git.

1

Introduction

A popular criterion for measuring the differences between two stochastic processes is the weak
convergence. In this framework, one views stochastic processes as path-valued random variables and
then defines the convergence for their laws, which are distributions on path space. However, this
viewpoint ignores the filtration of stochastic processes, which models the evolution of information,
and therefore such loss may have negative implications in multi-period optimisation problems. For
example, for the American option pricing task, even if the two underlying processes are stochastic
processes with very similar laws, the corresponding price of American options can be completely
different, see a toy example A.1 in Appendix A.1. To address this shortcoming of weak convergence, D. Aldous [1] introduced the notion of extended weak convergence. The central object in
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

