Optimal Top-Two Method for Best Arm Identification
and Fluid Analysis

Agniv Bandyopadhyay
TIFR Mumbai, India
agniv.bandyopadhyay@tifr.res.in

Sandeep Juneja
Ashoka University, India
sandeep.juneja2010@gmail.com

Shubhada Agrawal
Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
sagrawal362@gatech.edu

Abstract
Top-2 methods have become popular in solving the best arm identification (BAI)
problem. The best arm, or the arm with the largest mean amongst finitely many,
is identified through an algorithm that at any sequential step independently pulls
the empirical best arm, with a fixed probability β, and pulls the best challenger
arm otherwise. The probability of incorrect selection is guaranteed to lie below
a specified δ > 0. Information theoretic lower bounds on sample complexity
are well known for BAI problem and are matched asymptotically as δ → 0 by
computationally demanding plug-in methods. The above top 2 algorithm for any
β ∈ (0, 1) has sample complexity within a constant of the lower bound. However,
determining the optimal β that matches the lower bound has proven difficult. In this
paper, we address this and propose an optimal top-2 type algorithm. We consider
a function of allocations anchored at a threshold. If it exceeds the threshold then
the algorithm samples the empirical best arm. Otherwise, it samples the challenger
arm. We show that the proposed algorithm is optimal as δ → 0. Our analysis
relies on identifying a limiting fluid dynamics of allocations that satisfy a series
of ordinary differential equations pasted together and that describe the asymptotic
path followed by our algorithm. We rely on the implicit function theorem to
show existence and uniqueness of these fluid ode’s and to show that the proposed
algorithm remains close to the ode solution.

1

Introduction

Stochastic best arm identification (BAI) problem has attracted a great deal of attention in the multi
armed bandit community (see [21], [10], [3] for some early references in BAI). The basic problem
involves a finite number of unknown probability distributions or arms that can be sampled from
independently and the aim is to identify the arm with the largest mean. We consider a popular fixed
confidence version of the problem where the sampling is sequential and the aim is to minimise
sample complexity while guaranteeing that the probability of selecting the wrong arm is restricted to
a pre-specified δ > 0. Applications are many including in healthcare and recommendation systems.
[11] developed asymptotically (as δ → 0) tight lower bound on sample complexity of δ−correct
algorithms for these BAI problems under the assumption that arms belong to a single parameter
exponential family (SPEF). This assumption reduces a probability distribution to a single parameter
and allows the analysis to better focus on certain aspects of the problem structure. We retain it for
similar reasons. The sample complexity lower bounds involve solving an optimization problem that
also identifies optimal proportion of allocations across arms. They also propose a track-and-stop
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

