Discrete Modeling via Boundary Conditional Diffusion
Processes
Yuxuan Gu†

Xiaocheng Feng†‡ Lei Huang† Yingsheng Wu† Zekun Zhou†
Weihong Zhong† Kun Zhu† Bing Qin†‡
†
Harbin Institute of Technology ‡ Peng Cheng Laboratory
{yxgu,xcfeng,lhuang,yswu,zkzhou,whzhong,kzhu,qinb}@ir.hit.edu.cn

Abstract
We present an novel framework for efficiently and effectively extending the powerful continuous diffusion processes to discrete modeling. Previous approaches have
suffered from the discrepancy between discrete data and continuous modeling. Our
study reveals that the absence of guidance from discrete boundaries in learning
probability contours is one of the main reasons. To address this issue, we propose a
two-step forward process that first estimates the boundary as a prior distribution and
then rescales the forward trajectory to construct a boundary conditional diffusion
model. The reverse process is proportionally adjusted to guarantee that the learned
contours yield more precise discrete data. Experimental results indicate that our
approach achieves strong performance in both language modeling and discrete
image generation tasks. In language modeling, our approach surpasses previous
state-of-the-art continuous diffusion language models in three translation tasks and
a summarization task, while also demonstrating competitive performance compared
to auto-regressive transformers. Moreover, our method achieves comparable results
to continuous diffusion models when using discrete ordinal pixels and establishes a
new state-of-the-art for categorical image generation on the C IFAR -10 dataset.

1

Introduction

Discrete modeling is essential due to the natural prevalence of discreteness in numerous domains,
including proteins [Madani et al., 2020, 2023], images [Parmar et al., 2018, Dosovitskiy et al., 2021],
and natural language [Sutskever et al., 2014, Brown et al., 2020]. Recent dominant framework
for discrete modeling is the Transformer [Vaswani et al., 2017] with an autoregressive manner.
While achieving impressive performance, it does suffer from a slow step-by-step generation process,
especially for long sequences. Continuous Diffusion models [Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015, Ho et al.,
2020], on the contrary, exhibit the ability to recover high-dimensional data from noise in parallel
with limited iteration steps. Although proved to be effective in continuous data generation [Rombach
et al., 2022, Kong et al., 2021], they continue to encounter challenges in discrete modeling [Austin
et al., 2021, Chen et al., 2023b, Li et al., 2022, Gong et al., 2023b].
In this paper, we reveal a significant discrepancy pertaining to the modeling of discrete data using
continuous diffusion models. Current approaches represent a discrete sample with a vector point in
the continuous space. The diffusion process learns a neural network to model the probability distributions that recovers this continuous point from Gaussian noise. However, the discrete data actually
corresponds to an area in the continuous space rather than a single point, where the oversimplified
assumption leads to a mismatch between learned probability contours and the boundary of the discrete
area. Take language generation as an example, a word is represented with an embedding vector in the
embedding space. To generate this word, it is impractical to strictly enforce the predicted vector to be
an exact match to the embedding. On the contrary, vectors around this embedding can also generate
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

