Optimal Multi-Fidelity Best-Arm Identification

Riccardo Poiani∗
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
riccardo.poiani@polimi.it
Rémy Degenne
Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189-CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France
remy.degenne@inria.fr
Emilie Kaufmann
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inria, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189-CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France
emilie.kaufmann@univ-lille.fr
Alberto Maria Metelli
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
albertomaria.metelli@polimi.it

Marcello Restelli
DEIB, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
marcello.restelli@polimi.it

Abstract
In bandit best-arm identification, an algorithm is tasked with finding the arm with
highest mean reward with a specified accuracy as fast as possible. We study multifidelity best-arm identification, in which the algorithm can choose to sample an arm
at a lower fidelity (less accurate mean estimate) for a lower cost. Several methods
have been proposed for tackling this problem, but their optimality remain elusive,
notably due to loose lower bounds on the total cost needed to identify the best
arm. Our first contribution is a tight, instance-dependent lower bound on the cost
complexity. The study of the optimization problem featured in the lower bound
provides new insights to devise computationally efficient algorithms, and leads us
to propose a gradient-based approach with asymptotically optimal cost complexity.
We demonstrate the benefits of the new algorithm compared to existing methods in
experiments. Our theoretical and empirical findings also shed light on an intriguing
concept of optimal fidelity for each arm.

1

Introduction

In multi-armed bandits [20], an algorithm chooses at each step one arm among K > 1 possibilities.
It then observes a reward, sampled from a probability distribution on R corresponding to the arm.
Several goals are possible for the algorithm, and we focus on the best arm identification task (BAI)
in which we aim to identify the arm with the largest mean, using as few samples as possible. This
is a well-studied problem [6, 1, 12, 10, 8] with potential applications to, e.g. A/B/n testing [27] or
hyper-parameter optimization [11].
In some applications, like physics, parameter studies, or hyper-parameter optimization, getting a
sample from the arm distribution might be expensive since it requires evaluating or training a complex
model and is computationally demanding. However, it is often the case that cheaper, less accurate
sampling methods are available, for instance, by using a coarser model in the physics study example.
∗

Work done while at Inria, Lille, France.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

