The Implicit Bias of Adam on Separable Data

Chenyang Zhang
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science
School of Computing and Data Science
The University of Hong Kong
chyzhang@connect.hku.hk

Difan Zou
Department of Computer Science
School of Computing and Data Science
& Institute of Data Science
The University of Hong Kong
dzou@cs.hku.hk

Yuan Cao
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science
School of Computing and Data Science
& Department of Mathematics
The University of Hong Kong
yuancao@hku.hk

Abstract
Adam has become one of the most favored optimizers in deep learning problems.
Despite its success in practice, numerous mysteries persist regarding its theoretical
understanding. In this paper, we study the implicit bias of Adam in linear logistic
regression. Specifically, we show that when the training data are linearly separable,
the iterates of Adam converge towards a linear classifier that achieves the maximum
ℓ∞ -margin in direction. Notably, for a general class of diminishing learning rates,
this convergence occurs within polynomial time. Our result shed light on the
difference between Adam and (stochastic) gradient descent from a theoretical
perspective.

1

Introduction

Adam [25] is one of the most widely used optimization algorithms in deep learning. By entry-wisely
adjusting the learning rate based on the magnitude of historical gradients, Adam has proven to be
highly efficient in solving optimization tasks in machine learning. However, despite the remarkable
empirical success of Adam, current theoretical understandings of Adam cannot fully explain its
fundamental difference compared with other optimization algorithms.
It has been recently pointed out that the implicit bias [32, 40, 21] of an optimization algorithm is essential in understanding the performance of the algorithm in machine learning. In over-parameterized
learning tasks where the training objective function may have infinitely many solutions, the implicit
bias of an optimization algorithm characterizes how the algorithm prioritizes converging towards a
specific optimum with particular structures and properties. Several recent works studied the implicit
bias of Adam and other adaptive gradient methods. Specifically, [35] studied the implicit bias
of AdaGrad, and showed that AdaGrad converges to a direction that can be characterized as the
solution of a quadratic optimization problem related to the limit of preconditioners. However, their
results cannot be extended to Adam. [45] showed that gradient descent with momentum (GDM)
and its adaptive variants have the same implicit bias with gradient descent. This result is extended
to the setting of training homogeneous models in [44]. However, the results in [45, 44] reply on a
nonnegligible stability constant – when the gradient entries are minimized below the stability constant
(which is by default 10−8 in Adam), adaptive gradient methods will essentially behave like gradient
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

