The Edge-of-Reach Problem in Offline Model-Based
Reinforcement Learning

Anya Sims
University of Oxford
anya.sims@stats.ox.ac.uk

Cong Lu
University of Oxford

Jakob N. Foerster
FLAIR, University of Oxford

Yee Whye Teh
University of Oxford

Abstract
Offline reinforcement learning (RL) aims to train agents from pre-collected datasets.
However, this comes with the added challenge of estimating the value of behaviors
not covered in the dataset. Model-based methods offer a potential solution by
training an approximate dynamics model, which then allows collection of additional
synthetic data via rollouts in this model. The prevailing theory treats this approach
as online RL in an approximate dynamics model, and any remaining performance
gap is therefore understood as being due to dynamics model errors. In this paper,
we analyze this assumption and investigate how popular algorithms perform as the
learned dynamics model is improved. In contrast to both intuition and theory, if
the learned dynamics model is replaced by the true error-free dynamics, existing
model-based methods completely fail. This reveals a key oversight: The theoretical
foundations assume sampling of full horizon rollouts in the learned dynamics
model; however, in practice, the number of model-rollout steps is aggressively
reduced to prevent accumulating errors. We show that this truncation of rollouts
results in a set of edge-of-reach states at which we are effectively “bootstrapping
from the void.” This triggers pathological value overestimation and complete
performance collapse. We term this the edge-of-reach problem. Based on this new
insight, we fill important gaps in existing theory, and reveal how prior model-based
methods are primarily addressing the edge-of-reach problem, rather than modelinaccuracy as claimed. Finally, we propose Reach-Aware Value Learning (RAVL),
a simple and robust method that directly addresses the edge-of-reach problem and
hence - unlike existing methods - does not fail as the dynamics model is improved.
Since world models will inevitably improve, we believe this is a key step towards
future-proofing offline RL.1

1

Introduction

Standard online reinforcement learning (RL) requires collecting large amounts of on-policy data.
This can be both costly and unsafe, and hence represents a significant barrier against applying RL
in domains such as healthcare [28, 32] or robotics [2, 4, 20], and also against scaling RL to more
complex problems. Offline RL [6, 23] aims to remove this need for online data collection by enabling
agents to be trained on pre-collected datasets. One hope [21] is that it may facilitate advances in RL
similar to those driven by the use of large pre-existing datasets in supervised learning [3].
1

Our code is open-sourced at: github.com/anyasims/edge-of-reach.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

