Logical Characterizations of Recurrent Graph
Neural Networks with Reals and Floats
Veeti Ahvonen1 , Damian Heiman1 , Antti Kuusisto1 , Carsten Lutz2,3
1
Tampere University, 2 Leipzig University, 3 ScaDS.AI, Dresden/Leipzig
1
firstname.lastname@tuni.fi, 2,3 clu@informatik.uni-leipzig.de

Abstract
In pioneering work from 2019, Barceló and coauthors identified logics that precisely match the expressive power of constant iteration-depth graph neural networks (GNNs) relative to properties definable in first-order logic. In this article,
we give exact logical characterizations of recurrent GNNs in two scenarios: (1) in
the setting with floating-point numbers and (2) with reals. For floats, the formalism matching recurrent GNNs is a rule-based modal logic with counting, while for
reals we use a suitable infinitary modal logic, also with counting. These results
give exact matches between logics and GNNs in the recurrent setting without relativising to a background logic in either case, but using some natural assumptions
about floating-point arithmetic. Applying our characterizations, we also prove
that, relative to graph properties definable in monadic second-order logic (MSO),
our infinitary and rule-based logics are equally expressive. This implies that recurrent GNNs with reals and floats have the same expressive power over MSOdefinable properties and shows that, for such properties, also recurrent GNNs with
reals are characterized by a (finitary!) rule-based modal logic. In the general case,
in contrast, the expressive power with floats is weaker than with reals. In addition
to logic-oriented results, we also characterize recurrent GNNs, with both reals and
floats, via distributed automata, drawing links to distributed computing models.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [11, 30, 34] have proven to be highly useful for processing graph
data in numerous applications that span a remarkable range of disciplines including bioinformatics [35], recommender systems [33], traffic forecasting [21], and a multitude of others. The success
of GNNs in applications has stimulated lively research into their theoretical properties such as expressive power. A landmark result is due to Barceló et al. [5] which was among the first to characterize the expressive power of GNNs in terms of logic, see [12, 8, 6, 26] and references therein for
related results. More precisely, Barceló et al. show that a basic GNN model with a constant number
of iterations has exactly the same expressive power as graded modal logic GML in restriction to
properties definable in first-order logic FO.
In this article, we advance the analysis of the expressive power of GNNs in two directions. First,
we study the relation between GNN models based on real numbers, as mostly studied in theory, and
GNN models based on floating-point numbers, as mostly used in practice. And second, we focus
on a family of basic recurrent GNNs while previous research has mainly considered GNNs with a
constant number of iterations, with the notable exception of [26]. The GNNs studied in the current
paper have a simple and natural termination (or acceptance) condition: termination is signaled via
designated feature vectors and thus the GNN “decides” by itself about when to terminate. We
remark that some of our results also apply to constant iteration GNNs and to recurrent GNNs with
a termination condition based on fixed points, as used in the inaugural work on GNNs [11]; see the
conclusion section for further details.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

