Improving Linear System Solvers for Hyperparameter
Optimisation in Iterative Gaussian Processes

Jihao Andreas Lin1, 2
Shreyas Padhy1
Bruno Mlodozeniec1, 2
1, 3
Javier Antorán
José Miguel Hernández-Lobato1, 3
1
2
University of Cambridge
MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen 3 Ångström AI

Abstract
Scaling hyperparameter optimisation to very large datasets remains an open problem in the Gaussian process community. This paper focuses on iterative methods,
which use linear system solvers, like conjugate gradients, alternating projections
or stochastic gradient descent, to construct an estimate of the marginal likelihood
gradient. We discuss three key improvements which are applicable across solvers:
(i) a pathwise gradient estimator, which reduces the required number of solver
iterations and amortises the computational cost of making predictions, (ii) warm
starting linear system solvers with the solution from the previous step, which leads
to faster solver convergence at the cost of negligible bias, (iii) early stopping linear
system solvers after a limited computational budget, which synergises with warm
starting, allowing solver progress to accumulate over multiple marginal likelihood
steps. These techniques provide speed-ups of up to 72× when solving to tolerance,
and decrease the average residual norm by up to 7× when stopping early.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes [22] (GPs) are a versatile class of probabilistic machine learning models which are
used widely for Bayesian optimisation of black-box functions [24], climate and earth sciences [10, 26],
and data-efficient learning in robotics and control [6]. However, their effectiveness depends on good
estimates of hyperparameters, such as kernel length scales and observation noise. These quantities
are typically learned by maximising the marginal likelihood, which balances model complexity with
training data fit. In general, the marginal likelihood is a non-convex function of the hyperparameters
and evaluating its gradient requires inverting the kernel matrix. Using direct methods, this requires
compute and memory resources which are respectively cubic and quadratic in the number of training
examples. This is intractable when dealing with large datasets of modern interest.
Methods to improve the scalability of Gaussian processes can roughly be grouped into two categories.
Sparse methods [20, 27, 12] approximate the kernel matrix with a low-rank surrogate, which is
cheaper to invert. This reduced flexibility may result in failure to properly fit increasingly large or
sufficiently complex data [15]. On the other hand, iterative methods [11] express GP computations in
terms of systems of linear equations. The solution to these linear systems is approximated up to a
specified numerical precision with linear system solvers, such as conjugate gradients (CG) [11, 9,
30], alternating projections (AP) [23, 28, 33], or stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [15, 16]. These
methods allow for a trade-off between compute time and accuracy. However, convergence can be
slow in the large data regime, where system conditioning is often poor.
In this paper, we focus on iterative GPs and identify techniques, which were important to the success
of previously proposed methods, but did not receive special attention in the literature. Many of these
amount to amortisations which leverage previous computations to accelerate subsequent ones. We
analyse and adapt these techniques, and show that they can be applied to accelerate different linear
solvers, obtaining speed-ups of up to 72× without sacrificing predictive performance (see Figure 1).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

