High-dimensional (Group) Adversarial Training in
Linear Regression

Yiling Xie
School of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia, USA
yxie350@gatech.edu

Xiaoming Huo
School of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia, USA
huo@gatech.edu

Abstract
Adversarial training can achieve robustness against adversarial perturbations and
has been widely used in machine-learning models. This paper delivers a nonasymptotic consistency analysis of the adversarial training procedure under ℓ∞ perturbation in high-dimensional linear regression. It will be shown that, under the
restricted eigenvalue condition, the associated convergence rate of prediction error
can achieve the minimax rate up to a logarithmic factor in the high-dimensional linear regression on the class of sparse parameters. Additionally, the group adversarial
training procedure is analyzed. Compared with classic adversarial training, it will
be proved that the group adversarial training procedure enjoys a better prediction
error upper bound under certain group-sparsity patterns.

1

Introduction

Adversarial training is proposed to hedge against adversarial perturbations and has attracted much
research interest in recent years. Adversarial training has been widely used in Large Language
Models [14, 24], computer vision [13], cybersecurity [33], etc. While the empirical risk minimization
procedure optimizes the empirical loss, the adversarial training procedure seeks conservative solutions
that optimize the worst-case loss under a given magnitude of perturbation. People have actively
investigated model modifications and algorithmic frameworks to improve performance and training
efficiency for adversarial training under different problem settings [1, 10, 12, 22, 23, 27, 29].
We are interested in understanding the fundamental properties of adversarial training from a statistical
viewpoint. A standard approach for statisticians to evaluate statistical or machine-learning models
is to investigate whether the estimator obtained from the model can achieve the minimax rate [25].
In this paper, we will give the non-asymptotic convergence rate of the prediction error in highdimensional adversarial training. The associated convergence rate achieves the minimax rate under
certain settings, which will be clarified in Section 2.2.
In machine-learning models, adversarial training has the following mathematical formulation:
n

min
β

1X
sup L (Xi + ∆, Yi , β) ,
n i=1 ∥∆∥≤δ

where (X1 , Y1 ), ..., (Xn , Yn ) are given samples, ∆ is the perturbation, ∥ · ∥ is the perturbation norm,
δ is the perturbation magnitude, β is the model parameter, and L(x, y, β) is the loss function with x
being the input variable and y being the response variable.
Regarding the choice of the perturbation norm, we focus on ℓ∞ -perturbation, i.e., ∥∆∥ = ∥∆∥∞ .
Some literature has pointed out that ℓ∞ -perturbation could help recover the model sparsity [21, 28].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

