On the Worst Prompt Performance of Large Language
Models∗
Bowen Cao♢,† Deng Cai♡,‡ Zhisong Zhang♡ Yuexian Zou♠ Wai Lam♢
♢ The Chinese University of Hong Kong
♡ Tencent AI Lab ♠ Peking University
bwcao@link.cuhk.edu.hk, thisisjcykcd@gmail.com, zhisonzhang@tencent.com
zouyx@pku.edu.cn, wlam@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
The performance of large language models (LLMs) is acutely sensitive to the
phrasing of prompts, which raises significant concerns about their reliability in
real-world scenarios. Existing studies often divide prompts into task-level instructions and case-level inputs and primarily focus on evaluating and improving
robustness against variations in tasks-level instructions. However, this setup fails
to fully address the diversity of real-world user queries and assumes the existence
of task-specific datasets. To address these limitations, we introduce ROBUSTA L PACA E VAL , a new benchmark that consists of semantically equivalent case-level
queries and emphasizes the importance of using the worst prompt performance
to gauge the lower bound of model performance. Extensive experiments on RO BUSTA LPACA E VAL with ChatGPT and six open-source LLMs from the Llama,
Mistral, and Gemma families uncover substantial variability in model performance;
for instance, a difference of 45.48% between the worst and best performance for
the Llama-2-70B-chat model, with its worst performance dipping as low as 9.38%.
We further illustrate the difficulty in identifying the worst prompt from both modelagnostic and model-dependent perspectives, emphasizing the absence of a shortcut
to characterize the worst prompt. We also attempt to enhance the worst prompt
performance using existing prompt engineering and prompt consistency methods,
but find that their impact is limited. These findings underscore the need to create
more resilient LLMs that can maintain high performance across diverse prompts.
Data and code are available at https://github.com/bwcao/RobustAlpacaEval.

1

Introduction

In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have made extraordinary progress (Brown et al.,
2020; Touvron et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2023; Team et al., 2024) and one key factor in their success
is their ability to adapt to diverse tasks through prompting. However, the performance of these
LLMs is significantly sensitive to the prompts they receive (Gu et al., 2022; Mizrahi et al., 2024;
Sun et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024). Even minor alterations in format, without semantic changes, can
trigger substantial performance degradation (Sclar et al., 2023). Consequently, prompt engineering
has surfaced as a critical component, playing a critical role in unlocking the full potential of these
models (Shin et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2022a; Pryzant et al., 2023; Prasad et al., 2023; Gonen et al.,
2022; Schulhoff et al., 2024).
∗

The work described in this paper is partially supported by a grant from the Research Grant Council of the
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China (Project Code: 14200719).
†
Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
‡
Corresponding author.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

