HardCore Generation: Generating Hard UNSAT
Problems for Data Augmentation

Joseph Cotnareanu1,2,3,∗ Zhanguang Zhang 4 Hui-Ling Zhen4
Yingxue Zhang4 Mark Coates1,2,3,∗
McGill University1 , International Laboratory on Learning Systems (ILLS)2 ,
Mila Québec Institute3 , Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab4
joseph.cotnareanu@mail.mcgill.ca,mark.coates@mcgill.ca,
{zhanguang.zhang,zhenhuiling2,yingxue.zhang}@huawei.com

Abstract
Efficiently determining the satisfiability of a boolean equation — known as the
SAT problem for brevity — is crucial in various industrial problems. Recently, the
advent of deep learning methods has introduced significant potential for enhancing
SAT solving. However, a major barrier to the advancement of this field has been the
scarcity of large, realistic datasets. The majority of current public datasets are either
randomly generated or extremely limited, containing only a few examples from
unrelated problem families. These datasets are inadequate for meaningful training
of deep learning methods. In light of this, researchers have started exploring
generative techniques to create data that more accurately reflect SAT problems
encountered in practical situations. These methods have so far suffered from either
the inability to produce challenging SAT problems or time-scalability obstacles. In
this paper we address both by identifying and manipulating the key contributors to a
problem’s “hardness”, known as cores. Although some previous work has addressed
cores, the time costs are unacceptably high due to the expense of traditional
heuristic core detection techniques. We introduce a fast core detection procedure
that uses a graph neural network. Our empirical results demonstrate that we can
efficiently generate problems that remain hard to solve and retain key attributes
of the original example problems. We show via experiment that the generated
synthetic SAT problems can be used in a data augmentation setting to provide
improved prediction of solver runtimes2 .

1

Introduction

The boolean satisfiability problem (the SAT problem) emerges in multiple industrial settings such
as circuit design (Goldberg et al., 2001), cryptoanalysis (Ramamoorthy and Jayagowri, 2023), and
scheduling (Habiby et al., 2021). While machine learning is not well suited for solving SAT problems
— solvers are typically required to have perfect accuracy and return correct proofs — it does have
applications in predicting wall-clock solving time for a given solver, which is important for algorithm
selection (Kadioglu et al., 2010; KhudaBukhsh et al., 2009) and benchmarking (Fuchs et al., 2023).
SAT has also been gaining attention in Large-Language-Model reasoning, as it is a natural tool for
interacting with the propositional-logical structure of many reasoning problems (Ye et al., 2023).
A major challenge for SAT-related learning is the scarcity of high quality, reasonably homogeneous,
real-structured data. The most commonly-used datasets have been compiled via a series of annual
∗

We acknowledge the support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC).
Nous remercions le Conseil de recherches en sciences naturelles et en génie du Canada (CRSNG) de son soutien.
2
We make our code publically available at https://github.com/joseph-cotnareanu/HardCore
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

