Distributional regression: CRPS-error bounds for
model fitting, model selection and convex aggregation

Clément Dombry∗
Université de Franche-Comté,
CNRS, LmB (UMR 6623),
F-25000 Besançon, France.
clement.dombry@univ-fcomte.fr

Ahmed Zaoui
Université de Franche-Comté,
CNRS, LmB (UMR 6623),
F-25000 Besançon, France.
ahmed.zaoui@univ-fcomte.fr

Abstract
Distributional regression aims at estimating the conditional distribution of a target
variable given explanatory co-variates. It is a crucial tool for forecasting when
a precise uncertainty quantification is required. A popular methodology consists
in fitting a parametric model via empirical risk minimization where the risk is
measured by the Continuous Rank Probability Score (CRPS). For independent
and identically distributed observations, we provide a concentration result for the
estimation error and an upper bound for its expectation. Furthermore, we consider
model selection performed by minimization of the validation error and provide a
concentration bound for the regret. A similar result is proved for convex aggregation
of models. Finally, we show that our results may be applied to various models such
as Ensemble Model Output Statistics (EMOS), distributional regression networks,
distributional nearest neighbors or distributional random forests and we illustrate
our findings on two data sets (QSAR aquatic toxicity and Airfoil self-noise).

1

Introduction

Motivation and related literature. We consider in this paper the distributional regression problem,
where we want to estimate the conditional distribution of a target random variable Y given explanatory
co-variates X. We assume (X, Y ) ∈ Rd × R and we let
Fx∗ (y) = P (Y ≤ y | X = x) .

(1)

be the conditional cumulative distribution functions (c.d.f.). Estimation is built on a training sample
Dn = {(Xi , Yi ), 1 ≤ i ≤ n} of independent identically distributed (i.i.d.) copies of (X, Y ).
Let us emphasize that distributional regression is much more challenging than standard regression
where only a point prediction for Y given X = x is provided which typically reduces to an estimation
of the conditional expectation. The conditional distribution provides a full account for the variability
of Y given X = x and distributional regression is therefore a crucial tool for forecasting when a
precise uncertainty quantification is required.
Distributional regression is of relevance in various applied fields. To name a few, let us mention
statistical post-processing of weather forecast (Matheson and Winkler, 1976; Gneiting et al., 2005),
forecasting of wind gusts (Baran and Lerch, 2015), of solar irradiance (Schulz et al., 2021), of
ICU length stays during COVID-19 pandemy (Henzi et al., 2021a), of breast cancer ODX score in
oncology (Al Masry et al., 2024). . .
The methodology relies on probabilistic forecast where the forecaster produces a predictive distribution for the quantity of interest (Gneiting and Katzfuss, 2014). Fitting a distributional regression
∗

clement.dombry@univ-fcomte.fr

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

