SnapKV: LLM Knows What You Are Looking for
before Generation
Yuhong Li1∗ Yingbing Huang1∗ Bowen Yang2 Bharat Venkitesh2 Acyr Locatelli2
Hanchen Ye1 Tianle Cai3 Patrick Lewis2 Deming Chen1
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Cohere 3 Princeton University
1

2

{leeyh, yh21, hanchen8, dchen}@illinois.edu
{bowen, bharat, acyr, patrick}@cohere.com 3 tianle.cai@princeton.edu

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have made remarkable progress in processing
extensive contexts, with the Key-Value (KV) cache playing a vital role in enhancing
their performance. However, the growth of the KV cache in response to increasing
input length poses challenges to memory and time efficiency. To address this
problem, this paper introduces SnapKV, an innovative and fine-tuning-free approach
that efficiently minimizes KV cache size while still delivering comparable accuracy
in real-world applications.
We discover that each attention head in the model consistently focuses on specific
prompt attention features during generation. Meanwhile, this robust pattern can be
obtained from an ‘observation’ window located at the end of the prompts. Drawing
on this insight, SnapKV automatically compresses KV caches by selecting clustered
important KV positions for each attention head. Our approach significantly reduces
the growing computational overhead and memory footprint when processing long
input sequences. Specifically, SnapKV achieves a consistent decoding speed with a
3.6x increase in generation speed and an 8.2x enhancement in memory efficiency
compared to the baseline when processing inputs of 16K tokens. At the same
time, it maintains comparable performance to the baseline models across 16 long
sequence datasets. Moreover, SnapKV can process up to 380K context tokens on a
single A100-80GB GPU using HuggingFace implementation with minor changes,
exhibiting only a negligible accuracy drop in the Needle-in-a-Haystack test. Further
comprehensive studies suggest SnapKV’s potential for practical applications. Our
code is available at https://github.com/FasterDecoding/SnapKV.

1

Introduction

Many leading LLMs have started to handle longer contexts, overcoming the difficulties in context
maintenance and attention mechanism scalability, such as GPT-4 [1] and Command-R [2] with
context length 128K, Claude-3 [3] with 200K, and Gemini-Pro-1.5 with 1M [4]. Despite their
impressive capabilities, LLMs still face significant challenges when dealing with long context
prompts. Specifically, the KV cache in attention calculation becomes less efficient when processing
long context. During inference time, as prompt length increases, the decoding latency per step grows
linearly due to the attention calculation across past KVs. Moreover, the large KV cache requires
significant memory capacity, increasing hardware demands and limiting model scalability.
∗

equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

