Flow Priors for Linear Inverse Problems via
Iterative Corrupted Trajectory Matching

Yasi Zhang

Peiyu Yu

Yaxuan Zhu

UCLA
yasminzhang@ucla.edu

UCLA
yupeiyu98@g.ucla.edu

UCLA
yaxuanzhu@g.ucla.edu

Yingshan Chang

Feng Gao∗

Ying Nian Wu

CMU
yingshac@andrew.cmu.edu

Amazon
fenggo@amazon.com

UCLA
ywu@stat.ucla.edu

Oscar Leong
UCLA
oleong@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
Generative models based on flow matching have attracted significant attention for
their simplicity and superior performance in high-resolution image synthesis. By
leveraging the instantaneous change-of-variables formula, one can directly compute
image likelihoods from a learned flow, making them enticing candidates as priors
for downstream tasks such as inverse problems. In particular, a natural approach
would be to incorporate such image probabilities in a maximum-a-posteriori (MAP)
estimation problem. A major obstacle, however, lies in the slow computation of
the log-likelihood, as it requires backpropagating through an ODE solver, which
can be prohibitively slow for high-dimensional problems. In this work, we propose
an iterative algorithm to approximate the MAP estimator efficiently to solve a
variety of linear inverse problems. Our algorithm is mathematically justified by
the observation that the MAP objective can be approximated by a sum of N “local
MAP” objectives, where N is the number of function evaluations. By leveraging
Tweedie’s formula, we show that we can perform gradient steps to sequentially
optimize these objectives. We validate our approach for various linear inverse
problems, such as super-resolution, deblurring, inpainting, and compressed sensing,
and demonstrate that we can outperform other methods based on flow matching.
Code is available at https://github.com/YasminZhang/ICTM.

1

Introduction

Linear inverse problems are ubiquitous across many imaging domains, pervading areas such as
astronomy [41, 23], medical imaging [38, 49], and seismology [35, 39]. In these problems the goal is
to reconstruct an unknown image x∗ ∈ Rn from observed measurements y ∈ Rm of the form:
n

m

y = A(x∗ ) + noise,

(1)

where A : R → R with m ≤ n is a linear operator that degrades the clean image x∗ , and
the additive noise is drawn from a known distribution. In this work, we assume the noise follows
N (0, σy2 I). Due to the under-constrained nature of such problems, they are typically ill-posed, i.e.,
∗

This work is not related to the author’s position at Amazon.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

