Are Uncertainty Quantification Capabilities of
Evidential Deep Learning a Mirage?

Maohao Shen1∗, J. Jon Ryu1∗ , Soumya Ghosh2†,
Yuheng Bu , Prasanna Sattigeri2 , Subhro Das2 , Gregory W. Wornell1
3

1

Department of EECS, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research, Cambridge, MA 02142
3
Department of ECE, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611
2

{maohao,jongha,gww}@mit.edu,
{ghoshoso,prasanna}@us.ibm.com, subhro.das@ibm.com,
buyuheng@ufl.edu

Abstract
This paper questions the effectiveness of a modern predictive uncertainty quantification approach, called evidential deep learning (EDL), in which a single neural
network model is trained to learn a meta distribution over the predictive distribution by minimizing a specific objective function. Despite their perceived strong
empirical performance on downstream tasks, a line of recent studies by Bengs et al.
identify limitations of the existing methods to conclude their learned epistemic uncertainties are unreliable, e.g., in that they are non-vanishing even with infinite data.
Building on and sharpening such analysis, we 1) provide a sharper understanding
of the asymptotic behavior of a wide class of EDL methods by unifying various
objective functions; 2) reveal that the EDL methods can be better interpreted as
an out-of-distribution detection algorithm based on energy-based-models; and 3)
conduct extensive ablation studies to better assess their empirical effectiveness with
real-world datasets. Through all these analyses, we conclude that even when EDL
methods are empirically effective on downstream tasks, this occurs despite their
poor uncertainty quantification capabilities. Our investigation suggests that incorporating model uncertainty can help EDL methods faithfully quantify uncertainties
and further improve performance on representative downstream tasks, albeit at the
cost of additional computational complexity.1

1

Introduction

Accurate estimation of uncertainty in the prediction becomes more crucial to enhance the reliability
of a predictive model, especially for high-stake applications such as medical diagnosis [1, 2]. Among
several approaches proposed, a class of uncertainty estimation methods under the category of
evidential deep learning (EDL) has recently gained attention [3], due to their claimed advantages
over other methods. EDL methods typically learn a single neural network that maps input data to
the parameters of a meta distribution, which is a distribution over the predictive distribution. The
EDL methods generally claim the following advantages. (1) Computational efficiency: they bypass
the expensive sampling costs associated with Bayesian or ensemble-based methods by training a
∗

The two authors contributed equally to this work.
This author is currently affiliated with Merck and can be reached at Soumya.Ghosh@merck.com.
1
The code to replicate the experiments is available on https://github.com/maohaos2/EDL-Mirage.

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

