DapperFL: Domain Adaptive Federated Learning with
Model Fusion Pruning for Edge Devices

Yongzhe Jia1 , Xuyun Zhang2 , Hongsheng Hu3 , Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo4 ,
Lianyong Qi5 , Xiaolong Xu6∗, Amin Beheshti2 , Wanchun Dou1
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
School of Computing, Macquarie University, Australia
3
School of Information and Physical Sciences, University of Newcastle, Australia
4
Department of Information Systems and Cyber Security, University of Texas at San Antonio, USA
5
College of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Petroleum (East China), China
6
School of Computer and Software,
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, China

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) has emerged as a prominent machine learning paradigm in
edge computing environments, enabling edge devices to collaboratively optimize a
global model without sharing their private data. However, existing FL frameworks
suffer from efficacy deterioration due to the system heterogeneity inherent in edge
computing, especially in the presence of domain shifts across local data. In this
paper, we propose a heterogeneous FL framework DapperFL, to enhance model
performance across multiple domains. In DapperFL, we introduce a dedicated
Model Fusion Pruning (MFP) module to produce personalized compact local
models for clients to address the system heterogeneity challenges. The MFP module
prunes local models with fused knowledge obtained from both local and remaining
domains, ensuring robustness to domain shifts. Additionally, we design a Domain
Adaptive Regularization (DAR) module to further improve the overall performance
of DapperFL. The DAR module employs regularization generated by the pruned
model, aiming to learn robust representations across domains. Furthermore, we
introduce a specific aggregation algorithm for aggregating heterogeneous local
models with tailored architectures and weights. We implement DapperFL on a realworld FL platform with heterogeneous clients. Experimental results on benchmark
datasets with multiple domains demonstrate that DapperFL outperforms several
state-of-the-art FL frameworks by up to 2.28%, while significantly achieving
model volume reductions ranging from 20% to 80%. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/jyzgh/DapperFL.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL), an emerging distributed machine learning paradigm in edge computing
environments [1, 2], enables participant devices (i.e., clients) to optimize their local models while
a central server aggregates these local models into a global model [3]. In contrast to traditional
centralized machine learning paradigms, FL facilitates the collaborative training of a global model by
distributed clients without the need for transmitting raw local data, thus mitigating privacy concerns
associated with data transmission [2].
∗

Corresponding author: Xiaolong Xu (xlxu@nuist.edu.cn).

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

