Functional Bilevel Optimization for Machine Learning

Ieva Petrulionyte, Julien Mairal, Michael Arbel
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France
firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a new functional point of view on bilevel optimization
problems for machine learning, where the inner objective is minimized over a
function space. These types of problems are most often solved by using methods
developed in the parametric setting, where the inner objective is strongly convex
with respect to the parameters of the prediction function. The functional point of
view does not rely on this assumption and notably allows using over-parameterized
neural networks as the inner prediction function. We propose scalable and efficient
algorithms for the functional bilevel optimization problem and illustrate the benefits
of our approach on instrumental regression and reinforcement learning tasks.

1

Introduction

Bilevel optimization methods solve problems with hierarchical structures, optimizing two interdependent objectives: an inner-level objective and an outer-level one. Initially used in machine learning for
model selection [Bennett et al., 2006] and sparse feature learning [Mairal et al., 2012], these methods
gained popularity as efficient alternatives to grid search for hyper-parameter tuning [Feurer and Hutter,
2019, Lorraine et al., 2019, Franceschi et al., 2017]. Applications of bilevel optimization include
meta-learning [Bertinetto et al., 2019], auxiliary task learning [Navon et al., 2021], reinforcement
learning [Hong et al., 2023, Liu et al., 2021a, Nikishin et al., 2022], inverse problems [Holler et al.,
2018] and invariant risk minimization [Arjovsky et al., 2019, Ahuja et al., 2020].
Bilevel problems are challenging to solve, even in the well-defined bilevel setting with a unique
inner-level solution. This difficulty stems from approximating both the inner-level solution and its
sensitivity to the outer-level variable during gradient-based optimization. Methods like Iterative
Differentiation (ITD, Baydin et al., 2017) and Approximate Implicit Differentiation (AID, Ghadimi
and Wang, 2018) were designed to address these challenges in the well-defined setting, resulting in
scalable algorithms with strong convergence guarantees [Domke, 2012, Gould et al., 2016, Ablin
et al., 2020, Arbel and Mairal, 2022a, Blondel et al., 2022, Liao et al., 2018, Liu et al., 2022b,
Shaban et al., 2019]. These guarantees usually require the inner-level objective to be strongly convex.
However, when the inner-level variables are neural network parameters, the lower-level problem
becomes non-convex and may have multiple solutions due to over-parameterization. While nonconvexity is considered "benign" in this setting [Allen-Zhu et al., 2019, Liu et al., 2022a], multiplicity
of inner-level solutions makes their dependence on the outer-level variable ambiguous [Liu et al.,
2021b], posing a major challenge in bilevel optimization for modern machine learning applications.
We identify a common functional structure in bilevel machine learning problems to address the
ambiguity challenge that arises with flexible models like neural networks. Specifically, we consider
a prediction function h optimized by the inner-level problem over a Hilbert space H. This space
consists of functions defined over an input space X and taking values in a finite dimensional vector
space V. The optimal prediction function is then evaluated in the outer-level to optimize an outer-level
parameter ω in a finite dimensional space Ω = Rd , resulting in a functional bilevel problem:
min F(ω) : = Lout (ω, h⋆ω )
ω∈Ω

s.t.

h⋆ω = arg min Lin (ω, h) .
h∈H

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

(FBO)

