Collaborative Refining for Learning from Inaccurate
Labels
Bin Han, Yi-Xuan Sun, Ya-Lin Zhang, Libang Zhang, Haoran Hu
Longfei Li, Jun Zhou† , Guo Ye, Huimei He
Ant Group
{binlin.hb, xuan.syx, lyn.zyl, libang.zlb, hhr327996,
longyao.llf, jun.zhoujun, yeguo.yg, huimei.hhm}@antgroup.com

Abstract
This paper considers the problem of learning from multiple sets of inaccurate
labels, which can be easily obtained from low-cost annotators, such as rule-based
annotators. Previous works typically concentrate on aggregating information from
all the annotators, overlooking the significance of data refinement. This paper
presents a collaborative refining approach for learning from inaccurate labels. To
refine the data, we introduce the annotator agreement as an instrument, which
refers to whether multiple annotators agree or disagree on the labels for a given
sample. For samples where some annotators disagree, a comparative strategy
is proposed to filter noise. Through theoretical analysis, the correlations among
multiple sets of labels, the respective models trained on them, and the true labels
are uncovered, so that relatively reliable labels can be identified. For samples
where all annotators agree, an aggregating strategy is designed to mitigate potential
noise. Guided by theoretical bounds on loss values, a sample selection criterion
is introduced and improved to be more robust against potentially problematic
values. Through these two modules, all the samples are refined during training,
and these refined samples are used to train a lightweight model simultaneously.
Extensive experiments are conducted on benchmark and real-world datasets, which
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed framework.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has recently demonstrated remarkable achievements across a wide array of applications [5, 6, 9, 15, 33]. The cornerstone of its success rests on the availability of high-quality
datasets. However, in industrial environments, obtaining accurate labels can often be costly and
time-consuming. For example, in financial scenarios, it is challenging for human annotators to
accurately assign labels to predict whether a user will default. Currently, many banks and companies
utilize rules as low-cost autonomous annotators, especially in the early stages of some financial
products. In healthcare scenarios, many rule-based algorithms are also employed to identify patients
at risk of developing certain conditions, allowing for early intervention and potentially preventing
more severe complications. Although these annotators can provide labels in a time- and cost-efficient
manner [7, 44, 45], a single low-cost annotator usually produces biased or inaccurate labels in
practice [8, 13, 18, 24, 29, 40].
On the other hand, multiple annotators can provide diverse perspectives with different insights and
knowledge to mitigate errors and biases of individual annotators [30, 45]. Learning from multiple
sets of inaccurate labels provided by multiple annotators has garnered widespread attention and
†

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

