Marginal Causal Flows for Validation and Inference

Daniel de Vassimon Manela∗
University of Oxford
manela@stats.ox.ac.uk

Laura Battaglia∗
University of Oxford
battaglia@stats.ox.ac.uk

Robin J. Evans
University of Oxford
evans@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Investigating the marginal causal effect of an intervention on an outcome from
complex data remains challenging due to the inflexibility of employed models
and the lack of complexity in causal benchmark datasets, which often fail to
reproduce intricate real-world data patterns. In this paper we introduce Frugal
Flows, a novel likelihood-based machine learning model that uses normalising
flows to flexibly learn the data-generating process, while also directly inferring
the marginal causal quantities from observational data. We propose that these
models are exceptionally well suited for generating synthetic data to validate causal
methods. They can create synthetic datasets that closely resemble the empirical
dataset, while automatically and exactly satisfying a user-defined average treatment
effect. To our knowledge, Frugal Flows are the first generative model to both
learn flexible data representations and also exactly parameterise quantities such
as the average treatment effect and the degree of unobserved confounding. We
demonstrate the above with experiments on both simulated and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Simulating realistic datasets such that the marginal causal effect is constrained to take a specific form
is a significant challenge in causal inference. Many methods for inferring these effects exist, but
simulating from them is a significant challenge (Young et al., 2008; Havercroft and Didelez, 2012;
Keogh et al., 2021). In particular, it is difficult to simulate complex benchmarks from generative
models in such a way that a custom marginal effect exactly holds.
The frugal parameterisation (Evans and Didelez, 2024) provides a solution to this problem by
constructing a joint distribution that explicitly parameterises the marginal causal effect and builds the
rest of the model around it. Frugal models typically represent the dependency between an outcome
and pretreatment covariates using copulae. Standard multivariate copulae are parametric, leading to
potential model misspecification.
In this paper we show how one can construct frugally parameterised marginal causal models using
normalising flows (NFs, Rezende and Mohamed, 2015; Dinh et al., 2016) to target the causal margin of
the distribution (a conditional univariate marginal density of an outcome conditioned on a treatment).
We name the resulting model a Frugal Flow (FF). To the best of our knowledge, FFs offer the first
likelihood-based framework for learning a marginal causal effect while modelling the outcome and
propensity nuisance parameters using flexible generative models.
FFs are exceptionally well suited for generating benchmark datasets for causal method validation.
Since FFs enable direct parameterisation of the causal margin, they provide a framework for generating causal benchmark datasets which resemble real-world datasets, but which also allow users to
encode causal properties in order to validate novel inference models. FFs can be used to generate
benchmarks with customisable degrees of unobserved confounding. This can aid in the validation
∗

Equal Contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

