Benign overfitting in leaky ReLU networks with
moderate input dimension

Kedar Karhadkar1∗ Erin George1∗ Michael Murray1 Guido Montúfar12 Deanna Needell1
{kedar,egeo,mmurray,montufar,deanna}@math.ucla.edu
1
UCLA 2 Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences
∗
Equal contribution

Abstract
The problem of benign overfitting asks whether it is possible for a model to perfectly
fit noisy training data and still generalize well. We study benign overfitting in twolayer leaky ReLU networks trained with the hinge loss on a binary classification
task. We consider input data that can be decomposed into the sum of a common
signal and a random noise component, that lie on subspaces orthogonal to one
another. We characterize conditions on the signal to noise ratio (SNR) of the model
parameters giving rise to benign versus non-benign (or harmful) overfitting: in
particular, if the SNR is high then benign overfitting occurs, conversely if the
SNR is low then harmful overfitting occurs. We attribute both benign and nonbenign overfitting to an approximate margin maximization property and show that
leaky ReLU networks trained on hinge loss with gradient descent (GD) satisfy
this property. In contrast to prior work we do not require the training data to be
nearly orthogonal. Notably, for input dimension d and training sample size n, while
results in prior work require d = Ω(n2 log n), here we require only d = Ω (n).

1

Introduction

Intuition from learning theory suggests that fitting noise during training reduces a model’s performance on test data. However, it has been observed in some settings that machine learning models can
interpolate noisy training data with only nominal cost to their generalization performance (Zhang
et al., 2017; Belkin et al., 2018, 2019), a phenomenon referred to as benign overfitting. Establishing
theory that can explain this phenomenon has attracted much interest in recent years and there is now
a rich body of work on this topic particularly in the context of linear models. However, the study of
benign overfitting in the context of non-linear models, in particular shallow ReLU or leaky ReLU
networks, has additional technical challenges and subsequently is less well advanced.
Much of the effort in regard to theoretically characterizing benign overfitting focuses on showing,
under an appropriate scaling of the dimension of the input domain d, size of the training sample
n, number of corruptions k and number of model parameters p that a model can interpolate noisy
training data while achieving an arbitrarily small generalization error. Such characterizations of benign
overfitting position it as a high dimensional phenomenon1 : indeed, the decrease in generalization
error is achieved by escaping to higher dimensions at some rate relative to the other aforementioned
hyperparameters. However, for these mathematical results to be relevant for explaining benign
overfitting as observed in practice, clearly the particular scaling of d with respect to n, k and p needs
to reflect the ratios seen in practice. Although a number of works, which we discuss in Section
1.2, establish benign overfitting results for shallow neural networks, a key and significant limitation
they share is the requirement that the input features of the training data are at least approximately
1

We provide a formal definition of benign overfitting as a high dimensional phenomenon in Appendix E.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

