Occupancy-based Policy Gradient: Estimation,
Convergence, and Optimality

Audrey Huang
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Champaign, IL 61820
audreyh5@illinois.edu

Nan Jiang
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Champaign, IL 61820
nanjiang@illinois.edu

Abstract
Occupancy functions play an instrumental role in reinforcement learning (RL) for
guiding exploration, handling distribution shift, and optimizing general objectives
beyond the expected return. Yet, computationally efﬁcient policy optimization
methods that use (only) occupancy functions are virtually non-existent. In this
paper, we establish the theoretical foundations of model-free policy gradient (PG)
methods that compute the gradient through the occupancy for both online and
ofﬂine RL, without modeling value functions. Our algorithms reduce gradient estimation to squared-loss regression and are computationally oracle-efﬁcient. We
characterize the sample complexities of both local and global convergence, accounting for both ﬁnite-sample estimation error and the roles of exploration (online) and data coverage (ofﬂine). Occupancy-based PG naturally handles arbitrary
ofﬂine data distributions, and, with one-line algorithmic changes, can be adapted
to optimize any differentiable objective functional.

1

Introduction

Value-based methods have been the dominant paradigm in model-free reinforcement learning, with
a solid theoretical foundation in large state spaces under function approximation [CJ19; JYWJ20a;
ZLKB20; JLM21; XJ21; XFBJK22]. In contrast, a model-free RL paradigm based on their natural
counterparts—the occupancy functions—remains largely under-investigated. Occupancy functions
are densities that describe a policy’s state visitation, and play instrumental roles in guiding exploration [HKSVS19; AFK24], handling distribution shift [HM17; NCDL19; CJ22], and optimizing
general objectives beyond the expected return [ZBWK20; MDSDBR22]. Despite this, they are seldom modeled directly in learning algorithms and appear only in the analyses, except in conjunction
with value functions in marginalized importance sampling [LLTZ18; NDKCLS19; UHJ20; ZHHJL22; HJ22a]. Recently, [HCJ23] developed algorithms in online and ofﬂine RL that model only
occupancies via density function classes, spotlighting their roles in handling non-exploratory ofﬂine
data and in online exploration. However, their focus was on statistical guarantees, and computationally efﬁcient policy optimization for occupancy-based methods remained an open problem.
In answer, we develop model-free policy gradient (PG) algorithms that compute the gradient through
occupancy functions, without estimating any values. By leveraging a Bellman-like recursion, we
reduce occupancy-based gradient estimation to solving a series of squared-loss minimization problems, which can be done in a computationally oracle-efﬁcient manner. Our analysis captures the
effects of gradient estimation error, exploration (in online PG, which is characterized by the initial
state distribution), and ofﬂine data quality (in ofﬂine PG) on the sample and iteration complexity
required for local and global convergence. In the online setting, our results complement previous
works on the optimality of value-based PG [AKLM21; BR24] and extend past their scope to in38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

