GENOT: Entropic (Gromov) Wasserstein Flow
Matching with Applications to Single-Cell Genomics

Dominik Klein∗†
Helmholtz Munich
dominik.klein@helmholtz-munich.de
Fabian Theis
Helmholtz Munich
fabian.theis@helmholtz-munich.de

Théo Uscidda∗
CREST-ENSAE
theo.uscidda@ensae.fr
Marco Cuturi
Apple
cuturi@apple.com

Abstract
Single-cell genomics has significantly advanced our understanding of cellular behavior, catalyzing innovations in treatments and precision medicine. However,
single-cell sequencing technologies are inherently destructive and can only measure a limited array of data modalities simultaneously. This limitation underscores
the need for new methods capable of realigning cells. Optimal transport (OT)
has emerged as a potent solution, but traditional discrete solvers are hampered by
scalability, privacy, and out-of-sample estimation issues. These challenges have
spurred the development of neural network-based solvers, known as neural OT
solvers, that parameterize OT maps. Yet, these models often lack the flexibility
needed for broader life science applications. To address these deficiencies, our
approach learns stochastic maps (i.e. transport plans), allows for any cost function,
relaxes mass conservation constraints and integrates quadratic solvers to tackle the
complex challenges posed by the (Fused) Gromov-Wasserstein problem. Utilizing
flow matching as a backbone, our method offers a flexible and effective framework.
We demonstrate its versatility and robustness through applications in cell development studies, cellular drug response modeling, and cross-modality cell translation,
illustrating significant potential for enhancing therapeutic strategies.

1

Introduction

Discrete Optimal Transport in Single-Cell Genomics. Due to the destructive nature of single-cell
sequencing technologies, it is fundamental to realign distributions of sequenced cells. Discrete
optimal transport (OT) has proven useful in this task. For example, it is standard practice to leverage
the framework of OT to reconstruct cellular trajectories across developmental time points [72]
and to study the response of cells to external perturbations like drugs or gene knockouts [18]. In
these settings, both distributions, i.e. earlier and later time point and before perturbation and after
perturbation, respectively, live in the same space, a setting which we refer to as linear OT. In contrast,
most applications of OT in single-cell genomics require maps across (partially) incomparable spaces,
the setting which we refer to as quadratic OT. For example, analysis of spatial transcriptomics
datasets requires the quadratic formulation of OT as the coordinate systems of two different slices
are warped and rotated, thus not living in the same coordinate space [60]. Similarly, adding spatial
information as a prior has been shown to improve the performance of modeling the trajectory of
cells in the discrete setting [39]. Analogously, adding information from lineage tracing readouts [89]
∗
†

Equal contribution
Work done during internship at Apple

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

