Unveiling The Matthew Effect Across Channels:
Assessing Layer Width Sufficiency via Weight Norm
Variance
Yiting Chen, Jiazi Bu, Junchi Yan‡
Dept. of CSE & School of AI & MoE Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{sjtucyt, bujiazi001, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn
https://github.com/Ytchen981/Channel_Matthew_Effect

Abstract
The trade-off between cost and performance has been a longstanding and critical
issue for deep neural networks. One key factor affecting the computational cost is
the width of each layer. However, in practice, the width of layers in a neural network
is mostly empirically determined. In this paper, we show that a pattern regarding
the variance of weight norm corresponding to different channels can indicate
whether the layer is sufficiently wide and may help us better allocate computational
resources across the layers. Starting from a simple intuition that channels with
larger weights would have larger gradients and the difference in weight norm
enlarges between channels with similar weight, we empirically validate that wide
and narrow layers show two different patterns with experiments across different
data modalities and network architectures. Based on the two different patterns, we
identify three stages during training and explain each stage with corresponding
evidence. We further propose to adjust the width based on the identified pattern
and show that conventional layer width settings for CNNs could be adjusted to
reduce the number of parameters while boosting the performance.

1

Introduction

The cost-accuracy trade-off has been a longstanding and critical issue for deep neural networks. As
one key factor that affects the computational cost, the width of each layer is mostly empirically
determined or extensively searched over an architecture space in neural network architecture search
literature [43, 28]. Despite the research on over-parameterization [24, 23] and empirical evidence [37,
15, 31, 41] showing that the wider network leads to better performance, there are few works about
how we allocate the computational resources across the layers. On understanding the layer width
requirement in a deep neural network, [20] theoretically proves the lower bound of layer width for the
model to approximate any Lebesgue-integrable function while [4] improves the width lower bound
with dynamic systems. However, a practical indicator of sufficient layer width is still lacking.
In this paper, we identify a simple pattern difference between wide and narrow layers regarding the
weight norm variance between different channels during training. A simple observation is that largerweight channels would have a larger gradient. As the weight norm increases during training [30, 11],
we show the disparity of weight norm between similar channels also increases during training, which
we call the Matthew effect between channels. It motivates us to investigate the weight norm variance
across the channels in each layer during training. With experiments on image, graph, and text datasets
(including CIFAR-10 [18], cora [35], and enwiki8 [22]) with various model structures including
‡
Corresponding author. This work was in part supported by NSFC (92370201, 62222607) and Shanghai
Municipal Science and Technology Major Project under Grant 2021SHZDZX0102.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

