The Value of Reward Lookahead in
Reinforcement Learning

Nadav Merlis
FairPlay Joint Team, CREST, ENSAE Paris
nadav.merlis@ensae.fr

Dorian Baudry
FairPlay Joint Team, CREST, ENSAE Paris
Institut Polytechnique de Paris

Vianney Perchet
FairPlay Joint Team, CREST, ENSAE Paris
Criteo AI Lab

Abstract
In reinforcement learning (RL), agents sequentially interact with changing environments while aiming to maximize the obtained rewards. Usually, rewards are
observed only after acting, and so the goal is to maximize the expected cumulative
reward. Yet, in many practical settings, reward information is observed in advance
– prices are observed before performing transactions; nearby traffic information
is partially known; and goals are oftentimes given to agents prior to the interaction. In this work, we aim to quantifiably analyze the value of such future reward
information through the lens of competitive analysis. In particular, we measure
the ratio between the value of standard RL agents and that of agents with partial
future-reward lookahead. We characterize the worst-case reward distribution and
derive exact ratios for the worst-case reward expectations. Surprisingly, the resulting ratios relate to known quantities in offline RL and reward-free exploration.
We further provide tight bounds for the ratio given the worst-case dynamics. Our
results cover the full spectrum between observing the immediate rewards before
acting to observing all the rewards before the interaction starts.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning [RL, Sutton and Barto, 2018] is the problem of learning how to interact
with a changing environment. The setting usually consists of two major elements: a transition kernel,
which governs how the state of the environment evolves due to the actions of an agent, and a reward
given to the agent for performing an action at a given environment state. Agents must decide which
actions to perform in order to collect as much reward as possible, taking into account not only the
immediate reward gain, but also the long-term effects of actions on the state dynamics.
In the standard RL framework, reward information is usually observed after playing an action, and
agents only aim to maximize their cumulative expected reward, also known as the value [Jaksch et al.,
2010, Azar et al., 2017, Jin et al., 2018, Dann et al., 2019, Zanette and Brunskill, 2019, Efroni et al.,
2019b, Simchowitz and Jamieson, 2019, Zhang et al., 2021b]. Yet, in many real-world scenarios,
partial information about the future reward is accessible in advance. For example, when performing
transactions, prices are usually known. In navigation settings, rewards are sometimes associated with
traffic, which can be accurately estimated for the near future. In goal-oriented problems [Schaul et al.,
2015, Andrychowicz et al., 2017], the location of the goal is oftentimes revealed in advance. This
information is completely ignored by agents that maximize the expected reward, even though using
this future information on the reward should greatly increase the reward collected by the agent.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

