Active Sequential Posterior Estimation
for Sample-Efficient Simulation-Based Inference

Sam Griesemer1 Defu Cao1 Zijun Cui1,2† Carolina Osorio3,4
1
USC 2 MSU 3 Google Research 4 HEC Montréal
{samgriesemer,defucao,yanliu.cs}@usc.edu
cuizijun@msu.edu
osorioc@google.com

Yan Liu1

Abstract
Computer simulations have long presented the exciting possibility of scientific
insight into complex real-world processes. Despite the power of modern computing, however, it remains challenging to systematically perform inference under
simulation models. This has led to the rise of simulation-based inference (SBI), a
class of machine learning-enabled techniques for approaching inverse problems
with stochastic simulators. Many such methods, however, require large numbers of
simulation samples and face difficulty scaling to high-dimensional settings, often
making inference prohibitive under resource-intensive simulators. To mitigate these
drawbacks, we introduce active sequential neural posterior estimation (ASNPE).
ASNPE brings an active learning scheme into the inference loop to estimate the
utility of simulation parameter candidates to the underlying probabilistic model.
The proposed acquisition scheme is easily integrated into existing posterior estimation pipelines, allowing for improved sample efficiency with low computational
overhead. We further demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method in the
travel demand calibration setting, a high-dimensional inverse problem commonly
requiring computationally expensive traffic simulators. Our method outperforms
well-tuned benchmarks and state-of-the-art posterior estimation methods on a largescale real-world traffic network, as well as demonstrates a performance advantage
over non-active counterparts on a suite of SBI benchmark environments.

1

Introduction

High-fidelity computer simulations have been embraced across countless scientific domains, furthering the ability to understand and predict behaviour in complex real-world systems. Modern
computing architectures and flexible programming paradigms have further lowered the barrier to
capturing approximate models for scientific study in silico, enabling wide-spread use of computational
experiments across disciplines. However, despite the relative ease of capturing real-world generative processes programmatically, the resulting black-box programs are often difficult to leverage
for inverse problems. This is a common challenge in practical applications; the simulator is often
computationally expensive to evaluate, its implicit likelihood function is generally intractable, and
the dimensionality of high-fidelity outputs is typically prohibitive. To address these issues, likelihoodfree inference methods have been introduced, operating under the broadly applicable assumption
that no tractable likelihood function is available. Early success along this direction was achieved
through easy-to-use methods like Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC) [41, 6], or extensions
of kernel density estimation. The scale of real-world applications demands more flexible and scalable
approaches, which has lead to the integration of aptly suited deep learning methods in likelihood-free
†

Work completed while at USC.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

