Retrieval & Fine-Tuning for In-Context Tabular Models

Valentin Thomas∗
valentin.t@layer6.ai
Keyvan Golestan
keyvan@layer6.ai

Junwei Ma∗
jeremy@layer6.ai

Guangwei Yu
guang@layer6.ai

Maksims Volkovs
maks@layer6.ai

Rasa Hosseinzadeh
rasa@layer6.ai
Anthony Caterini
anthony@layer6.ai

Abstract
Tabular data is a pervasive modality spanning a wide range of domains, and
this inherent diversity poses a considerable challenge for deep learning. Recent
advancements using transformer-based in-context learning have shown promise
on smaller and less complex tabular datasets, but have struggled to scale to larger
and more complex ones. To address this limitation, we propose a combination
of retrieval and fine-tuning: we can adapt the transformer to a local subset of the
data by collecting nearest neighbours, and then perform task-specific fine-tuning
with this retrieved set of neighbours in context. Using TabPFN as the base model
– currently the best tabular in-context learner – and applying our retrieval and
fine-tuning scheme on top results in what we call a locally-calibrated PFN, or
LoCalPFN. We conduct extensive evaluation on 95 datasets curated by TabZilla
from OpenML, upon which we establish a new state-of-the-art with LoCalPFN –
even with respect to tuned tree-based models. Notably, we show a significant boost
in performance compared to the base in-context model, demonstrating the efficacy
of our approach and advancing the frontier of deep learning in tabular data.

1

Introduction

Tabular data is the most pervasive modality for practical problems in data science, spanning across
a wide variety of domains including finance, healthcare, and science [3, 47, 12, 46, 48]. The diversity
and heterogeneity of tabular data pose great challenges for deep learning approaches [21], unlike
modalities such as text and images in which neural networks can be designed to specifically exploit
inductive biases underlying the data [9]. As such, obtaining a performant neural network on a
particular tabular data task often results in expensive iterations of training and hyperparameter tuning.
Meanwhile, tree-based methods such as XGBoost [11] and CatBoost [40] have proven to be more
robust to the inherent challenges of tabular data, and thus have remained the dominant approach for
this setting [21, 44, 9]. Yet recently, there has been progress made with transformers and In-Context
Learning (ICL): one such example is TabPFN [26], which is trained using a prior-fitting procedure
[36] that exposes the network to millions of possible data-generating processes, thus taking a step
towards encapsulating the heterogeneity of tabular data. Such approaches differ from classical
algorithms in that they process entirely new datasets in a single forward pass and obviate the need
for training and hyperparameter tuning.
Despite the promise of transformer-based ICL methods in the tabular setting – particularly on smaller
datasets – scaling remains an issue: memory scales quadratically with the size of the context. This
limits performance when the entire dataset cannot fit into memory, and contrasts with classical
algorithms that tend to improve as the amount of available data increases. In addition to this, and
as depicted in Figure 1, TabPFN in particular can struggle with underfitting as dataset complexity
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

