Universal Rates of Empirical Risk Minimization

Mingyue Xu
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
xu1864@purdue.edu

Steve Hanneke
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
steve.hanneke@gmail.com

Abstract
The well-known empirical risk minimization (ERM) principle is the basis of many
widely used machine learning algorithms, and plays an essential role in the classical
PAC theory. A common description of a learning algorithm’s performance is its
so-called “learning curve”, that is, the decay of the expected error as a function of
the input sample size. As the PAC model fails to explain the behavior of learning
curves, recent research has explored an alternative universal learning model and has
ultimately revealed a distinction between optimal universal and uniform learning
rates (Bousquet et al., 2021). However, a basic understanding of such differences
with a particular focus on the ERM principle has yet to be developed.
In this paper, we consider the problem of universal learning by ERM in the realizable case and study the possible universal rates. Our main result is a fundamental
tetrachotomy: there are only four possible universal learning rates by ERM, namely,
the learning curves of any concept class learnable by ERM decay either at e−n , 1/n,
log (n)/n, or arbitrarily slow rates. Moreover, we provide a complete characterization of which concept classes fall into each of these categories, via new complexity
structures. We also develop new combinatorial dimensions which supply sharp
asymptotically-valid constant factors for these rates, whenever possible.

1

Introduction

The classical statistical learning theory mainly focuses on the celebrated PAC (Probably Approximately Correct) model (Vapnik and Chervonenkis, 1974; Valiant, 1984) with emphasis on supervised
learning. A particular setting therein, called the realizable case, has been extensively studied. Complemented by the “no-free-lunch" theorem (Antos and Lugosi, 1996), the PAC framework, which adopts
a minimax perspective, can only explain the best worst-case learning rate by a learning algorithm over
all realizable distributions. Such learning rates are thus also called the uniform rates. However, the
uniform rates can only capture the upper envelope of all learning curves, and are too coarse to explain
practical machine learning performance. This is because real-world data is rarely worst-case, and the
data source is typically fixed in a given learning scenario. Indeed, Cohn and Tesauro (1990, 1992)
observed from experiments that practical learning rates can be much faster than is predicted by PAC
theory. Moreover, many theoretical works (Schuurmans, 1997; Koltchinskii and Beznosova, 2005;
Audibert and Tsybakov, 2007, etc.) were able to prove faster-than-uniform rates for certain learning
problems, though requiring additional modelling assumptions. To distinguish from the uniform rates,
these rates are named the universal rates and was formalized recently by Bousquet et al. (2021) via a
distribution-dependent framework. Unlike the simple dichotomy of the optimal uniform rates: every
concept class H has a uniform rate being either linear VC(H)/n or “bounded away from zero", the
optimal universal rates are captured by a trichotomy: every concept class H has a universal rate being
either exponential, linear or arbitrarily slow (see Thm.1.6 Bousquet et al., 2021).
In supervised learning, a family of successful learners called the empirical risk minimization (ERM)
consist of all learning algorithms that output a sample-consistent classifier. In other words, an ERM
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

