Generating Origin-Destination Matrices in Neural
Spatial Interaction Models
Ioannis Zachos1∗

Mark Girolami1,2

Theodoros Damoulas2,3

Department of Engineering, Cambridge University, Cambridge, CB2 1PZ.
2
The Alan Turing Institute, London, NW1 2DB.
3
Departments of Statistics & Computer Science, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL.
iz230@cam.ac.uk
1

Abstract
Agent-based models (ABMs) are proliferating as decision-making tools across
policy areas in transportation, economics, and epidemiology. In these models, a
central object of interest is the discrete origin-destination matrix which captures spatial interactions and agent trip counts between locations. Existing approaches resort
to continuous approximations of this matrix and subsequent ad-hoc discretisations
in order to perform ABM simulation and calibration. This impedes conditioning on
partially observed summary statistics, fails to explore the multimodal matrix distribution over a discrete combinatorial support, and incurs discretisation errors. To
address these challenges, we introduce a computationally efficient framework that
scales linearly with the number of origin-destination pairs, operates directly on the
discrete combinatorial space, and learns the agents’ trip intensity through a neural
differential equation that embeds spatial interactions. Our approach outperforms
the prior art in terms of reconstruction error and ground truth matrix coverage, at a
fraction of the computational cost. We demonstrate these benefits in large-scale
spatial mobility ABMs in Cambridge, UK and Washington, DC, USA.

1

Introduction

High-resolution complex simulators such as agent-based models (ABMs) are increasingly deployed
to assist policymaking in transportation [10, 21], social sciences [3, 8, 14, 34], and epidemiology
[16, 22]. They simulate individual agent interactions governed by stochastic dynamic systems,
giving rise to an aggregate, in a mean field sense, continuous emergent structure. This is achieved
by computationally expensive forward simulations, which hinders ABM parameter calibration and
large-scale testing of multiple policy scenarios [25]. Considering ABMs for the COVID-19 pandemic
[16] as an example, the continuous mean field process corresponds to the spatial intensity of the
infections which is noisily observed at some spatial aggregation level, while the individual and
discrete human contact interactions that give rise to that intensity are at best partially observed or
fully latent. In transportation and mobility, running examples in this work, the continuous mean field
process corresponds to the spatial intensity of trips arising from unobserved individual agent trips
between discrete sets of origin and destination locations [19, 10].
The formal object of interest that describes the discrete count of these spatial interactions, e.g.
agent trips between locations, is the origin-destination matrix (ODM). It is an I × J (two-way)
contingency table T with elements Ti,j ∈ N counting the interactions of two spatial categorical
variables i, j ∈ N>0 , see Fig. 1. It is typically sparse due to infeasible links between origin and
destination locations, and partially observed through summary statistics – such as table row and/or
column marginals – due to privacy concerns, data availability, and data collection costs. Operating at
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

