From Text to Trajectory: Exploring Complex
Constraint Representation and Decomposition in Safe
Reinforcement Learning

Pusen Dong1 , Tianchen Zhu1 , Yue Qiu1 , Haoyi Zhou1, 2 , Jianxin Li1, 2
1
Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
{dongps, zhutc, qiuyue, zhouhy, lijx}@act.buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Safe reinforcement learning (RL) requires the agent to finish a given task while
obeying specific constraints. Giving constraints in natural language form has
great potential for practical scenarios due to its flexible transfer capability and
accessibility. Previous safe RL methods with natural language constraints typically
need to design cost functions manually for each constraint, which requires domain
expertise and lacks flexibility. In this paper, we harness the dual role of text in
this task, using it not only to provide constraint but also as a training signal. We
introduce the Trajectory-level Textual Constraints Translator (TTCT) to replace
the manually designed cost function. Our empirical results demonstrate that TTCT
effectively comprehends textual constraint and trajectory, and the policies trained
by TTCT can achieve a lower violation rate than the standard cost function. Extra
studies are conducted to demonstrate that the TTCT has zero-shot transfer capability
to adapt to constraint-shift environments.

1

Introduction

In recent years, reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved remarkable success in multiple domains,
such as go game [37, 38] and robotic control [21, 45]. However, deploying RL in real-world scenarios
still remains challenging. Many real-world decision-making applications, such as autonomous driving
[13, 9] require agents to obey certain constraints while achieving the desired goals. To learn a safe
constrained policy, some safe RL works [2, 33, 44, 49, 39, 48, 6] have proposed methods to maximize
the reward while minimizing the constraint violations after training or during training.
However, several limitations prevent the existing safe RL methods’ widespread use in real-world
applications. Firstly, these methods often require mathematical or logical definitions of cost functions,
which require domain expertise (Limitation 1). Secondly, their cost function definitions are frequently
specific to a particular context and cannot be easily generalized to new tasks with similar constraints
(Limitation 2). Lastly, most current safe RL methods focus on constraints that are logically simple,
typically involving only one single entity or one single state [28], which can’t represent the real-world
safety requirements and lack universality (Limitation 3).
Using natural language to provide constraints [46, 29, 20] is a promising approach to overcome
Limitation 1 and 2 because natural language allows for flexible, high-level expression of constraints
that can easily adapt to different scenarios. Regarding Limitation 3, previous approaches primarily
employ what we call the single state/entity textual constraint. The single-state/entity textual constraint focuses solely on constraints related to one specific state or entity, limiting the ability to model
complex safety requirements in real-world scenarios. Many safety requirements involve interactions
and dependencies among multiple states or entities over time. By only addressing a single state or
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

