Visual Fourier Prompt Tuning
Runjia Zeng1 * , Cheng Han2 * , Qifan Wang3 , Chunshu Wu4 , Tong Geng4 ,
Lifu Huang5 , Ying Nian Wu6 and Dongfang Liu1†
1

Rochester Institute of Technology 2 University of Missouri - Kansas City
3
Meta AI 4 University of Rochester
5
UC Davis 6 University of California, Los Angeles

Abstract
With the scale of Transformer-based vision models continuing to grow, finetuning these large-scale pretrained models for new tasks has become increasingly
parameter-intensive. Visual prompt tuning is introduced as a parameter-efficient
finetuning (PEFT) method to this trend. Despite its successes, a notable research
challenge persists within almost all PEFT approaches: significant performance
degradation is observed when there is a substantial disparity between the datasets
used in pretraining and finetuning phases. To address this challenge, we draw
inspiration from human visual cognition, and propose the Visual Fourier Prompt
Tuning (VFPT) method as an effective and efficient solution for adapting largescale Transformer-based models. Our approach innovatively incorporates the Fast
Fourier Transform into prompt embeddings, seamlessly integrating both spatial and
frequency domain information. Apart from its inherent simplicity and intuitiveness,
VFPT exhibits superior performance across various tasks, offering a general solution to address the data disparity challenge. Empirical results demonstrate that our
approach outperforms several state-of-the-art baselines on two benchmarks, with
low parameter usage (e.g., 0.57% of model parameters on VTAB-1k) and notable
performance enhancements (e.g., 73.20% of mean accuracy on VTAB-1k). Our
code is avaliable at https://github.com/runtsang/VFPT.

1

Introduction
“Fourier’s theorem is not only one of the most beautiful results of modern analysis,
but it may be said to furnish an indispensable instrument in the treatment of
nearly every recondite question in modern physics.”
− Lord William Thomson Kelvin [1]

Prompt tuning [2, 3] is initially introduced for parameter-efficient adaptation of large foundation
models in natural language processing (NLP). As vision models continue to scale for enhanced
performance, visual prompt tuning [4] has been applied to various vision domains (e.g., image
classification [5], segmentation [6, 7], detection [8]), demonstrating superior performance and lower
parameter usage compared to other parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods. However, a
common challenge within the research community remains unaddressed: significant performance
degradation occurs when there is a substantial disparity between the data used in pretraining and
finetuning [9, 10]. This issue hinders the broader application of visual prompt tuning. Consequently,
a natural question arises: ① Can prompt tuning generalize across datasets with varying disparities?
As researchers commonly draw insights from human to replicate the principles in intelligent machines [11, 12, 13, 14], we consider to answer this question from the human visual cognition’s
perspective. While humans comprehend the world through past experiences/knowledge, it is essential
to generalize and adapt this understanding to new tasks efficiently and effectively. The robust and
rapid adaptability of human visual cognition thus arises from various domain analysis, capturing the
new patterns from different channels and perspectives [15, 16, 17].
*

Equal contribution.

†

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

