Scaling transformer neural networks for skillful and
reliable medium-range weather forecasting

Tung Nguyen1 Rohan Shah1, 2 Hritik Bansal1 Troy Arcomano3 Romit Maulik3, 4
Veerabhadra Kotamarthi3 Ian Foster3 Sandeep Madireddy3 Aditya Grover1
1
UCLA 2 CMU 3 Argonne National Laboratory 4 Penn State University

Abstract
Weather forecasting is a fundamental problem for anticipating and mitigating the
impacts of climate change. Recently, data-driven approaches for weather forecasting based on deep learning have shown great promise, achieving accuracies
that are competitive with operational systems. However, those methods often
employ complex, customized architectures without sufficient ablation analysis,
making it difficult to understand what truly contributes to their success. Here
we introduce Stormer, a simple transformer model that achieves state-of-the-art
performance on weather forecasting with minimal changes to the standard transformer backbone. We identify the key components of Stormer through careful
empirical analyses, including weather-specific embedding, randomized dynamics forecast, and pressure-weighted loss. At the core of Stormer is a randomized forecasting objective that trains the model to forecast the weather dynamics
over varying time intervals. During inference, this allows us to produce multiple forecasts for a target lead time and combine them to obtain better forecast
accuracy. On WeatherBench 2, Stormer performs competitively at short to mediumrange forecasts and outperforms current methods beyond 7 days, while requiring
orders-of-magnitude less training data and compute. Additionally, we demonstrate
Stormer’s favorable scaling properties, showing consistent improvements with
increases in model size and training tokens. Code and checkpoints are available at
https://github.com/tung-nd/stormer.
31 December 2020 00:00 UTC

31 December 2020 00:00 UTC

Initial Conditions

5-day Forecast

Ground Truth

m/s

26 December 2020 00:00 UTC

Figure 1: Illustration of an example 5-day forecast of near-surface wind speed (color-fill) and mean
sea level pressure (contours). On December 31, 2020, an extratropical cyclone impacted Alaska
setting a new North Pacific low-pressure record. We evaluate the ability of Stormer to predict this
record-breaking event 5 days in advance. Using initial conditions from 0000 UTC, 26 December 2011,
Stormer successfully forecasts the location and strength of this extreme event with great accuracy.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

