E2E-MFD: Towards End-to-End Synchronous
Multimodal Fusion Detection
Jiaqing Zhang1 , Mingxiang Cao1 , Weiying Xie1∗ , Jie Lei2 ,
Daixun Li1 , Wenbo Huang3 , Yunsong Li1 , Xue Yang4∗
1

2

The State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University
University of Technology Sydney 3 Southeast University 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
https://github.com/icey-zhang/E2E-MFD

Abstract
Multimodal image fusion and object detection are crucial for autonomous driving.
While current methods have advanced the fusion of texture details and semantic
information, their complex training processes hinder broader applications. Addressing this challenge, we introduce E2E-MFD, a novel end-to-end algorithm
for multimodal fusion detection. E2E-MFD streamlines the process, achieving
high performance with a single training phase. It employs synchronous joint optimization across components to avoid suboptimal solutions associated to individual
tasks. Furthermore, it implements a comprehensive optimization strategy in the
gradient matrix for shared parameters, ensuring convergence to an optimal fusion
detection configuration. Our extensive testing on multiple public datasets reveals
E2E-MFD’s superior capabilities, showcasing not only visually appealing image
fusion but also impressive detection outcomes, such as a 3.9% and 2.0% mAP50
increase on horizontal object detection dataset M3FD and oriented object detection
dataset DroneVehicle, respectively, compared to state-of-the-art approaches.

1

Introduction

Precise and reliable object parsing is critical in fields such as autonomous driving [1] and remote
sensing monitoring [2]. Relying solely on visible sensors can lead to inaccuracies in object recognition
in challenging environments, like inclement weather conditions. Visible-infrared image fusion
[3; 4; 5; 6] as a typical common multimodal fusion (MF) task addresses these challenges by leveraging
complementary information from different modalities, leading to the rapid development of various
multimodal image fusion techniques [7; 8; 9; 10; 11]. Techniques like CDDFuse [12] and DIDFuse
[13] employ a two-step process where a MF network is trained initially, followed by training an object
detection (OD) network with the results from the MF network to assess fusion effectiveness separately.
Although deep neural networks have significantly enhanced the ability to learn representations across
modalities, resulting in promising multimodal fusion outcomes, the focus has predominantly been on
producing visually appealing images. This emphasis often overlooks the improvement of downstream
high-level visual tasks, such as enhanced object parsing, which remains a substantial hurdle.
Recent studies have devoted into designing joint learning methods that integrate fusion networks
with high-level tasks such as object detection [14] and segmentation [15; 16]. The synergy between
MF and OD in Multimodal Fusion Detection (MFD) methods has emerged as a vibrant area of
research. This partnership allows MF to produce richer, more informative images, enhancing OD
performance, while OD contributes valuable object semantic insights to MF, aiming to accurately
locate and identify objects in a scene. Typically, MFD networks adopt a cascaded design where joint
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

