MARPLE: A Benchmark for Long-Horizon Inference
∗

∗

Emily Jin
Zhuoyi Huang
Jan-Philipp Fränken Weiyu Liu
Hannah Cha
Erik Brockbank Sarah Wu Ruohan Zhang
Jiajun Wu Tobias Gerstenberg
Stanford University

Abstract
Reconstructing past events requires reasoning across long time horizons. To figure
out what happened, humans draw on prior knowledge about the world and human
behavior and integrate insights from various sources of evidence including visual,
language, and auditory cues. We introduce MARPLE, a benchmark for evaluating
long-horizon inference capabilities using multi-modal evidence. Our benchmark
features agents interacting with simulated households, supporting vision, language,
and auditory stimuli, as well as procedurally generated environments and agent
behaviors. Inspired by classic “whodunit” stories, we ask AI models and human
participants to infer which agent caused a change in the environment based on a
step-by-step replay of what actually happened. The goal is to correctly identify the
culprit as early as possible. Our findings show that human participants outperform
both traditional Monte Carlo simulation methods and an LLM baseline (GPT-4)
on this task. Compared to humans, traditional inference models are less robust
and performant, while GPT-4 has difficulty comprehending environmental changes.
We analyze factors influencing inference performance and ablate different modes
of evidence, finding that all modes are valuable for performance. Overall, our
experiments demonstrate that the long-horizon, multimodal inference tasks in
our benchmark present a challenge to current models. Project website: https:
//marple-benchmark.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Long-horizon inferences are critical for solving “whodunit” problems in our every day lives. For
example, we may wonder, “Who left the fridge open?”, “Who spilled the food?”, or “Who turned on
the light?” To find out what happened and who did it, humans rely on an intuitive understanding of
the physical world and how people interact with their environment to pursue their goals. Importantly,
humans readily combine evidence across sensory modalities to figure out what happened [14, 40].
Long-horizon inferences are critical for solving “whodunit” problems in our every day lives. For
example, we may wonder, “Who left the fridge open?”, “Who spilled the food?”, or “Who turned on
the light?” To find out what happened and who did it, humans rely on an intuitive understanding of
the physical world and how people interact with their environment to pursue their goals. Importantly,
humans readily combine evidence across sensory modalities to figure out what happened [14, 40].
Developing AI models capable of performing such long-horizon reasoning and event reconstruction
from multimodal information is critical for bridging the gap between human and machine intelligence.
While the field of AI has developed increasingly powerful, general-purpose inference models [30, 38],
the ability of these models to solve long-horizon inference problems, such as reasoning about
“whodunit” scenarios, remains unclear. Existing benchmarks for evaluating inference capabilities
focus on problems that require reasoning over short time horizons about physical events [3, 27]
and over agent behaviors [28, 33]. In addition, they focus on visual stimuli, with only recent ones
supporting language and audio [19, 21]. However, these benchmarks lack coverage of long-horizon,
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

