Lisa: Lazy Safety Alignment for Large Language
Models against Harmful Fine-tuning Attack

Tiansheng Huang, Sihao Hu, Fatih Ilhan, Selim Furkan Tekin, Ling Liu
School of Computer Science
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA
{thuang374, shu335, filhan3, stekin6}@gatech.edu, ling.liu@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Recent studies show that Large Language Models (LLMs) with safety alignment
can be jail-broken by fine-tuning on a dataset mixed with harmful data. For the
first time in the literature, we show that the jail-break effect can be mitigated by
separating two states in the fine-tuning stage to respectively optimize over the
alignment and user datasets. Unfortunately, our subsequent study shows that this
simple Bi-State Optimization (BSO) solution experiences convergence instability
when steps invested in its alignment state is too small, leading to downgraded
alignment performance. By statistical analysis, we show that the excess drift
towards the switching iterates of the two states could be a probable reason for
the instability. To remedy this issue, we propose Lazy(i) safety alignment (Lisa),
which introduces a proximal term to constraint the drift of each state. Theoretically,
the benefit of the proximal term is supported by the convergence analysis, wherein
we show that a sufficient large proximal factor is necessary to guarantee Lisa’s
convergence. Empirically, our results on four downstream fine-tuning tasks show
that Lisa with a proximal term can significantly increase alignment performance
while maintaining the LLM’s accuracy on the user tasks. Code is available at
https://github.com/git-disl/Lisa.
Disclaimer: This document contains content that some may find disturbing or
offensive, including content that is hateful or violent in nature.

1

Introduction

Alignment
Fine-tuning services for Large Language Models
User data
data
(LLMs) have emerged as a new paradigm. In the
User
Alignment
finetuning
most common business model, users upload labeled
stage
stage
data to the service provider for fine-tuning and in
return gain a customized model that performs better
for their own use cases 1 . However, the fine-tuning Figure 1: A common two-stage pipeline
service exposes serious security threats for the ser- for fine-tuning-as-a-service. Fine-tuning on
vice providers, given that the data uploaded from the harmful user data on Stage ② compromises
user may be unsanitized, or even contain harmful alignment performance. Existing defense sodata that may trigger the fine-tuned LLMs to deliver lutions, e.g., Vaccine (Huang et al., 2024e)
harmful outputs ((Qi et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023; enhance alignment performance on Stage ①,
Zhan et al., 2023; Lermen et al., 2023; Chen et al., while we focus on Stage ②.
2024; Yi et al., 2024a)). As the service provider is liable for the output of the LLMs, an effective and
computationally affordable mitigation is in urgent need.
Pretrained LLM

1

Aligned LLM

Customized LLM

User fine-tuning API by OpenAI: https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/fine-tuning.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

