AutoSurvey: Large Language Models Can
Automatically Write Surveys
Yidong Wang1,2∗, Qi Guo2,3∗ ,
Wenjin Yao , Hongbo Zhang1 , Xin Zhang4 , Zhen Wu3 ,Meishan Zhang4 ,
Xinyu Dai3 , Min Zhang4 , Qingsong Wen5 , Wei Ye2†, Shikun Zhang2† , Yue Zhang1†
2

3

1
Westlake University, 2 Peking University,
Nanjing University, 4 Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, 5 Squirrel AI

Abstract
This paper introduces AutoSurvey, a speedy and well-organized methodology for
automating the creation of comprehensive literature surveys in rapidly evolving
fields like artificial intelligence. Traditional survey paper creation faces challenges
due to the vast volume and complexity of information, prompting the need for
efficient survey methods. While large language models (LLMs) offer promise in
automating this process, challenges such as context window limitations, parametric
knowledge constraints, and the lack of evaluation benchmarks remain. AutoSurvey
addresses these challenges through a systematic approach that involves initial retrieval and outline generation, subsection drafting by specialized LLMs, integration
and refinement, and rigorous evaluation and iteration. Our contributions include a
comprehensive solution to the survey problem, a reliable evaluation method, and
experimental validation demonstrating AutoSurvey’s effectiveness.

1

Introduction

Survey papers provide essential academic resources, offering comprehensive overviews of recent
research developments, highlighting ongoing trends, and identifying future directions [1, 2, 3, 4].
However, crafting these surveys is increasingly challenging, especially in the fast-paced domain of
Artificial Intelligence including large language models(LLMs) [5, 6, 7, 8]. Figure 1a illustrates a
significant trend: in just the first four months of 2024 alone, over 4,000 papers containing the phrase
"Large Language Model" in their titles or abstracts were submitted to arXiv. This surge highlights
a critical academic issue: the rapid accumulation of new information often outpaces the capacity
for comprehensive scholarly review and synthesis, emphasizing the growing need for more efficient
methods to synthesize the expanding literature. Moreover, as depicted in Figure 1b, while the number
of survey papers has rapidly increased, the growing difficulty of producing traditional human-authored
survey papers—due to the sheer volume and complexity of data—remains a significant challenge.
This challenge is evidenced by the lack of comprehensive surveys in many fields (Figure 1c), which
hinders knowledge transfer and makes it difficult for new researchers to efficiently navigate the vast
amount of available information.
The advent of LLMs [7, 9] presents a promising avenue for addressing these challenges. These
models, trained on extensive text corpora, demonstrate remarkable capabilities in understanding and
generating human-like text, even in long-context scenarios [10, 11, 12]. Despite these advancements,
the practical application of LLMs to survey generation is fraught with challenges. Firstly, context
∗

Equal contribution. yidongwang37@gmail.com, qguo@smail.nju.edu.cn; Yidong Wang did this work
during his internship at Squirrel AI.
†
Correspondence to: wye@pku.edu.cn, zhangsk@pku.edu.cn, zhangyue@westlake.edu.cn.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

