Generalized Protein Pocket Generation with
Prior-Informed Flow Matching

Zaixi Zhang1,2 , Marinka Zitnik3∗ , Qi Liu1,2∗,
1: School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2:State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, Hefei, Anhui, China
3:Harvard University
zaixi@mail.ustc.edu.cn, marinka@hms.harvard.edu, qiliuql@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Designing ligand-binding proteins, such as enzymes and biosensors, is essential
in bioengineering and protein biology. One critical step in this process involves
designing protein pockets, the protein interface binding with the ligand. Current
approaches to pocket generation often suffer from time-intensive physical computations or template-based methods, as well as compromised generation quality due
to the overlooking of domain knowledge. To tackle these challenges, we propose
PocketFlow, a generative model that incorporates protein-ligand interaction priors
based on flow matching. During training, PocketFlow learns to model key types of
protein-ligand interactions, such as hydrogen bonds. In the sampling, PocketFlow
leverages multi-granularity guidance (overall binding affinity and interaction geometry constraints) to facilitate generating high-affinity and valid pockets. Extensive
experiments show that PocketFlow outperforms baselines on multiple benchmarks,
e.g., achieving an average improvement of 1.29 in Vina Score and 0.05 in scRMSD.
Moreover, modeling interactions make PocketFlow a generalized generative model
across multiple ligand modalities, including small molecules, peptides, and RNA.

1

Introduction

Proteins are the fundamental building blocks of living organisms, often interacting with ligands (e.g.,
small molecules, nucleic acids, and peptides) to execute their functions. Recently, computational
methods have played critical roles in designing functional proteins binding with ligands with broad
applications in bio-engineering and therapeutics [76, 52, 50, 51, 67, 8, 58]. For example, Polizzi
et al., [65] leverage template-matching methods to design de novo proteins binding with the drug
apixaban [15]; Yeh et al., [83] use deep learning methods to generate efficient light-emitting enzyme
luciferases with selective substrate catalysis capabilities. To design such ligand-binding proteins,
an essential step is to design protein pockets, the protein interface interacting with binding ligands
[68, 39, 12, 28]. However, the complexity of ligand-protein interactions, the variability of protein
sidechains, and sequence-structure relationships pose great challenges for pocket design [25, 51, 48].
Traditional methods for pocket design mainly focus on physics modeling or template-matching [12, 28,
65, 19, 62]. However, the involved physical energy calculation or substructure enumeration could be
quite time-consuming. Recent advancements in pocket design have benefited a lot from deep learningbased approaches [73, 92, 83, 47, 51, 48]. However, these innovative approaches often overlook
essential domain knowledge, such as the protein-ligand interactions and the geometric constraints
governing them. Though they can efficiently generate many candidates, further screening/optimization
is required to get valid and high-affinity pockets. Moreover, most methods are restricted to small
molecule ligands, omitting other important ligand types such as nucleic acids [8] and peptides [53].
∗

Marinka Zitnik and Qi Liu are the corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

