Collaboration! Towards Robust Neural Methods
for Routing Problems

Yaoxin Wu∗
Eindhoven University of Technology
y.wu2@tue.nl

Jianan Zhou
Nanyang Technological University
jianan004@e.ntu.edu.sg
Zhiguang Cao
Singapore Management University
zgcao@smu.edu.sg

Wen Song
Shandong University
wensong@email.sdu.edu.cn

Jie Zhang, Zhiqi Shen
Nanyang Technological University
{zhangj,zqshen}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Despite enjoying desirable efficiency and reduced reliance on domain expertise,
existing neural methods for vehicle routing problems (VRPs) suffer from severe
robustness issues – their performance significantly deteriorates on clean instances
with crafted perturbations. To enhance robustness, we propose an ensemble-based
Collaborative Neural Framework (CNF) w.r.t. the defense of neural VRP methods,
which is crucial yet underexplored in the literature. Given a neural VRP method,
we adversarially train multiple models in a collaborative manner to synergistically
promote robustness against attacks, while boosting standard generalization on clean
instances. A neural router is designed to adeptly distribute training instances among
models, enhancing overall load balancing and collaborative efficacy. Extensive
experiments verify the effectiveness and versatility of CNF in defending against
various attacks across different neural VRP methods. Notably, our approach also
achieves impressive out-of-distribution generalization on benchmark instances.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial optimization problems (COPs) are crucial yet challenging to solve due to the NPhardness. Neural combinatorial optimization (NCO) aims to leverage machine learning (ML) to
automatically learn powerful heuristics for solving COPs, and has attracted considerable attention
recently [2]. Among them, a large number of NCO works develop neural methods for vehicle routing
problems (VRPs) – one of the most classic COPs with broad applications in transportation [54],
logistics [35], planning and scheduling [52], etc. With various training paradigms (e.g., reinforcement
learning (RL)), the neural methods learn construction or improvement heuristics, which achieve competitive or even superior performance to the conventional algorithms. However, recent studies show
that these neural methods are plagued by severe robustness issues [20], where their performance drops
devastatingly on clean instances (sampled from the training distribution) with crafted perturbations.
Although the robustness issue has been investigated in a couple of recent works [87, 20, 42], the
defensive methods on how to help forge sufficiently robust neural VRP methods are still underexplored.
∗

Yaoxin Wu is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

