SkiLD: Unsupervised Skill Discovery
Guided by Factor Interactions

Zizhao Wang1∗ Jiaheng Hu1∗ Caleb Chuck1∗ Stephen Chen1
Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n1 Amy Zhang1 Scott Niekum2 Peter Stone1,3
1
University of Texas at Austin 2 University of Massachusettes, Amherst 3 Sony AI
{zizhao.wang,jiahengh,stephen.chen,robertomm}@utexas.edu
amy.zhang@austin.utexas.edu, sniekum@umass.edu, {calebc,pstone}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Unsupervised skill discovery carries the promise that an intelligent agent can learn
reusable skills through autonomous, reward-free environment interaction. Existing
unsupervised skill discovery methods learn skills by encouraging distinguishable
behaviors that cover diverse states. However, in complex environments with
many state factors (e.g., household environments with many objects), learning
skills that cover all possible states is impossible, and naively encouraging state
diversity often leads to simple skills that are not ideal for solving downstream
tasks. This work introduces Skill Discovery from Local Dependencies (SkiLD),
which leverages state factorization as a natural inductive bias to guide the skill
learning process. The key intuition guiding SkiLD is that skills that induce diverse
interactions between state factors are often more valuable for solving downstream
tasks. To this end, SkiLD develops a novel skill learning objective that explicitly
encourages the mastering of skills that effectively induce different interactions
within an environment. We evaluate SkiLD in several domains with challenging,
long-horizon sparse reward tasks including a realistic simulated household robot
domain, where SkiLD successfully learns skills with clear semantic meaning and
shows superior performance compared to existing unsupervised reinforcement
learning methods that only maximize state coverage. Code and visualizations are
at https://wangzizhao.github.io/SkiLD/.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) achieves impressive successes when solving decision-making problems
with well-defined reward functions [65, 20, 33]. However, designing this reward function is often not
trivial [7, 61]. In contrast, humans and other intelligent creatures can learn, without external reward
supervision, behaviors that produce repeatable and predictable changes in the environment [18].
These behaviors, which we call skills, can be later repurposed to solve downstream tasks efficiently.
One of the promises of this form of unsupervised RL is to endow artificial agents with similar
capabilities to discover reusable skills without explicit rewards.
One predominant strategy of prior skill discovery methods focuses on training skills to reach diverse
states while being distinguishable [19, 59, 50]. However, in complex environments that contain many
state factors—distinct elements such as individual objects in a household (a formal description in
Sec. 2.1), the exponential number of distinct states makes it impossible to learn skills that cover
every state. Consequently, these methods typically result in simple skills that only change the
easy-to-control factors (e.g., in a manipulation task moving the agent itself to diverse positions or
∗

Indicates equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

