Diffusion of Thought: Chain-of-Thought Reasoning
in Diffusion Language Models

Jiacheng Ye1∗, Shansan Gong1∗, Liheng Chen1∗, Lin Zheng1 ,
Jiahui Gao ,Han Shi2 ,Chuan Wu1 ,Xin Jiang2 , Zhenguo Li2 ,Wei Bi3 ,Lingpeng Kong1
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 Tencent AI Lab
2

{carsonye, sansa933}@connect.hku.hk

Abstract
Recently, diffusion models have garnered significant interest in the field of text
processing due to their many potential advantages compared to conventional
autoregressive models. In this work, we propose Diffusion-of-Thought (DoT),
a novel approach that integrates diffusion models with Chain-of-Thought, a
well-established technique for improving the reasoning ability of autoregressive
language models. In contrast to autoregressive language models that make decisions
in a left-to-right, token-by-token manner, DoT allows reasoning steps to diffuse over
time through a diffusion language model and offers greater flexibility in trading-off
computation for reasoning performance. Our experimental results demonstrate
the effectiveness of DoT in multi-digit multiplication, boolean logic, and grade
school math problems, with a small diffusion model outperforming a much larger
autoregressive model in both efficiency and accuracy. In addition to that, DoT
showcases promising self-correction abilities and benefits from existing reasoningenhancing techniques like self-consistency decoding. Our findings contribute to
the understanding and development of reasoning with diffusion language models.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have had a profound impact on the entire field of artificial
intelligence [42, 50], transforming our approach to addressing classical problems in natural language
processing and machine learning. Among the most notable aspects of LLMs is their remarkable
reasoning ability, which many researchers consider to be a representative emergent capability
brought about by LLMs [53]. Chain-of-thought prompting (CoT) [54]), which generates a series
of intermediate reasoning steps in autoregressive (AR) way, has emerged as a central technique to
support complex reasoning processes in LLMs. Despite advancements, errors in intermediate CoT
steps can lead to inaccurate answers [32], posing self-correction difficulties [25], and concerns about
CoT’s inefficiency have been highlighted in recent studies [7].
Recently, diffusion models have attracted interest in text processing [33, 65, 69] as a result of success
in the vision domain and distinctive modeling strengths over autoregressive models [34], offering
potential benefits including global planning ability [59, 63], self correction [23] and efficiency [37].
As part of the research community effort, pre-trained diffusion language models such as Plaid [18]
and SEDD [37] have shown significant progress in text generation capabilities. Although they have
not yet attained the scale and capabilities of existing proprietary autoregressive LLMs like GPT-4 [42],
these models have demonstrated performance on par with GPT2 [4] and the scaling law [27] in
diffusion language models have been highlighted in Plaid. As a result, it becomes pertinent to explore
the following question: can diffusion language models also leverage the CoT-style technique to gain
enhanced complex reasoning abilities?
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

