Does Egalitarian Fairness Lead to Instability? The
Fairness Bounds in Stable Federated Learning Under
Altruistic Behaviors
Jiashi Gao1 , Ziwei Wang1,2 , Xiangyu Zhao3 , Xin Yao4 , Xuetao Wei1∗
1

Southern University of Science and Technology
2
University of Birmingham
3
City University of Hong Kong
4
Lingnan University
{12131101,12250053}@mail.sustech.edu.cn
xy.zhao@cityu.edu.hk
xinyao@ln.edu.hk
weixt@sustech.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) offers a machine learning paradigm that protects privacy,
allowing multiple clients to collaboratively train a global model while only accessing their local data. Recent research in FL has increasingly focused on improving
the uniformity of model performance across clients, a fairness principle known as
egalitarian fairness. However, achieving egalitarian fairness in FL may sacrifice the
model performance for data-rich clients to benefit those with less data. This tradeoff raises concerns about the stability of FL, as data-rich clients may opt to leave
the current coalition and join another that is more closely aligned with its expected
high performance. In this context, our work rigorously addresses the critical concern: Does egalitarian fairness lead to instability? Drawing from game theory and
social choice theory, we initially characterize fair FL systems as altruism coalition
formation games (ACFGs) and reveal that the instability issues emerging from the
pursuit of egalitarian fairness are significantly related to the clients’ altruism within
the coalition and the configuration of the friends-relationship networks among the
clients. Then, we theoretically propose the optimal egalitarian fairness bounds
that an FL coalition can achieve while maintaining core stability under various
types of altruistic behaviors. The theoretical contributions clarify the quantitative
relationships between achievable egalitarian fairness and the disparities in the sizes
of local datasets, disproving the misconception that egalitarian fairness inevitably
leads to instability. Finally, we conduct experiments to evaluate the consistency of
our theoretically derived egalitarian fairness bounds with the empirically achieved
egalitarian fairness in fair FL settings.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) has emerged as a significant learning paradigm in which clients utilize their
local data to train a global model collaboratively without sharing data and has attracted researchers
from various fields, especially in domains where data privacy and security are critical, such as
healthcare, finance, and social networks [1, 2, 3]. In vanilla FLs, different clients sharing the same
global model may experience varying performance (i.e., error) due to differences in the amount
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

