FuseFL: One-Shot Federated Learning through the
Lens of Causality with Progressive Model Fusion

Zhenheng Tang†∗ Yonggang Zhang† Peijie Dong♯ Yiu-ming Cheung†
Amelie Chi Zhou† Bo Han† Xiaowen Chu♯, §
†
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
♯
DSA Thrust, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
{zhtang, ygzhang, ymc, amelieczhou, bhanml}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk
{pdong212, xwchu}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn

Abstract
One-shot Federated Learning (OFL) significantly reduces communication costs
in FL by aggregating trained models only once. However, the performance of
advanced OFL methods is far behind the normal FL. In this work, we provide
a causal view to find that this performance drop of OFL methods comes from
the isolation problem, which means that locally isolatedly trained models in OFL
may easily fit to spurious correlations due to data heterogeneity. From the causal
perspective, we observe that the spurious fitting can be alleviated by augmenting
intermediate features from other clients. Built upon our observation, we propose a novel learning approach to endow OFL with superb performance and low
communication and storage costs, termed as FuseFL. Specifically, FuseFL decomposes neural networks into several blocks and progressively trains and fuses each
block following a bottom-up manner for feature augmentation, introducing no
additional communication costs. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that
FuseFL outperforms existing OFL and ensemble FL by a significant margin. We
conduct comprehensive experiments to show that FuseFL supports high scalability
of clients, heterogeneous model training, and low memory costs. Our work is the
first attempt using causality to analyze and alleviate data heterogeneity of OFL2 .

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) [96; 67] has become a popular paradigm that enables collaborative model
training without sharing private datasets from clients. Two typical characteristics of FL limit its
performance: (1) FL normally has non-IID (Independently and Identically Distributed) data, also
called data heterogeneity [67], which causes unstable slow convergence [68; 146; 124; 135] and
poor model performance [157; 94; 134; 162; 150]; (2) The extremely low bandwidth, e.g. 1 ∼ 10
MB/s of FL in Internet environments [67; 133; 129; 128; 132; 129], leads to high communication
time of a large neural network. For example, communicating once ResNet-50 [51] with 25.56M
parameters (102.24MB) or GPT-3 [14] with 175B parameters (700GB) will consume around 102.24
seconds or 194 hours, respectively. Current FL methods alleviate this problem by skipping the
gradient synchronization of traditional distributed training to save communication costs [96; 67]. But
the required hundreds or thousands of communication rounds still make the communication time
unacceptable.
∗

This work is partially done during the visiting in The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
(Guangzhou).
§
Correspondence to Xiaowen Chu (xwchu@hkust-gz.edu.cn).
2
The code is publicly available: https://github.com/wizard1203/FuseFL
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

