Bridge the Modality and Capability Gaps in
Vision-Language Model Selection

Chao Yi, Yu-Hang He, De-Chuan Zhan, Han-Jia YeB
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
{yic,heyh,zhandc,yehj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Vision Language Models (VLMs) excel in zero-shot image classification by pairing
images with textual category names. The expanding variety of Pre-Trained VLMs
enhances the likelihood of identifying a suitable VLM for specific tasks. To
better reuse the VLM resource and fully leverage its potential on different zeroshot image classification tasks, a promising strategy is selecting appropriate PreTrained VLMs from the VLM Zoo, relying solely on the text data of the target
dataset without access to the dataset’s images. In this paper, we analyze two
inherent challenges in assessing the ability of a VLM in this Language-Only VLM
selection: the “Modality Gap”—the disparity in VLM’s embeddings across two
different modalities, making text a less reliable substitute for images; and the
“Capability Gap”— the discrepancy between the VLM’s overall ranking and its
ranking for target dataset, hindering direct prediction of a model’s dataset-specific
performance from its general performance. We propose VLM Selection With
gAp Bridging (S WAB) to mitigate the negative impact of two gaps. S WAB first
adopts optimal transport to capture the relevance between open-source and target
datasets with a transportation matrix. It then uses this matrix to transfer useful
statistics of VLMs from open-source datasets to the target dataset for bridging two
gaps. By bridging two gaps to obtain better substitutes for test images, S WAB can
accurately predict the performance ranking of different VLMs on the target task
without the need for the dataset’s images. Experiments across various VLMs and
image classification datasets validate S WAB’s effectiveness. Code is available at:
https://github.com/YCaigogogo/SWAB.

1

Introduction

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [46, 22, 48, 68] have demonstrated impressive image-text matching
ability. One notable application of VLMs is zero-shot image classification [46, 40, 14, 37], where
VLMs are leveraged to generate image classifiers using only class names directly. This zero-shot
approach has shown considerable success in scenarios with scarce or no training images [35, 18].
Despite the success of VLM in image classification, the performance of a VLM may vary substantially
according to the datasets and domains [11], making it challenging to use a single model to handle
all tasks. Fortunately, many open-source VLMs are available [21], and these VLMs form a vast
VLM Zoo. With different architectures, pre-training datasets, or training methods, these VLMs have
different strengths. The diverse pre-trained VLMs increase the likelihood of pinpointing at least one
VLM that excels in a given target dataset in most cases.1 To more effectively reuse the VLM Zoo
across diverse target tasks and unlock its full potential, we need a model selection method to choose
suitable VLMs from the VLM Zoo for the target task. However, in scenarios such as zero-shot image
1

Throughout this paper, the term “VLM” specifically refers to a pre-trained VLM.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

