Model Sensitivity Aware Continual Learning

Zhenyi Wang and Heng Huang
Department of Computer Science, Institute of Health Computing
University of Maryland College Park
College Park, MD, 20742
zwang@umd.edu;heng@umd.edu

Abstract
Continual learning (CL) aims to adapt to non-stationary data distributions while
retaining previously acquired knowledge. However, CL models typically face a
trade-off between preserving old task knowledge and excelling in new task performance. Existing approaches often sacrifice one for the other. To overcome this
limitation, orthogonal to existing approaches, we propose a novel perspective that
views the CL model ability in preserving old knowledge and performing well in
new task as a matter of model sensitivity to parameter updates. Excessive parameter
sensitivity can lead to two drawbacks: (1) significant forgetting of previous knowledge; and (2) overfitting to new tasks. To reduce parameter sensitivity, we optimize
the model’s performance based on the parameter distribution, which achieves the
worst-case CL performance within a distribution neighborhood. This innovative
learning paradigm offers dual benefits: (1) reduced forgetting of old knowledge
by mitigating drastic changes in model predictions under small parameter updates;
and (2) enhanced new task performance by preventing overfitting to new tasks.
Consequently, our method achieves superior ability in retaining old knowledge
and achieving excellent new task performance simultaneously. Importantly, our
approach is compatible with existing CL methodologies, allowing seamless integration while delivering significant improvements in effectiveness, efficiency, and
versatility with both theoretical and empirical supports.

1

Introduction

Continual learning (CL) embodies a dynamic approach aimed at adapting to non-stationary data
distributions that evolve over time. However, in pursuit of this goal, CL encounters a significant
challenge: the trade-off between preserving previously acquired knowledge and effectively learning
new knowledge. As the model assimilates new information, it often swiftly erases previously learned
knowledge, resulting in catastrophic forgetting (CF) on past tasks [44, 54]. Effectively addressing CF
during CL is essential to preserve previously acquired information. On the other hand, effectively
learning new information is equally crucial for CL models to adapt to new tasks and environments.
Existing approaches in CL often face a dilemma: they either prioritize preserving old knowledge or
excelling in new task performance, often at the expense of the other. When a CL model prioritizes
preserving old knowledge, it focuses on retaining information from previous tasks while minimizing
interference or forgetting. However, excessive emphasis on old knowledge can limit the model’s
ability to adapt to new tasks. Conversely, when a model prioritizes new task performance, it aims
to quickly adapt to new tasks or data distributions. Yet, this emphasis on new tasks can potentially
degrade performance on previously learned tasks.
To overcome the aforementioned limitations, orthogonal to existing approaches, we introduce the
concept of model sensitivity and approach the challenge of balancing old knowledge retention and
new task performance in CL from the perspective of model parameter sensitivity. When a CL
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

