Autobidder’s Dilemma: Why More Sophisticated
Autobidders Lead to Worse Auction Efficiency

Yuan Deng
Google Research
dengyuan@google.com

Jieming Mao
Google Research
maojm@google.com

Hanrui Zhang
Chinese University of Hong Kong
hanrui@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research
mirrokni@google.com
Song Zuo
Google Research
szuo@google.com

Abstract
The recent increasing adoption of autobidding has inspired the growing interest
in analyzing the performance of classic mechanism with value-maximizing autobidders both theoretically and empirically. It is known that optimal welfare can be
obtained in first-price auctions if autobidders are restricted to uniform bid-scaling
and the price of anarchy is 2 when non-uniform bid-scaling strategies are allowed.
In this paper, we provide a fine-grained price of anarchy analysis for non-uniform
bid-scaling strategies in first-price auctions, demonstrating the reason why more
powerful (individual) non-uniform bid-scaling strategies may lead to worse (aggregated) performance in social welfare. Our theoretical results match recent
empirical findings that a higher level of non-uniform bid-scaling leads to lower
welfare performance in first-price auctions.

1

Introduction

The online advertising market has witnessed increasing adoption of autobidding in recent years,
which shifts the bidding behavior model of advertisers from the classic utility-maximizing bidding
to value-maximizing bidding [Aggarwal et al., 2019, Balseiro et al., 2021b]. Unlike the classic
utility maximizers who maximize their quasi-linear utility given by the difference between value
and payment, value maximizers maximize the total value subject to a return-on-spend (RoS) constraint [Balseiro et al., 2021b].
The shift in the bidding behavior model has motivated a growing body of literature on auction design
with value-maximizing autobidders. Notably, it has been shown that the price of anarchy (PoA) in
second-price auctions [Aggarwal et al., 2019] and first-price auctions [Deng et al., 2022, Liaw et al.,
2023] are both 2. However, (1) these PoA results measure the welfare performance in the worst-case
scenario (i.e., the worst-case equilibrium of the worst-case instance); moreover, (2) these PoA results
assume the bidding agents can find the optimal bidding strategies in response to other bidders so
that their bidding profile forms an equilibrium, while computing optimal bidding strategies and/or
finding equilibria could be computationally infeasible [Aggarwal et al., 2023, Chen et al., 2021, Li
and Tang, 2024, Paes Leme et al., 2024]. On the other hand, Balseiro et al. [2021a] demonstrate
that optimal welfare can be obtained in first-price auctions if autobidders are restricted to the simple
uniform bid-scaling strategy (i.e., always bid θv when the bidder’s value is v with a universal bid
multiplier θ). But, uniform bid-scaling is not always an optimal strategy for autobidders in first-price
auctions as non-uniform bidding scaling, in which autobidder may apply different bid multipliers in
different auctions, may result in better bidding performance.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

