Spatio-Spectral Graph Neural Networks

Simon Geisler† , Arthur Kosmala† , Daniel Herbst, and Stephan Günnemann
Department of Computer Science & Munich Data Science Institute
Technical University of Munich
{s.geisler, a.kosmala, d.herbst, s.guennemann}@tum.de

Abstract
Spatial Message Passing Graph Neural Networks (MPGNNs) are widely used for
learning on graph-structured data. However, key limitations of ℓ-step MPGNNs
are that their “receptive field” is typically limited to the ℓ-hop neighborhood of
a node and that information exchange between distant nodes is limited by oversquashing. Motivated by these limitations, we propose Spatio-Spectral Graph
Neural Networks (S2 GNNs) – a new modeling paradigm for Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) that synergistically combines spatially and spectrally parametrized
graph filters. Parameterizing filters partially in the frequency domain enables
global yet efficient information propagation. We show that S2 GNNs vanquish
over-squashing and yield strictly tighter approximation-theoretic error bounds
than MPGNNs. Further, rethinking graph convolutions at a fundamental level
unlocks new design spaces. For example, S2 GNNs allow for free positional encodings that make them strictly more expressive than the 1-Weisfeiler-Leman
(WL) test. Moreover, to obtain general-purpose S2 GNNs, we propose spectrally
parametrized filters for directed graphs. S2 GNNs outperform spatial MPGNNs,
graph transformers, and graph rewirings, e.g., on the peptide long-range benchmark tasks, and are competitive with state-of-the-art sequence modeling. On a
40 GB GPU, S2 GNNs scale to millions of nodes.

1

Introduction

Spatial Message-Passing Graph Neural Networks (MPGNNs) ushered in various recent breakthroughs. For example, MPGNNs are
able to predict the weather with unprecedented precision (Lam et al.,
2023), can be composed as a foundation model for a rich set of tasks
on knowledge graphs (Galkin et al., 2023), and are a key component
in the discovery of millions of AI-generated crystal structures (Merchant et al., 2023). Despite this success, MPGNNs produce nodelevel signals solely considering limited-size neighborhoods, effectively bounding their expressivity. Even with a large number of
message-passing steps, MPGNNs are limited in their capability of
propagating information to distant nodes due to over-squashing. As
evident by the success of global models like transformers (Vaswani
et al., 2017), modeling long-range interactions can be pivotal and an
important step towards foundation models that understand graphs.
We propose Spatio-Spectral Graph Neural Networks (S2 GNNs), Figure 1: S2 GNN principle.
a new modeling paradigm for tackling the aforementioned limitations, that synergistically combine message passing with spectral filters, explicitly parametrized in
the spectral domain. Spectral filters are virtually ignored by prior work but go beyond stacks of
message-passing layers or polynomial parametrizations. Due to message passing’s finite number
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

† equal contribution.

