Indoor Air Quality Dataset with Activities of Daily
Living in Low to Middle-income Communities

Prasenjit Karmakar
IIT Kharagpur, India
prasenjitkarmakar52282@gmail.com

Swadhin Pradhan
Cisco Systems, USA
swadhinjeet88@gmail.com

Sandip Chakraborty
IIT Kharagpur, India
sandipc@cse.iitkgp.ac.in

Abstract
In recent years, indoor air pollution has posed a significant threat to our society,
claiming over 3.2 million lives annually. Developing nations, such as India, are
most affected since lack of knowledge, inadequate regulation, and outdoor air
pollution lead to severe daily exposure to pollutants. However, only a limited
number of studies have attempted to understand how indoor air pollution affects
developing countries like India. To address this gap, we present spatiotemporal
measurements of air quality from 30 indoor sites over six months during summer
and winter seasons. The sites are geographically located across four regions of type:
rural, suburban, and urban, covering the typical low to middle-income population
in India. The dataset1 contains various types of indoor environments (e.g., studio
apartments, classrooms, research laboratories, food canteens, and residential households), and can provide the basis for data-driven learning model research aimed at
coping with unique pollution patterns in developing countries. This unique dataset
demands advanced data cleaning and imputation techniques for handling missing
data due to power failure or network outages during data collection. Furthermore,
through a simple speech-to-text application, we provide real-time indoor activity
labels annotated by occupants. Therefore, environmentalists and ML enthusiasts
can utilize this dataset to understand the complex patterns of the pollutants under
different indoor activities, identify recurring sources of pollution, forecast exposure, improve floor plans and room structures of modern indoor designs, develop
pollution-aware recommender systems, etc.

1

Introduction

Motivation: In the last decade, researchers have raised concerns about outdoor air pollution from
manufacturing, production [1], textile [2], transport [3], etc. With an increasing awareness about
the long-term health impacts of pollutants, governments [4, 5], and NGOs [6] in recent years have
shown a great deal of interest in studying our environment in a variety of ways. As per 2023
data [7], developing nations like India, China, Bangladesh, etc., are the most affected because foreign
nations often offload their chemical and electronic goods production to developing countries with the
availability of cheap labor [8]. Increasing outdoor air pollution [9] in these places also contributes to
indoor pollution due to rapid and unplanned urbanization, cramped living conditions, compromised
household ventilation, and general ignorance [10, 11]. Furthermore, an average person spends 90%
1

https://github.com/prasenjit52282/dalton-dataset (Access:October 21, 2024)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

