Retrieval-Retro: Retrieval-based Inorganic
Retrosynthesis with Expert Knowledge

Heewoong Noh1 , Namkyeong Lee1 , Gyoung S. Na2∗ , Chanyoung Park1∗
1
2
KAIST
KRICT
{heewoongnoh,namkyeong96,cy.park}@kaist.ac.kr
ngs0@krict.re.kr

Abstract
While inorganic retrosynthesis planning is essential in the field of chemical science,
the application of machine learning in this area has been notably less explored
compared to organic retrosynthesis planning. In this paper, we propose RetrievalRetro for inorganic retrosynthesis planning, which implicitly extracts the precursor
information of reference materials that are retrieved from the knowledge base
regarding domain expertise in the field. Specifically, instead of directly employing
the precursor information of reference materials, we propose implicitly extracting
it with various attention layers, which enables the model to learn novel synthesis
recipes more effectively. Moreover, during retrieval, we consider the thermodynamic relationship between target material and precursors, which is essential
domain expertise in identifying the most probable precursor set among various
options. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of Retrieval-Retro in
retrosynthesis planning, especially in discovering novel synthesis recipes, which is
crucial for materials discovery. The source code for Retrieval-Retro is available at
https://github.com/HeewoongNoh/Retrieval-Retro.

1

Introduction

Discovering new materials is a fundamental problem in materials science [28, 4, 25], providing
innovative options in various industry fields, such as semiconductors and batteries [37, 36]. On the
other hand, it is also important to establish synthetic routes for newly discovered materials [21], i.e.,
retrosynthesis planning, as the ability to synthesize these materials is essential for their successful
commercialization beyond mere discovery.
For organic materials, retrosynthesis planning approaches identify valid and efficient synthetic
routes [8] by breaking down complex target molecules into smaller molecules that are commercially
available and easily synthesizable. During the process, they focus on the structural information of
target molecules, such as functional groups and reaction centers, that are related to widely known
organic reaction mechanisms [21, 7, 9, 40, 22, 23]. Following the practice of organic retrosynthesis,
machine learning (ML) based approaches utilizing the molecular structure expressed as SMILES
strings [43] or molecular graphs have been extensively studied [45, 33].
However, unlike organic retrosynthesis, using the atomic structural information of inorganic materials
for retrosynthesis presents significant challenges due to 1) the high computational load incurred by
the larger number of atoms compared to organic molecules [7, 6], and 2) the failure of traditional
physical theories for the atomic structure computation caused by the inclusion of diverse and unusual
elements [11, 1]. Therefore, a chemical composition-based approach is essential for retrosynthesis
planning of inorganic materials. Besides the challenges of using the atomic structural information,
there is a lack of a clear and general theory regarding the mechanisms of inorganic synthesis reactions
∗

Corresponding Author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

