PromptFix: You Prompt and We Fix the Photo

Yongsheng Yu1 *

Ziyun Zeng1 *
Hang Hua1
Jianlong Fu 2
Jiebo Luo1
2
University of Rochester, Microsoft Research
{yyu90,zzeng24}@ur.rochester.edu, {hhua2,jluo}@cs.rochester.edu, jianf@microsoft.com
1

Abstract
Diffusion models equipped with language models demonstrate excellent controllability in image generation tasks, allowing image processing to adhere to human
instructions. However, the lack of diverse instruction-following data hampers the
development of models that effectively recognize and execute user-customized
instructions, particularly in low-level tasks. Moreover, the stochastic nature of the
diffusion process leads to deficiencies in image generation or editing tasks that
require the detailed preservation of the generated images. To address these limitations, we propose PromptFix, a comprehensive framework that enables diffusion
models to follow human instructions to perform a wide variety of image-processing
tasks. First, we construct a large-scale instruction-following dataset that covers
comprehensive image-processing tasks, including low-level tasks, image editing,
and object creation. Next, we propose a high-frequency guidance sampling method
to explicitly control the denoising process and preserve high-frequency details in unprocessed areas. Finally, we design an auxiliary prompting adapter, utilizing VisionLanguage Models (VLMs) to enhance text prompts and improve the model’s task
generalization. Experimental results show that PromptFix outperforms previous
methods in various image-processing tasks. Our proposed model also achieves comparable inference efficiency with these baseline models and exhibits superior zeroshot capabilities in blind restoration and combination tasks. The dataset and code
are available at https://www.yongshengyu.com/PromptFix-Page.

1

Introduction

In recent years, diffusion models [19, 57, 66] have achieved remarkable advancements in textto-image generation. Benefiting from large-scale training on image-text pairs [59], these models
can generate highly realistic and diverse images that align with text prompts. They have been
successfully applied to various real-world applications, including visual design, photography, digital
art, and the film industry. In addition, models trained with instruction-following data [7] have shown
promising results in understanding human instruction and performing the corresponding imageprocessing tasks. Previous studies [21–23, 74, 73] have illustrated that with instruction-following
data, we can simply fine-tune a text-to-image generation model to perform various vision tasks
such as image editing [7, 21, 74], object detection [22], segmentation [23], inpainting [23, 73], and
depth estimation [22, 9]. To follow the success of these methods, we train our model utilizing
input-goal-instruction triplet data for low-level image-processing tasks.
We first overcome the challenge of lacking the instruction-following data for low-level tasks. Specifically, we collect image pairs by generating degraded images from the source images and adopting
data from existing datasets. Then, we employ GPT4 [51] to generate the diverse text instructions
for each task. We obtain ∼ 1.01 million input-goal-instruction triplets in the collected dataset. This
dataset covers various low-level tasks including image inpainting, object creation, image dehazing,
colorization, super-resolution, low light enhancement [8], snow removal, and watermark removal.
We enrich the dataset through back-translation augmentation by swapping the inpainted and origi38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

