Watermarking Makes Language Models Radioactive
Tom Sander∗
Meta FAIR & École polytechnique
Alain Durmus
École polytechnique

Pierre Fernandez∗
Meta FAIR & Inria Rennes

Matthijs Douze
Meta FAIR

Teddy Furon
Inria Rennes

Abstract
We investigate the radioactivity of text generated by large language models (LLM),
i.e., whether it is possible to detect that such synthetic input was used to train a
subsequent LLM. Current methods like membership inference or active IP protection either work only in settings where the suspected text is known or do
not provide reliable statistical guarantees. We discover that, on the contrary, it
is possible to reliably determine if a language model was trained on synthetic
data if that data is output by a watermarked LLM. Our new methods, specialized for radioactivity, detects with a provable confidence weak residuals of the
watermark signal in the fine-tuned LLM. We link the radioactivity contamination level to the following properties: the watermark robustness, its proportion in
the training set, and the fine-tuning process. For instance, if the suspect model
is open-weight, we demonstrate that training on watermarked instructions can
be detected with high confidence (p-value < 10−5 ) even when as little as 5%
of training text is watermarked. Radioactivity detection code is available at
https://github.com/facebookresearch/radioactive-watermark

Generated texts

Public
LLM

Statistical Test
Open-model

✔ / ✗
Closed-model

Fine-tuned
LLM

Figure 1: Bob fine-tunes his LLM on data with a fraction coming from Alice’s LLM. This leaves traces in Bob’s
model that Alice can detect reliably, provided that her text was watermarked. Thus, a side effect of Alice’s
watermark, intended for machine-generated text detection, is to reveal what data Bob’s model was fine-tuned on.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) are often instruction fine-tuned to align them with human prompts
and improve their performance and generalization [Ouyang et al., 2022, Wei et al., 2022, Chung et al.,
2022]. Fine-tuning requires expert knowledge to balance diversity and quality in the instruction dataset
and a costly collection of manual annotations, especially for alignment [OpenAI, 2023, Touvron
et al., 2023b, Gemini, 2023]. To address the cost and the difficulties of fine-tuning, practitioners
often train on synthetic data generated by a model that has already been instructed, such as Bard,
ChatGPT, or Claude. For example, works by Wang et al. [2022], Honovich et al. [2022], Peng et al.
[2023a] created instruction data for many of the most recent LLMs [Taori et al., 2023, Xu et al., 2023,
*

Equal Contribution. Correspondence at {tomsander,pfz}@meta.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

