Hamiltonian Monte Carlo on ReLU
Neural Networks is Inefficient
Vu C. Dinh
Department of Mathematical Sciences
University of Delaware
vucdinh@udel.edu

Lam Si Tung Ho
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Dalhousie University
lam.ho@dal.ca

Cuong V. Nguyen
Department of Mathematical Sciences
Durham University
viet.c.nguyen@durham.ac.uk

Abstract
We analyze the error rates of the Hamiltonian Monte Carlo algorithm with leapfrog
integrator for Bayesian neural network inference. We show that due to the nondifferentiability of activation functions in the ReLU family, leapfrog HMC for
networks with these activation functions has a large local error rate of Ω(ϵ) rather
than the classical error rate of O(ϵ3 ). This leads to a higher rejection rate of the
proposals, making the method inefficient. We then verify our theoretical findings
through empirical simulations as well as experiments on a real-world dataset that
highlight the inefficiency of HMC inference on ReLU-based neural networks
compared to analytical networks.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been a growing interest in doing full Bayesian analyses for neural networks
and deep learning (Hernández-Lobato and Adams, 2015; Huber, 2020; Cobb and Jalaian, 2021; Dhulipala et al., 2023). Since neural network models are typically high-dimensional, Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo (HMC) (Neal, 2011) is a natural choice over other Markov Chain Monte Carlo approaches
(Duane et al., 1987; Neal, 2011). When the activation function of a network is analytic (e.g., sigmoid
function), one could rely on the theoretical foundations and practical guidelines of HMC in classical
settings with smooth energy functions for computational designs (Neal, 2011; Beskos et al., 2013;
Betancourt et al., 2017).
For ReLU-based neural networks, the situation is not as clear since the ReLU activation has a point of
non-differentiability at zero. The derivative of ReLU at zero, in principle, is not well-defined, although
often set to be zero in most computational platforms (Bertoin et al., 2021). Since non-differentiability
only happens on a set of measure zero on the parameter space, it is natural to assume that this
technical singularity does not pose a problem beyond theoretical considerations. For example, when
training ReLU networks, it is known that the vast majority of stochastic gradient descent sequences
produced by minimizing the loss function are not meaningfully impacted by changing the value of
the derivative of ReLU at zero (Berner et al., 2019; Bolte and Pauwels, 2020; Bertoin et al., 2021;
Bianchi et al., 2022).
For HMC, this line of thought is also not completely misguided, as we will show in this paper that
HMC with leapfrog integrator is correct (i.e., it samples from the correct distribution) as long as the
computed derivatives during sampling are well-defined up to the second order and are compatible
with the chain rule. Since the backpropagation algorithm to compute gradients for neural networks
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

