A Nearly Optimal and Low-Switching Algorithm for
Reinforcement Learning with General Function
Approximation

Heyang Zhao
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
hyzhao@cs.ucla.edu
Jiafan He
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
jiafanhe19@ucla.edu

Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
The exploration-exploitation dilemma has been a central challenge in reinforcement
learning (RL) with complex model classes. In this paper, we propose a new
algorithm, Monotonic Q-Learning with Upper Confidence Bound (MQL-UCB) for
RL with general function approximation. Our key algorithmic design includes (1)
a general deterministic policy-switching strategy that achieves low switching cost,
(2) a monotonic value function structure with carefully controlled function class
complexity, and (3) a variance-weighted regression scheme that exploits historical
trajectories
√ with high data efficiency. MQL-UCB achieves minimax optimal regret
e
of O(d HK) when K is sufficiently large and near-optimal policy switching cost
e
of O(dH),
with d being the eluder dimension of the function class, H being the
planning horizon, and K being the number of episodes. Our work sheds light
on designing provably sample-efficient and deployment-efficient Q-learning with
nonlinear function approximation.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), a learner interacts with an unknown environment and aims to
maximize the cumulative reward. As one of the most mainstream paradigms for sequential decisionmaking, RL has extensive applications in many real-world problems (Kober et al., 2013; Mnih et al.,
2015; Lillicrap et al., 2015; Zoph and Le, 2016; Zheng et al., 2018). Theoretically, the RL problem is
often formulated as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Puterman, 2014). Achieving the optimal
regret bound for various MDP settings has been a long-standing fundamental problem in RL research.
In tabular MDPs where the state space S and the action space A are finite, the optimal regret bound
has been well-established, ranging from the episodic setting (Azar et al., 2017; Zanette and Brunskill,
2019; Simchowitz and Jamieson, 2019; Zhang et al., 2020), average-reward setting (Zhang and Ji,
2019) to the discounted setting (He et al., 2021b). Nevertheless, these regret guarantees are intolerably
large in many real-world applications, where the state space S and the action space A are often large
or even infinite.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

