Better by Default: Strong Pre-Tuned MLPs and
Boosted Trees on Tabular Data
Léo Grinsztajn
SODA Team, Inria Saclay

David Holzmüller∗
SIERRA Team, Inria Paris
Ecole Normale Superieure
PSL University

Ingo Steinwart
University of Stuttgart
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Institute for Stochastics and Applications

Abstract
For classification and regression on tabular data, the dominance of gradient-boosted
decision trees (GBDTs) has recently been challenged by often much slower deep
learning methods with extensive hyperparameter tuning. We address this discrepancy by introducing (a) RealMLP, an improved multilayer perceptron (MLP),
and (b) strong meta-tuned default parameters for GBDTs and RealMLP. We tune
RealMLP and the default parameters on a meta-train benchmark with 118 datasets
and compare them to hyperparameter-optimized versions on a disjoint meta-test
benchmark with 90 datasets, as well as the GBDT-friendly benchmark by Grinsztajn et al. (2022). Our benchmark results on medium-to-large tabular datasets
(1K–500K samples) show that RealMLP offers a favorable time-accuracy tradeoff
compared to other neural baselines and is competitive with GBDTs in terms of
benchmark scores. Moreover, a combination of RealMLP and GBDTs with improved default parameters can achieve excellent results without hyperparameter
tuning. Finally, we demonstrate that some of RealMLP’s improvements can also
considerably improve the performance of TabR with default parameters.

1

Introduction

Perhaps the most common type of data in practical machine learning (ML) is tabular data, characterized by a fixed number of features (columns) that can take different types such as numerical
or categorical, as well as a lack of the spatiotemporal structure found in image or text data. The
moderate dimension and lack of symmetries make tabular data accessible to a wide variety of machine
learning methods. Although tabular data is very diverse and no method is dominant on all datasets,
gradient-boosted decision trees (GBDTs) exhibit excellent results on benchmarks [18, 43, 58, 69],
although their superiority has been challenged by a variety of deep learning methods [3].
While many architectures for neural networks (NNs) have been proposed [3], variants of the simple
multilayer perceptron (MLP) have repeatedly been shown to be good baselines for tabular NNs
[15, 16, 30, 54]. Moreover, in terms of training time, MLPs are often slower than GBDTs but still
considerably faster than many other architectures [18, 43]. Therefore, we study how MLPs can be
improved in terms of architecture, training, preprocessing, hyperparameters, and initialization. We
also demonstrate that at least some of these improvements can successfully improve TabR [17].
∗

Work done partially while still at University of Stuttgart.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

