VB-LoRA: Extreme Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning
with Vector Banks
Yang Li
Dept. of Computer Science
Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA 30303
yli93@student.gsu.edu

Shihao Ji∗
School of Computing
University of Connecticut
Storrs, CT 06269
shihao.ji@uconn.edu

Shaobo Han
Optical Networking and Sensing
NEC Laboratories America
Princeton, NJ 08540
shaobo@nec-labs.com

Abstract
As the adoption of large language models increases and the need for per-user or pertask model customization grows, the parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods, such as low-rank adaptation (LoRA) and its variants, incur substantial storage
and transmission costs. To further reduce stored parameters, we introduce a "divideand-share" paradigm that breaks the barriers of low-rank decomposition across
matrix dimensions, modules, and layers by sharing parameters globally via a vector
bank. As an instantiation of the paradigm to LoRA, our proposed VB-LoRA composites all the low-rank matrices of LoRA from a shared vector bank with a differentiable top-k admixture module. VB-LoRA achieves extreme parameter efficiency
while maintaining comparable or better performance compared to state-of-the-art
PEFT methods. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of VB-LoRA
on natural language understanding, natural language generation, instruction tuning,
and mathematical reasoning tasks. When fine-tuning the Llama2-13B model, VBLoRA only uses 0.4% of LoRA’s stored parameters, yet achieves superior results.
Our source code is available at https://github.com/leo-yangli/VB-LoRA.
This method has been merged into the Hugging Face PEFT package2 .

Introduction

Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) casts a new paradigm
that leverages strong prior knowledge built in foundation models and adapts them to a wide range of downstream tasks by
updating a small amount of trainable parameters [He et al.,
2021]. Compared to prefix/prompt tuning [Li and Liang, 2021,
Lester et al., 2021] or in-context learning [Brown et al., 2020],
fine-tuning a large-scale pre-trained model yields better domain
specialization dictated by high-quality datasets [Brown et al.,
2020, Liu et al., 2022, Zhao et al., 2023]. This process can be repeated to suit the needs of ever-changing deployment scenarios
and personalizations. However, the sheer volume of parameter space across a multitude of instantiations [Sheng et al.,
2023] poses challenges for storage, transmission, and computation, especially for low-resource hardware and consumer-grade
networks [Borzunov et al., 2024].

Matthew s correlation

1

69
68
67
66
65

VB-LoRA (Ours)
VeRA
Tied-LoRA
LoRA

106
104
105
# of stored parameters
Figure 1: Comparison of the PEFT
methods on RoBERTa-Large. Our
VB-LoRA achieves higher scores
with significantly smaller number
of stored parameters.

To mitigate these challenges, various PEFT methods have been proposed by adding or adapting a
small amount of trainable parameters per task without sacrificing performance [Houlsby et al., 2019,
∗
2

Part of the work was done while the author was affiliated with Georgia State University.
https://huggingface.co/docs/peft/en/package_reference/vblora

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

