Tactile DreamFusion:
Exploiting Tactile Sensing for 3D Generation

Ruihan Gao1 Kangle Deng1 Gengshan Yang1 Wenzhen Yuan2 Jun-Yan Zhu1
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
https://ruihangao.github.io/TactileDreamFusion/

Abstract
3D generation methods have shown visually compelling results powered by diffusion image priors. However, they often fail to produce realistic geometric details,
resulting in overly smooth surfaces or geometric details inaccurately baked in
albedo maps. To address this, we introduce a new method that incorporates touch
as an additional modality to improve the geometric details of generated 3D assets.
We design a lightweight 3D texture field to synthesize visual and tactile textures,
guided by 2D diffusion model priors on both visual and tactile domains. We condition the visual texture generation on high-resolution tactile normals and guide
the patch-based tactile texture refinement with a customized TextureDreambooth.
We further present a multi-part generation pipeline that enables us to synthesize
different textures across various regions. To our knowledge, we are the first to leverage high-resolution tactile sensing to enhance geometric details for 3D generation
tasks. We evaluate our method in both text-to-3D and image-to-3D settings. Our
experiments demonstrate that our method provides customized and realistic fine
geometric textures while maintaining accurate alignment between two modalities
of vision and touch.

1

Introduction

Generating high-fidelity 3D assets is crucial for a wide range of applications, from content creation
in gaming and VR/AR to developing realistic simulations for robotics. Recently, a surge in emerging
methods has enabled the creation of 3D assets from a single image [1] or a short text prompt [2, 3].
Their success can be attributed to advances in generative models [4, 5] and neural rendering [6, 7], as
well as the availability of extensive 2D and 3D datasets [8, 9].
Although existing methods can effectively capture the overall shape and visual appearance of objects,
they often struggle with synthesizing fine-grained geometric details, such as stochastic patterns or
bumps from the material, as shown on the left side of Figure 1. As a result, the final mesh output
tends to be either overly smooth (e.g., the avocado in the top row) or has geometric details incorrectly
baked into the albedo map (e.g., the beanie in the bottom row). But why is that?
We argue that there are two major bottlenecks. First, high-resolution geometric data are largely
absent in current 2D and 3D datasets. For image datasets like LAION [8], obtaining geometric details
is challenging due to the limited camera resolution in capturing real-world objects. In the case of
3D asset datasets like Objaverse [9], although the assets often include visual textures, they rarely
feature high-resolution geometric textures. Second, it is difficult for humans to precisely describe fine
geometric textures in natural language, making text-based applications even more challenging.
To address these issues, we propose exploring tactile sensing to capture high-resolution texture data
for 3D generation. Given a text prompt or an input image, we first generate a base mesh with an
albedo map as our 3D representation. We then capture detailed surface geometry of the target texture
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

