Learning from Snapshots of Discrete and Continuous
Data Streams
Pramith Devulapalli
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
pdevulap@purdue.edu

Steve Hanneke
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
steve.hanneke@gmail.com

Abstract
Imagine a smart camera trap selectively clicking pictures to understand animal
movement patterns within a particular habitat. These "snapshots", or pieces of
data captured from a data stream at adaptively chosen times, provide a glimpse
of different animal movements unfolding through time. Learning a continuoustime process through snapshots, such as smart camera traps, is a central theme
governing a wide array of online learning situations. In this paper, we adopt a
learning-theoretic perspective in understanding the fundamental nature of learning
different classes of functions from both discrete data streams and continuous data
streams. In our first framework, the update-and-deploy setting, a learning algorithm
discretely queries from a process to update a predictor designed to make predictions
given as input the data stream. We construct a uniform sampling algorithm that can
learn with bounded error any concept class with finite Littlestone dimension. Our
second framework, known as the blind-prediction setting, consists of a learning
algorithm generating predictions independently of observing the process, only
engaging with the process when it chooses to make queries. Interestingly, we show
a stark contrast in learnability where non-trivial concept classes are unlearnable.
However, we show that adaptive learning algorithms are necessary to learn sets
of time-dependent and data-dependent functions, called pattern classes, in either
framework. Finally, we develop a theory of pattern classes under discrete data
streams for the blind-prediction setting.

1

Introduction

1.1

Two Motivating Examples

Pretend you’re a farmer by day and businessperson by night. As a farmer, you oversee a 10,000 acre
plot of land equipped with a smart irrigation system. To feed data to your irrigation system, you rely
on hyperspectral imaging taken from a satellite to gauge soil moisture conditions. Ideally, you would
like to constantly feed your irrigation system with hyperspectral data; however, the steep financial
cost of processing hyperspectral data prevents you from doing so. As a result, you need to devise a
strategy to sparingly use satellite data; at all other times, you rely on the smart irrigation system to
accurately extrapolate the soil moisture conditions as time passes by.
At night, you become a businessperson. You employ a translator on your work laptop during your
virtual meetings to automatically convert your voice into the preferred language of your client. This
translator is fine-tuned by a speech-to-text translation system that takes in voice data and updates
the translator’s model on the correct language translation. But, there’s a caveat. Each request costs
money. And each transmission dominates a sizable portion of the available Internet bandwidth. Your
task is to come up with the optimal strategy of balancing requests to the cloud versus trusting the
fidelity of the translator.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

