Cross-Care: Assessing the Healthcare Implications
of Pre-training Data on Language Model Bias

Shan Chen1,2,3∗, Jack Gallifant4∗, Mingye Gao4†, Pedro Moreira4,10†, Nikolaj Munch4,5 ,
Ajay Muthukkumar6 , Arvind Rajan6 , Jaya Kolluri2 , Amelia Fiske7
Janna Hastings8 , Hugo Aerts1,2,9 , Brian Anthony4 , Leo Anthony Celi1,2,4,11 ,
William G. La Cava1,3 , Danielle S. Bitterman1,2,3‡
1

5

Harvard, 2 Mass General Brigham, 3 Boston Children’s Hospital, 4 MIT,
Aarhus University, 6 University of North Carolina, 7 Technical University of Munich,
8
University of Zurich and University of St. Gallen, 9 Maastricht University,
10
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 11 Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly essential in processing natural
languages, yet their application is frequently compromised by biases and inaccuracies originating in their training data. In this study, we introduce Cross-Care, the
first benchmark framework dedicated to assessing biases and real world knowledge
in LLMs, specifically focusing on the representation of disease prevalence across
diverse demographic groups. We systematically evaluate how demographic biases
embedded in pre-training corpora like T heP ile influence the outputs of LLMs.
We expose and quantify discrepancies by juxtaposing these biases against actual
disease prevalences in various U.S. demographic groups. Our results highlight substantial misalignment between LLM representation of disease prevalence and real
disease prevalence rates across demographic subgroups, indicating a pronounced
risk of bias propagation and a lack of real-world grounding for medical applications
of LLMs. Furthermore, we observe that various alignment methods minimally
resolve inconsistencies in the models’ representation of disease prevalence across
different languages. For further exploration and analysis, we make all data and a
data visualization tool available at: www.crosscare.net.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) enabled transformative progress in many applications [1–5]. Benchmarks to assess language models, such as GLU E [6] and SuperGLU E [7], are instrumental in
evaluating general language understanding and complex task performance. However, as LLMs are
increasingly applied in diverse domains, challenges of domain knowledge grounding [1, 2, 8–11],
safety [12–17], hallucinations [18, 19], and bias [20–23] have emerged as important issues that are
inadequately assessed by existing benchmarks. These problems are magnified in high-stakes domains
like healthcare, given the potential for biased or inaccurate outputs [24–28] to influence disparities in
health care and outcomes.
This paper investigates representational biases in LLMs, focusing on medical information. Our
research explores the interplay between biases in pretraining datasets and their manifestation in LLMs’
∗

Co-first authors: Shan Chen and Jack Gallifant
Co-second authors: Mingye Gao and Pedro Moreira
‡
Corresponding author: dbitterman@bwh.harvard.edu
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

