Warped Diffusion: Solving Video Inverse Problems
with Image Diffusion Models

Giannis Daras∗
UT Austin

Weili Nie
NVIDIA

Morteza Mardani
NVIDIA

Karsten Kreis
NVIDIA
Nikola B. Kovachki
NVIDIA

Alexandros G. Dimakis
UT Austin
Arash Vahdat
NVIDIA

Abstract
Using image models naively for solving inverse video problems often suffers from
flickering, texture-sticking, and temporal inconsistency in generated videos. To
tackle these problems, in this paper, we view frames as continuous functions in the
2D space, and videos as a sequence of continuous warping transformations between
different frames. This perspective allows us to train function space diffusion models
only on images and utilize them to solve temporally correlated inverse problems.
The function space diffusion models need to be equivariant with respect to the underlying spatial transformations. To ensure temporal consistency, we introduce a simple post-hoc test-time guidance towards (self)-equivariant solutions. Our method
allows us to deploy state-of-the-art latent diffusion models such as Stable Diffusion
XL to solve video inverse problems. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method for video inpainting and 8× video super-resolution, outperforming existing
techniques based on noise transformations. We provide generated video results in
the following URL: https://giannisdaras.github.io/warped_diffusion.github.io/.

How I Warp
Your Noise

Diffusion models (DMs) [79, 39, 82] can synthesize photorealistic imagery [73, 64, 66, 5, 60, 26].
They can be conditioned easily, through explicit training or guidance [25, 41], and have
also been widely used to solve inverse problems [19, 86, 15, 16, 80, 84, 47, 56], in particular
for image processing applications like inpainting
and super-resolution [40, 72, 74, 66].

Input Video

Introduction

Warped Diffusion
(Ours)

1

How do these methods extend to video processing and solving inverse problems on
videos? Although video DMs are seeing rapid
progress [38, 78, 9, 29, 8, 30, 7, 11], general textto-video synthesis has not yet reached the level of Figure 1: Inpainting results for “a robot sitting
robustness and expressivity comparable to modern on a bench”. As the input video shifts smoothly,
image models. Moreover, no state-of-the-art video our output frames stay consistent.
generative models are publicly available [11], and
most video DMs are computationally expensive. To circumvent these challenges, a natural research
direction is to leverage existing, powerful image generative models to solve video inverse problems.
∗

The work was done during an internship at NVIDIA.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

