Task Confusion and Catastrophic Forgetting in
Class-Incremental Learning: A Mathematical
Framework for Discriminative and Generative
Modelings

Milad Khademi Nori∗
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Queen’s University
Kingston, Ontario, Canada
19mkn1@queensu.ca

Il-Min Kim
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Queen’s University
Kingston, Ontario, Canada
ilmin.kim@queensu.ca

Abstract
In class-incremental learning (class-IL), models must classify all previously seen
classes at test time without task-IDs, leading to task confusion. Despite being
a key challenge, task confusion lacks a theoretical understanding. We present a
novel mathematical framework for class-IL and prove the Infeasibility Theorem,
showing optimal class-IL is impossible with discriminative modeling due to task
confusion. However, we establish the Feasibility Theorem, demonstrating that
generative modeling can achieve optimal class-IL by overcoming task confusion.
We then assess popular class-IL strategies, including regularization, bias-correction,
replay, and generative classifier, using our framework. Our analysis suggests that
adopting generative modeling, either for generative replay or direct classification
(generative classifier), is essential for optimal class-IL.

1

Introduction

Incremental learning (IL) has garnered significant interest in academia and industry [1, 2] due to its
ability to (i) achieve more resource-efficient learning by avoiding retraining models from scratch
with new data, (ii) reduce memory usage by eliminating the need to store raw data, which is vital for
complying with privacy regulations, and (iii) develop a learning system that mirrors human learning
[3]. There are two categories of incremental learning settings in the literature [4]: (i) task-based
[5, 6, 7] and (ii) task-free [8, 9, 10, 11].
Task-based category itself consists of three scenarios [5]: (a) task-incremental learning (task-IL), (b)
domain-incremental learning (domain-IL), and (c) class-incremental learning (class-IL). The three
scenarios differ at the test time, where the task-IL scenario is given with the task-ID, the domain-IL
does not need task-ID to begin with, whereas the class-IL must infer task-ID. The second category,
which is task-free, aims to banish the notion of task (boundary) at all, both at the training and test
time.
This paper focuses on task-based class-IL, currently the most popular regime [12, 13, 14, 15].
However, our theoretical results and proposed scheme are applicable to task-free settings as well
[8, 9]. Progressing towards task-free learning is important because IL, like the brain, should aim to
be less reliant on supervision, eliminating the need for task-IDs.
∗
Milad’s current affiliation is Toronto Metropolitan University, and his current email is mkn@torontomu.ca.
His personal email is miladkhademinori@gmail.com.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

