Deep Support Vectors

Junhoo Lee

Hyunho Lee
Kyomin Hwang
Nojun Kwak∗
Seoul National University
{mrjunoo, hhlee822, kyomin98, nojunk}@snu.ac.kr

ImageNet

Drilling Rig

Black Grouse

Volcano

Rocking Chair

Cabbage

Slug

Wall Clock

Vacuum Cleaner

Beaker

Greenhouse

Plane

Car

Bird

Cat

Deer

Dog

Frog

Horse

Ship

Truck

Castle

Wolf

Clock

Oak Tree

Kangaroo

Poppy Flower

Bed

Dolphin

Baby

Tractor

CIFAR10

CIFAR100

Figure 1: Generated images using a model trained with the ImageNet, CIFAR10, and CIFAR100
datasets, respectively. Each image was generated without referencing the original training data.

Abstract
Deep learning has achieved tremendous success. However, unlike SVMs, which
provide direct decision criteria and can be trained with a small dataset, it still has
significant weaknesses due to its requirement for massive datasets during training
and the black-box characteristics on decision criteria. This paper addresses these
issues by identifying support vectors in deep learning models. To this end, we
propose the DeepKKT condition, an adaptation of the traditional Karush-KuhnTucker (KKT) condition for deep learning models, and confirm that generated
Deep Support Vectors (DSVs) using this condition exhibit properties similar to
traditional support vectors. This allows us to apply our method to few-shot dataset
distillation problems and alleviate the black-box characteristics of deep learning
models. Additionally, we demonstrate that the DeepKKT condition can transform
conventional classification models into generative models with high fidelity, particularly as latent generative models using class labels as latent variables. We
validate the effectiveness of DSVs using common datasets (ImageNet, CIFAR10
and CIFAR100) on the general architectures (ResNet and ConvNet), proving their
practical applicability. (See Fig. 1)

1

Introduction

Although deep learning has gained enormous success, it requires huge amounts of data for training,
and its black-box characteristics regarding decision criteria result in a lack of reliability. For example,
CLIP [24] needs 400 million image pairs for training and Stable Diffusion XL (SDXL) [25] requires
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

