Recovering Complete Actions for Cross-dataset
Skeleton Action Recognition

1

Hanchao Liu1 Yujiang Li1 Tai-Jiang Mu1∗ Shi-Min Hu1
BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University

Abstract
Despite huge progress in skeleton-based action recognition, its generalizability to
different domains remains a challenging issue. In this paper, to solve the skeleton
action generalization problem, we present a recover-and-resample augmentation
framework based on a novel complete action prior. We observe that human daily
actions are confronted with temporal mismatch across different datasets, as they
are usually partial observations of their complete action sequences. By recovering
complete actions and resampling from these full sequences, we can generate strong
augmentations for unseen domains. At the same time, we discover the nature
of general action completeness within large datasets, indicated by the per-frame
diversity over time. This allows us to exploit two assets of transferable knowledge
that can be shared across action samples and be helpful for action completion:
boundary poses for determining the action start, and linear temporal transforms
for capturing global action patterns. Therefore, we formulate the recovering
stage as a two-step stochastic action completion with boundary pose-conditioned
extrapolation followed by smooth linear transforms. Both the boundary poses and
linear transforms can be efficiently learned from the whole dataset via clustering.
We validate our approach on a cross-dataset setting with three skeleton action
datasets, outperforming other domain generalization approaches by a considerable
margin.

1

Introduction

Skeleton-based action recognition has recently achieved great success [57, 42, 6, 29]. The skeletonbased action representation has the advantage of removed background changes and camera positions,
making it more robust compared to RGB representation. However, the generalizability to unseen
domains under such a representation is still affected by the inherent spatiotemporal difference of
3D coordinates of a same action across domains, which yet largely remains an under-explored issue.
In this paper, we study the single domain generalization problem [55] for skeleton-based action
recognition, in which we do not have knowledge about the target domain.
Essentially, both cross-subject and cross-view settings [41] fall under the category of cross-domain
settings, and they can be well addressed by designing more powerful backbones and applying
geometric transformations, achieving high accuracy in the test set [6, 29]. However, we find that in
the cross-dataset setting where source and target data come from different datasets, the performance
on accuracy degrades a lot (around or more than 20% in some cases [46]) and cannot be well remedied
by the above approaches. This indicates drastic domain gap in the inherent feature of human actions
across datasets, posing great challenges for real-life applications [40, 18] and calling for research on
domain generalization techniques for skeleton-based representation, which is the focus of this paper.
∗

Tai-Jiang Mu is the corresponding author. Email: taijiang@tsinghua.edu.cn. Code is available at https:
//github.com/HanchaoLiu/Recover-and-Resample
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

