Infinite Limits of Multi-head Transformer Dynamics

Blake Bordelon, Hamza Chaudhry, Cengiz Pehlevan
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Center for Brain Science
Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural and Artificial Intelligence
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
blake_bordelon@g.harvard.edu
hchaudhry@g.harvard.edu
cpehlevan@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
In this work, we analyze various scaling limits of the training dynamics of transformer models in the feature learning regime. We identify the set of parameterizations that admit well-defined infinite width and depth limits, allowing the attention
layers to update throughout training–a relevant notion of feature learning in these
models. We then use tools from dynamical mean field theory (DMFT) to analyze
various infinite limits (infinite key/query dimension, infinite heads, and infinite
depth) which have different statistical descriptions depending on which infinite
limit is taken and how attention layers are scaled. We provide numerical evidence
of convergence to the limits and discuss how the parameterization qualitatively
influences learned features.

1

Introduction

Increasing the scale of transformer models has continued to improve performance of deep learning
systems across many settings including computer vision [1, 2, 3, 4] and language modeling [5, 6, 7,
8, 9]. However, understanding the optimization stability and limiting behavior of these models under
increases in model scale remains a core challenge.
One approach to scaling up systems in a stable and predictable way is to identify parameterizations
of neural networks that give approximately scale-independent feature updates during training [10,
11, 12]. The mean field parameterization, commonly referred to as µP, is a well-known example that
satisfies this property [13, 14, 15]. When such parameterizations are adopted, the learned internal
representations in hidden layers of the network are very similar across model scales [16, 17], but
performance tends to improve with model scale [10, 11, 12]. Further, theoretical results about their
limits can often be obtained using Tensor Programs [14] or dynamical mean field theory (DMFT)
techniques [15, 17].
In this work, we develop a theoretical treatment of randomly initialized transformers. We study
various scaling limits of the training dynamics of these models including the infinite key/query
dimension limit, the infinite head limit, and the infinite depth limit. Concretely, our contributions are
the following:
1. We derive a DMFT for feature learning in randomly initialized transformers with key/query
dimension N , attention head count H and depth L. From the derived DMFT action, we
identify large N , large H and large L limits of the training dynamics.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

