BTS: Building Timeseries Dataset:
Empowering Large-Scale Building Analytics
Arian Prabowo1 , Xiachong Lin1 , Imran Razzak1 , Hao Xue1 , Emily W. Yap2 , Matthew Amos3 ,
Flora D. Salim1
CSE, UNSW ∗, Sydney NSW 2052
SBRC †, UOW, Wollongong NSW 2522
3
Energy, CSIRO ‡, Newcastle NSW 2304
{arian.prabowo, imran.razzak, hao.xue1, flora.salim}@unsw.edu.au
dawn.lin@student.unsw.edu.au
eyap@uow.edu.au
matt.amos@csiro.au
1

2

Abstract
Buildings play a crucial role in human well-being, influencing occupant comfort,
health, and safety. Additionally, they contribute significantly to global energy
consumption, accounting for one-third of total energy usage, and carbon emissions.
Optimizing building performance presents a vital opportunity to combat climate
change and promote human flourishing. However, research in building analytics
has been hampered by the lack of accessible, available, and comprehensive realworld datasets on multiple building operations. In this paper, we introduce the
Building TimeSeries (BTS) dataset. Our dataset covers three buildings over a
three-year period, comprising more than ten thousand timeseries data points with
hundreds of unique classes. Moreover, the metadata is standardized using the
Brick schema. To demonstrate the utility of this dataset, we performed benchmarks
on the multi-label timeseries classification task. This task represent an essential
initial step in addressing challenges related to interoperability in building analytics.
Access to the dataset and the code used for benchmarking are available here:
https://github.com/cruiseresearchgroup/DIEF_BTS

1

Introduction

Importance of building analytics. Building analytics, also known as data-driven smart building [12],
involves the automated adjustment of building operations to minimize emissions and costs, optimize
energy usage, and enhance indoor environmental quality and occupant experience, including comfort,
health, and safety [72]. This is particularly crucial given that buildings account for a third of global
energy usage and a quarter of global carbon emissions, comparable to the transport sector [27].
Optimizing building performance has the potential to significantly mitigate climate change and
promote human well-being.
Literature gaps. This paper addresses two critical gaps in building analytics research. Firstly,
in Section 2.1, we highlight the scarcity of publicly available and freely accessible datasets on
comprehensive real-world building operations, as exemplified in Table 1. While LBNL59 [49, 36] is
the only dataset that captures various aspects of building operations comprehensively, it only includes
data from a single building.
∗

School of Computer Science and Engineering (CSE), University of New South Wales (UNSW).
Sustainable Buildings Research Centre (SBRC), University of Wollongong (UOW).
‡
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO).
†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

