Regularized Adaptive Momentum Dual
Averaging with an Efficient Inexact Subproblem
Solver for Training Structured Neural Network

Zih-Syuan Huang
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering
National Taiwan University
Taipei 106, Taiwan
r11922210@ntu.edu.tw
Ching-pei Lee
Department of Advanced Data Science
Institute of Statistical Mathematics
Tachikawa, Tokyo 190-8562, Japan
chingpei@ism.ac.jp

Abstract
We propose a Regularized Adaptive Momentum Dual Averaging (RAMDA)
algorithm for training structured neural networks. Similar to existing regularized adaptive methods, the subproblem for computing the update direction
of RAMDA involves a nonsmooth regularizer and a diagonal preconditioner,
and therefore does not possess a closed-form solution in general. We thus
also carefully devise an implementable inexactness condition that retains
convergence guarantees similar to the exact versions, and propose a companion efficient solver for the subproblems of both RAMDA and existing methods
to make them practically feasible. We leverage the theory of manifold identification in variational analysis to show that, even in the presence of such
inexactness, the iterates of RAMDA attain the ideal structure induced by the
regularizer at the stationary point of asymptotic convergence. This structure
is locally optimal near the point of convergence, so RAMDA is guaranteed
to obtain the best structure possible among all methods converging to the
same point, making it the first regularized adaptive method outputting
models that possess outstanding predictive performance while being (locally) optimally structured. Extensive numerical experiments in large-scale
modern computer vision, language modeling, and speech tasks show that
the proposed RAMDA is efficient and consistently outperforms state of the
art for training structured neural network. Implementation of our algorithm
is available at https://www.github.com/ismoptgroup/RAMDA/.

1

Introduction

Since the recent emergence of ChatGPT, large language models (LLMs) and other huge
deep learning models have garnered much attention and popularity, even among the public
who are unfamiliar with machine learning. A challenge with such gigantic neural network
models is their vast number of model parameters, reaching hundreds of billions, resulting in
expensive storage and inference. It thus becomes crucial to find ways to exploit structures in
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

