Practical Shuffle Coding

Julius Kunze
University College London
juliuskunze@gmail.com

Daniel Severo
University of Toronto and Vector Institute
d.severo@mail.utoronto.ca

Jan-Willem van de Meent
University of Amsterdam
j.w.vandemeent@uva.nl

James Townsend
University of Amsterdam
j.h.n.townsend@uva.nl

Abstract
We present a general method for lossless compression of unordered data structures,
including multisets and graphs. It is a variant of shuffle coding that is many orders
of magnitude faster than the original and enables ‘one-shot’ compression of single
unordered objects. Our method achieves state-of-the-art compression rates on
various large-scale network graphs at speeds of megabytes per second, efficiently
handling even a multi-gigabyte plain graph with one billion edges. We release an
implementation that can be easily adapted to different data types and statistical
models.

1

Introduction

Big data is often contained in unordered objects, such as sets, multisets, graphs, or hypergraphs.
Unlike ordered data types like text, audio, and video, the order of elements in these structures is
irrelevant and represents redundant information. Recent work by Kunze et al. (2024) shows that
eliminating this redundancy can lead to significant storage and transmission savings. It proposed
shuffle coding, an entropy coding method based on bits-back (Townsend et al., 2019) with asymmetric
numeral systems (ANS; Duda, 2009) that approaches optimal compression rates for sequences of
unordered objects. However, their specific method, which we will refer to as complete joint shuffle
coding, has two major limitations that make it impractical for large unordered data structures: It
incurs a prohibitive initial bit cost in one-shot scenarios where only a single unordered object needs
to be compressed, and it requires the exact computation of automorphism groups which is often slow
or completely intractable, for example for large graphs.
To overcome these limitations, we propose two new variants, autoregressive and incomplete shuffle
coding. Autoregressive shuffle coding builds on recent work by Severo et al. (2023a), which
constructed an optimal one-shot codec for multisets from a codec of vectors by storing information in
an ordering. This method depends on the simple structure of multisets’ automorphism groups, and
does not extend to other unordered objects such as unlabeled graphs. Autoregressive shuffle coding
generalizes this method to arbitrary unordered objects. Incomplete shuffle coding approximates an
object’s symmetries, enabling compression despite intractable automorphism groups. These two
variants can be combined into a method allowing one-shot compression of large unordered data
structures at practical speeds.
Our experiments show that our high-performance implementation matches the optimal compression
rates from Severo et al. (2023a) for multisets, but is orders of magnitude faster. Similarly, it is many
orders of magnitude faster than joint shuffle coding for medium-sized graphs of various types with
minimal rate increase. We also compress much larger unordered graphs, including social network
graphs and random graphs with up to a billion edges, which are infeasible for complete shuffle
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

