Long-Horizon Planning for Multi-Agent Robots in
Partially Observable Environments

Siddharth Nayak1∗ Adelmo Morrison Orozco1∗ Marina Ten Have1 Vittal Thirumalai1
Jackson Zhang1 Darren Chen1 Aditya Kapoor2 Eric Robinson3 Karthik Gopalakrishnan4
James Harrison5 Brian Ichter† 5 Anuj Mahajan‡ 6 Hamsa Balakrishnan1
1
MIT 2 TCS 3 USAF-MIT AI Accelerator
4
Stanford 5 Google DeepMind 6 Apple

Abstract
The ability of Language Models (LMs) to understand natural language makes them
a powerful tool for parsing human instructions into task plans for autonomous
robots. Unlike traditional planning methods that rely on domain-specific knowledge and handcrafted rules, LMs generalize from diverse data and adapt to various
tasks with minimal tuning, acting as a compressed knowledge base. However,
LMs in their standard form face challenges with long-horizon tasks, particularly in
partially observable multi-agent settings. We propose an LM-based Long-Horizon
Planner for Multi-Agent Robotics (LLaMAR), a cognitive architecture for planning that achieves state-of-the-art results in long-horizon tasks within partially
observable environments. LLaMAR employs a plan-act-correct-verify framework,
allowing self-correction from action execution feedback without relying on oracles
or simulators. Additionally, we present MAP-THOR, a comprehensive test suite
encompassing household tasks of varying complexity within the AI2-THOR environment. Experiments show that LLaMAR achieves a 30% higher success rate than
other state-of-the-art LM-based multi-agent planners in MAP-THOR and Search &
Rescue tasks. Code can be found at https://github.com/nsidn98/LLaMAR

1

Introduction

Creating embodied agents that assist humans in real-life scenarios is a significant challenge when
humans communicate their intentions in natural language. Certain tasks like moving furniture [1, 2],
search-and-rescue [3], environmental monitoring [4], etc,. require coordination among multiple agents
to solve the tasks efficiently as compared to single-agent scenarios. This challenge of understanding
these natural language inputs and effectively coordinating these agents to solve the task is exacerbated
in the multi-agent scenario. Recent works [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13] have shown that Language
Models (LMs) 1 can effectively use language instructions to develop plans for robots. However, most
studies focus on single-agent long-horizon task planning. Naïve extensions of single-agent planning
algorithms to multi-agent settings often fail due to environment non-stationarity, where the policies
of other agents—modeled as a part of the environment—are continuously changing [14, 15]. Such
failures lead to suboptimal performance as agents struggle to anticipate and adapt to the actions of
others. We therefore formulate a centralized process in which decisions are made simultaneously
for all agents based on their (partial) observations, similar to the centralized multi-agent system
framework (CMAS) proposed in [16]. Leveraging the ability of pre-trained LMs to generalize across
diverse tasks, we aim to use LMs for long-horizon embodied multi-agent task planning.
The key insight of our work is that integrating a plan-act-correct-verify framework with LMs
enables a robust and adaptive approach to multi-agent task planning in dynamic, partially observable
Equal Contribution. † Now at Physical Intelligence. ‡ Work done outside Apple.
Language Models as LLMs, Vision Language Models as VLMs
*

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

1

We denote Large

