Training-Free Open-Ended Object Detection and
Segmentation via Attention as Prompts

Zhiwei Lin Yongtao Wang∗ Zhi Tang
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, China
{zwlin, wyt, tangzhi}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing perception models achieve great success by learning from large amounts
of labeled data, but they still struggle with open-world scenarios. To alleviate
this issue, researchers introduce open-set perception tasks to detect or segment
unseen objects in the training set. However, these models require predefined
object categories as inputs during inference, which are not available in real-world
scenarios. Recently, researchers pose a new and more practical problem, i.e.,
open-ended object detection, which discovers unseen objects without any object
categories as inputs. In this paper, we present VL-SAM, a training-free framework
that combines the generalized object recognition model (i.e., Vision-Language
Model) with the generalized object localization model (i.e., Segment-Anything
Model), to address the open-ended object detection and segmentation task. Without
additional training, we connect these two generalized models with attention maps
as the prompts. Specifically, we design an attention map generation module by
employing head aggregation and a regularized attention flow to aggregate and
propagate attention maps across all heads and layers in VLM, yielding high-quality
attention maps. Then, we iteratively sample positive and negative points from
the attention maps with a prompt generation module and send the sampled points
to SAM to segment corresponding objects. Experimental results on the long-tail
instance segmentation dataset (LVIS) show that our method surpasses the previous
open-ended method on the object detection task and can provide additional instance
segmentation masks. Besides, VL-SAM achieves favorable performance on the
corner case object detection dataset (CODA), demonstrating the effectiveness of
VL-SAM in real-world applications. Moreover, VL-SAM exhibits good model
generalization that can incorporate various VLMs and SAMs.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved remarkable success in perception tasks, with autonomous driving as a
typical practical application. Existing deep learning based perception models rely on extensive labeled
training data to learn to recognize and locate objects. However, training data cannot cover all types
of objects in real-world scenarios. When faced with out-of-distribution objects, existing perception
models may fail to recognize and locate objects, which can lead to severe safety issues [24].
Many open-world perception methods [15, 48] are proposed to address this issue. Open-world
perception tries to give precise results in dynamic and unpredictable environments, which contain
novel objects and involve scene domain shifting. Current open-world perception methods can be
roughly divided into two categories: open-set and open-ended. Open-set methods [52, 43, 6] often
calculate the similarity between image regions and category names with a pretrained CLIP [35]
model. Thus, they require predefined object categories as inputs for the CLIP text encoder during
∗

Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

