Score-based 3D molecule generation with neural fields

Matthieu Kirchmeyer* , Pedro O. Pinheiro* , Saeed Saremi
Prescient Design, Genentech

Abstract
We introduce a new representation for 3D molecules based on their continuous
atomic density fields. Using this representation, we propose a new model based on
walk-jump sampling [1] for unconditional 3D molecule generation in the continuous space using neural fields. Our model, FuncMol, encodes molecular fields into
latent codes using a conditional neural field, samples noisy codes from a Gaussiansmoothed distribution with Langevin MCMC (walk), denoises these samples in a
single step (jump), and finally decodes them into molecular fields. FuncMol performs all-atom generation of 3D molecules without assumptions on the molecular
structure and scales well with the size of molecules, unlike most approaches. Our
method achieves competitive results on drug-like molecules and easily scales to
macro-cyclic peptides, with at least one order of magnitude faster sampling.1

1

Introduction

Generative modeling of 3D molecular structures, if deployed successfully, can help on many problems
in material and life sciences. Recently, state-of-the-art image and text generative models were adapted
to 3D molecule generation, achieving some degree of success [2, 3]. However, unlike other domains
where the data modality is defined by the representation itself (e.g., a digital image is a tensor of
pixels), there are multiple ways to represent a molecule. Therefore, an important problem to consider
when modeling 3D molecules is: what constitutes a good representation for molecules?
Recent methods for 3D molecule generation usually represent molecules as point clouds of atoms [4]
or discrete grids of atomic densities [5], which we will refer to as voxel grids. Point clouds are
processed by graph neural networks (GNNs), usually based on equivariant architectures [6, 7]. GNNs
are known to be less expressive than other architectures due to the message passing formalism [8,
9, 10] and often scale quadratically with the number of atoms. On the other hand, voxel grids are
compatible with more expressive models (e.g., convnets and transformers) but computation and
memory scales cubically with the volume occupied by the molecules. These limitations in expressivity
and scalability hinder the scope of application of these models.
In this work, we propose a new representation for molecules that overcomes those limitations.
Inspired by the 3D computer vision community [11], we represent molecules as fields encoding
atomic occupancy, i.e., continuous functions that map 3D coordinates to atomic densities. Arguably
this representation is more natural for molecules than for visual data: while visual data is obtained
via discrete measurements, molecular fields are continuous by nature. We handle these fields as such,
by parameterizing the molecular occupancy field with a neural network, shared among all molecules,
and modulation codes, specific to each molecule. Fields that are parametrized by neural networks are
referred to as neural fields, implicit neural representations (INR) or coordinate-based neural networks.
The former models common molecular structures (e.g., bonds, angles, valencies, symmetries) while
the later encodes variations that make each molecule unique. Given a modulation code, we decode the
*

Equal contribution. Correspondence to kirchmeyer.matthieu@gene.com, oliveira_pinheiro.
pedro@gene.com, saremi.saeed@gene.com
1
The code is available at https://github.com/prescient-design/funcmol.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

