Multi-Object 3D Grounding with Dynamic Modules
and Language-Informed Spatial Attention

Haomeng Zhang Chiao-An Yang Raymond A. Yeh
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University
{zhan5050, yang2300, rayyeh}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Multi-object 3D Grounding involves locating 3D boxes based on a given query
phrase from a point cloud. It is a challenging and significant task with numerous
applications in visual understanding, human-computer interaction, and robotics.
To tackle this challenge, we introduce D-LISA, a two-stage approach incorporating
three innovations. First, a dynamic vision module that enables a variable and learnable number of box proposals. Second, a dynamic camera positioning that extracts
features for each proposal. Third, a language-informed spatial attention module
that better reasons over the proposals to output the final prediction. Empirically,
experiments show that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on
multi-object 3D grounding by 12.8% (absolute) and is competitive in single-object
3D grounding.1

1

Introduction

Building agents that can operate in real-world environments with humans has been a fundamental
goal of artificial intelligence. Importantly, the agent would need to understand the 3D scene and
natural language to take instructions from humans. To benchmark these capabilities, there is an
increasing amount of interest in the task of object grounding in 3D [2, 4, 8, 17, 21, 23, 39, 40, 46, 50].
Recently, the task of multi-object 3D grounding [52] has been proposed, i.e., given a text description
and a 3D scene localize all objects referred by the description.
Along with the benchmark, Zhang et al. [52] proposes, M3DRef-CLIP, a two-stage approach that
first detects all the potential objects (capped at a maximum number) from the 3D scene, and then
reasons about which of the objects are relevant to the text description by extracting features for each
of the objects. Specifically, they leverage both 3D features from the point cloud, and 2D features
extracted from renderings of the detected objects at fixed camera poses. These object features along
with the text embedding are passed into a Transformer to make the final prediction. Model training is
formulated as multi-output classification, where each potential object is classified based on whether it
is referred to by the text.
In this work, we identify several directions in which M3DRef-CLIP could be improved. First, the
generation of object proposals is based on a fixed maximum. Prior work [30] points out the dilemma
of deciding the number of boxes in the 3D grounding task under the two-stage detection-and-selection
diagram. Excessive proposals may increase complexity and lead to redundant computations while
sparse proposals may miss critical information in the scene. Second, the camera poses of the renderer
are fixed to hand-selected viewpoints, which seems unlikely to be ideal given the variability in object
sizes. Third, the fusion module does not effectively reason over the spatial relationship of the objects
based on the text description.
1

Project page: https://haomengz.github.io/dlisa
Code: https://github.com/haomengz/D-LISA

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

