M EGALODON: Efficient LLM Pretraining and
Inference with Unlimited Context Length

Xuezhe Maπ ∗
Hao Zhangδ
µ

Xiaomeng Yangµ∗

Wenhan Xiongµ

Beidi Chenκ Lili Yuµ

Jonathan Mayπ Luke Zettlemoyerµ Omer Levyµ Chunting Zhouµ∗

AI at Meta
Carnegie Mellon University

κ

π

δ

University of Southern California
University of California San Diego

Abstract
The quadratic complexity and weak length extrapolation of Transformers limits
their ability to scale to long sequences, and while sub-quadratic solutions like linear
attention and state space models exist, they empirically underperform Transformers
in pretraining efficiency and downstream task accuracy. We introduce M EGA LODON , an neural architecture for efficient sequence modeling with unlimited
context length. M EGALODON inherits the architecture of M EGA (exponential
moving average with gated attention), and further introduces multiple technical
components to improve its capability and stability, including complex exponential moving average (CEMA), timestep normalization layer, normalized attention
mechanism and pre-norm with two-hop residual configuration. In a controlled
head-to-head comparison with L LAMA2, M EGALODON achieves better efficiency
than Transformer in the scale of 7 billion parameters and 2 trillion training tokens.
M EGALODON reaches a training loss of 1.70, landing mid-way between L LAMA27B (1.75) and 13B (1.67). The improvements of M EGALODON over Transformers
are robust throughout a range of benchmarks across different tasks and modalities.
Code: https://github.com/XuezheMax/megalodon

1

Introduction

In many real-world applications, such as multi-turn conversation, long-document comprehension,
and video generation, large language models (LLMs) must efficiently process long sequential data,
understand internal long-range dynamics, and generate coherent output. The Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017), despite its remarkable capabilities, faces challenges with quadratic
computational complexity and limited inductive bias for length generalization, making it inefficient
for long sequence modeling (Wang et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024). Even with recently proposed
distributed attention solutions (Li et al., 2023b; Liu et al., 2024), computing a single training step of a
7B parameter model over a 1M-token sequence is more than 100 times slower than performing the
equivalent computation using 256 separate sequences of 4K tokens each.
Techniques like efficient attention mechanisms (Tay et al., 2020; Ma et al., 2021) and structured state
space models (Gu et al., 2022a; Poli et al., 2023; Gu and Dao, 2023) have been introduced to overcome
these limitations, aiming to enhance scalability and performance. However, the practical application
of these methods still falls short of Transformers (Tay et al., 2022; Gu and Dao, 2023). This work
introduces an unlimited context model that outperforms the canonical Transformer architecture on
real-world language modeling.
∗

Equal Contribution. Correspondence to chuntinz@meta.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

