RTify: Aligning Deep Neural Networks with Human
Behavioral Decisions
Yu-Ang Cheng∗1 , Ivan Felipe Rodriguez∗1 , Sixuan Chen1 ,
Kohitij Kar2 , Takeo Watanabe1 , Thomas Serre1
1
Brown University 2 York University
{yuang_cheng,ivan_felipe_rodriguez
sixuan_chen1,takeo_watanabe,thomas_serre}@brown.edu
k0h1t1j@yorku.ca

Abstract
Current neural network models of primate vision focus on replicating overall levels
of behavioral accuracy, often neglecting perceptual decisions’ rich, dynamic nature.
Here, we introduce a novel computational framework to model the dynamics
of human behavioral choices by learning to align the temporal dynamics of a
recurrent neural network (RNN) to human reaction times (RTs). We describe an
approximation that allows us to constrain the number of time steps an RNN takes
to solve a task with human RTs. The approach is extensively evaluated against
various psychophysics experiments. We also show that the approximation can be
used to optimize an “ideal-observer” RNN model to achieve an optimal tradeoff
between speed and accuracy without human data. The resulting model is found to
account well for human RT data. Finally, we use the approximation to train a deep
learning implementation of the popular Wong-Wang decision-making model. The
model is integrated with a convolutional neural network (CNN) model of visual
processing and evaluated using both artificial and natural image stimuli. Overall,
we present a novel framework that helps align current vision models with human
behavior, bringing us closer to an integrated model of human vision.

1

Introduction

Categorizing visual stimuli is crucial for survival, and it requires an organism to make informed
decisions in dynamic and noisy environments. This critical aspect of visual perception has driven the
development of computational models to understand and replicate these processes. Traditionally, the
field has followed two distinct paths.
On the one hand, image-computable vision models are used to predict behavioral decisions during
(rapid) visual categorization tasks ranging from models of early- [1–3], mid- [4–6] and high-level
vision [7–9] (see [10] for a review). More recently, these earlier models were superseded by deep
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which have become the de-facto choice for modeling behavioral decision [11–14]. Models are typically evaluated by estimating confidence scores computed for
individual images, which are then correlated with similar scores derived for human observers(such
as the proportion of correct human responses for each image). Such metrics ignore human reaction
times (RTs); hence, current vision models only partially account for human decisions.
On the other hand, decision-making models have been used to explain how visual information gets
integrated over time – predicting behavioral choices and RTs jointly. Notably, mathematical models,
exemplified by evidence accumulation models such as the drift-diffusion [15–17] and linear ballistic
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

