RAW: A Robust and Agile Plug-and-Play Watermark
Framework for AI-Generated Images with Provable
Guarantees
Xun Xian
Department of ECE
University of Minnesota
xian0044@umn.edu
Xuan Bi
Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
xbi@umn.edu

Ganghua Wang
School of Statistics
University of Minnesota
wang9019@umn.edu
Jayanth Srinivasa
Cisco Research
jasriniv@cisco.com

Ashish Kundu
Cisco Research
ashkundu@cisco.com

Jie Ding
School of Statistics
University of Minnesota
dingj@umn.edu

Mingyi Hong
Department of ECE
University of Minnesota
mhong@umn.edu

Abstract
Safeguarding intellectual property and preventing potential misuse of AI-generated
images are of paramount importance. This paper introduces a robust and agile
plug-and-play watermark detection framework, referred to as RAW. As a departure
from existing encoder-decoder methods, which incorporate fixed binary codes as
watermarks within latent representations, our approach introduces learnable watermarks directly into the original image data. Subsequently, we employ a classifier
that is jointly trained with the watermark to detect the presence of the watermark.
The proposed framework is compatible with various generative architectures and
supports on-the-fly watermark injection after training. By incorporating state-ofthe-art smoothing techniques, we show that the framework also provides provable
guarantees regarding the false positive rate for misclassifying a watermarked image,
even in the presence of adversarial attacks targeting watermark removal. Experiments on a diverse range of images generated by state-of-the-art diffusion models
demonstrate substantially improved watermark encoding speed and watermark
detection performance, under adversarial attacks, while maintaining image quality.
Our code is publicly available here.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Generative Artificial Intelligence, notably in computer vision, has made significant
strides. The adoption of diffusion models (DM) in applications like Stable Diffusion [1] and DALLE2 [2] has greatly improved image generation quality. However, these advancements also raise concerns
about potential misuse, seen in instances such as DeepFake [3] and copyright infringement [4].
To mitigate the potential misuse of diffusion models, the incorporation of watermarks emerges as a
promising solution. Watermarked images, tagged with crafted signals, act as markers to identify their
machine-generated origin. Watermarking techniques designed for generative models can be generally
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

