Acoustic Volume Rendering for
Neural Impulse Response Fields

Zitong Lan1
Chenhao Zheng2
1
University of Pennsylvania

Zhiwei Zheng1
Mingmin Zhao1
2
University of Washington

Abstract
Realistic audio synthesis that captures accurate acoustic phenomena is essential for
creating immersive experiences in virtual and augmented reality. Synthesizing the
sound received at any position relies on the estimation of impulse response (IR),
which characterizes how sound propagates in one scene along different paths
before arriving at the listener’s position. In this paper, we present Acoustic Volume
Rendering (AVR), a novel approach that adapts volume rendering techniques to
model acoustic impulse responses. While volume rendering has been successful in
modeling radiance fields for images and neural scene representations, IRs present
unique challenges as time-series signals. To address these challenges, we introduce
frequency-domain volume rendering and use spherical integration to fit the IR
measurements. Our method constructs an impulse response field that inherently
encodes wave propagation principles and achieves state-of-the-art performance
in synthesizing impulse responses for novel poses. Experiments show that AVR
surpasses current leading methods by a substantial margin. Additionally, we
develop an acoustic simulation platform, AcoustiX, which provides more accurate
and realistic IR simulations than existing simulators. Code for AVR and AcoustiX
are available at https://zitonglan.github.io/avr.

1

Introduction

Our acoustic environment shapes every sound we hear – from the crisp echoes bouncing through
hallways to the layered resonance of a symphony filling a concert hall. These spatial characteristics
not only define our daily auditory experiences but also prove crucial for creating convincing virtual
worlds [15, 60]. At the core of these spatial characteristics is the impulse response (IR), which
captures the complex relationship between an emitted sound and what we hear. Like a unique
acoustic fingerprint, the impulse response varies across different positions, encoding how sound
waves interact with the environment through reflection, diffraction, and absorption [22, 41]. We
can recreate the acoustic experience at any position by convolving the corresponding impulse
response with any desired sound sources (e.g., music, speech). Given its foundational role in
spatial audio synthesis, understanding and modeling the spatial variation of impulse responses
in acoustic environments has emerged as a critical challenge and attracted increasing research
attention [2, 26, 27, 29, 35, 36, 44, 49, 53].
Current approaches construct a neural impulse response field – a learned mapping that generates
impulse responses given the emitter and listener poses. To model the high spatial variation of impulse
responses, existing methods either fit a neural network to directly learn the field [29, 44] or rely
on audio-visual correspondences to learn mappings from vision [26, 27]. While these methods can
approximate the general energy trend, they struggle to capture the detailed characteristics of impulse
responses, leading to incorrect spatial variation of impulse responses (Fig. 1).
We argue that a key barrier to achieving better performance is the absence of physical constraints that
inherently enforce consistency across multiple poses. Without such physical constraints, the network
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

