ActAnywhere: Subject-Aware Video Background
Generation
Boxiao Pan∗
Stanford University
Krishna Kumar Singh
Adobe Research

Zhan Xu
Adobe Research
Yang Zhou
Adobe Research

Chun-Hao Paul Huang
Adobe Research
Leonidas J. Guibas
Stanford University

Jimei Yang
Runway

Abstract
We study a novel problem to automatically generate video background that tailors
to foreground subject motion. It is an important problem for the movie industry
and visual effects community, which traditionally requires tedious manual efforts
to solve. To this end, we propose ActAnywhere, a video diffusion model that takes
as input a sequence of foreground subject segmentation together with an image
of a novel background, and generates a video of the subject interacting in this
background. We train our model on a large-scale dataset of 2.4M videos of humanscene interactions. Through extensive evaluation, we show that our model produces
videos with realistic foreground-background interaction while strictly following
the guidance of the condition image. Our model generalizes to diverse scenarios
including non-human subjects, gaming and animation clips, as well as videos
with multiple moving subjects. Both quantitative and qualitative comparisons
demonstrate that our model significantly outperforms existing methods, which
fail to accomplish the studied task. Please visit our project webpage at https:
//actanywhere.github.io.

1

Introduction

Compositing an acting video of a subject onto a novel background is central for creative story-telling
in filmmaking and visual effects. The key requirement is seamlessly integrating the foreground
subject with the background in terms of camera motions, interactions, lighting and shadows, so that
the composition looks realistic and vivid as if the subject acts physically in the scene. In movie
industry, this process is often conducted by virtual production [1] that requires artists to first create
a 3D scene and then to film the acting video in an LED-walled studio or to render the video in 3D
engines. This process is not only tedious and expensive, but most importantly, prevents artists from
quickly iterating their ideas.
Inspired by this artistic workflow, we study the novel problem of automated subject-aware video
background generation. As shown in fig. 1, given a foreground segmentation sequence that provides
the subject motion, as well as a condition frame that describes a scene, we aim to generate a video
that adapts the subject to this scene with realistically synthesized foreground-background interaction.
This condition frame can be either a background-only image, or a composite frame consisting of both
background and foreground created via photo editing tools [3] or generative image model [32].
This problem, at its core, requires retaining part of the input video while generating the rest to adapt
to it. To the best of our knowledge, the closest works to this setting are those on video editing and
inpainting / outpainting. Video editing methods assume a source video as input and make edits
∗

Work done during an internship at Adobe.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

