3D Structure Prediction of Atomic Systems with
Flow-Based Direct Preference Optimization

Rui Jiao1,2 Xiangzhe Kong1,2 Wenbing Huang3,4∗ Yang Liu1,2∗
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua University
2
Institute for AIR, Tsinghua University
3
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
4
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China

Abstract
Predicting high-fidelity 3D structures of atomic systems is a fundamental yet
challenging problem in scientific domains. While recent work demonstrates the
advantage of generative models in this realm, the exploration of different probability
paths are still insufficient, and hallucinations during sampling are persistently
occurring. To address these pitfalls, we introduce FlowDPO, a novel framework
that explores various probability paths with flow matching models and further
suppresses hallucinations using Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) for structure
generation. Our approach begins with a pre-trained flow matching model to
generate multiple candidate structures for each training sample. These structures are
then evaluated and ranked based on their distance to the ground truth, resulting in
an automatic preference dataset. Using this dataset, we apply DPO to optimize the
original model, improving its performance in generating structures closely aligned
with the desired reference distribution. As confirmed by our theoretical analysis,
such paradigm and objective function are compatible with arbitrary Gaussian paths,
exhibiting favorable universality. Extensive experimental results on antibodies and
crystals demonstrate substantial benefits of our FlowDPO, highlighting its potential
to advance the field of 3D structure prediction with generative models.

1

Introduction

Predicting 3D structures of atomic systems is indispensable in various scientific domains, ranging
from pharmaceutical drug design [1, 17] to materials science [7]. Accurate 3D modeling is not
only crucial for understanding the physical and chemical properties of substances at the atomic
level [2, 18] but also for simulating and predicting their behavior in various environments [3, 26].
Nevertheless, it remains challenging due to the intricate nature of atomic interactions, the vastness of
the conformational space, as well as limited resources of structure data.
Conventional methods typically employ physics-based algorithms to derive structures at local energy
optimum [24, 31, 32]. Recent advancements leverage deep generative model to learn the distribution
of stable structures from available data, showcasing remarkable success across various domains. For
example, DiffAb [20] designs a diffusion-based method for antigen-specific antibody design, which
is further available for antibody structure prediction, and DiffCSP [14] proposes a joint diffusion
framework for crystal structure prediction. Despite these advancements, generative models for
structure prediction are confronted with two primary challenges.
First, existing structure prediction methods predominantly utilize diffusion-based generative models.
While effective, this focus narrows the scope of exploration into other probability paths that could
∗

Wenbing Huang and Yang Liu are corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

