Gliding over the Pareto Front with Uniform Designs

Xiaoyuan Zhanga , Genghui Li b , Xi Lin a , Yichi Zhangc , Yifan Chend , Qingfu Zhanga ∗
a
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong;
b
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
c
Department of Statistics, Indiana University Bloomingtom
d
Departments of Mathematics and Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University

Abstract
Multiobjective optimization (MOO) plays a critical role in various real-world
domains. A major challenge therein is generating K uniform Pareto-optimal
solutions to approximate the entire Pareto front. To address this issue, this paper
firstly introduces fill distance to evaluate the K design points, which provides
a quantitative metric for the representativeness of the design. However, directly
specifying the optimal design that minimizes the fill distance is nearly intractable
due to the involved nested min − max − min problem structure. To address this,
we propose a surrogate “max-packing” design for the fill distance design, which
is easier to optimize and leads to a rate-optimal design with a fill distance at
most 4× the minimum value. Extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world
benchmarks demonstrate that our proposed paradigm efficiently produces highquality, representative solutions and outperforms baseline MOO methods.

Introduction

Multiobjective optimization (MOO) is widely used to inform realworld decision-making across various fields, including materials
science [20, 46, 5, 30], recommendation systems [29, 61, 31], and
industrial design [44, 52, 50, 57]. An MOO problem (MOP) involves
optimizing multiple conflicting objectives, which can be (informally)
formulated as:

Solutions
Covering
PF

1.0
0.8
0.6

f2

1

0.4
0.2

min f (x) = (f1 (x), . . . , fm (x)),

x∈X

(1)

0.0
0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

f1
where m is the number of objectives. Equation (1) is a vector
optimization problem and it does not admit a total ordering, therefore,
to compare solutions, the concept of Pareto optimality is introduced. Figure 1: Covering of a Pareto
A solution is called Pareto optimal if no other solution x′ ∈ X Front (PF). Eight diverse Pareto
objectives are used to cover the
dominates it. Domination occurs when fi (x′ ) ≤ fi (x) for all entire PF with a small covering
i = 1, . . . , m, with at least one strict inequality [37, 19]. In this radius.
paper, f (x) denotes the Pareto objective of a Pareto optimal solution.
The set of all Pareto optimal solutions is the Pareto set (PS), and their objectives form the Pareto front
(PF).
Under mild conditions, a PS or PF forms a continuous (m-1)-dim manifold containing infinitely
many solutions [25]. For a general MOP, it is intractable to precisely depict the entire PS or PF with
a closed-form expression. Researchers thus turns to use a small number K of diverse Pareto optimal
objectives to “represent” the entire PF. Several prior works have been focused on generating diverse
∗
Corresponding to Qingfu Zhang. Contact: {xzhang2523-c@my.,qingfu.zhang@}cityu.edu.hk. The source
code is integrated into the LibMOON library, available at https://github.com/xzhang2523/libmoon.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

