Acceleration Exists! Optimization Problems When
Oracle Can Only Compare Objective Function Values

Aleksandr Lobanov
MIPT, Skoltech, ISP RAS
lobbsasha@mail.ru

Alexander Gasnikov
Innopolis, MIPT, MI RAS
gasnikov@yandex.ru

Andrei Krasnov
MIPT, Innopolis
krasnov.an@phystech.edu

Abstract
Frequently, the burgeoning field of black-box optimization encounters challenges
due to a limited understanding of the mechanisms of the objective function. To
address such problems, in this work we focus on the deterministic concept of Order
Oracle, which only utilizes order access between function values (possibly with
some bounded noise), but without assuming access to their values. As theoretical
results, we propose a new approach to create non-accelerated optimization algorithms (obtained by integrating Order Oracle into existing optimization “tools”) in
non-convex, convex, and strongly convex settings that are as good as both SOTA
coordinate algorithms with first-order oracle and SOTA algorithms with Order Oracle up to logarithm factor. Moreover, using the proposed approach, we provide the
first accelerated optimization algorithm using the Order Oracle. And also, using
an already different approach we provide the asymptotic convergence of the first
algorithm with the stochastic Order Oracle concept. Finally, our theoretical results
demonstrate effectiveness of proposed algorithms through numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

The black box problem has garnered extensive attention in diverse scientific and engineering domains, reflecting the challenge of optimizing systems with complex and opaque objective functions,
prompting the exploration of innovative solutions Conn et al. (2009); Kimiaei and Neumaier (2022).
This paper focuses on solving a standard general optimization problem in the following form:
min {f (x) := Eξ∼D fξ (x)} ,

x∈Rd

(1)

where f : Rd → R is a possibly non-convex, possibly stochastic function. This problem configuration
encompasses a broad range of applications in ML scenarios, e.g. empirical risk minimization,where D
denotes distribution across training data points, and fξ (x) represents loss of model x on data point ξ.
When the objective function f (x) has exclusive access to a zero-order oracle Rosenbrock (1960),
problem (1) falls under the classification of a black-box optimization problem. This class of problems
is actively studied in various application settings, e.g., deep learning Chen et al. (2017); Gao et al.
(2018), federated learning Dai et al. (2020); Alashqar et al. (2023); Patel et al. (2022), reinforcement
learning Choromanski et al. (2018); Mania et al. (2018), overparameterized models Lobanov and
Gasnikov (2023), online optimization (Agarwal et al., 2010; Bach and Perchet, 2016; Akhavan et al.,
2022), multi-armed bandits Shamir (2017); Lattimore and Gyorgy (2021), hyperparameter settings
Bergstra and Bengio (2012); Hernández-Lobato et al. (2014); Nguyen and Balasubramanian (2022),
and control system performance optimization Bansal et al. (2017); Xu et al. (2022). It is important to
highlight that the zero-order oracle presupposes awareness of the objective function’s value f (xk )
at a specific point xk (which may be inexact), enabling the development of effective gradient-free
algorithms tailored to various problem scenarios Gasnikov et al. (2022a).
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

