Rule Extrapolation in Language Models: A Study of
Compositional Generalization on OOD Prompts

Anna Mészáros1 , Szilvia Ujváry1,5 , Wieland Brendel2,3,4 , Patrik Reizinger∗2 , and
Ferenc Huszár∗1
2

1
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
3
ELLIS Institute Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
4
Tübingen AI Center, Tübingen, Germany
5
AI Center, UCL, London, United Kingdom

Abstract
LLMs show remarkable emergent abilities, such as inferring concepts from presumably out-of-distribution prompts, known as in-context learning. Though this success
is often attributed to the Transformer architecture, our systematic understanding is
limited. In complex real-world data sets, even defining what is out-of-distribution is
not obvious. To better understand the OOD behaviour of autoregressive LLMs, we
focus on formal languages, which are defined by the intersection of rules. We define
a new scenario of OOD compositional generalization, termed rule extrapolation.
Rule extrapolation describes OOD scenarios, where the prompt violates at least one
rule. We evaluate rule extrapolation in formal languages with varying complexity
in linear and recurrent architectures, the Transformer, and state space models to
understand the architectures’ influence on rule extrapolation. We also lay the first
stones of a normative theory of rule extrapolation, inspired by the Solomonoff prior
in algorithmic information theory.

1

Introduction

Autoregressive language models (AR LMs) can reach both low training and test loss, but even
minimal test loss is not predictive for out-of-distribution (OOD) model performance [Liu et al.,
2023, Reizinger et al., 2024], i.e. when the test data has vanishing probability under the training
distribution. Despite the success of deploying modern language models in OOD situations, OOD
generalization is not well understood theoretically. Recently, studies started to focus on a specific
form of OOD generalization: compositional generalization in language models [Ahuja and Mansouri,
2024, Han and Padó, 2024, Ramesh et al., 2024, Lake and Baroni, 2023, Reizinger et al., 2024]. To
systematically examine compositional generalization of AR LMs, we study a particular notion of
OOD generalization, which we call rule extrapolation.
Rule extrapolation is a form of compositional generalization: it studies OOD behavior of language
models trained on formal languages defined by a logical conjunction of rules.
For example, the an bn language is the intersection of two rules: (R1) the number of a’s is equal to the
number of b’s and (R2) a’s precede b’s. The prompt bbaab cannot be completed to obey the R2, but
it is still possible to satisfy (R1) (e.g., bbaaba). When a language model trained on an intersection
of rules remains consistent with one of the rules when another is broken, we say it successfully
extrapolated the rule beyond its training data.
∗
Joint senior authors.
Correspondence to
github.com/meszarosanna/rule_extrapolation

am3049@cam.ac.uk.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

Code

available

at:

