Unraveling Molecular Structure:
A Multimodal Spectroscopic Dataset for Chemistry

Marvin Alberts1,2,4∗ Oliver Schilter1,3,4∗ Federico Zipoli1,4
Nina Hartrampf2 Teodoro Laino1,4
1
IBM Research 2 University of Zürich 3 EPFL 4 NCCR Catalysis
marvin.alberts@ibm.com
{oli, fzi, teo}@zurich.ibm.com
nina.hartrampf@chem.uzh.ch

Abstract
Spectroscopic techniques are essential tools for determining the structure of
molecules. Different spectroscopic techniques, such as Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), Infrared spectroscopy, and Mass Spectrometry, provide insight into
the molecular structure, including the presence or absence of functional groups.
Chemists leverage the complementary nature of the different methods to their
advantage. However, the lack of a comprehensive multimodal dataset, containing
spectra from a variety of spectroscopic techniques, has limited machine-learning
approaches mostly to single-modality tasks for predicting molecular structures
from spectra. Here we introduce a dataset comprising simulated 1 H-NMR, 13 CNMR, HSQC-NMR, Infrared, and Mass spectra (positive and negative ion modes)
for 790k molecules extracted from chemical reactions in patent data. This dataset
enables the development of foundation models for integrating information from
multiple spectroscopic modalities, emulating the approach employed by human
experts. Additionally, we provide benchmarks for evaluating single-modality tasks
such as structure elucidation, predicting the spectra for a target molecule, and
functional group predictions. This dataset has the potential automate structure elucidation, streamlining the molecular discovery pipeline from synthesis to structure
determination. The dataset and code for the benchmarks can be found at https:
//rxn4chemistry.github.io/multimodal-spectroscopic-dataset.

1

Introduction

The rapid advancement of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) methods has ushered
in a new era for the field of chemistry. Computational approaches have transformed various aspects
of chemical research, including retrosynthesis planning [1, 2, 3, 4], reaction optimization through
Bayesian optimization [5, 6, 7, 8], molecular design [9, 10, 11, 12] and more. Tasks that were
previously laborious and time-consuming when performed manually are now being automated,
accelerating the discovery process. Despite these advancements, one critical aspect of chemistry that
remains heavily reliant on human expertise is structural elucidation – the process of determining the
molecular structure from spectroscopic data.
While chemists often have an intuition about a molecule that was synthesized, the actual composition
of the product needs to be verified using spectroscopic data. Different spectroscopic techniques yield
different types of information. For instance, certain functional groups (e.g., alcohols) will exhibit
characteristic peaks in specific regions of the infrared (IR) spectrum (e.g., 3200-3300 cm−1 [13]),
†

Equal Contributions

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

