ANAH-v2: Scaling Analytical Hallucination
Annotation of Large Language Models
Yuzhe Gu1,2∗

Ziwei Ji2,3∗

Wenwei Zhang2†

Chengqi Lyu2

Dahua Lin2,4,5

Kai Chen2†

1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
4
MMLab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong 5 HKGAI under InnoHK
{guyuzhe,zhangwenwei,lvchengqi,chenkai}@pjlab.org.cn zjiad@connect.ust.hk

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) exhibit hallucinations in long-form questionanswering tasks across various domains and wide applications. Current hallucination detection and mitigation datasets are limited in domain and size, which
struggle to scale due to prohibitive labor costs and insufficient reliability of existing
hallucination annotators. To facilitate the scalable oversight of LLM hallucinations,
this paper introduces an iterative self-training framework that simultaneously and
progressively scales up the annotation dataset and improves the accuracy of the
annotator. Based on the Expectation Maximization algorithm, in each iteration, the
framework first applies an automatic hallucination annotation pipeline for a scaled
dataset and then trains a more accurate annotator on the dataset. This new annotator
is adopted in the annotation pipeline for the next iteration. Extensive experimental
results demonstrate that the finally obtained hallucination annotator with only 7B
parameters surpasses GPT-4 and obtains new state-of-the-art hallucination detection results on HaluEval and HalluQA by zero-shot inference. Such an annotator
can not only evaluate the hallucination levels of various LLMs on the large-scale
dataset but also help to mitigate the hallucination of LLMs generations, with the
Natural Language Inference metric increasing from 25% to 37% on HaluEval. 1

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown remarkable capabilities in various tasks [10, 11, 35,
51, 57]. However, they tend to produce hallucination, i.e., plausible-sounding but unfaithful or
nonsensical information [5, 30], that significantly hinders their real-world applications. Initial steps
to address this issue involve the creation of datasets that can help to detect, annotate, and mitigate
hallucinations [14, 29, 40]. Since the potential hallucinations of LLMs are in various fields, the
spectrum of knowledge in the dataset is expected to be large-scale and comprehensive, covering
various domains. Consequently, the size and diversity of datasets are critical for the oversight of LLM
hallucinations.
However, constructing and scaling-up hallucination annotation datasets face significant hurdles [8, 9,
29, 43]. One primary challenge is the prohibitively high costs and labor intensity required for their
accurate assessment [43, 47], since the fine-grained hallucination annotation requires intensives labor
for reading long documents and annotating the hallucination details sentence by sentence. Moreover,
due to the insufficiency of accurate human annotations, the reliability of existing hallucination
annotators and detectors becomes another pressing concern [29]. These tools have been found to
∗

1

Equal contribution † Corresponding author
Dataset, code, and model are released at https://github.com/open-compass/ANAH.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

