Using Surrogates in Covariate-adjusted
Response-adaptive Randomized Experiments with
Delayed Outcomes

Lei Shi
Division of Biostatistics
University of California, Berkeley
2121 Berkeley Way, Berkeley, CA 94704
leishi@berkeley.edu

Waverly Wei
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
3670 Trousdale Pkwy, Los Angeles, CA 90089
waverly@marshall.usc.edu

Jingshen Wang
Division of Biostatistics
2121 Berkeley Way, Berkeley, CA 94704
jingshenwang@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Covariate-adjusted response-adaptive randomization (CARA) designs are gaining increasing attention. These designs combine the advantages of randomized
experiments with the ability to adaptively revise treatment allocations based on
data collected across multiple stages, enhancing estimation efficiency. Yet, CARA
designs often assume that primary outcomes are immediately observable, which is
not the case in many clinical scenarios where there is a delay in observing primary
outcomes. This assumption can lead to significant missingness and inefficient
estimation of treatment effects. To tackle this practical challenge, we propose a
CARA experimental strategy integrating delayed primary outcomes with immediately observed surrogate outcomes. Surrogate outcomes are intermediate clinical
outcomes that are predictive or correlated with the primary outcome of interest.
Our design goal is to improve the estimation efficiency of the average treatment
effect (ATE) of the primary outcome utilizing surrogate outcomes. From a methodological perspective, our approach offers two benefits: First, we accommodate
arm and covariates-dependent delay mechanisms without imposing any parametric
modeling assumptions on the distribution of outcomes. Second, when primary
outcomes are not fully observed, surrogate outcomes can guide the adaptive treatment allocation rule. From a theoretical standpoint, we prove the semiparametric
efficiency bound of estimating ATE under delayed primary outcomes while incorporating surrogate outcomes. We show that the ATE estimator under our proposed
design strategy attains this semiparametric efficiency bound and achieves asymptotic normality. Through theoretical investigations and a synthetic HIV study, we
show that our design is more efficient than the design without incorporating any
surrogate information.

1

Introduction

1.1

Motivation

In recent years, covariate-adjusted response-adaptive randomization (CARA) designs have become
increasingly prominent in clinical research for evaluating the effects of treatment plans or drugs on
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

