FIFO-Diffusion: Generating Infinite Videos from Text
without Training

Jihwan Kim∗ 1 Junoh Kang∗ 1 Jinyoung Choi1 Bohyung Han1,2
Computer Vision Laboratory, 1 ECE & 2 IPAI, Seoul National University
{kjh26720,junoh.kang, jin0.choi, bhhan}@snu.ac.kr

(a) "A spectacular fireworks display over Sydney Harbour, 4K, high resolution."

(b) "An astronaut walking on the moon’s surface, high-quality, 4K resolution."

(c) "A colony of penguins waddling on an Antarctic ice sheet, 4K, ultra HD."

Figure 1: Illustration of 10K-frame long videos generated by FIFO-Diffusion based on a pretrained
text-conditional video generation model, VideoCrafter2 [3]. The number at the top-left corner of
each image indicates the frame index. The results clearly show that FIFO-Diffusion can generate
extremely long videos effectively based on the model trained on short clips (16 frames) without
quality degradation while preserving the dynamics and semantics of scenes.

Abstract
We propose a novel inference technique based on a pretrained diffusion model for
text-conditional video generation. Our approach, called FIFO-Diffusion, is conceptually capable of generating infinitely long videos without additional training. This
is achieved by iteratively performing diagonal denoising, which simultaneously
processes a series of consecutive frames with increasing noise levels in a queue;
our method dequeues a fully denoised frame at the head while enqueuing a new
random noise frame at the tail. However, diagonal denoising is a double-edged
sword as the frames near the tail can take advantage of cleaner frames by forward
reference but such a strategy induces the discrepancy between training and inference. Hence, we introduce latent partitioning to reduce the training-inference gap
and lookahead denoising to leverage the benefit of forward referencing. Practically,
FIFO-Diffusion consumes a constant amount of memory regardless of the target
video length given a baseline model, while well-suited for parallel inference on
multiple GPUs. We have demonstrated the promising results and effectiveness of
the proposed methods on existing text-to-video generation baselines. Generated
video examples and source codes are available at our project page1 .
*
1

indicates equal contribution.
https://jjihwan.github.io/projects/FIFO-Diffusion.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

