arXiv:2410.05774v4 [cs.CV] 11 Nov 2024

ActionAtlas: A VideoQA Benchmark for
Domain-specialized Action Recognition

Mohammadreza Salehi⋄ Jae Sung Park⋄ Tanush Yadav⋄
Aditya Kusupati⋄ Ranjay Krishna⋄† Yejin Choi⋄‡ Hannaneh Hajishirzi⋄† Ali Farhadi⋄†
⋄
University of Washington † Allen Institute for AI ‡Nvidia
mrsalehi@cs.washington.edu
https://mrsalehi.github.io/action-atlas/

Abstract
Our world is full of varied actions and moves across specialized domains that we,
as humans, strive to identify and understand. Within any single domain, actions
can often appear quite similar, making it challenging for deep models to distinguish
them accurately. To evaluate the effectiveness of multimodal foundation models in
helping us recognize such actions, we present ActionAtlas v1.0, a multiple-choice
video question-answering benchmark featuring short videos across various sports.
Each video in the dataset is paired with a question and four or five choices. The
question pinpoints specific individuals, asking which choice “best” describes their
action within a certain temporal context. Overall, the dataset includes 934 videos
showcasing 580 unique actions across 56 sports, with a total of 1896 actions within
choices. Unlike most existing video question answering benchmarks that only
cover simplistic actions, often identifiable from a single frame, ActionAtlas focuses
on intricate movements and rigorously tests the model’s capability to discern subtle
differences between moves that look similar within each domain. We evaluate
open and proprietary foundation models on this benchmark, finding that the best
model, GPT-4o, achieves a maximum accuracy of 45.52%. Meanwhile, Nonexpert crowd workers, provided with action description for each choice, achieve
61.64% accuracy, where random chance is approximately 21%. Our findings
with state-of-the-art models indicate that having a high frame sampling rate is
important for accurately recognizing actions in ActionAtlas, a feature that some
leading proprietary video models, such as Gemini, do not include in their default
configurations.

1

Introduction

Multiple institutions have remarked on a striking finding: In many standard video benchmarks [59, 29,
77, 76, 74], a single frame without any modeling of temporal dynamics was enough to perform well
[33, 38]. The phenomenon, known as static appearance bias [33], allowed models to easily discern
the action depicted in the video. For example, simply recognizing presence of a pool was sufficient to
identify the action as “diving” from a single frame [43, 69]. In reaction, later action classification
datasets were designed to capture a richer distribution of temporal understanding [17, 58, 57] and
model architectures also evolved to incorporate the now “necessary” temporal dynamics [40, 13,
12, 73]. However, such datasets and models still do not cover all the complexities of real-world
video understanding and are only limited to traditional classification setups. The issue is even more
pronounced in video-language tasks; with the rise of foundation Vision-Language models (VLMs),
we find ourselves back at square one: Tasks such as video question answering [75, 37, 77] and
video-language retrieval [77, 21, 28] can be solved easily yet again by training on just a single or
sparsely sampled set of frames from videos [4, 33].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

