BAdam: A Memory Efficient Full Parameter
Optimization Method for Large Language Models

Qijun Luo1,2

Hengxu Yu1

Xiao Li1∗

1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
2
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
{qijunluo,hengxuyu}@link.cuhk.edu.cn, lixiao@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
This work presents BAdam, an optimization method that leverages the block coordinate descent (BCD) framework with Adam’s update rule. BAdam offers a memory
efficient approach to the full parameter finetuning of large language models. We
conduct a theoretical convergence analysis for BAdam in the deterministic case.
Experimentally, we apply BAdam to finetune the Llama 3-8B and Llama 3-70B
models using a single RTX3090-24GB GPU and 4×A100-80GB GPUs, respectively. The results confirm BAdam’s efficiency in terms of memory usage, running
time, and optimization capability. Furthermore, the downstream performance
evaluation based on MT-bench and math benchmarks shows that BAdam outperforms existing memory efficient baselines such as LoRA. It also demonstrates that
BAdam can achieve comparable or even superior performance compared to Adam.
Finally, the ablation study using SGD’s update rule illustrates the suitability of BCD
for finetuning LLMs. Our code can be easily integrated into any PyTorch-based
codebase and is available at https://github.com/Ledzy/BAdam.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) such as GPT-4 [1] and Llama 3 [15] have shown its strong ability
in language understanding, generation, reasoning, translation, etc [5, 73, 72, 60]. Due to its strong
applicability, LLMs have been regarded as a feasible approach towards artificial general intelligence
[6]. Finetuning or adaptation has become an important step in applying pretrained LLMs to follow
human instructions or perform specific downstream tasks [44, 63].
Backgrounds. When GPU memory (RAM) is not a major limitation, full parameter finetuning
methods—such as applying Adam to the entire set of parameters of LLMs—often offer the most
flexibility for parameter search. However, executing such a full parameter training method typically
requires a significant amount of GPU memory. For instance, to finetune an LLM with M billion
parameters, Adam [23] necessitates roughly 18M GB of GPU memory for successful training, and
this estimate does not even account for the storage of activations used in the backpropagation (BP)
process; see Section 2.2.1 for a detailed analysis. This requirement poses challenges for computational
resources as models scale up, given the fact that GPU memory is often limited in practical settings.
Parameter efficient finetuning (PEFT) methods such as low-rank adaptation (LoRA) [22], Adapter
[21], prompt- and prefix-tuning [29, 26], among others, play a critical role in finetuning large language
models under memory resource constraints. The principal idea of PEFT is to represent the parameter
updates in a much lower-dimensional subspace and, consequently, the memory consumption is
significantly reduced. Despite the success of PEFT methods, finetuning within a substantially
lower-dimensional subspace may potentially limit downstream performance; see, e.g., [62].
∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

