GAMap: Zero-Shot Object Goal Navigation with
Multi-Scale Geometric-Affordance Guidance
Shuaihang Yuan∗ 1,2,4 , Hao Huang∗2,4 , Yu Hao2,3,4 , Congcong Wen2,4
Anthony Tzes1,2 , Yi Fang † 1,2,3,4
1

NYUAD Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics (CAIR), Abu Dhabi, UAE.
New York University Abu Dhabi, Electrical Engineering, Abu Dhabi 129188, UAE.
3
New York University, Electrical & Computer Engineering Dept., Brooklyn, NY 11201, USA.
4
Embodied AI and Robotics (AIR) Lab, NYU Abu Dhabi, UAE.
2

Abstract
Zero-Shot Object Goal Navigation (ZS-OGN) enables robots or agents to navigate
toward objects of unseen categories without object-specific training. Traditional
approaches often leverage categorical semantic information for navigation guidance,
which struggles when only objects are partially observed or detailed and functional
representations of the environment are lacking. To resolve the above two issues,
we propose Geometric-part and Affordance Maps (GAMap), a novel method that
integrates object parts and affordance attributes as navigation guidance. Our method
includes a multi-scale scoring approach to capture geometric-part and affordance
attributes of objects at different scales. Comprehensive experiments conducted on
HM3D and Gibson benchmark datasets demonstrate improvements in Success Rate
and Success weighted by Path Length, underscoring the efficacy of our geometricpart and affordance-guided navigation approach in enhancing robot autonomy and
versatility, without any additional object-specific training or fine-tuning with the
semantics of unseen objects and/or the locomotions of the robot. Our project is
available at https://shalexyuan.github.io/GAMap/.

1

Introduction

Zero-Shot Object Goal Navigation (ZS-OGN) is a pivotal research domain in embodied AI and
robotics, enabling robots to navigate towards the objects of unseen categories without training or
fine-tuning on these objects [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. This capability is crucial for real-world robots, such
as home service robots and blind guiding robots, allowing them to interact with diverse objects in
real-world scenarios, thereby enhancing their autonomy and versatility.
Prior works on ZS-OGN either leverage deep neural networks to directly map RGB-D observations to
actions learned from paired training data [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11] or utilize map-based navigation methods
[12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 3]. However, deep neural network approaches often struggle due to their
dependence on extensive annotated data, resulting in poor generalization to unseen environments
[18, 16], while map-based navigation methods instead offer an alternative. Map-based navigation
methods track categorical semantics and topological information observed by the agent to select
promising exploration locations [17]. With the advent of foundation models, the studies [3, 17, 19]
have exploited the reasoning capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) to strategically select
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author: Yi Fang <yfang@nyu.edu>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

