Unconditional stability of a recurrent neural circuit
implementing divisive normalization

Shivang Rawat1,2

David J. Heeger3,4

Stefano Martiniani1,2,5

1

Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, NYU
Center for Soft Matter Research, Department of Physics, NYU
3
Department of Psychology, NYU 4 Center for Neural Science, NYU
5
Simons Center for Computational Physical Chemistry, Department of Chemistry, NYU
2

{sr6364, david.heeger, sm7683}@nyu.edu

Abstract
Stability in recurrent neural models poses a significant challenge, particularly in
developing biologically plausible neurodynamical models that can be seamlessly
trained. Traditional cortical circuit models are notoriously difficult to train due
to expansive nonlinearities in the dynamical system, leading to an optimization
problem with nonlinear stability constraints that are difficult to impose. Conversely,
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) excel in tasks involving sequential data but
lack biological plausibility and interpretability. In this work, we address these
challenges by linking dynamic divisive normalization (DN) to the stability of
“oscillatory recurrent gated neural integrator circuits” (ORGaNICs), a biologically
plausible recurrent cortical circuit model that dynamically achieves DN and that
has been shown to simulate a wide range of neurophysiological phenomena. By
using the indirect method of Lyapunov, we prove the remarkable property of
unconditional local stability for an arbitrary-dimensional ORGaNICs circuit when
the recurrent weight matrix is the identity. We thus connect ORGaNICs to a
system of coupled damped harmonic oscillators, which enables us to derive the
circuit’s energy function, providing a normative principle of what the circuit, and
individual neurons, aim to accomplish. Further, for a generic recurrent weight
matrix, we prove the stability of the 2D model and demonstrate empirically that
stability holds in higher dimensions. Finally, we show that ORGaNICs can be
trained by backpropagation through time without gradient clipping/scaling, thanks
to its intrinsic stability property and adaptive time constants, which address the
problems of exploding, vanishing, and oscillating gradients. By evaluating the
model’s performance on RNN benchmarks, we find that ORGaNICs outperform
alternative neurodynamical models on static image classification tasks and perform
comparably to LSTMs on sequential tasks.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have found widespread use in modeling tasks from experimental
systems neuroscience. The allure of DNN-based models lies in their ease of training and the flexibility
they offer in architecting systems with desired properties [1–3]. In contrast, neurodynamical models
like the Wilson-Cowan [4] or the Stabilized Supralinear Network (SSN) [5] are more biologically
plausible than DNNs, but these models confront considerable training challenges due to the lack
of stability guarantees for high-dimensional problems. Training recurrent neural networks (RNNs),
by comparison, is more straightforward thanks to ad hoc regularization techniques like layer nor38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

