DeepDRK: Deep Dependency Regularized Knockoff
for Feature Selection
Hongyu Shen1 Yici Yan2 Zhizhen Zhao1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering1 ,
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign.
Department of Statistics2 ,
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign.
{hongyu2, yiciyan2, zhizhenz}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Model-X knockoff has garnered significant attention among various feature selection methods due to its guarantees for controlling the false discovery rate (FDR).
Since its introduction in parametric design, knockoff techniques have evolved to
handle arbitrary data distributions using deep learning-based generative models.
However, we have observed limitations in the current implementations of the deep
Model-X knockoff framework. Notably, the “swap property” that knockoffs require
often faces challenges at the sample level, resulting in diminished selection power.
To address these issues, we develop “Deep Dependency Regularized Knockoff
(DeepDRK),” a distribution-free deep learning method that effectively balances
FDR and power. In DeepDRK, we introduce a novel formulation of the knockoff
model as a learning problem under multi-source adversarial attacks. By employing
an innovative perturbation technique, we achieve lower FDR and higher power.
Our model outperforms existing benchmarks across synthetic, semi-synthetic, and
real-world datasets, particularly when sample sizes are small and data distributions
are non-Gaussian.

1

Introduction

Feature selection (FS) has garnered significant attention over the past few decades due to the
rapidly increasing dimensionality of data, as well as the associated computational, storage, and
noise challenges [22, 15]. Successfully identifying the true informative features among inputs can
significantly enhance the performance of analysis frameworks and drive advancements in fields such
as biology, neuroscience, medicine, economics, and social sciences [15, 55]. However, the task
of accurately pinpointing informative features is often considered nearly impossible, particularly
due to the limited availability of data relative to the increasing dimensionality [55, 11]. A practical
approach to address this challenge is the development of algorithms designed to select features while
maintaining controlled error rates. Targeting this goal, Model-X knockoffs, a novel framework, is
proposed in [4, 11] to select relevant features while controlling the false discovery rate (FDR). In
contrast to the classical setup, where assumptions on the correlations between input features and the
response are imposed [6, 19], the Model-X knockoff framework only requires a linear relationship
between the response and the features. With a strong finite-sample FDR guarantee, Model-X knockoff
saw broad applications in domains such as biology, neuroscience, and medicine, where the sample
size is limited [4, 11, 27, 47, 55, 38, 62].
There have been considerable developments of knockoffs since its debut. In scenarios where feature
distributions are complex, various deep learning methods [27, 47, 55, 38, 62] have been proposed.
However, we observe major limitations despite improved performance. First, the performance of
existing methods varies across different data distributions. Second, the quality of selection declines
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

