On Tractable Φ-Equilibria in Non-Concave Games

Yang Cai
Yale University
yang.cai@yale.edu

Constantinos Daskalakis
MIT CSAIL
costis@csail.mit.edu

Chen-Yu Wei
University of Virginia
chenyu.wei@virginia.edu

Haipeng Luo
University of Southern California
haipengl@usc.edu

Weiqiang Zheng
Yale University
weiqiang.zheng@yale.edu

Abstract
While Online Gradient Descent and other no-regret learning procedures are known
to efficiently converge to a coarse correlated equilibrium in games where each
agent’s utility is concave in their own strategy, this is not the case when utilities
are non-concave – a common scenario in machine learning applications involving
strategies parameterized by deep neural networks, or when agents’ utilities are
computed by neural networks, or both. Non-concave games introduce significant
game-theoretic and optimization challenges: (i) Nash equilibria may not exist;
(ii) local Nash equilibria, though they exist, are intractable; and (iii) mixed Nash,
correlated, and coarse correlated equilibria generally have infinite support and
are intractable. To sidestep these challenges, we revisit the classical solution
concept of Φ-equilibria introduced by Greenwald and Jafari [GJ03], which is
guaranteed to exist for an arbitrary set of strategy modifications Φ even in nonconcave games [SL07]. However, the tractability of Φ-equilibria in such games
remains elusive. In this paper, we initiate the study of tractable Φ-equilibria in nonconcave games and examine several natural families of strategy modifications. We
show that when Φ is finite, there exists an efficient uncoupled learning algorithm
that approximates the corresponding Φ-equilibria. Additionally, we explore cases
where Φ is infinite but consists of local modifications, showing that Online Gradient
Descent can efficiently approximate Φ-equilibria in non-trivial regimes.

1

Introduction

Von Neumann’s celebrated minimax theorem establishes the existence of Nash equilibrium in all
two-player zero-sum games where the players’ utilities are continuous as well as concave in their
own strategy [Neu28].1 This assumption that players’ utilities are concave, or quasi-concave, in their
own strategies has been a cornerstone for the development of equilibrium theory in Economics, Game
Theory, and a host of other theoretical and applied fields that make use of equilibrium concepts. In
particular, (quasi-)concavity is key for showing the existence of many types of equilibrium, from
generalizations of min-max equilibrium [Fan53; Sio58] to competitive equilibrium in exchange
economies [AD54; McK54], mixed Nash equilibrium in finite normal-form games [Nas50], and,
more generally, Nash equilibrium in (quasi-)concave games [Deb52; Ros65].
1
Throughout this paper, we model games using the standard convention in Game Theory that each player
has a utility function that they want to maximize. This is, of course, equivalent to modeling the players as loss
minimizers, a convention more common in learning. When we say that a player’s utility is concave (respectively
non-concave) in their strategy, this is the same as saying that the player’s loss is convex (respectively non-convex)
in their strategy.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

