Diffusion Models are Certifiably Robust Classifiers

Huanran Chen1,2 , Yinpeng Dong1,2 , Shitong Shao1 , Zhongkai Hao1 ,
Xiao Yang1 , Hang Su1,3 , Jun Zhu1,2∗
1
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, THBI Lab
BNRist Center, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China 2 RealAI
3
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
huanran.chen@outlook.com {dongyinpeng, dcszj}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Generative learning, recognized for its effective modeling of data distributions,
offers inherent advantages in handling out-of-distribution instances, especially for
enhancing robustness to adversarial attacks. Among these, diffusion classifiers, utilizing powerful diffusion models, have demonstrated superior empirical robustness.
However, a comprehensive theoretical understanding of their robustness is still
lacking, raising concerns about their vulnerability to stronger future attacks. In this
study, we prove that diffusion classifiers possess O(1) Lipschitzness, and establish
their certified robustness, demonstrating their inherent resilience. To achieve nonconstant Lipschitzness, thereby obtaining much tighter certified robustness, we
generalize diffusion classifiers to classify Gaussian-corrupted data. This involves
deriving the evidence lower bounds (ELBOs) for these distributions, approximating
the likelihood using the ELBO, and calculating classification probabilities via
Bayes’ theorem. Experimental results show the superior certified robustness of
these Noised Diffusion Classifiers (NDCs). Notably, we achieve over 80% and 70%
certified robustness on CIFAR-10 under adversarial perturbations with ℓ2 norms
less than 0.25 and 0.5, respectively, using a single off-the-shelf diffusion model
without any additional data.

1

Introduction

Despite the unprecedented success of discriminative learning [32, 22], they are vulnerable to adversarial examples, which are generated by imposing human-imperceptible perturbations on natural examples but can mislead target models into making erroneous predictions [44, 8]. To improve the robustness of discriminative learning, numerous defense techniques have been developed [29, 51, 35, 27, 34].
However, since discriminative models are directly trained for specific tasks, they often find shortcuts
in the objective function, exhibiting non-robust nature [7, 36]. For example, adversarial training
exhibits poor generalization against unseen threat models [45, 34], and purification-based methods
typically cannot completely remove adversarial perturbations, leaving subsequent discriminative
classifiers still affected by these perturbations [1, 25, 3, 15].
On the contrary, generative learning is tasked with modeling the entire data distribution, which
offers a degree of inherent robustness without any adversarial training [53, 9]. As the current stateof-the-art generative approach, diffusion models provide a more accurate estimation of the score
function across the entire data space. Thus, they have been effectively utilized as generative classifiers
for robust classification, known as diffusion classifiers [26, 3, 5]. Specifically, they calculate the
classification probability p(y|x) ∝ p(x|y)p(y) through Bayes’ theorem and approximate the log
likelihood log p(x|y) via the evidence lower bound (ELBO). This method establishes a connection
between robust classification and the fast-growing field of pre-trained generative models. Although
∗

The corresponding Author.
Code is available at https://github.com/huanranchen/NoisedDiffusionClassifiers.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

