Randomized Strategic Facility Location with
Predictions
Eric Balkanski
Columbia University, IEOR
eb3224@columbia.edu

Vasilis Gkatzelis
Drexel University, Computer Science
gkatz@drexel.edu

Golnoosh Shahkarami
Max Planck Institut für Informatik, Universität des Saarlandes
gshahkar@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
In the strategic facility location problem, a set of agents report their locations in a
metric space and the goal is to use these reports to open a new facility, minimizing
an aggregate distance measure from the agents to the facility. However, agents are
strategic and may misreport their locations to influence the facility’s placement
in their favor. The aim is to design truthful mechanisms, ensuring agents cannot
gain by misreporting. This problem was recently revisited through the learningaugmented framework, aiming to move beyond worst-case analysis and design
truthful mechanisms that are augmented with (machine-learned) predictions. The
focus of this prior work was on mechanisms that are deterministic and augmented
with a prediction regarding the optimal facility location. In this paper, we provide a
deeper understanding of this problem by exploring the power of randomization as
well as the impact of different types of predictions on the performance of truthful
learning-augmented mechanisms. We study both the single-dimensional and the
Euclidean case and provide upper and lower bounds regarding the achievable
approximation of the optimal egalitarian social cost.

1

Introduction

In the classic facility location problem the goal is to determine the ideal location for a new facility,
taking as input the preferences of a group of n agents. Due to the wide variety of applications that this
problem captures, it has received a lot of attention from different perspectives. A notable example is
the strategic version of this problem which is motivated by the fact that the participating agents may
be able to strategically misreport their preferences, leading to a facility location choice that they prefer
over the one that would be chosen if they were truthful. In the strategic facility location problem,
the goal is to design truthful mechanisms, i.e., mechanisms that elicit the agents’ true preferences
by carefully removing any incentive for the agents to lie [Moulin, 1980, Procaccia and Tennenholtz,
2013]. This problem has played a central role in the broader literature on mechanism design without
money and a lot of prior work has focused on optimizing the quality of the returned location subject
to the truthfulness constraint (see Section 1.2 for a brief overview). However, this work has mostly
focused on worst-case analysis, often leading to unnecessarily pessimistic impossibility results.
Aiming to overcome the limitations of worst-case analysis, a surge of work during the last few years
has focused on the design of algorithms in the learning-augmented framework [Mitzenmacher and
Vassilvitskii, 2022]. According to this framework, the designer is provided with some machinelearned prediction regarding the instance at hand and the goal is to leverage this additional information
in the design process. However, crucially, this information is not guaranteed to be accurate and can,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

