CLIPCEIL: Domain Generalization through CLIP via
Channel rEfinement and Image-text aLignment

Xi Yu, Shinjae Yoo, Yuewei Lin∗
Artificial Intelligence Department, Computing and Data Science Directorate
Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973
{xyu1; sjyoo; ywlin}@bnl.gov

Abstract
Domain generalization (DG) is a fundamental yet challenging topic in machine
learning. Recently, the remarkable zero-shot capabilities of the large pre-trained
vision-language model (e.g., CLIP) have made it popular for various downstream
tasks. However, the effectiveness of this capacity often degrades when there
are shifts in data distribution during testing compared to the training data. In
this paper, we propose a novel method, known as CLIPCEIL, a model that utilizes Channel rEfinement and Image-text aLignment to facilitate the CLIP to the
inaccessible out-of-distribution test datasets that exhibit domain shifts. Specifically, we refine the feature channels in the visual domain to ensure they contain domain-invariant and class-relevant features by using a lightweight adapter.
This is achieved by minimizing the inter-domain variance while maximizing the
inter-class variance. In the meantime, we ensure the image-text alignment by
aligning text embeddings of the class descriptions and their corresponding image
embedding while further removing the domain-specific features. Moreover, our
model integrates multi-scale CLIP features by utilizing a self-attention fusion
module, technically implemented through one Transformer layer. Extensive experiments on five widely used benchmark datasets demonstrate that CLIPCEIL
outperforms the existing state-of-the-art methods. The source code is available at
https://github.com/yuxi120407/CLIPCEIL.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models inevitably face the challenge of out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization
when encountering new tasks with different distributions from the training data. To mitigate this
issue, extensive research has been dedicated to domain generalization (DG) [66], aiming to utilize
knowledge from source domains to enhance the model’s generalizability to the test dataset with
domain shifts.
Recently, the spotlight has been on advancements in Vision-language models (VLMs), like CLIP [41],
which are trained on web-scale image-language pairs containing a diverse range of domains and
concepts from an open world, exhibit exceptional zero-shot learning and transferability to various
downstream tasks [26, 31, 33, 41, 65]. However, despite their impressive zero-shot performance,
supervised fine-tuning on task-specific datasets remains essential for further improving performance
on downstream tasks. However, recent works [27, 55] have pointed out that fine-tuning degrades the
CLIP’s generalizability on the out-of-distribution test datasets exhibiting domain shift. To tackle this
challenge, various methodologies have been proposed. For instance, CoOp [68] and CoCoOp [67]
models utilized the prompt learning, DPL [62] learned a lightweight prompt generator, while WiSEFT [55] combined the original zero-shot and fine-tuned models. More recently, CLIPood [44]
∗

Y. Lin is the corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

