Towards Exact Gradient-based Training on
Analog In-memory Computing

Zhaoxian Wu
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY 12180
wuz16@rpi.edu

Tayfun Gokmen
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
tgokmen@us.ibm.com

Malte J. Rasch
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
malte.rasch@googlemail.com

Tianyi Chen
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY 12180
chentianyi19@gmail.com

Abstract
Given the high economic and environmental costs of using large vision or language
models, analog in-memory accelerators present a promising solution for energyefficient AI. While inference on analog accelerators has been studied recently,
the training perspective is underexplored. Recent studies have shown that the
"workhorse" of digital AI training - stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithm
converges inexactly when applied to model training on non-ideal devices. This
paper puts forth a theoretical foundation for gradient-based training on analog
devices. We begin by characterizing the non-convergent issue of SGD, which is
caused by the asymmetric updates on the analog devices. We then provide a lower
bound of the asymptotic error to show that there is a fundamental performance limit
of SGD-based analog training rather than an artifact of our analysis. To address this
issue, we study a heuristic analog algorithm called Tiki-Taka that has recently
exhibited superior empirical performance compared to SGD. We rigorously show
its ability to converge to a critical point exactly and hence eliminate the asymptotic
error. The simulations verify the correctness of the analyses.

1

Introduction

Large vision or language models have recently achieved great success in various applications.
However, training large models from scratch requires prolonged durations and substantial energy
consumption, which is very costly. For example, it took $2.4 million to train LLaMA [1] and $4.6
million to train GPT-3 [2]. To overcome this issue, a promising technique is application-specific
hardware accelerators for neural networks, such as TPU [3], NPU [4], and NorthPole chip [5], just
to name a few. Within these accelerators, the memory and processing units are physically split,
which requires constant data movements between the memory and processing units. This slows down
computation and limits efficiency. In this context, we focus on analog in-memory computing (AIMC)
accelerators with resistive crossbar arrays [6, 7, 8, 9] to accelerate the ubiquitous matrix-vector
multiplications (MVMs), which contribute to a significant portion of digital computation in model
training and inference, e.g., about 80% in VGG16 model [10]. Very recently, the first analog AI chip
has been fabricated in IBM’s Albany Complex [11], and has achieved an accuracy of 92.81% on the
The work was supported by National Science Foundation (NSF) project 2134168, NSF CAREER project
2047177, and the IBM-Rensselaer Future of Computing Research Collaboration.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

