Learning and Transferring Sparse Contextual Bigrams
with Linear Transformers
Yunwei Ren∗

Zixuan Wang∗
Jason D. Lee
Princeton University
{yunwei.ren, wangzx, jasonlee}@princeton.edu

Abstract
Transformers have excelled in natural language modeling and one reason behind
this success is their exceptional ability to combine contextual informal and global
knowledge. However, the theoretical basis remains unclear. In this paper, first we
introduce the Sparse Contextual Bigram (SCB), a natural extension of the classical
bigram model, where the next token’s generation depends on a sparse set of earlier
positions determined by the last token. We then analyze the training dynamics and
sample complexity of learning SCB using a one-layer linear transformer with a
gradient-based algorithm. We show that when trained from scratch, the training
process can be split into an initial sample-intensive stage where the correlation
is boosted from zero to a nontrivial value, followed by a more sample-efficient
stage of further improvement. Additionally, we prove that, provided a nontrivial
correlation between the downstream and pretraining tasks, finetuning from a
pretrained model allows us to bypass the initial sample-intensive stage. We also
empirically demonstrate that our algorithm can outperform SGD in this setting and
discuss its relationship with the usual softmax-based transformers.

1

Introduction

Transformers have played a central role in modern deep learning, achieving significant success across
various fields, including language modeling (OpenAI, 2023), computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al.,
2020), and natural sciences (Jumper et al., 2021). The core of transformers is the self-attention layer
(Vaswani et al., 2017), which can attend to any subset of the input sequence to output a weighted
linear combination of the (transformed) tokens.
Several capabilities of the transformers contribute to their success in language modeling. First,
they can extract contextual information from the input token sequences, which is essential in some
arithmetic tasks (Edelman et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Nanda et al., 2023; Yao et al., 2021). In
addition, transformers can memorize global in-domain knowledge (Petroni et al., 2019; Zhang et al.,
2023a; Haviv et al., 2022; Carlini et al., 2021). These two abilities combined enable transformers
to predict the next token based on the in-context information as well as global knowledge (OpenAI,
2023) acquired during training.
To theoretically understand how transformers learn both capabilities, we propose a minimalist datagenerating model, the Sparse Contextual Bigram (SCB). This model builds on the classical bigram
model and requires learning both contextual information and the (global) transition probabilities.
Here, the next token depends on the transition matrix 𝑷 and a sparse set of prior tokens that is
determined by the last token. In particular, SCB can be represented by a one-layer linear transformer
— a simplified architecture that can serve as an abstraction for studying transformer optimization (Ahn
et al., 2023), which makes it suitable for theoretical analysis.
* Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

