Visual Prompt Tuning in Null Space for Continual
Learning

Yue Lu1 , Shizhou Zhang1∗, De Cheng2∗, Yinghui Xing1 ,
Nannan Wang2 , Peng Wang1 , Yanning Zhang1
1
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University, China
zgxd@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, szzhang@nwpu.edu.cn, dcheng@xidian.edu.cn,
xyh_7491@nwpu.edu.cn, nnwang@xidian.edu.cn, peng.wang@nwpu.edu.cn,
ynzhang@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing prompt-tuning methods have demonstrated impressive performances in
continual learning (CL), by selecting and updating relevant prompts in the visiontransformer models. On the contrary, this paper aims to learn each task by tuning
the prompts in the direction orthogonal to the subspace spanned by previous tasks’
features, so as to ensure no interference on tasks that have been learned to overcome
catastrophic forgetting in CL. However, different from the orthogonal projection in
the traditional CNN architecture, the prompt gradient orthogonal projection in the
ViT architecture shows completely different and greater challenges, i.e., 1) the highorder and non-linear self-attention operation; 2) the drift of prompt distribution
brought by the LayerNorm in the transformer block. Theoretically, we have finally
deduced two consistency conditions to achieve the prompt gradient orthogonal
projection, which provide a theoretical guarantee of eliminating interference on
previously learned knowledge via the self-attention mechanism in visual prompt
tuning. In practice, an effective null-space-based approximation solution has been
proposed to implement the prompt gradient orthogonal projection. Extensive
experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of anti-forgetting on four classincremental benchmarks with diverse pre-trained baseline models, and our approach
achieves superior performances to state-of-the-art methods. Our code is available
at https://github.com/zugexiaodui/VPTinNSforCL .

1

Introduction

Continual learning (CL) is crucial for AI models to adapt to the ever-changing environment by learning
sequentially arrived data, where the catastrophic forgetting is the key challenge [21, 28]. Recently,
prompt tuning-based continual learning methods [40, 32, 34, 44, 10, 22, 38, 46, 20, 12, 18] have been
attracting increasing attention due to their impressive performances in the CL field. Existing prompt
tuning-based works tackle the downstream continual learning problem by selecting and updating
relevant prompts, which is encoded with full task-specific knowledge while exploiting the general
knowledge of the pre-trained ViTs [40, 39].
On the contrary, this paper aims to learn each task by tuning the prompts in the direction orthogonal
to the subspace spanned by previous tasks’ features, so as to ensure no interference with tasks that
have been learned to overcome catastrophic forgetting in CL. It is worth noting that forgetting can
be theoretically resolved by gradient orthogonal projection methods [43, 31, 36, 45], which have
∗

Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

