A Study of Plasticity Loss in
On-Policy Deep Reinforcement Learning

Arthur Juliani
Jordan T. Ash
Microsoft Research NYC
{ajuliani, ash.jordan}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Continual learning with deep neural networks presents challenges distinct from
both the fixed-dataset and convex continual learning regimes. One such challenge
is plasticity loss, wherein a neural network trained in an online fashion displays a
degraded ability to fit new tasks. This problem has been extensively studied in both
supervised learning and off-policy reinforcement learning (RL), where a number
of remedies have been proposed. Still, plasticity loss has received less attention in
the on-policy deep RL setting. Here we perform an extensive set of experiments
examining plasticity loss and a variety of mitigation methods in on-policy deep
RL. We demonstrate that plasticity loss is pervasive under domain shift in this
regime, and that a number of methods developed to resolve it in other settings
fail, sometimes even performing worse than applying no intervention at all. In
contrast, we find that a class of “regenerative” methods are able to consistently
mitigate plasticity loss in a variety of contexts, including in gridworld tasks and
more challenging environments like Montezuma’s Revenge and ProcGen.

1

Introduction

In many important machine learning domains, such as continual learning and online reinforcement
learning (RL), training data are not wholly available simultaneously. Rather, in these settings, data arrives sequentially over a long period of time. Irrespective of the available quantity of training data, we
would typically like to have the highest performing model possible at any given point. Unfortunately,
these sequential learning scenarios are known to present optimization issues for neural networks.
Specifically, if a model is naively updated to convergence each time new data arrives, and the amount
of training data effectively increases, the resulting model generalizes worse than it would under more
standard, non-sequential constraints. This phenomenon has been introduced by Ash and Adams
(2020) as the “warm-start problem,” where it was found that randomly initialized models generalize
well but are expensive to fit, and warm-started models generalize poorly but converge far more quickly.
An adjacent problem to warm-starting is that of plasticity loss (Lyle et al., 2023), which presents itself
both in the supervised learning and reinforcement learning settings. Like in the warm-start problem,
plasticity loss describes a degradation in a model’s ability to fit new data as training progresses,
ultimately harming both sample efficiency and asymptotic performance. If an agent achieves worse
performance when fitting first a source distribution and then a distinct target distribution than it would
if instead trained on the target distribution in isolation, the degradation is attributed to plasticity loss.
Whereas the warm-start problem is restricted to test performance, plasticity loss is generally measured
as a degradation in performance on training data, often under some form of distribution shift. Despite
the typical focus on training data, an ideal solution to plasticity loss would be able to prevent
performance degradation both for data seen and unseen when fitting the policy. Importantly, the
plasticity loss phenomenon is distinct from overfitting, as resolving plasticity loss should improve
both training performance and generalization. In contrast, overfitting describes the opposite, where
improving training performance has deleterious effects on generalization.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

