UNION: Unsupervised 3D Object Detection
using Object Appearance-based Pseudo-Classes

Ted Lentsch Holger Caesar Dariu M. Gavrila
Department of Cognitive Robotics
Delft University of Technology

Abstract
Unsupervised 3D object detection methods have emerged to leverage vast amounts
of data without requiring manual labels for training. Recent approaches rely on
dynamic objects for learning to detect mobile objects but penalize the detections of
static instances during training. Multiple rounds of (self) training are used to add
detected static instances to the set of training targets; this procedure to improve
performance is computationally expensive. To address this, we propose the method
UNION. We use spatial clustering and self-supervised scene flow to obtain a set of
static and dynamic object proposals from LiDAR. Subsequently, object proposals’
visual appearances are encoded to distinguish static objects in the foreground
and background by selecting static instances that are visually similar to dynamic
objects. As a result, static and dynamic mobile objects are obtained together, and
existing detectors can be trained with a single training. In addition, we extend
3D object discovery to detection by using object appearance-based cluster labels
as pseudo-class labels for training object classification. We conduct extensive
experiments on the nuScenes dataset and increase the state-of-the-art performance
for unsupervised 3D object discovery, i.e. UNION more than doubles the average
precision to 38.4. The code is available at github.com/TedLentsch/UNION.

4 Fusion: 𝐾1 Appearance Clusters with Motion Statistics

1 LiDAR: Object Proposals 𝑜𝑛

Static
Dynamic

Pedestrians
3D Point Cloud

𝑜1 [car]

𝑜2 [pedestrian]

𝑜3 [car]

Cars

𝑜4 [tree]

Cyclists

2 Temporal: Motion Estimates 𝑣𝑛

Trees

𝑣1 : Static

𝑣2 : Dynamic

𝑣3 : Dynamic

𝑣4 : Static

3 Camera: Visual Appearances 𝑎𝑛

5 Cluster Classification

Object Proposals

Only Static Instances

6 Train Object Detector

Appearance Cluster is Mobile Cluster if it
contains at least 𝑋 % Dynamic Instances

DINOv2
2D Image

Appearance Embedding Feature Space

Embedding
Module
𝑎1 𝑎2 𝑎3 𝑎4

Mobile

Mobile

Mobile Non-Mobile

Pseudo-Bounding Boxes of
Mobile Appearance Clusters

Train Standard 3D
Object Detector

Figure 1: UNION discovers mobile objects (e.g. cars, pedestrians, cyclists) in an unsupervised
manner by exploiting LiDAR, camera, and temporal information jointly. The key observation is
that mobile objects can be distinguished from background objects (e.g. buildings, trees, poles) by
grouping object proposals with similar visual appearance, i.e. clustering their appearance embeddings,
and selecting appearance clusters that contain at least X % dynamic instances.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

