Fast Encoder-Based 3D from Casual Videos via Point
Track Processing

Yoni Kasten1
1
NVIDIA Research

2

Wuyue Lu2
Simon Fraser University

Haggai Maron1,3
3
Technion

Abstract
This paper addresses the long-standing challenge of reconstructing 3D structures
from videos with dynamic content. Current approaches to this problem were not
designed to operate on casual videos recorded by standard cameras or require a
long optimization time. Aiming to significantly improve the efficiency of previous
approaches, we present T RACKS T O 4D, a learning-based approach that enables
inferring 3D structure and camera positions from dynamic content originating from
casual videos using a single efficient feed-forward pass. To achieve this, we propose
operating directly over 2D point tracks as input and designing an architecture
tailored for processing 2D point tracks. Our proposed architecture is designed with
two key principles in mind: (1) it takes into account the inherent symmetries present
in the input point tracks data, and (2) it assumes that the movement patterns can be
effectively represented using a low-rank approximation.T RACKS T O 4D is trained in
an unsupervised way on a dataset of casual videos utilizing only the 2D point tracks
extracted from the videos, without any 3D supervision. Our experiments show that
T RACKS T O 4D can reconstruct a temporal point cloud and camera positions of
the underlying video with accuracy comparable to state-of-the-art methods, while
drastically reducing runtime by up to 95%. We further show that T RACKS T O 4D
generalizes well to unseen videos of unseen semantic categories at inference time.
Project page: https://tracks-to-4d.github.io.

1

Introduction

Predicting 3D geometry in dynamic scenes is a challenging problem. In this problem setup, we
are given access to multiple images of a scene taken sequentially, e.g., from a monocular video
camera, where both the content in the scene and the camera are moving. Our task is to reconstruct
the dynamic 3D positions of the points seen in the images and the camera poses. This fundamental
problem has gained significant interest from the research community over the years [7, 37, 26, 64],
mainly due to its important applications in many fields such as robot navigation, autonomous driving
and 3D reconstruction of general environments [19]. Importantly, in contrast to static scenes where
the epipolar geometry constraints hold between the corresponding points of different views [17],
determining the depth of a moving point from monocular views is an ill-posed problem [3]. This
causes standard Structure from Motion techniques [42, 55, 33] to be inadequate in this setup [25].
Previous work and limitations. Many existing approaches for the above problem make simplifying
assumptions that limit their applicability to real-world scenarios. Methods based on orthographic
camera models and low-rank assumptions use matrix factorization techniques [7, 26], but the orthographic camera assumption might not be realistic and may cause reconstruction errors. Techniques
that incorporate depth priors often require lengthy optimization processes in order to make the depth
estimates across frames consistent [25, 64]. Other physics-based approaches make assumptions
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

