IMPACT: A Large-scale Integrated Multimodal Patent
Analysis and Creation Dataset for Design Patents

Homaira Huda Shomee
Zhu Wang
Sourav Medya
Sathya N. Ravi
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Chicago
{hshome2,zwang260,medya,sathya}@uic.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce I MPACT (Integrated Multimodal Patent Analysis and
CreaTion Dataset for Design Patents), a large-scale multimodal patent dataset with
detailed captions for design patent figures. Our dataset includes half a million
design patents comprising 3.61 million figures along with captions from patents
granted by the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) over a 16year period from 2007 to 2022. We incorporate the metadata of each patent
application with elaborate captions that are coherent with multiple viewpoints
of designs. Even though patents themselves contain a variety of design figures,
titles, and descriptions of viewpoints, we find that they lack detailed descriptions
that are necessary to perform multimodal tasks such as classification and retrieval.
I MPACT closes this gap thereby providing researchers with necessary ingredients
to instantiate a variety of multimodal tasks. Our dataset has a huge potential for
novel design inspiration and can be used with advanced computer vision models
in tandem. We perform preliminary evaluations on the dataset on the popular
patent analysis tasks such as classification and retrieval. Our results indicate that
integrating images with generated captions significantly improves the performance
of different models on the corresponding tasks. Given that design patents offer
various benefits for modeling novel tasks, we propose two standard computer
vision tasks that have not been investigated in analyzing patents as future directions
using I MPACT as a benchmark viz., 3D Image Construction and Visual Question
Answering (VQA). To facilitate research in these directions, we make our I MPACT
dataset and the code/models used in this work publicly available here.

1

Introduction

Design patents are important for intellectual property protection in industries where aesthetics and
user experience are predominant, such as consumer electronics, fashion, and automotive design [27, 1].
Unlike utility patents, which protect the functional aspects of an invention, design patents safeguard
the ornamental or aesthetic features of a product. This includes elements such as shape, surface
ornamentation, and overall visual appearance. Design patents provide inventors with exclusive rights
to their creations and prevent others from producing, selling, or using designs that are substantially
similar. In the past few years, the number of design patents granted in the US is increasing. Though
these are publicly available by law, the data is not well-organized for patent analyses which could
help patent offices as well as can serve as a benchmark for the machine learning community.
Existing works on patent datasets. A variety of patent data formats, including XML, TSV, TIFF,
and PDF, are publicly accessible for bulk download from multiple sources. One notable dataset,
USPTO2M [33], comprises approximately 2 million utility patents specifically curated for classification tasks. Another dataset, BIGPATENT [48], contains a corpus of 1.3 million utility patents,
exclusively in textual format. Additionally, the Harvard University Patent Dataset (HUPD) [55]
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

