Motion Graph Unleashed:
A Novel Approach to Video Prediction

Yiqi Zhong13∗ Luming Liang1∗ Bohan Tang2 Ilya Zharkov1 Ulrich Neumann3
1
Microsoft 2 University of Oxford 3 University of Southern California
1

2

{yiqizhong,lulian,zharkov}@microsoft.com
bohan.tang@eng.ox.ac.uk 3 {yiqizhon,uneumann}@usc.edu

Abstract
We introduce motion graph, a novel approach to the video prediction problem,
which predicts future video frames from limited past data. The motion graph
transforms patches of video frames into interconnected graph nodes, to comprehensively describe the spatial-temporal relationships among them. This representation
overcomes the limitations of existing motion representations such as image differences, optical flow, and motion matrix that either fall short in capturing complex
motion patterns or suffer from excessive memory consumption. We further present
a video prediction pipeline empowered by motion graph, exhibiting substantial
performance improvements and cost reductions. Experiments on various datasets,
including UCF Sports, KITTI and Cityscapes, highlight the strong representative
ability of motion graph. Especially on UCF Sports, our method matches and
outperforms the SOTA methods with a significant reduction in model size by 78%
and a substantial decrease in GPU memory utilization by 47%. Please refer to this
link for the official code.

1

Introduction

Video prediction aims at predicting future frames given a limited number of past frames. This
technology has potential for numerous applications, including video compression, visual robotics,
and surveillance systems. A critical aspect of designing an effective video prediction system is the
precise modeling of motion information, which is essential for its successful deployment.

Figure 1: (A) Hard cases which cannot be properly modeled by most existing representations. (B)
Motion graph transforms single-frame patches into interconnected nodes, describing the spatialtemporal relationships. Future per-pixel motion dynamic vectors are then predicted on this graph.
1

Equal contributions. The work is mostly done during Yiqi Zhong’s internship at Microsoft.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

