Breaking Semantic Artifacts for Generalized
AI-generated Image Detection

Chende Zheng1 Chenhao Lin1∗ Zhengyu Zhao1 Hang Wang2
Xu Guo3 Shuai Liu3∗ Chao Shen1
1
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
School of Automation Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
zhengchende@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
{linchenhao, zhengyu.zhao, cshangwang}@xjtu.edu.cn
xuguo@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
{sh_liu, chaoshen}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
With the continuous evolution of AI-generated images, the generalized detection of
them has become a crucial aspect of AI security. Existing detectors have focused on
cross-generator generalization, while it remains unexplored whether these detectors
can generalize across different image scenes, e.g., images from different datasets
with different semantics. In this paper, we reveal that existing detectors suffer from
substantial accuracy drops in such cross-scene generalization. In particular, we
attribute their failures to “semantic artifacts” in both real and generated images,
to which detectors may overfit. To break such “semantic artifacts”, we propose a
simple yet effective approach based on conducting an image patch shuffle and then
training an end-to-end patch-based classifier. We conduct a comprehensive openworld evaluation on 31 test sets, covering 7 Generative Adversarial Networks, 18
(variants of) Diffusion Models, and another 6 CNN-based generative models. The
results demonstrate that our approach outperforms previous approaches by 2.08%
(absolute) on average regarding cross-scene detection accuracy. We also notice the
superiority of our approach in open-world generalization, with an average accuracy
improvement of 10.59% (absolute) across all test sets. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Zig-HS/FakeImageDetection.

1

Introduction

Recently, the rapid development of AI-generated image technology has led to the emergence of
synthetic images on the internet, raising significant concerns about AI security. These images
exhibit remarkable diversity due to the continuous introduction of new generative architectures,
e.g., from Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [1], Variational Auto-Encoders (VAEs) [2], to
Diffusion Models (DMs) [3]. For now, Internet users can easily generate a large number of exquisite
images using text prompts. As the quality and variety of these synthetic images continue to advance,
developing a universal detector for fake images becomes a crucial aspect of AI security.
To determine whether an image is synthetic, existing studies typically train a binary classifier to assess
the authenticity of an unknown image during inference. Previous methods have primarily focused on
cross-generator detection. For instance, Wang et al. [4] developed a ResNet50 trained on images
from proGAN [5], and then tested it on different GAN variants. Intriguingly, their findings suggested
∗

Corresponding Authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

