NeuroBOLT: Resting-state EEG-to-fMRI Synthesis
with Multi-dimensional Feature Mapping

Yamin Li1 Ange Lou1 Ziyuan Xu1 Shengchao Zhang1 Shiyu Wang1
Dario J. Englot2 Soheil Kolouri1 Daniel Moyer1 Roza G. Bayrak1 Catie Chang1
1
Vanderbilt University 2 Vanderbilt University Medical Center
yamin.li@vanderbilt.edu

Abstract
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is an indispensable tool in modern
neuroscience, providing a non-invasive window into whole-brain dynamics at
millimeter-scale spatial resolution. However, fMRI is constrained by issues such
as high operation costs and immobility. With the rapid advancements in crossmodality synthesis and brain decoding, the use of deep neural networks has emerged
as a promising solution for inferring whole-brain, high-resolution fMRI features
directly from electroencephalography (EEG), a more widely accessible and portable
neuroimaging modality. Nonetheless, the complex projection from neural activity
to fMRI hemodynamic responses and the spatial ambiguity of EEG pose substantial
challenges both in modeling and interpretability. Relatively few studies to date have
developed approaches for EEG-fMRI translation, and although they have made
significant strides, the inference of fMRI signals in a given study has been limited
to a small set of brain areas and to a single condition (i.e., either resting-state or a
specific task). The capability to predict fMRI signals in other brain areas, as well
as to generalize across conditions, remain critical gaps in the field. To tackle these
challenges, we introduce a novel and generalizable framework: NeuroBOLT1 , i.e.,
Neuro-to-BOLD Transformer, which leverages multi-dimensional representation
learning from temporal, spatial, and spectral domains to translate raw EEG data
to the corresponding fMRI activity signals across the brain. Our experiments
demonstrate that NeuroBOLT effectively reconstructs unseen resting-state fMRI
signals from primary sensory, high-level cognitive areas, and deep subcortical brain
regions, achieving state-of-the-art accuracy with the potential to generalize across
varying conditions and sites, which significantly advances the integration of these
two modalities.

1

Introduction

Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and electroencephalography (EEG) are the most
commonly utilized non-invasive neuroimaging techniques, providing crucial insights into brain
functionality. These two modalities offer distinct advantages and limitations that can complement
one another when combined [45, 13]. fMRI offers high spatial resolution imaging of whole-brain
activity by measuring blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) signal changes, which facilitates
probing regional and network-level function. However, fMRI suffers from low temporal resolution
and hemodynamic blurring, which limits its ability to capture the accurate timing of rapid neuronal
activity dynamics. Additionally, its high cost, non-portability, and incompatibility with metal implants
further restrict the utility of MRI in certain contexts. Conversely, EEG stands out as a low-cost,
portable neuroimaging modality with high temporal resolution [10, 30, 61]. However, EEG faces
1

Project page: https://soupeeli.github.io/NeuroBOLT

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

