Wasserstein Distributionally Robust Optimization
Through the Lens of Structural Causal Models and
Individual Fairness
Ahmad-Reza Ehyaei
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen AI Center, Germany
ahmad.ehyaei@tuebingen.mpg.de
Golnoosh Farnadi∗
Mila Québec AI Institute ; McGill University, Montréal, Canada
farnadig@mila.quebec
Samira Samadi
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen AI Center, Germany
ssamadi@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
In recent years, Wasserstein Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO) has
garnered substantial interest for its efficacy in data-driven decision-making under
distributional uncertainty. However, limited research has explored the application
of DRO to address individual fairness concerns, particularly when considering
causal structures and sensitive attributes in learning problems. To address this
gap, we first formulate the DRO problem from causality and individual fairness
perspectives. We then present the DRO dual formulation as an efficient tool to
convert the DRO problem into a more tractable and computationally efficient form.
Next, we characterize the closed form of the approximate worst-case loss quantity
as a regularizer, eliminating the max-step in the min-max DRO problem. We further
estimate the regularizer in more general cases and explore the relationship between
DRO and classical robust optimization. Finally, by removing the assumption of
a known structural causal model, we provide finite sample error bounds when
designing DRO with empirical distributions and estimated causal structures to
ensure efficiency and robust learning.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models must address discrimination because they often reflect and amplify biases
present in their training datasets [31]. These biases can significantly influence decisions in domains
such as healthcare [30], education [3], recruitment [18], and lending services [6]. Consequently,
these decisions disproportionately affect individuals based on sensitive attributes like race or gender,
perpetuating systemic discrimination.
To address and quantify unfairness, researchers have developed concepts like group fairness and
individual fairness [45, 4]. Group fairness aims to achieve equitable outcomes across demographic
groups, while individual fairness ensures that similar individuals receive similar treatment. Formally,
with V as the feature space and Y as the label space, a model h : V → Y ensures individual fairness
∗

Lead scientific advisor on the project

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

