Learning World Models for Unconstrained Goal
Navigation

Yuanlin Duan
Rutgers University
yuanlin.duan@rutgers.edu

Wensen Mao
Rutgers University
wm300@cs.rutgers.edu

He Zhu
Rutgers University
hz375@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Learning world models offers a promising avenue for goal-conditioned reinforcement learning with sparse rewards. By allowing agents to plan actions or exploratory goals without direct interaction with the environment, world models
enhance exploration efficiency. The quality of a world model hinges on the richness of data stored in the agent’s replay buffer, with expectations of reasonable
generalization across the state space surrounding recorded trajectories. However,
challenges arise in generalizing learned world models to state transitions backward along recorded trajectories or between states across different trajectories,
hindering their ability to accurately model real-world dynamics. To address these
challenges, we introduce a novel goal-directed exploration algorithm, MUN (short
for "World Models for Unconstrained Goal Navigation"). This algorithm is capable
of modeling state transitions between arbitrary subgoal states in the replay buffer,
thereby facilitating the learning of policies to navigate between any "key" states.
Experimental results demonstrate that MUN strengthens the reliability of world
models and significantly improves the policy’s capacity to generalize across new
goal settings.

1

Introduction

Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (GCRL) has emerged as a powerful framework for learning
diverse skills within an environment and subsequently solving tasks based on user-specified goal
commands, without requiring further training (Mendonca et al., 2021; Andrychowicz et al., 2017).
Given that specifying dense task rewards for GCRL requires domain expertise, access to object
positions, is time-consuming, and is prone to human errors, rewards in GCRL are typically sparse,
signaling success only upon reaching goal states. However, sparse rewards pose a challenge for
exploration during training. To address this challenge, several previous methods, e.g., (Hafner et al.,
2019a; Hansen et al., 2023; Mendonca et al., 2021) have proposed learning a generative world
model of the environment using a reconstruction (decoder) objective, an instantiation of Model-based
Reinforcement Learning (MBRL), visualized in Fig. 1. This approach is appealing because the world
model can provide a rich learning signal (Yu et al., 2020; Georgiev et al., 2024). For example, world
models allow agents to plan their actions or exploratory goals without directly interacting with the
real environment for more efficient exploration (Hu et al., 2023; Sekar et al., 2020).
Existing MBRL techniques train world models to capture the dynamics of the environment from the
agent’s past experiences stored in a replay buffer. The richness of the data stored in the agent’s replay
buffer directly impacts the quality of a World Model. It is expected that the world model generalizes
reasonably well to the state space surrounding the trajectories recorded in the replay buffer. However,
the world model may not generalize well to state transitions backward along recorded trajectories or
to states across different trajectories, which impedes the world model’s learning of the real-world
dynamics.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

