Semi-Truths: A Large-Scale Dataset of AI-Augmented
Images for Evaluating Robustness of AI-Generated
Image detectors

Anisha Pal1∗ Julia Kruk1∗ Mansi Phute1 Manognya Bhattaram1
Diyi Yang2 Duen Horng Chau1 Judy Hoffman1
1

Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 Stanford University
{apal72, jkruk3, mphute6, polo, judy}@gatech.edu
{manognya.work}@gmail.com , {diyiy}@stanford.edu
https://huggingface.co/datasets/semi-truths/Semi-Truths

Visualizing Varying Magnitudes of Change by Area Ratio (AR)
AR Bin: Small

AR Bin: Medium

AR Bin: Large

Visualizing Varying Magnitudes of Change by Semantic Magnitude
Semantic Mag. Bin: Small

Semantic Mag. Bin: Medium

Semantic Mag. Bin: Large

Figure 1: S EMI -T RUTHS image augmentations that are measured by the size of the augmented region (Area Ratio) and the
semantic change achieved (Semantic Magnitude), categorized into 3 levels - small (col1), medium (col2), and large (col3).

Abstract
Text-to-image diffusion models have impactful applications in art, design, and
entertainment, yet these technologies also pose significant risks by enabling the
creation and dissemination of misinformation. Although recent advancements have
produced AI-generated image detectors that claim robustness against various augmentations, their true effectiveness remains uncertain. Do these detectors reliably
identify images with different levels of augmentation? Are they biased toward
specific scenes or data distributions? To investigate, we introduce S EMI -T RUTHS,
featuring 27, 600 real images, 223, 400 masks, and 1, 329, 155 AI-augmented
images that feature targeted and localized perturbations produced using diverse
augmentation techniques, diffusion models, and data distributions. Each augmented
image is accompanied by metadata for standardized and targeted evaluation of
detector robustness. Our findings suggest that state-of-the-art detectors exhibit
varying sensitivities to the types and degrees of perturbations, data distributions,
and augmentation methods used, offering new insights into their performance and
limitations. The code for the augmentation and evaluation pipeline is available at
https://github.com/J-Kruk/SemiTruths.
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

