Long-range Meta-path Search on Large-scale
Heterogeneous Graphs

1

Chao Li1,2,∗ , Zijie Guo1,3,∗ , Qiuting He1 , Kun He1,†
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
China Mobile Information Technology Co.,Ltd.
3
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
{chaoli,zijieguo,brooklet60}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Utilizing long-range dependency, a concept extensively studied in homogeneous
graphs, remains underexplored in heterogeneous graphs, especially on large ones,
posing two significant challenges: Reducing computational costs while maximizing
effective information utilization in the presence of heterogeneity, and overcoming
the over-smoothing issue in graph neural networks. To address this gap, we investigate the importance of different meta-paths and introduce an automatic framework
for utilizing long-range dependency on heterogeneous graphs, denoted as Longrange Meta-path Search through Progressive Sampling (LMSPS). Specifically, we
develop a search space with all meta-paths related to the target node type. By employing a progressive sampling algorithm, LMSPS dynamically shrinks the search
space with hop-independent time complexity. Through a sampling evaluation strategy, LMSPS conducts a specialized and effective meta-path selection, leading to
retraining with only effective meta-paths, thus mitigating costs and over-smoothing.
Extensive experiments across diverse heterogeneous datasets validate LMSPS’s capability in discovering effective long-range meta-paths, surpassing state-of-the-art
methods. Our code is available at https://github.com/JHL-HUST/LMSPS.

1

Introduction

Heterogeneous graphs are widely used for modeling multiple types of entities and relationships in
complex systems by various types of nodes and edges. For instance, the large-scale academic network,
OGBN-MAG, contains multiple node types, i.e., Paper (P), Author (A), Institution (I), and Field (F), as
writes
cites
is affiliated with
well as multiple edge types, such as Author −−−−→ Paper, Paper−−−→Paper, Author −−−−−−−−−−→
has a topic of

Institution, and Paper−−−−−−−−→Field. These elements can be combined to build higher-level
semantic relations called meta-paths [44]. For example, APA is a 2-hop meta-path representing the
co-author relationship, and PFPAPFP is a 6-hop meta-path related to long-range dependency.
Utilizing long-range dependency is essential for graph representation learning. For homogeneous
graphs, many graph neural networks (GNNs) [28, 4, 1, 54] have been developed to gain benefit from
long-range dependency. Utilizing long-range dependency is also crucial for heterogeneous graphs.
For instance, the Internet movie database (IMDB) contains 21K nodes with only 87K edges. Such
sparsity means each node has only a few directly connected neighbors and requires models to enhance
the node embedding from long-range neighbors. The main challenge in using long-range dependency
on heterogeneous graphs is how to alleviate costs while striving to effectively utilize information in
exponentially increased receptive fields, which is much more challenging compared to homogeneous
∗
†

The first two authors contribute equally.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

