Bayesian Domain Adaptation with Gaussian Mixture
Domain-Indexing

Yanfang Ling
Sun Yat-sen University
lingyf3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
Lingbo Li
InfMind Technology Ltd
lingbo@infmind.ai

Jiyong Li
Sun Yat-sen University
lijy373@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
Shangsong Liang∗
Sun Yat-sen University
liangshangsong@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent methods are proposed to improve performance of domain adaptation by
inferring domain index under an adversarial variational bayesian framework, where
domain index is unavailable. However, existing methods typically assume that the
global domain indices are sampled from a vanilla gaussian prior, overlooking the
inherent structures among different domains. To address this challenge, we propose
a Bayesian Domain Adaptation with Gaussian Mixture Domain-Indexing(GMDI)
algorithm. GMDI employs a Gaussian Mixture Model for domain indices, with
the number of component distributions in the “domain-themes” space adaptively
determined by a Chinese Restaurant Process. By dynamically adjusting the mixtures at the domain indices level, GMDI significantly improves domain adaptation
performance. Our theoretical analysis demonstrates that GMDI achieves a more
stringent evidence lower bound, closer to the log-likelihood. For classification,
GMDI outperforms all approaches, and surpasses the state-of-the-art method, VDI,
by up to 3.4%, reaching 99.3%. For regression, GMDI reduces MSE by up to 21%
(from 3.160 to 2.493), achieving the lowest errors among all methods. Source code
is publicly available from https://github.com/lingyf3/GMDI.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models often suffer from performance degradation when applied to new domains
that differ from their training domains, a phenomenon known as domain shift [21, 8, 28, 15]. Domain
Adaptation (DA) [4, 44, 49, 42, 6, 1, 37, 32, 38, 13] seeks to mitigate this issue by producing domaininvariant features, thereby enhancing generalization from source to target domains [23, 19, 12, 39, 45].
Recent research has explored the use of domain identity and domain index to improve domaininvariant data encoding and enhance domain adaptation performance [36, 40, 41]. Domain identity [41], a one-hot discrete variable vector, differentiates between domains, whereas domain
index [41], a real-valued continuous variable vector, captures domain semantics. Due to the
limited information in the discrete domain identity vector, research has increasingly focused
on the domain index. Current approaches to incorporating domain index in domain adaptation include: (1) Directly using existing additional information in the dataset as the domain index [36, 40], which is impractical for datasets lacking such indices [22, 29], and (2) Treating
the domain index as a latent variable to be inferred [26, 41]. However, these methods typically
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

