DiP-GO: A Diffusion Pruner via Few-step Gradient
Optimization

Haowei Zhu∗ 12 , Dehua Tang1 , Ji Liu1 , Mingjie Lu1 , Jintu Zheng1 , Jinzhang Peng1 , Dong Li1 ,
Yu Wang1 , Fan Jiang1 , Lu Tian1 , Spandan Tiwari1 , Ashish Sirasao1 , Junhai Yong2 ,
Bin Wang† 2 , Emad Barsoum† 1
1
Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. 2 Tsinghua University
zhuhw23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
{dehua.tang, ji.liu, jinz.peng, d.li, lu.tian, ebarsoum}@amd.com;
{yongjh, wangbins}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved remarkable progress in the field of image generation due to their outstanding capabilities. However, these models require substantial
computing resources because of the multi-step denoising process during inference.
While traditional pruning methods have been employed to optimize these models,
the retraining process necessitates large-scale training datasets and extensive computational costs to maintain generalization ability, making it neither convenient
nor efficient. Recent studies attempt to utilize the similarity of features across
adjacent denoising stages to reduce computational costs through simple and static
strategies. However, these strategies cannot fully harness the potential of the similar
feature patterns across adjacent timesteps. In this work, we propose a novel pruning
method that derives an efficient diffusion model via a more intelligent and differentiable pruner. At the core of our approach is casting the model pruning process
into a SubNet search process. Specifically, we first introduce a SuperNet based
on standard diffusion via adding some backup connections built upon the similar
features. We then construct a plugin pruner network and design optimization losses
to identify redundant computation. Finally, our method can identify an optimal
SubNet through few-step gradient optimization and a simple post-processing procedure. We conduct extensive experiments on various diffusion models including
Stable Diffusion series and DiTs. Our DiP-GO approach achieves 4.4× speedup
for SD-1.5 without any loss of accuracy, significantly outperforming the previous
state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models have undergone significant advancements over the past years due to the outstanding
capabilities of diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) [1]. DPMs typically consist of two processes:
the noise diffusion process and the reverse denoising process. Given their remarkable superiority
in content generation, diffusion models have made significant progress in various fields of general
image generation, including text-to-image generation [2, 3], layout-to-image generation [4, 5], image
editing [6, 7], and image personalization [8, 9]. Furthermore, diffusion models have contributed to
advancements in autonomous driving, ranging from driving dataset generation [10–12] to perception
model enhancement [13, 14] through diffusion strategies. However, DPMs often incur considerable
computational overhead during both the training and inference phases. The high cost of inference, due
∗
†

Work done during an internship at AMD.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

