How does PDE order affect the convergence of PINNs?

Changhoon Song1∗
Yesom Park1,2∗
Myungjoo Kang3
Research Institute of Mathematics, Seoul National University
2
Department of Mathematics, University of California, Los Angeles
3
Department of Mathematical Sciences, Seoul National University
changhoon.song93@gmail.com, yeisom@math.ucla.edu, mkang@snu.ac.kr
1

Abstract
This paper analyzes the inverse relationship between the order of partial differential
equations (PDEs) and the convergence of gradient descent in physics-informed
neural networks (PINNs) with the power of ReLU activation. The integration of
the PDE into a loss function endows PINNs with a distinctive feature to require
computing derivatives of model up to the PDE order. Although it has been empirically observed that PINNs encounter difficulties in convergence when dealing
with high-order or high-dimensional PDEs, a comprehensive theoretical understanding of this issue remains elusive. This paper offers theoretical support for this
pathological behavior by demonstrating that the gradient flow converges in a lower
probability when the PDE order is higher. In addition, we show that PINNs struggle
to address high-dimensional problems because the influence of dimensionality on
convergence is exacerbated with increasing PDE order. To address the pathology,
we use the insights garnered to consider variable splitting that decomposes the
high-order PDE into a system of lower-order PDEs. We prove that by reducing the
differential order, the gradient flow of variable splitting is more likely to converge
to the global optimum. Furthermore, we present numerical experiments in support
of our theoretical claims.

1

Introduction

Understanding of partial differential equations (PDEs) is fundamental in describing diverse phenomena in science and engineering, including fluid dynamics [60, 17], weather prediction [51], disease
progression [3, 46], and quantum mechanics [20, 8]. This underscores the imperative necessity for
the effective acquisition of their solutions. Given that analytically solving PDEs is often infeasible or
even impossible for numerous practical scenarios due to their complexity, numerical methodologies
play a pivotal role in approximating solutions to PDEs, enabling researchers and engineers to address
real-world problems effectively.
The advent of deep learning has led to a surge in attempts to leverage it to solve PDEs [59, 42, 30].
Among these, physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) [39, 21, 38, 58] stand out as a prominent
methodology. Coupled with the automatic differentiation technique [7], they integrate the residuals
of PDEs and boundary conditions into the loss function, thereby enforcing the approximation of
solutions using artificial neural networks. This distinctive incorporation of PDEs into the loss
function introduces partial differential operators in calculating the loss, distinguishing PINNs from
conventional deep learning models. Renowned for their accessibility and versatility in being capable
of easily handling arbitrary PDEs and being mesh-free, PINNs have garnered significant attention
and demonstrated promising outcomes across various fields [13, 28, 2, 65].
∗

Equal contribution authors. Correspondence to: <mkang@snu.ac.kr>.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

