Samba: Severity-aware Recurrent Modeling for
Cross-domain Medical Image Grading

Qi Bi1∗, Jingjun Yi2 , Hao Zheng2 , Wei Ji3 , Haolan Zhan4 ,
Yawen Huang2 , Yuexiang Li5 , Yefeng Zheng1
1
Westlake University, China, 2 Jarvis Research Center, Tencent Youtu Lab, China,
3
Yale University, United States, 4 Monash University, Australia,
5
Guangxi Medical University, China
howzheng@tencent.com, yuexiang.li@ieee.org
zhengyefeng@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
Disease grading is a crucial task in medical image analysis. Due to the continuous
progression of diseases, i.e., the variability within the same level and the similarity
between adjacent stages, accurate grading is highly challenging. Furthermore, in
real-world scenarios, models trained on limited source domain datasets should also
be capable of handling data from unseen target domains. Due to the cross-domain
variants, the feature distribution between source and unseen target domains can be
dramatically different, leading to a substantial decrease in model performance. To
address these challenges in cross-domain disease grading, we propose a Severityaware Recurrent Modeling (Samba) method in this paper. As the core objective of
most staging tasks is to identify the most severe lesions, which may only occupy a
small portion of the image, we propose to encode image patches in a sequential and
recurrent manner. Specifically, a state space model is tailored to store and transport
the severity information by hidden states. Moreover, to mitigate the impact of
cross-domain variants, an Expectation-Maximization (EM) based state recalibration
mechanism is designed to map the patch embeddings into a more compact space.
We model the feature distributions of different lesions through the Gaussian Mixture
Model (GMM) and reconstruct the intermediate features based on learnable severity
bases. Extensive experiments show the proposed Samba outperforms the VMamba
baseline by an average accuracy of 23.5%, 5.6% and 4.1% on the cross-domain
grading of fatigue fracture, breast cancer and diabetic retinopathy, respectively.
Source code is available at https://github.com/BiQiWHU/Samba.

1

Introduction

Disease grading aims to assess the severity level of a disease or a pathological region from a medical
image [46, 31, 52, 50, 6]. It is more challenging than conventional deterministic classification with
distinctive categories (e.g., cat vs. dog), owing to the inherent severity ambiguity within and between
levels. This ambiguity arises because the progression of a certain disease or a pathological region
is a transitional, continuous and time-growing process (illustrated in Fig. 1a). On the one hand,
different medical images within a same severity level can have rather different disease or pathological
developments (shown in Fig. 1b). On the other hand, medical images among different severity levels
can share similar patterns, as low-level lesions may persist throughout the disease’s progression.
∗

Qi Bi is affiliated with University of Amsterdam. This research was conducted with Westlake University
and Tencent Youtu Lab.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

