Community Detection Guarantees using Embeddings
Learned by Node2Vec

Andrew Davison
Department of Statistics
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
ad3395@columbia.edu

S. Carlyle Morgan
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MA 48109
scmorgan@umich.edu

Owen G. Ward
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science
Simon Fraser University
Burnaby, British Columbia
owen_ward@sfu.ca

Abstract
Embedding the nodes of a large network into an Euclidean space is a common
objective in modern machine learning, with a variety of tools available. These embeddings can then be used as features for tasks such as community detection/node
clustering or link prediction, where they achieve state of the art performance. With
the exception of spectral clustering methods, there is little theoretical understanding
for commonly used approaches to learning embeddings. In this work we examine
the theoretical properties of the embeddings learned by node2vec. Our main result
shows that the use of k-means clustering on the embedding vectors produced by
node2vec gives weakly consistent community recovery for the nodes in (degree
corrected) stochastic block models. We demonstrate this result empirically for both
real and simulated networks, and examine how this relates to other embedding
tools and machine learning procedures for network data.

1

Introduction

Within network science, a widely applicable and important inference task is to understand how the
behavior of interactions between different units (nodes) within the network depend on their latent
characteristics. This occurs within a wide array of disciplines, from sociological [14] to biological
[33] networks.
One simple and interpretable model for such a task is the stochastic block model (SBM) [20],
which assumes that nodes within the network are assigned a discrete community label. Edges
between nodes in the network are then formed independently across all pairs of edges, conditional
on these community assignments. While such a model is simplistic, various extensions have been
proposed. These include the degree corrected SBM (DCSBM), used to handle degree heterogenity
[23], and mixed-membership SBMs, used to allow for more complex community structures [4].
These extensions have seen a wide degree of empirical success [26, 28, 3].
A restriction of the stochastic block model and its generalizations is the requirement for a discrete
community assignment as a latent representation of the units within the network. While the statistical
community has previously considered more flexible latent representations [19], over the past decade,
there have been significant advancements in general embedding methods for networks. These produce
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

