What Is Missing In Homophily? Disentangling Graph
Homophily For Graph Neural Networks

Yilun Zheng1 , Sitao Luan2 , Lihui Chen1 †
yilun001@e.ntu.edu.sg, sitao.luan@mail.mcgill.ca, elhchen@ntu.edu.sg
1
Nanyang Technological University, Centre for Info. Sciences and Systems;
2
Mila - Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute; † Corresponding Author

Abstract
Graph homophily refers to the phenomenon that connected nodes tend to share
similar characteristics. Understanding this concept and its related metrics is crucial
for designing effective Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). The most widely used
homophily metrics, such as edge or node homophily, quantify such "similarity" as
label consistency across the graph topology. These metrics are believed to be able
to reflect the performance of GNNs, especially on node-level tasks. However, many
recent studies have empirically demonstrated that the performance of GNNs does
not always align with homophily metrics, and how homophily influences GNNs still
remains unclear and controversial. Then, a crucial question arises: What is missing
in our current understanding of homophily? To figure out the missing part, in this
paper, we disentangle the graph homophily into three aspects: label, structural, and
feature homophily, which are derived from the three basic elements of graph data.
We argue that the synergy of the three homophily can provide a more comprehensive
understanding of GNN performance. Our new proposed structural and feature
homophily consider the neighborhood consistency and feature dependencies among
nodes, addressing the previously overlooked structural and feature aspects in graph
homophily. To investigate their synergy, we propose a Contextual Stochastic Block
Model with three types of Homophily (CSBM-3H), where the topology and feature
generation are controlled by the three metrics. Based on the theoretical analysis of
CSBM-3H, we derive a new composite metric, named Tri-Hom, that considers all
three aspects and overcomes the limitations of conventional homophily metrics. The
theoretical conclusions and the effectiveness of Tri-Hom have been verified through
synthetic experiments on CSBM-3H. In addition, we conduct experiments on 31
real-world benchmark datasets and calculate the correlations between homophily
metrics and model performance. Tri-Hom has significantly higher correlation
values than 17 existing metrics that only focus on a single homophily aspect,
demonstrating its superiority and the importance of homophily synergy. Our code
is available at https://github.com/zylMozart/Disentangle_GraphHom.

1

Introduction

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been widely used in processing non-Euclidean data due to their
superiority in extracting topological relations [10, 13, 26, 41, 35]. They have achieved great success
on numerous real-world applications, e.g., recommendation [49, 58], bio-informatics [21, 20] and
telecommunication [34]. It is found that their success, especially on node-level tasks, is closely related
to the homophily assumption [47, 72, 38, 43, 36, 71], i.e., similar nodes tend to be connected [17].
On the other hand, when dissimilar nodes are more likely to be connected, which is known as the
non-homophily/heterophily scenario, GNNs fail to capture the useful neighbor information and
even underperform Multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) [37]. Several homophily metrics, such as edge
homophily [72, 1] and node homophily [50] were proposed, which were believed to be able to
recognize the difficult datasets [43] and measure the performance of GNNs [39].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

