Abrupt Learning in Transformers:
A Case Study on Matrix Completion

Pulkit Gopalani
University of Michigan
gopalani@umich.edu

Ekdeep Singh Lubana
Harvard University
ekdeeplubana@fas.harvard.edu

Wei Hu
University of Michigan
vvh@umich.edu

Abstract
Recent analysis on the training dynamics of Transformers has unveiled an interesting characteristic: the training loss plateaus for a significant number of training
steps, and then suddenly (and sharply) drops to near–optimal values. To understand
this phenomenon in depth, we formulate the low-rank matrix completion problem
as a masked language modeling (MLM) task, and show that it is possible to train a
BERT model to solve this task to low error. Furthermore, the loss curve shows a
plateau early in training followed by a sudden drop to near-optimal values, despite
no changes in the training procedure or hyper-parameters. To gain interpretability
insights into this sudden drop, we examine the model’s predictions, attention heads,
and hidden states before and after this transition. Concretely, we observe that (a)
the model transitions from simply copying the masked input to accurately predicting the masked entries; (b) the attention heads transition to interpretable patterns
relevant to the task; and (c) the embeddings and hidden states encode information
relevant to the problem. We also analyze the training dynamics of individual model
components to understand the sudden drop in loss.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized the field of natural language processing (NLP).
However, there are still gaps in our understanding of these models, leading to challenges in controlling
their behavior. As a pertinent example, the training of these models appears to demonstrate sudden
improvements in metrics correlated with various capabilities [8], prompting questions about whether
learning of a given capability can be predicted by tracking predefined progress measures and why
such sudden changes occur. If undesirable capabilities can suddenly ‘emerge’ (despite any explicit
supervision for them) [16], such sudden changes can be a challenge for AI regulation [21].
To better understand such sudden changes during model training, this work investigates training
BERT [12] on the classical mathematical task of low-rank matrix completion (LRMC) [6]. Making
an analogy with masked language modeling (MLM), where sudden learning of syntactical structures
was recently demonstrated [8], we argue matrix completion captures the core aspect of this learning
problem (Fig. 1): given some relevant context (observed tokens), fill the missing elements (masked
tokens). Specifically, we assume access to a matrix with some fraction of its entries missing, and
would like to complete the missing entries of this matrix assuming the ground truth matrix is low-rank.
We find that despite being a simplified abstraction of MLM, this setting already demonstrates a
sharp decrease in loss as the model undergoes training (Fig. 1 (B)), preceded by a loss plateau for a
significant number of training steps (akin to Chen et al. [8]). The simplicity of our setting further
affords us interpretability, as we find that the point of sudden drop coincides with a precise change in
how the model solves the task—we call this change an algorithmic transition. Specifically, we show
that the pre–transition model simply copies the input (predicting 0 at masked positions), while the
post–transition model accurately predicts missing values at masked positions. To perform the latter,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

