Online Control in Population Dynamics

Noah Golowich˚

Elad Hazan:

Zhou Lu;

Dhruv Rohatgi§

Y. Jennifer Sun¶

Abstract
The study of population dynamics originated with early sociological works but
has since extended into many fields, including biology, epidemiology, evolutionary
game theory, and economics. Most studies on population dynamics focus on
the problem of prediction rather than control. Existing mathematical models for
population control are often restricted to specific, noise-free dynamics, while
real-world population changes can be complex and adversarial.
To address this gap, we propose a new framework based on the paradigm of online
control. We first characterize a set of linear dynamical systems that can naturally
model evolving populations. We then give an efficient gradient-based controller
for these systems, with near-optimal regret bounds with respect to a broad class
of linear policies. Our empirical evaluations demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed algorithm for population control even in non-linear models such as SIR
and replicator dynamics.

1

Introduction

Dynamical systems involving populations are ubiquitous in describing processes that arise in natural
environments. As one example, the SIR model [26] is a fundamental concept in epidemiology, used
to describe the spread of infectious diseases within a population. It divides the population into three
groups – Susceptible (S), Infected (I) and Removed (R). A susceptible individual has not contracted
the disease but has the chance to be infected if interacting with an infected individual. A removed
individual either has recovered from the disease and gained immunity or is deceased. The population
evolves over time according to three ordinary differential equations:
dI
dR
dS
“ ´βIS ,
“ βIS ´ θI ,
“ θI,
(1)
dt
dt
dt
for constants β, θ ą 0 representing the infection and recovery rate, respectively. Numerous extensions
of this basic model have been proposed to better capture how epidemics evolve and spread [8].
Beyond epidemiology, population dynamics naturally arise in many other fields, notably evolutionary
game theory [23], biology [14, 7], and the analysis of genetic algorithms [39, 25]. For any dynamical
system, it is natural to ask how it might best be controlled. For instance, controlling the spread of an
infectious disease while minimizing externalities is a problem of significant societal importance.
In many natural models, these dynamics tend to be nonlinear, so the control problem is often
computationally intractable. Existing algorithms are designed on a case-by-case basis by positing a
specific system of differential equations, and then numerically or analytically solving for the optimal
controller. Unfortunately, this approach is not robust to adversarial shocks to the system and cannot
adapt to time-varying cost functions.
˚

MIT. nzg@mit.edu.
Google DeepMind & Princeton University. ehazan@princeton.edu.
;
Princeton University. zhoul@princeton.edu.
§
MIT. drohatgi@mit.edu.
¶
Princeton University. ys7849@princeton.edu.
:

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

