Skill-aware Mutual Information Optimisation for
Generalisation in Reinforcement Learning

Xuehui Yu1,2 Mhairi Dunion2 Xin Li1 Stefano V. Albrecht2
1
Harbin Institute of Technology 2 University of Edinburgh
{yuxuehui,22s103169}@stu.hit.edu.cn
{mhairi.dunion,s.albrecht}@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Meta-Reinforcement Learning (Meta-RL) agents can struggle to operate across
tasks with varying environmental features that require different optimal skills
(i.e., different modes of behaviour). Using context encoders based on contrastive
learning to enhance the generalisability of Meta-RL agents is now widely studied
but faces challenges such as the requirement for a large sample size, also referred
to as the log-K curse. To improve RL generalisation to different tasks, we first
introduce Skill-aware Mutual Information (SaMI), an optimisation objective that
aids in distinguishing context embeddings according to skills, thereby equipping RL
agents with the ability to identify and execute different skills across tasks. We then
propose Skill-aware Noise Contrastive Estimation (SaNCE), a K-sample estimator
used to optimise the SaMI objective. We provide a framework for equipping an RL
agent with SaNCE in practice and conduct experimental validation on modified
MuJoCo and Panda-gym benchmarks. We empirically find that RL agents that learn
by maximising SaMI achieve substantially improved zero-shot generalisation to
unseen tasks. Additionally, the context encoder trained with SaNCE demonstrates
greater robustness to a reduction in the number of available samples, thus possessing
the potential to overcome the log-K curse.

1

Introduction
(a)

(b)

Reinforcement Learning (RL)
agents often learn policies that
do not generalise across tasks
Unpushable
Pushable
(High Friction)
(Low Friction)
Goal Position
in which the environmental features and optimal skills are different [des Combes et al., 2018,
Environmental features
Mass, Friction, Material, …
Garcin et al., 2024]. Consider a
set of cube-moving tasks where
👉
an agent is required to move a
Friction
cube to a goal position on a table
Liftable (Low Mass) Unliftable (High Mass)
(Figure 1). These tasks become
challenging if environmental fea- Figure 1: (a) In a cube-moving environment, tasks are defined
tures, such as table friction, vary according to different environmental features. (b) Different tasks
between tasks. When facing an have different transition dynamics caused by underlying environunknown environment, the agent mental features, hence optimal skills are different across tasks.
needs to explore effectively, understand the environment, and adjust its behaviour accordingly within
an episode. For instance, if the agent tries to push a cube across a table covered by a tablecloth and
finds it “unpushable,” it should infer that the table friction is relatively high and adapt by lifting
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

