Leveraging Hallucinations to Reduce Manual Prompt
Dependency in Promptable Segmentation

1

Jian Hu1 , Jiayi Lin1 , Junchi Yan2 , Shaogang Gong1
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, Queen Mary University of London
2
Dept. of CSE & School of AI & Moe Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{jian.hu, jiayi.lin, s.gong}@qmul.ac.uk, yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn
https://lwpyh.github.io/ProMaC/

Abstract
Promptable segmentation typically requires instance-specific manual prompts to
guide the segmentation of each desired object. To minimize such a need, taskgeneric promptable segmentation has been introduced, which employs a single
task-generic prompt to segment various images of different objects in the same
task. Current methods use Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) to reason detailed instance-specific prompts from a task-generic prompt for improving
segmentation accuracy. The effectiveness of this segmentation heavily depends on
the precision of these derived prompts. However, MLLMs often suffer hallucinations during reasoning, resulting in inaccurate prompting. While existing methods
focus on eliminating hallucinations to improve a model, we argue that MLLM
hallucinations can reveal valuable contextual insights when leveraged correctly, as
they represent pre-trained large-scale knowledge beyond individual images. In this
paper, we utilize hallucinations to mine task-related information from images and
verify its accuracy for enhancing precision of the generated prompts. Specifically,
we introduce an iterative Prompt-Mask Cycle generation framework (ProMaC)
with a prompt generator and a mask generator. The prompt generator uses a multiscale chain of thought prompting, initially exploring hallucinations for extracting
extended contextual knowledge on a test image. These hallucinations are then
reduced to formulate precise instance-specific prompts, directing the mask generator to produce masks that are consistent with task semantics by mask semantic
alignment. The generated masks iteratively induce the prompt generator to focus
more on task-relevant image areas and reduce irrelevant hallucinations, resulting
jointly in better prompts and masks. Experiments on 5 benchmarks demonstrate
the effectiveness of ProMaC. Code given in https://lwpyh.github.io/ProMaC/.

1

Introduction

Current promptable segmentation methods rely on instance-specific manual prompts to guide segmentation, greatly limiting its large-scale application. Recently, a manual-free task-generic promptable
segmentation approach was introduced [21]: only a single task-generic prompt is needed for all
samples under the same task, e.g., “camouflaged animal” is a task-generic prompt for all images in
a camouflaged object detection task. The model segments task-relevant objects in various images
based on this generic prompt, significantly reducing the annotation workload.
This work was supported by Veritone, Adobe, OpenAI, the Apocrita HPC facility from the QMUL ResearchIT, the China Scholarship Council, NSFC (92370201, 62222607) and Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Major Project under Grant 2021SHZDZX0102. Thanks to Weitong Cai for helpful discussion.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

