Universal Physics Transformers: A Framework For
Efficiently Scaling Neural Operators

Benedikt Alkin 1,2 Andreas Fürst 1 Simon Schmid 3 Lukas Gruber 1
Markus Holzleitner 4 Johannes Brandstetter 1,2
1

ELLIS Unit Linz, Institute for Machine Learning, JKU Linz, Austria
2
NXAI GmbH, Linz, Austria
3
Software Competence Center Hagenberg GmbH, Hagenberg, Austria
4
MaLGa Center, Department of Mathematics, University of Genoa, Italy
{alkin, fuerst, brandstetter}@ml.jku.at

Abstract
Neural operators, serving as physics surrogate models, have recently gained increased interest. With ever increasing problem complexity, the natural question
arises: what is an efficient way to scale neural operators to larger and more complex
simulations – most importantly by taking into account different types of simulation
datasets. This is of special interest since, akin to their numerical counterparts,
different techniques are used across applications, even if the underlying dynamics
of the systems are similar. Whereas the flexibility of transformers has enabled
unified architectures across domains, neural operators mostly follow a problem
specific design, where GNNs are commonly used for Lagrangian simulations and
grid-based models predominate Eulerian simulations. We introduce Universal
Physics Transformers (UPTs), an efficient and unified learning paradigm for a wide
range of spatio-temporal problems. UPTs operate without grid- or particle-based
latent structures, enabling flexibility and scalability across meshes and particles.
UPTs efficiently propagate dynamics in the latent space, emphasized by inverse
encoding and decoding techniques. Finally, UPTs allow for queries of the latent
space representation at any point in space-time. We demonstrate diverse applicability and efficacy of UPTs in mesh-based fluid simulations, and steady-state
Reynolds averaged Navier-Stokes simulations, and Lagrangian-based dynamics.
Project page: https://ml-jku.github.io/UPT

1

Introduction

In scientific pursuits, extensive efforts have produced highly intricate mathematical models of physical
phenomena, many of which are naturally expressed as partial differential equations (PDEs) [76].
Solving most PDEs is analytically intractable and necessitates falling back on compute-expensive
numerical approximation schemes. In recent years, deep neural network based surrogates, most
importantly neural operators [51, 61, 47], have emerged as a computationally efficient alternative [99,
119], and impact e.g., weather forecasting [48, 8, 1], molecular modeling [7, 4], or computational fluid
dynamics [107, 30, 51, 43, 31, 19]. Additional to computational efficiency, neural surrogates offer
potential to introduce generalization capabilities across phenomena, as well as generalization across
characteristics such as boundary conditions or PDE coefficients [66, 14]. Consequently, the nature of
neural operators inherently complements handcrafted numerical solvers which are characterized by a
substantial set of solver requirements, and mostly due to these requirements tend to differ among
sub-problems [3].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

