Improving Neural ODE Training with Temporal
Adaptive Batch Normalization

Su Zheng1∗, Zhengqi Gao2∗ , Fan-Keng Sun2 , Duane S. Boning2 , Bei Yu1 , Martin Wong1
1
2
Department of CSE, CUHK
Department of EECS, MIT

Abstract
Neural ordinary differential equations (Neural ODEs) is a family of continuousdepth neural networks where the evolution of hidden states is governed by learnable
temporal derivatives. We identify a significant limitation in applying traditional
Batch Normalization (BN) to Neural ODEs, due to a fundamental mismatch — BN
was initially designed for discrete neural networks with no temporal dimension,
whereas Neural ODEs operate continuously over time. To bridge this gap, we
introduce temporal adaptive Batch Normalization (TA-BN), a novel technique that
acts as the continuous-time analog to traditional BN. Our empirical findings reveal
that TA-BN enables the stacking of more layers within Neural ODEs, enhancing
their performance. Moreover, when confined to a model architecture consisting
of a single Neural ODE followed by a linear layer, TA-BN achieves 91.1% test
accuracy on CIFAR-10 with 2.2 million parameters, making it the first unmixed
Neural ODE architecture to approach MobileNetV2-level parameter efficiency.
Extensive numerical experiments on image classification and physical system
modeling substantiate the superiority of TA-BN compared to baseline methods.

Introduction

Originally derived as the continuous limit of a residual connection [4], neural ordinary differential equations (Neural
ODEs) [4, 7, 37, 45, 8, 42, 30, 18, 32, 19, 31] is a family
of continuous-depth neural networks where the evolution of
hidden states is governed by learnable temporal derivatives.
These models exhibit several intriguing features, such as the
capability of temporal reversibility, which enables generative
modeling [4, 15].
Previous studies on Neural ODEs parameterize the learnable
temporal derivatives using a shallow neural network with a limited number of parameters [7, 30]. Without special treatment,
merely stacking additional layers in the temporal derivatives
does not necessarily enhance Neural ODE performance. Furthermore, deeper networks might increase the stiffness of the
ODE system, leading to challenges with the ODE solver, such
as excessively small step sizes or even failures due to infinite
state values, as shown in Figure 1.

0.95
Test Accuracy

1

0.8
0.65

NODE w/ TA-BN (Ours, 18 layers)
NODE w/ Mini-batch BN (18 layers)
NODE w/o BN (18 layers)
NODE w/o BN (12 layers)
NODE w/o BN (8 layers)
NODE w/o BN (4 layers)

0.5
0.35

20

40

60
80
Epoch

100

120

Figure 1: Test accuracies are depicted over the training epochs on
CIFAR-10, utilizing Neural ODEs
with different numbers of convolution layers as the backbones for
learnable derivatives. Dashed horizontal lines denote instances of
training failures.

In efforts to deepen the model and address instabilities, one
might instinctively consider Batch Normalization (BN) [5, 29, 16, 39, 2] as a remedy to stabilize the
intermediate state values of Neural ODEs [13, 35], because BN was originally proposed to accelerate
∗

The first two authors contribute equally. Correspond to Bei Yu at byu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

