CoSW: Conditional Sample Weighting for Smoke
Segmentation with Label Noise

Haitao Zhao∗ Zhongze Wang Kaijie Zhao Jingchao Peng
School of Information Science and Engineering
East China University of Science and Technology
Shanghai, China
{lujianyao,zzwang,kjzhao,pjc}@mail.ecust.edu.cn,
haitaozhao@ecust.edu.cn

Lujian Yao

Abstract
Smoke segmentation is of great importance in precisely identifying the smoke
location, enabling timely fire rescue and gas leak detection. However, due to the
visual diversity and blurry edges of the non-grid smoke, noisy labels are almost
inevitable in large-scale pixel-level smoke datasets. Noisy labels significantly
impact the robustness of the model and may lead to serious accidents. Nevertheless,
currently, there are no specific methods for addressing noisy labels in smoke segmentation. Smoke differs from regular objects as its transparency varies, causing
inconsistent features in the noisy labels. In this paper, we propose a conditional
sample weighting (CoSW). CoSW utilizes a multi-prototype framework, where
prototypes serve as prior information to apply different weighting criteria to the
different feature clusters. A novel regularized within-prototype entropy (RWE) is
introduced to achieve CoSW and stable prototype update. The experiments show
that our approach achieves SOTA performance on both real-world and synthetic
noisy smoke segmentation datasets.

1

Introduction

Smoke segmentation holds significant research value as it enables precise localization of smoke.
In wildlife, smoke serves as a vital indicator of fire, and smoke segmentation allows for rapid
identification of the source of fire, facilitating prompt rescue [22, 56]. In industrial production, smoke
segmentation can identify gas leakage thereby preventing further spread [16]. There have been
numerous methods developed for smoke segmentation, ranging from traditional approaches based on
color [19, 48] and smoke morphology [11] to deep learning techniques that involve expanding the
receptive field [22, 28, 54, 55].
However, to the best of our knowledge, there is no specific work for smoke segmentation with label
noise. Noisy labels are almost inevitable in smoke segmentation. Unlike regular objects with clear
and concise edges, which are easy to annotate, smoke annotation poses two main challenges: 1)
Smoke edges are complex and blurry [53, 55], making it hard to distinguish smoke and background.
2) Smoke is non-rigid [23, 51] and lacks a fixed shape, making it difficult for annotators to become
proficient through practice with the same shape.
The noisy labels can have a large impact on the robustness of the model due to their strong memorization power [1, 58]. Given that smoke segmentation is related to safety problems, errors stemming from
the instability can lead to significant disasters, resulting in extensive casualties and property losses.
Therefore, it is crucial to develop robust training to mitigate the noisy labels in smoke segmentation.
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

