shapiq: Shapley Interactions for Machine Learning

Maximilian Muschalik∗
LMU Munich, MCML

Patrick Kolpaczki
Paderborn University

Hubert Baniecki
University of Warsaw,
Warsaw University of Technology
Barbara Hammer
Bielefeld University

Fabian Fumagalli
Bielefeld University

Eyke Hüllermeier
LMU Munich, MCML

Abstract
Originally rooted in game theory, the Shapley Value (SV) has recently become an
important tool in machine learning research. Perhaps most notably, it is used for
feature attribution and data valuation in explainable artificial intelligence. Shapley
Interactions (SIs) naturally extend the SV and address its limitations by assigning
joint contributions to groups of entities, which enhance understanding of black
box machine learning models. Due to the exponential complexity of computing
SVs and SIs, various methods have been proposed that exploit structural assumptions or yield probabilistic estimates given limited resources. In this work, we
introduce shapiq, an open-source Python package that unifies state-of-the-art
algorithms to efficiently compute SVs and any-order SIs in an application-agnostic
framework. Moreover, it includes a benchmarking suite containing 11 machine
learning applications of SIs with pre-computed games and ground-truth values to
systematically assess computational performance across domains. For practitioners,
shapiq is able to explain and visualize any-order feature interactions in predictions
of models, including vision transformers, language models, as well as XGBoost
and LightGBM with TreeSHAP-IQ. With shapiq, we extend shap beyond feature
attributions and consolidate the application of SVs and SIs in machine learning
that facilitates future research. The source code and documentation are available at
https://github.com/mmschlk/shapiq.

1

Introduction

Assigning value to entities collectively performing a task is essential in various real-world applications
of machine learning (ML) [63, 74]. For instance, when reimbursing data providers based on the value
of data [30, 80], or justifying a model’s prediction based on value of feature information [13, 18, 19,
55, 77]. The fair distribution of value among a group of entities is a central aspect of cooperative
game theory, where the Shapley Value (SV) [76] defines a unique allocation scheme based on intuitive
axioms. The SV is applicable to any game, i.e. a function that specifies the worth of all possible groups
of entities, called coalitions. In ML, application-specific games were introduced [5, 30, 74, 80, 84],
which typically require a definition of the overall worth and a notion of entities’ absence [19]. The
SV fairly distributes the overall worth among individuals by evaluating the game for all coalitions.
However, it does not give insights on synergies or redundancies between entities. For instance, while
two features such as latitude and longitude convey separate information, only their joint consideration
reveals the synergy of encoding an exact location. The value of such a group of entities is known as
an interaction [33], or in this context feature interaction [29], and is crucial to understand predictions
of complex ML models [20, 48, 49, 61, 66, 78, 82, 86], as illustrated in Figure 1.
∗

Corresponding author (maximilian.muschalik@ifi.lmu.de)

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

