Benchmarking Complex Instruction-Following with
Multiple Constraints Composition
†∗

∗

Bosi Wen1, , Pei Ke3, Xiaotao Gu2 Lindong Wu2 Hao Huang2 Jinfeng Zhou1
†
†
Wenchuang Li4, Binxin Hu5, Wendy Gao2 Jiaxin Xu1 Yiming Liu1
‡
Jie Tang1 Hongning Wang1 Minlie Huang1,
1
2
3
Tsinghua University
Zhipu AI
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
4
China University of Geosciences 5 Central China Normal University
wbs23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, aihuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Instruction following is one of the fundamental capabilities of large language
models (LLMs). As the ability of LLMs is constantly improving, they have been
increasingly applied to deal with complex human instructions in real-world scenarios. Therefore, how to evaluate the ability of complex instruction-following of
LLMs has become a critical research problem. Existing benchmarks mainly focus
on modeling different types of constraints in human instructions while neglecting
the composition of different constraints, which is an indispensable constituent in
complex instructions. To this end, we propose ComplexBench, a benchmark for
comprehensively evaluating the ability of LLMs to follow complex instructions
composed of multiple constraints. We propose a hierarchical taxonomy for complex instructions, including 4 constraint types, 19 constraint dimensions, and 4
composition types, and manually collect a high-quality dataset accordingly. To
make the evaluation reliable, we augment LLM-based evaluators with rules to
effectively verify whether generated texts can satisfy each constraint and composition. Furthermore, we obtain the final evaluation score based on the dependency
structure determined by different composition types. ComplexBench identifies
significant deficiencies in existing LLMs when dealing with complex instructions
with multiple constraints composition1 .

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have proven their remarkable abilities in addressing various NLP
tasks [1]. Among these, instruction following is one of the most crucial requirements for LLM
applications as it determines how well LLMs align with human intents [2]. In real-world use of
LLMs, almost all the tasks are formulated as instruction following, where human instructions impose
different constraints on the model output to specify the requirement of specific tasks [3].
Hence, how to accurately measure the quality of instruction following has become an essential
problem. While early works focused on simple and direct human instructions in traditional NLP
tasks, such as translation and text classification [4, 5, 6], recent works have resorted to complex
instructions consisting of multiple constraints [3, 7, 8, 9], which are important constituents of
LLM’s real-world use including role-play [10] and LLMs as agents [11]. These complex instruction* Equal contribution
†

Work done when these authors interned at Zhipu AI.
Corresponding author
1
Our dataset and codes are available at https://github.com/thu-coai/ComplexBench.
‡

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

