Inversion-based Latent Bayesian Optimization

Jaewon Chu∗, Jinyoung Park∗, Seunghun Lee, Hyunwoo J. Kim†
Computer Science & Engineering
Korea University
{allonsy07, lpmn678, llsshh319, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Latent Bayesian optimization (LBO) approaches have successfully adopted
Bayesian optimization over a continuous latent space by employing an encoderdecoder architecture to address the challenge of optimization in a high dimensional
or discrete input space. LBO learns a surrogate model to approximate the black-box
objective function in the latent space. However, we observed that most LBO methods suffer from the ‘misalignment problem’, which is induced by the reconstruction
error of the encoder-decoder architecture. It hinders learning an accurate surrogate
model and generating high-quality solutions. In addition, several trust region-based
LBO methods select the anchor, the center of the trust region, based solely on the
objective function value without considering the trust region’s potential to enhance
the optimization process. To address these issues, we propose Inversion-based
Latent Bayesian Optimization (InvBO), a plug-and-play module for LBO. InvBO
consists of two components: an inversion method and a potential-aware trust region
anchor selection. The inversion method searches the latent code that completely
reconstructs the given target data. The potential-aware trust region anchor selection
considers the potential capability of the trust region for better local optimization.
Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of InvBO on nine real-world
benchmarks, such as molecule design and arithmetic expression fitting tasks. Code
is available at https://github.com/mlvlab/InvBO.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) has been used in a wide range of applications such as material science [1], chemical design [2, 3], ,and hyperparameter optimization [4, 5]. The main idea of BO
is probabilistically estimating the expensive black-box objective function using a surrogate model
to find the optimal solution with minimum objective function evaluation. While BO has shown its
success on continuous domains, applying BO over discrete input space is challenging [6, 7]. To
address it, Latent Bayesian Optimization (LBO) has been proposed [8–14]. LBO performs BO over
a latent space by mapping the discrete input space into the continual latent space with generative
models such as Variational Auto Encoders (VAE) [15], consisting of an encoder qϕ and a decoder pθ .
Unlike the standard BO, the surrogate model in LBO associates a latent vector z with an objective
function value by emulating the composition of the objective function and the decoder of VAE.
In LBO, however, the reconstruction error of the VAE often leads to one latent vector z being
associated with two different objective function values as explained in Figure 1. We observe that
the discrepancy between y and y ′ (or x and x′ ) hinders learning an accurate surrogate model g
and generating high-quality solutions. We name this the ‘misalignment problem’. Most prior
works [9, 11, 12] use the surrogate model g enc , which is trained with the encoder triplet (x, z, y), and
∗
†

equal contributions
Corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

