Fast Best-of-N Decoding via Speculative Rejection

Hanshi Sun1∗ , Momin Haider2∗† , Ruiqi Zhang3∗ , Huitao Yang5 , Jiahao Qiu4 ,
Ming Yin4 , Mengdi Wang4 , Peter L. Bartlett3,6 , Andrea Zanette1∗
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 University of Virginia, 3 UC Berkeley
4
Princeton University, 5 Fudan University, 6 Google DeepMind
{hanshis,azanette}@andrew.cmu.edu, {rqzhang,peter}@berkeley.edu
{jq3984,my0049,mengdiw}@princeton.edu, htyang21@m.fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
The safe and effective deployment of Large Language Models (LLMs) involves a
critical step called alignment, which ensures that the model’s responses are in accordance with human preferences. Prevalent alignment techniques, such as DPO,
PPO and their variants, align LLMs by changing the pre-trained model weights
during a phase called post-training. While predominant, these post-training methods add substantial complexity before LLMs can be deployed. Inference-time
alignment methods avoid the complex post-training step and instead bias the generation towards responses that are aligned with human preferences. The bestknown inference-time alignment method, called Best-of-N, is as effective as the
state-of-the-art post-training procedures. Unfortunately, Best-of-N requires vastly
more resources at inference time than standard decoding strategies, which makes
it computationally not viable. In this work, we introduce S PECULATIVE R EJEC TION , a computationally-viable inference-time alignment algorithm. It generates
high-scoring responses according to a given reward model, like Best-of-N does,
while being between 16 to 32 times more computationally efficient.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs), pre-trained on massive corpora, have demonstrated remarkable
capabilities in handling diverse tasks like creative writing, summarization and question-answering
[10, 13, 63]. Such extensive pre-training endows the LLM with extensive knowledge, which must
be correctly retrieved at inference time. Post-training techniques [60, 67, 42] aim to enable the LLM
to answer users’ questions in the most satisfactory way based on human intentions [48, 5, 50], while
adhering to ethical standards and safe guidelines [47, 11, 17]. Popular post-training methods include
supervised finetuning, Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF), Direct Preference
Optimization (DPO), Expert Iteration (EI), and their variants [14, 48, 56, 26, 6, 64, 78, 77, 19, 50,
40, 49, 73, 80].
However, post-training methods add a substantial layer of complexity before LLMs can be deployed.
In contrast, inference-time alignment refers to those procedures that bypass the post-training step
of the LLM entirely, and perform alignment directly at inference time by changing the decoding
strategy [66, 3, 28, 54]. Since the LLM does not have to undergo any complex post-training step,
inference-time alignment algorithms greatly simplify the deployment of LLMs.
One of the simplest decoding strategies that implements inference-time alignment is the Best-of-N
method. Best-of-N generates N responses for a single prompt, and the best response is selected
∗

indicates core authors; the detailed contributions are listed in Appendix A. Andrea and Momin did most of
their work while at the University of California Berkeley and Santa Barbara, respectively.
† rest in peace
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

