Learning a Single Neuron Robustly
to Distributional Shifts and Adversarial Label Noise
Shuyao Li∗
University of Wisconsin-Madison
shuyao.li@wisc.edu

Sushrut Karmalkar∗
University of Wisconsin-Madison
skarmalkar@wisc.edu

Ilias Diakonikolas
University of Wisconsin-Madison
ilias@cs.wisc.edu

Jelena Diakonikolas
University of Wisconsin-Madison
jelena@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of learning a single neuron with respect to the L22 -loss in
the presence of adversarial distribution shifts, where the labels can be arbitrary,
and the goal is to find a “best-fit” function. More precisely, given training samples
from a reference distribution p0 , the goal is to approximate the vector w∗ which
minimizes the squared loss with respect to the worst-case distribution that is close in
χ2 -divergence to p0 . We design a computationally efficient algorithm that recovers
a vector ŵ satisfying Ep∗ (σ(ŵ · x) − y)2 ≤ C Ep∗ (σ(w∗ · x) − y)2 + ϵ, where
C > 1 is a dimension-independent constant and (w∗ , p∗ ) is the witness attaining
the min-max risk minw : ∥w∥≤W maxp E(x,y)∼p(σ(w·x)−y)2 −νχ2 (p, p0 ). Our
algorithm follows a primal-dual framework and is designed by directly bounding
the risk with respect to the original, nonconvex L22 loss. From an optimization
standpoint, our work opens new avenues for the design of primal-dual algorithms
under structured nonconvexity.

1

Introduction

The problem of learning a single neuron from randomly drawn labeled examples is a fundamental
problem extensively studied in the machine learning literature. Given labeled examples {(xi , yi ) :
(xi , yi ) ∈ Rd × R}N
i=1 drawn from a reference distribution p0 , the goal in this context is to recover a
parameter vector w0∗ that minimizes the squared loss Λσ,p0 (w) over a ball of radius W > 0:
w0∗ :=

arg min
w∈Rd :∥w∥2 ≤W

Λσ,p0 (w);

Λσ,p0 (w) := E(x,y)∼p0 (σ(w · x) − y)2 ,

(1)

where σ : R → R is a known (typically non-linear) non-decreasing activation function (e.g., the ReLU
activation σ(t) = max(0, t)) and we denote by OPT0 = minw:∥w∥2 ≤W Λσ,p0 (w) the minimum
squared loss. In the realizable setting — where y = σ(w0∗ · x) and thus OPT0 = 0 — this problem
is well-understood and by now part of the folklore (see, e.g., [KS09; Kak+11; Sol17; YS20]). The
results for the realizable setting also naturally extend to zero-mean bounded-variance label noise.
The more realistic agnostic model [Hau92; KSS92] (a.k.a. adversarial label noise) aims to identify
the best-fitting neuron for a reference distribution of the examples, without any assumptions on
label structure. However, it is known that in this setting finding a parameter vector with square loss
OPT0 +ϵ requires dpoly(1/ϵ) time, even if the x-marginal distribution is Gaussian [GKK19; DKZ20;
GGK20; Dia+21; DKR23]. Even if we relax our goal to achieve error O(OPT0 ) + ϵ, efficient
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

