Layer-Adaptive State Pruning
for Deep State Space Models

Minseon Gwak† , Seongrok Moon† , Joohwan Ko‡ , PooGyeon Park†∗
†
Department of Electrical Engineering, POSTECH
‡
Department of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts Amherst
{minseon25,srmoon,ppg}@postech.ac.kr, joohwanko@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Due to the lack of state dimension optimization methods, deep state space models
(SSMs) have sacrificed model capacity, training search space, or stability to alleviate computational costs caused by high state dimensions. In this work, we provide
a structured pruning method for SSMs, Layer-Adaptive STate pruning (LAST),
which reduces the state dimension of each layer in minimizing model-level output
energy loss by extending modal truncation for a single system. LAST scores are
evaluated using the H∞ norms of subsystems and layer-wise energy normalization.
The scores serve as global pruning criteria, enabling cross-layer comparison of
states and layer-adaptive pruning. Across various sequence benchmarks, LAST optimizes previous SSMs, revealing the redundancy and compressibility of their state
spaces. Notably, we demonstrate that, on average, pruning 33% of states still maintains performance with 0.52% accuracy loss in multi-input multi-output SSMs without retraining. Code is available at https://github.com/msgwak/LAST.

1

Introduction

Deep state space models (SSMs) have proven effective in modeling sequential data by optimally
compressing input history to internal states [Gu et al., 2020, 2021, 2022b, Gu and Dao, 2023, Zhang
et al., 2023, Parnichkun et al., 2024]. Given their modeling capabilities, ensuring the feasibility
and stability of SSMs during training has become a crucial research focus for achieving efficient
learning without divergence. Leveraging the knowledge founded in linear system theory [Kailath,
1980], various advancements have emerged, including stability-guaranteeing parameterization [Gu
et al., 2022a], general system architecture [Smith et al., 2023], and efficiency improvements via
frequency-domain operations, utilizing the fast Fourier transform and the transfer functions of systems
[Gu et al., 2022b,a, Zhang et al., 2023, Parnichkun et al., 2024].
One of the main computation and memory contributors of SSMs is the state dimension n. Since the
initial proposal of SSMs, a multiple single-input single-output (multi-SISO) architecture has been
employed for scalable and efficient training Gu et al. [2022b,a], Gu and Dao [2023], Zhang et al.
[2023], Parnichkun et al. [2024]. In this architecture, rather than directly learning an n-dimensional
system, smaller-dimensional SISO systems are trained in parallel and then integrated through a
channel-mixing layer. Within this structure, Gupta et al. [2022] presented that diagonal systems
can achieve matching performance to nondiagonal systems. Gu et al. [2022a] introduced a stabilityguaranteed model, where the diagonal systems are trained to satisfy the necessary and sufficient
stability condition.
Instead of utilizing multiple SISO systems in parallel, Smith et al. [2023] adopted a multi-input
multi-output (MIMO) architecture, where the enhanced information usage through a MIMO system.
∗

corresponding author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

