DMC-VB: A Benchmark for Representation Learning
for Control with Visual Distractors
Joseph Ortiz∗, Antoine Dedieu∗ , Wolfgang Lehrach, J. Swaroop Guntupalli,
Carter Wendelken, Ahmad Humayun, Guangyao Zhou, Sivaramakrishnan Swaminathan,
Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla, Kevin Murphy
Google DeepMind
{joeortiz,adedieu}@google.com

Abstract
Learning from previously collected data via behavioral cloning or offline reinforcement learning (RL) is a powerful recipe for scaling generalist agents by avoiding the
need for expensive online learning. Despite strong generalization in some respects,
agents are often remarkably brittle to minor visual variations in control-irrelevant
factors such as the background or camera viewpoint. In this paper, we present
the DeepMind Control Vision Benchmark (DMC-VB), a dataset collected in the
DeepMind Control Suite to evaluate the robustness of offline RL agents for solving
continuous control tasks from visual input in the presence of visual distractors.
In contrast to prior works, our dataset (a) combines locomotion and navigation
tasks of varying difficulties, (b) includes static and dynamic visual variations, (c)
considers data generated by policies with different skill levels, (d) systematically
returns pairs of state and pixel observation, (e) is an order of magnitude larger, and
(f) includes tasks with hidden goals. Accompanying our dataset, we propose three
benchmarks to evaluate representation learning methods for pretraining, and carry
out experiments on several recently proposed methods. First, we find that pretrained
representations do not help policy learning on DMC-VB, and we highlight a large
representation gap between policies learned on pixel observations and on states.
Second, we demonstrate when expert data is limited, policy learning can benefit
from representations pretrained on (a) suboptimal data, and (b) tasks with stochastic
hidden goals. Our dataset and benchmark code to train and evaluate agents are available at https://github.com/google-deepmind/dmc_vision_benchmark.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [46] provides a framework for learning behaviors for control, represented by policies, that maximize rewards collected in an environment. Online RL algorithms
iteratively take actions—collecting observations and rewards from the environment—then update
their policy using the latest experience. This online learning process is however fundamentally slow.
Recently it has become clear that learning behaviors from large previously collected datasets, via
behavioral cloning or other forms of offline RL [29], is an effective alternative way to build scalable
generalist agents—see e.g. [40, 38].
Despite these advances, recent research indicates that agents trained on offline visual data often
exhibit poor generalization to novel visual domains, and can fail under minor visual variations in the
background or camera viewpoint [9, 41]. This poor generalization can be understood by formalizing
environments as Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) with a factorized state consisting of control
relevant and irrelevant variables [13]—see Appendix B for further discussion. In such MDPs, in
∗

Equal contribution

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

