AdaptiveISP: Learning an Adaptive Image Signal
Processor for Object Detection

Yujin Wang 1

Tianyi Xu 1,2

Fan Zhang 1

Tianfan Xue 3,1

Jinwei Gu 3

1

2
Shanghai AI Laboratory
Peking University
{wangyujin, zhangfan}@pjlab.org.cn, photon@stu.pku.edu.cn
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{tfxue@ie, jwgu@cse}.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Image Signal Processors (ISPs) convert raw sensor signals into digital images,
which significantly influence the image quality and the performance of downstream
computer vision tasks. Designing ISP pipeline and tuning ISP parameters are two
key steps for building an imaging and vision system. To find optimal ISP configurations, recent works use deep neural networks as a proxy to search for ISP parameters
or ISP pipelines. However, these methods are primarily designed to maximize the
image quality, which are sub-optimal in the performance of high-level computer
vision tasks such as detection, recognition, and tracking. Moreover, after training,
the learned ISP pipelines are mostly fixed at the inference time, whose performance
degrades in dynamic scenes. To jointly optimize ISP structures and parameters, we
propose AdaptiveISP, a task-driven and scene-adaptive ISP. One key observation is
that for the majority of input images, only a few processing modules are needed to
improve the performance of downstream recognition tasks, and only a few inputs
require more processing. Based on this, AdaptiveISP utilizes deep reinforcement
learning to automatically generate an optimal ISP pipeline and the associated ISP
parameters to maximize the detection performance. Experimental results show that
AdaptiveISP not only surpasses the prior state-of-the-art methods for object detection but also dynamically manages the trade-off between detection performance
and computational cost, especially suitable for scenes with large dynamic range
variations. Project website: https://openimaginglab.github.io/AdaptiveISP/.

1

Introduction

Image Signal Processors (ISPs) play a fundamental role in camera systems. Originally, ISPs aimed at
enhancing the perceptual quality, focusing on photography-related applications. Recently, machine
vision cameras also optimized the ISP pipeline for downstream recognition tasks [35, 39, 34, 36].
For recognition tasks, studies have shown a specially designed ISP can significantly enhance their
performance. However, most machine vision cameras [13] still prefer a static hand-designed ISP
and manually-tuned parameters, making it sub-optimal for downstream recognition tasks and also
inflexible for dynamic scenes. Another solution is to directly train detection networks that take raw
files as input, skipping the entire ISP processing. However, this may require re-training the detection
network for each camera sensor, as the raw format varies between cameras, and studies [23] also show
that the raw detection network still performs worse than the detection network runs on ISP-processed
images. Therefore, a well-tuned ISP is important for downstream recognition tasks.
In this work, we aim to design an ISP that can dynamically adapt its pipeline and parameters
for different inputs, tailored for a given high-level computer vision task. This problem faces two
challenges: complexity and efficiency. First, it is a complicated optimization problem to jointly
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

