Neuc-MDS: Non-Euclidean Multidimensional
Scaling Through Bilinear Forms

Chengyuan Deng, Jie Gao, Kevin Lu, Feng Luo, Hongbin Sun, Cheng Xin∗

Abstract
We introduce Non-Euclidean-MDS (Neuc-MDS), an extension of classical
Multidimensional Scaling (MDS) that accommodates non-Euclidean and
non-metric inputs. The main idea is to generalize the standard inner product to symmetric bilinear forms to utilize the negative eigenvalues of dissimilarity Gram matrices. Neuc-MDS efficiently optimizes the choice of (both
positive and negative) eigenvalues of the dissimilarity Gram matrix to reduce STRESS, the sum of squared pairwise error. We provide an in-depth
error analysis and proofs of the optimality in minimizing lower bounds of
STRESS. We demonstrate Neuc-MDS’s ability to address limitations of
classical MDS raised by prior research, and test it on various synthetic and
real-world datasets in comparison with both linear and non-linear dimension reduction methods.

1

Introduction

Many datasets in applications adopt dissimilarities that are non-Euclidean and/or nonmetric. Examples of such popular dissimilarity measures [19, 7] include Minkowski distance
(Lp ), cosine similarity, Hamming, Jaccard, Mahalanobis, Chebyshev, and KL-divergence.
Studies in psychology have long recognized that human perception of similarity is not a
metric [42]. Further, dissimilarity matrices with negative entries (e.g.: cosine similarity,
correlation, signed distance) have also been widely used in various problems. Negative inner
product norms also have deep connections to hyperbolic spaces as well as the study of
spacetime in special relativity theory.
In many machine learning practices, embedding in low dimensional vector space is often explicitly or implicitly done within the data processing pipeline. Such embedding may already
need to consider more general dissimilarities. For example, one branch of graph learning
adopts embedding in non-Euclidean spaces (e.g., hyperbolic spaces [9]), and machine learning for physics model and data (AI4Sicence) needs to consider more general inner product
norms [22]. In transformer models [45, 13], the attention mechanism can also be viewed as
learning a general bilinear form on tokens. Despite the wide adoption of general dissimilarity measures in practice, theoretical study of embedding and dimension reduction for
non-Euclidean non-metric data appears to be still very limited.
In this paper we consider one of the most classical algorithms for data embedding and
dimension reduction — multidimensional scaling – and develop a non-Euclidean, non-metric
version with theoretical performance guarantee.
Background on MDS. Classical multidimensional scaling (cMDS) takes as input a Euclidean distance matrix (EDM), i.e., a symmetric matrix D ∈ Rn×n where each entry is
the squared Euclidean distance between two points in Euclidean space, and recovers the
Euclidean coordinates. Using a standard double centering trick, D can be turned into a
∗

Rutgers University. {cd751,jg1555,kll160,fluo,hongbin.sun,cx122}@rutgers.edu

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

