Cost-efficient Knowledge-based Question Answering
with Large Language Models
Junnan Dong1 , Qinggang Zhang1 , Chuang Zhou1 , Hao Chen1† , Daochen Zha2 , Xiao Huang1
1

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
Rice University
{hanson.dong, qinggangg.zhang, chuang-qqzj.zhou}@connect.polyu.hk,
sundaychenhao@gmail.com,daochen.zha@rice.edu, xiaohuang@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Knowledge-based question answering (KBQA) is widely used in many scenarios that necessitate domain knowledge. Large language models (LLMs) bring
opportunities to KBQA, while their costs are significantly higher and absence of
domain-specific knowledge during pre-training. We are motivated to combine
LLMs and prior small models on knowledge graphs (KGMs) for both inferential
accuracy and cost saving. However, it remains challenging since accuracy and
cost are not readily combined in the optimization as two distinct metrics. It is
also laborious for model selection since different models excel in diverse knowledge. To this end, we propose Coke, a novel cost-efficient strategy for KBQA with
LLMs, modeled as a tailored multi-armed bandit problem to minimize calls to
LLMs within limited budgets. We first formulate the accuracy expectation with
a cluster-level Thompson Sampling for either KGMs or LLMs. A context-aware
policy is optimized to further distinguish the expert model subject to the question
semantics. The overall decision is bounded by the cost regret according to historical
expenditure on failures. Extensive experiments showcase the superior performance
of Coke, which moves the Pareto frontier with up to 20.89% saving of GPT-4 fees
while achieving a 2.74% higher accuracy on the benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Knowledge-based question answering (KBQA) has gained significant attention across various specialized domains, e.g., education and medicine [24, 13, 21, 20]. Given a question, the model is required
to make inferences based on necessary reasoning background [14]. Inspired by the effectiveness of
knowledge graphs (KGs), e.g., ConceptNet [33, 8], where real-world entities are represented in the
structural form as (head entity, relation, tail entity) [7], KG-based models (KGMs) have been proposed to leverage KGs for reasoning. Based on the hypothesis that answers could be located multiple
hops away from the question concepts [24] in KGs, former studies are mainly dedicated to tracing the
trajectory from questions to answers to model the structural information [16, 25, 5, 4], or utilizing
graph neural networks (GNNs) to learn the question-specific subgraph from KGs [14, 37, 39].
With the emergence of large language models (LLMs), e.g., ChatGPT and GPT-4 [29], They have
shown remarkable performance benefited from the injected knowledge during pre-training [38, 12].
However, it is challenging to adopt LLMs in practice. First, either calling the API or deploying
the open-source LLMs with cloud service is prohibitive [2, 9]. GPT-4 is estimated to cost at least
thousands of dollars for pilot-scale customer service [6] while Llama3 70B requires unaffordable
† Corresponding Author.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

