L E D EX: Training LLMs to Better Self-Debug and
Explain Code

Nan Jiang1∗ Xiaopeng Li2 Shiqi Wang2 Qiang Zhou2 Soneya Binta Hossain3∗
Baishakhi Ray2 Varun Kumar2 Xiaofei Ma2 Anoop Deoras2
1
Purdue University 2 AWS AI Labs 3 University of Virginia
jiang719@purdue.edu
{xiaopel,wshiqi,zhouqia,rabaisha,kuvrun,xiaofeim,adeoras}@amazon.com
sh7hv@virginia.edu

Abstract
In the domain of code generation, self-debugging is crucial. It allows LLMs
to refine their generated code based on execution feedback. This is particularly
important because generating correct solutions in one attempt proves challenging
for complex tasks. Prior works on self-debugging mostly focus on prompting
methods by providing LLMs with few-shot examples, which work poorly on small
open-sourced LLMs. In this work, we propose L E D EX, a training framework
that significantly improves the self-debugging capability of LLMs. Intuitively, we
observe that a chain of explanations on the wrong code followed by code refinement
helps LLMs better analyze the wrong code and do refinement. We thus propose
an automated pipeline to collect a high-quality dataset for code explanation and
refinement by generating a number of explanations and refinement trajectories from
the LLM itself or a larger teacher model and filtering via execution verification. We
perform supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and further reinforcement learning (RL) on
both success and failure trajectories with a novel reward design considering code
explanation and refinement quality. SFT improves the pass@1 by up to 15.92%
and pass@10 by 9.30% over four benchmarks. RL training brings additional up to
3.54% improvement on pass@1 and 2.55% improvement on pass@10. The trained
LLMs show iterative refinement ability and can keep refining code continuously.
Lastly, our human evaluation shows that the LLMs trained with our framework
generate more useful code explanations and help developers better understand bugs
in source code.

1

Introduction

Code generation has become a crucial research task to automatically generate source code based
on natural language description [1–4]. Although the recent Large Language Models (LLMs) have
shown impressive capability in code generation, generating the correct code for a complex problem
in single attempt is still challenging [5–12]. This is expected because even for human developers,
completing a hard programming problem might need multiple rounds of trial-and-error debugging.
Self-debugging capability that allows LLMs to retrospect the incorrect code and make changes to
resolve the errors is becoming increasingly important besides their code generation ability.
Existing works [13, 14] investigate off-the-shelf LLMs in the scale of Codex (code-davinci-002) [1],
GPT-3.5 and GPT-4, and show that these LLMs can self-debug the wrong code they generated via
prompting methods in a pipeline of code generation and self-refinement as shown in Figure 1. The
∗

Work done while interning at AWS AI Labs

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

