Attention Interpolation for Text-to-Image Diffusion

1

Qiyuan He1
Jinghao Wang2
Ziwei Liu2
Angela Yao1,
2
National University of Singapore
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
qhe@u.nus.edu.sg
ayao@comp.nus.edu.sg
{jinghao003, ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Conditional diffusion models can create unseen images in various settings, aiding image interpolation. Interpolation in latent spaces is well-studied, but interpolation with specific conditions like text or image is less understood. Common approaches interpolate linearly in the conditioning space but tend to result
in inconsistent images with poor fidelity. This work introduces a novel trainingfree technique named Attention Interpolation via Diffusion (AID). AID has two
key contributions: 1) a fused inner/outer interpolated attention layer to boost image consistency and fidelity; and 2) selection of interpolation coefficients via a
beta distribution to increase smoothness. Additionally, we present an AID variant called Prompt-guided Attention Interpolation via Diffusion (PAID), which
3) treats interpolation as a condition-dependent generative process. Experiments
demonstrate that our method achieves greater consistency, smoothness, and efficiency in condition-based interpolation, aligning closely with human preferences. Furthermore, PAID offers substantial benefits for compositional generation, controlled image editing, image morphing and image-controlled generation,
all while remaining training-free. Our code and demo are available at https://qyh00.github.io/attention-interpolation-diffusion/.

1

Introduction

Interpolation is a common operation applied to generative image models. It generates smoothly
transitioning sequences of images from one seed to another within the latent space and facilitates
applications in image attribute modification [40], data augmentation [38], and videos [46]. Interpolation has been investigated extensively [18, 43, 42] in VAEs [20], GANs [8], and diffusion models [13]. Text-to-image diffusion models [35, 37] are a new class of conditional generative models
that generate high-quality images conditioned on textual descriptions. How to interpolate between
distinct text conditions such as “a truck" and “a cat" (see Fig. 1 (d)) is relatively under-explored. This
issue is, however, crucial for various downstream tasks, such as conditional generation with multiple
conditions [6, 25, 51] or cross-modality conditions [54, 56], as well as for image editing [11, 48],
where precise control over impact of different conditions is essential to achieve desired results.
This paper formulates the task of conditional interpolation and identifies three ideal properties for interpolating text-to-image diffusion models: thematic consistency, smooth visual transitions between
adjacent images, and high-quality interpolated images. For instance, interpolating from “a truck”
to “a cat” should avoid irrelevant transitions (e.g., via “a bowl”). The sequence should change
between the two conditions gradually and feature high-quality and high-fidelity images (vs. e.g.
simple overlays of the truck and cat). These properties directly motivate our quantitative evaluation
metrics for conditional interpolation: consistency, smoothness, and fidelity.
A direct approach to traverse the conditioning space is interpolating in the text embedding itself [53,
55, 16]. Such an approach often has sub-optimal results (see the first row of Fig. 2). A closer analysis
reveals that interpolating the text embedding is mathematically equivalent to interpolating the keys
and values of the cross-attention module between the text and image space. Our analysis further
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

