An Adaptive Approach for Infinitely Many-armed
Bandits under Generalized Rotting Constraints

Jung-hun Kim
Seoul National University
Seoul, South Korea
junghunkim@snu.ac.kr

Milan Vojnović
London School of Economics
London, United Kingdom
m.vojnovic@lse.ac.uk

Se-Young Yun
KAIST AI
Seoul, South Korea
yunseyoung@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
In this study, we consider the infinitely many-armed bandit problems in a rested
rotting setting, where the mean reward of an arm may decrease with each pull,
while otherwise, it remains unchanged. We explore two scenarios regarding the
rotting of rewards: one in which the cumulative amount of rotting is bounded by
VT , referred to as the slow-rotting case, and the other in which the cumulative
number of rotting instances is bounded by ST , referred to as the abrupt-rotting
case. To address the challenge posed by rotting rewards, we introduce an algorithm
that utilizes UCB with an adaptive sliding window, designed to manage the bias
and variance trade-off arising due to rotting rewards. Our proposed algorithm
achieves tight regret bounds for both slow and abrupt rotting scenarios. Lastly, we
demonstrate the performance of our algorithm using numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

We consider multi-armed bandit problems [15], which are fundamental sequential learning problems
where an agent plays an arm at each time and receives a corresponding reward. The core challenge
lies in balancing the exploration-exploitation trade-off. Bandit problems have significant implications
across diverse real-world applications, such as recommendation systems [17] and clinical trials [23].
In a recommendation system, each arm could represent an item, and the objective is to maximize the
click-through rate by making effective recommendations.
In practice, the mean rewards associated with arms may decrease over repeated plays. For instance,
in content recommendation systems, the click rates for each item (arm) may diminish due to user
boredom with repeated exposure to the same content. Another example is evident in clinical trials,
where the efficacy of a medication can decline over time due to drug tolerance induced by repeated
administration. The decline in mean rewards resulting from playing arms, referred to as (rested)
rotting bandits, has been studied by Levine et al. [16], Seznec et al. [20, 21]. The previous
work
√
focuses on finite K arms, in which Seznec et al. [20] proposed algorithms achieving Õ( KT ) regret.
This suggests that rotting bandits with a finite number of arms are no harder than the stationary case.
However, in real-world scenarios like recommendation systems, where the content items such as
movies or articles are numerous, prior methods encounter limitations as the parameter K becomes
large, resulting in trivial regret. This emphasizes the necessity of studying rotting scenarios with
infinitely many arms, particularly when there is a lack of information about the features of each item.
The consideration of infinitely many arms for rested rotting bandits fundamentally distinguishes these
problems from those with a finite number of arms, as we will explain later.
The study of multi-armed bandit problems with an infinite number of arms has been extensively
conducted in the context of stationary rewards [6, 24, 8, 10, 5], where the agent has no chance to
play all the arms at least once until horizon time T . Initially, the distribution of the mean rewards for
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

