Learning Spatially-Aware
Language and Audio Embeddings

Bhavika Devnani1,∗ Skyler Seto2 Zakaria Aldeneh2 Alessandro Toso2
Elena Menyaylenko2 Barry-John Theobald2 Jonathan Sheaffer2 Miguel Sarabia2
1
2
Georgia Institute of Technology
Apple
bdevnani3@gatech.edu, {sseto, zaldeneh, atoso}@apple.com
{elenam, bjtheobald, sheaffer, miguelsdc}@apple.com

Abstract
Humans can picture a sound scene given an imprecise natural language description.
For example, it is easy to imagine an acoustic environment given a phrase like “the
lion roar came from right behind me!”. For a machine to have the same degree of
comprehension, the machine must know what a lion is (semantic attribute), what
the concept of “behind” is (spatial attribute) and how these pieces of linguistic
information align with the semantic and spatial attributes of the sound (what a
roar sounds like when its coming from behind). State-of-the-art audio foundation
models, such as CLAP [7, 44], which learn to map between audio scenes and
natural textual descriptions, are trained on non-spatial audio and text pairs, and
hence lack spatial awareness. In contrast, sound event localization and detection
models are limited to recognizing sounds from a fixed number of classes, and
they localize the source to absolute position (e.g., 0.2m) rather than a position
described using natural language (e.g., “next to me”). To address these gaps, we
present ELSA (Embeddings for Language and Spatial Audio), a spatially awareaudio and text embedding model trained using multimodal contrastive learning.
ELSA supports non-spatial audio, spatial audio, and open vocabulary text captions
describing both the spatial and semantic components of sound. To train ELSA: (a)
we spatially augment the audio and captions of three open-source audio datasets
totaling 4,738 hours and 890,038 samples of audio comprised from 8,972 simulated
spatial configurations, and (b) we design an encoder to capture the semantics of
non-spatial audio, and the semantics and spatial attributes of spatial audio using
contrastive learning. ELSA is a single model that is competitive with state-of-theart for both semantic retrieval and 3D source localization. In particular, ELSA
achieves +2.8% mean audio-to-text and text-to-audio R@1 above the LAIONCLAP [44] baseline, and outperforms by −11.6◦ mean-absolute-error in 3D source
localization over the SeldNET [40] baseline on the TUT Sound Events 2018
benchmark [1]. Moreover, we show that the representation-space of ELSA is
structured, enabling swapping of direction of audio via vector arithmetic of two
directional text embeddings.

1

Introduction

Humans use implicit context when communicating about and comprehending sounds in their environment. For instance, the instruction “Pull over if you hear a siren from behind you” is easily
understood by most humans. However, a machine would need to not only recognize the source the
sound, i.e., the siren (a semantic cue), but also interpret the spatial reference implied by “behind”
∗

Work done while at Apple.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

