LCM: Locally Constrained Compact Point Cloud
Model for Masked Point Modeling

Yaohua Zha1,2 Naiqi Li1 Yanzi Wang1 Tao Dai3 ∗
Hang Guo1 Bin Chen4 Zhi Wang1 Zhihao Ouyang5 Shu-Tao Xia1,2
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Institute of Visual Intelligence, Pengcheng Laboratory
3
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
4
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 5 Bytedance Inc.
zyh1614399882@gmail.com

Abstract
The pre-trained point cloud model based on Masked Point Modeling (MPM) has exhibited substantial improvements across various tasks. However, these models heavily rely on the Transformer, leading to quadratic complexity and limited decoder,
hindering their practice application. To address this limitation, we first conduct a
comprehensive analysis of existing Transformer-based MPM, emphasizing the idea
that redundancy reduction is crucial for point cloud analysis. To this end, we propose a Locally constrained Compact point cloud Model (LCM) consisting of a locally constrained compact encoder and a locally constrained Mamba-based decoder.
Our encoder replaces self-attention with our local aggregation layers to achieve
an elegant balance between performance and efficiency. Considering the varying
information density between masked and unmasked patches in the decoder inputs
of MPM, we introduce a locally constrained Mamba-based decoder. This decoder
ensures linear complexity while maximizing the perception of point cloud geometry
information from unmasked patches with higher information density. Extensive
experimental results show that our compact model significantly surpasses existing
Transformer-based models in both performance and efficiency, especially our LCMbased Point-MAE model, compared to the Transformer-based model, achieved
an improvement of 1.84%, 0.67%, and 0.60% in average accuracy on the three
variants of ScanObjectNN while reducing parameters by 88% and computation by
73%. Code is available at https://github.com/zyh16143998882/LCM.

1

Introduction

3D point cloud perception, as a crucial application of deep learning, has achieved significant success
across various areas such as autonomous driving, robotics, and virtual reality. Recently, point cloud
self-supervised learning [1, 58, 60], capable of learning universal representations from extensive
unlabeled point cloud data, has gained much attention. Among which, masked point modeling
(MPM) [8, 37, 60, 62, 65, 66], as an important self-supervised paradigm, has become mainstream in
point cloud analysis and has gained immense success across diverse point cloud tasks.
The classical MPM [37, 60, 65], inspired by masked image modeling [2, 22, 59] (MIM), divides
point clouds into patches and uses a standard Transformer [46] backbone. It randomly masks some
patches in the encoder input and combines the unmasked patch tokens with randomly initialized
∗

Corresponding author.

daitao.edu@gmail.com

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

