Reinforcement Learning with Lookahead Information

Nadav Merlis
FairPlay Joint Team, CREST, ENSAE Paris
nadav.merlis@ensae.fr

Abstract
We study reinforcement learning (RL) problems in which agents observe the reward
or transition realizations at their current state before deciding which action to
take. Such observations are available in many applications, including transactions,
navigation and more. When the environment is known, previous work shows that
this lookahead information can drastically increase the collected reward. However,
outside of specific applications, existing approaches for interacting with unknown
environments are not well-adapted to these observations. In this work, we close this
gap and design provably-efficient learning algorithms able to incorporate lookahead
information. To achieve this, we perform planning using the empirical distribution
of the reward and transition observations, in contrast to vanilla approaches that
only rely on estimated expectations. We prove that our algorithms achieve tight
regret versus a baseline that also has access to lookahead information – linearly
increasing the amount of collected reward compared to agents that cannot handle
lookahead information.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), agents sequentially interact with a changing environment, aiming
to collect as much reward as possible. While performing actions that yield immediate rewards is
enticing, agents must also bear in mind that actions influence the state of the environment, affecting
the potential reward that could be collected in future steps. When the environment is unknown, agents
also need to balance reward maximization based on previous data and exploration – gathering of data
that might improve future reward collection.
In the standard interaction model, at each timestep, agents first choose an action and only then observe
its outcome on the rewards and state dynamics. As such, agents can only maximize the expected
rewards, collected through the expected dynamics. Yet, in many applications, some information on
the immediate outcome of actions is known before actions are performed. For example, when agents
interact through transactions, prices and traded goods are usually agreed upon before performing any
exchange (‘reward information’). Alternatively, in navigation problems, nearby traffic information is
known to the agent before choosing which path to go through (‘transition information’).
In a recent work, Merlis et al. [2024] shows that even for agents with full statistical knowledge
of the environment, such ‘lookahead’ information can drastically increase the reward collected by
agents – by a multiplicative factor of up to AH when immediate rewards are revealed in advance and
AH/2 when observing the immediate future transitions.1 Intuitively, agents do not only gain from
instantaneously using this information – they can also adapt their planning to account for lookahead
information being revealed in subsequent states, significantly increasing their future values. However,
the work of Merlis et al. [2024] only tackles planning settings in which the model is known and does
not provide algorithms or guarantees when interacting with unknown environments.
1

A is the size of the action space, S is the size of the state space and H is the interaction length.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

