Nonlocal Attention Operator: Materializing Hidden
Knowledge Towards Interpretable Physics Discovery
Yue Yu∗
Department of Mathematics,
Lehigh University,
Bethlehem, PA 18015, USA
yuy214@lehigh.edu
Tian Gao
IBM Research,
Yorktown Heights,
NY 10598, USA

Ning Liu
Global Engineering and
Materials, Inc.,
Princeton, NJ 08540, USA

Siavash Jafarzadeh
Department of Mathematics,
Lehigh University,
Bethlehem, PA 18015, USA

Fei Lu
Department of Mathematics,
Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD 21218, USA

Stewart Silling
Center for Computing Research,
Sandia National Laboratories,
Albuquerque, NM 87123, USA

Abstract
Despite the recent popularity of attention-based neural architectures in core AI
ﬁelds like natural language processing (NLP) and computer vision (CV), their potential in modeling complex physical systems remains under-explored. Learning
problems in physical systems are often characterized as discovering operators that
map between function spaces based on a few instances of function pairs. This task
frequently presents a severely ill-posed PDE inverse problem. In this work, we
propose a novel neural operator architecture based on the attention mechanism,
which we coin Nonlocal Attention Operator (NAO), and explore its capability towards developing a foundation physical model. In particular, we show that the attention mechanism is equivalent to a double integral operator that enables nonlocal
interactions among spatial tokens, with a data-dependent kernel characterizing the
inverse mapping from data to the hidden parameter ﬁeld of the underlying operator.
As such, the attention mechanism extracts global prior information from training
data generated by multiple systems, and suggests the exploratory space in the form
of a nonlinear kernel map. Consequently, NAO can address ill-posedness and rank
deﬁciency in inverse PDE problems by encoding regularization and achieving generalizability. We empirically demonstrate the advantages of NAO over baseline
neural models in terms of generalizability to unseen data resolutions and system
states. Our work not only suggests a novel neural operator architecture for learning
interpretable foundation models of physical systems, but also offers a new perspective towards understanding the attention mechanism. Our code and data accompanying this paper are available at https://github.com/fishmoon1234/NAO.

1

Introduction

The interpretability of machine learning (ML) models has become increasingly important from the
security and robustness standpoints [Rudin et al., 2022, Molnar, 2020]. This is particularly true in
physics modeling problems that can affect human lives, where not only the accuracy but also the
transparency of data-driven models are essential in making decisions [Coorey et al., 2022, Ferrari
and Willcox, 2024]. Nevertheless, it remains challenging to discover the underlying physical system
and the governing mechanism from data. Taking the material modeling task for instance, given that
only the deformation ﬁeld is observable, the goal of discovering the underlying material parame∗

Corresponding Author

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

