E2ENet: Dynamic Sparse Feature Fusion for Accurate
and Efficient 3D Medical Image Segmentation

Boqian Wu1,2,∗ , Qiao Xiao3,∗, Shiwei Liu4 , Lu Yin5 , Mykola Pechenizkiy3 ,
Decebal Constantin Mocanu2,3 , Maurice van Keulen1 , Elena Mocanu1
1
University of Twente, 2 University of Luxembourg, 3 Eindhoven University of Technology,
4
University of Oxford, 5 University of Surrey
{b.wu, m.vankeulen,e.mocanu}@utwente.nl
{q.xiao,m.pechenizkiy}@tue.nl, shiwei.liu@maths.ox.ac.uk,
l.yin@surrey.ac.uk, decebal.mocanu@uni.lu

Abstract
Deep neural networks have evolved as the leading approach in 3D medical image
segmentation due to their outstanding performance. However, the ever-increasing
model size and computational cost of deep neural networks have become the primary barriers to deploying them on real-world, resource-limited hardware. To
achieve both segmentation accuracy and efficiency, we propose a 3D medical
image segmentation model called Efficient to Efficient Network (E2ENet), which
incorporates two parametrically and computationally efficient designs. i. Dynamic
sparse feature fusion (DSFF) mechanism: it adaptively learns to fuse informative multi-scale features while reducing redundancy. ii. Restricted depth-shift
in 3D convolution: it leverages the 3D spatial information while keeping the
model and computational complexity as 2D-based methods. We conduct extensive experiments on AMOS, Brain Tumor Segmentation and BTCV Challenge,
demonstrating that E2ENet consistently achieves a superior trade-off between
accuracy and efficiency than prior arts across various resource constraints. E2ENet
achieves comparable accuracy on the large-scale challenge AMOS-CT, while saving over 69% parameter count and 27% FLOPs in the inference phase, compared
with the previous best-performing method. Our code has been made available at:
https://github.com/boqian333/E2ENet-Medical.

1

Introduction

3D medical image segmentation plays an essential role in numerous clinical applications, including
computer-aided diagnosis [Yu et al., 2020] and image-guided surgery systems [Ronneberger et al.,
2015]. Over the past decade, the rapid development of deep neural networks has achieved tremendous
breakthroughs and significantly boosted the progress in this area [Zhou et al., 2018, Huang et al., 2020,
Isensee et al., 2021]. However, the model sizes and computational costs are also exploding, which
deter their deployment in many real-world applications, especially for 3D models where resource
consumption scales cubically [Hu et al., 2021, Valanarasu and Patel, 2022]. This naturally raises a
research question: Can we design a 3D medical image segmentation method that trades off accuracy
and efficiency better, subjected to different resource availability?
Accurately segmenting organs is a challenging task in 3D medical image segmentation due to the
variability in size and shape even among the same type of organ, caused by factors such as patient
anatomy and disease stage. This diversity amplifies the difficulty to accurately identify and distinguish
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).
∗

Equal contribution.

