Aggregating Quantitative Relative Judgments:
From Social Choice to Ranking Prediction

Yixuan Even Xu
Carnegie Mellon University
yixuanx@cs.cmu.edu

Hanrui Zhang
Chinese University of Hong Kong
hanrui@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Yu Cheng
Brown University
yu_cheng@brown.edu

Vincent Conitzer
Carnegie Mellon University
conitzer@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Quantitative Relative Judgment Aggregation (QRJA) is a new research topic in
(computational) social choice. In the QRJA model, agents provide judgments
on the relative quality of different candidates, and the goal is to aggregate these
judgments across all agents. In this work, our main conceptual contribution is to
explore the interplay between QRJA in a social choice context and its application
to ranking prediction. We observe that in QRJA, judges do not have to be people
with subjective opinions; for example, a race can be viewed as a “judgment” on
the contestants’ relative abilities. This allows us to aggregate results from multiple
races to evaluate the contestants’ true qualities. At a technical level, we introduce
new aggregation rules for QRJA and study their structural and computational properties. We evaluate the proposed methods on data from various real races and show
that QRJA-based methods offer effective and interpretable ranking predictions.

1

Introduction

In voting theory, each voter ranks a set of candidates, and a voting rule maps the vector of rankings
to either a winning candidate or an aggregate ranking of all the candidates. There has been significant interaction between computer scientists interested in voting theory and the learning-to-rank
community. The learning-to-rank community is interested in problems such as ranking webpages in
response to a search query, or ranking recommendations to a user (see, e.g., Liu [2009]). Another
problem of interest is to aggregate multiple rankings into a single one, for example combining the
ranking results from different algorithms (“voters”) into a single meta-ranking. While the interests of
the communities may differ, e.g., the learning-to-rank community is less concerned about strategic
aspects of voting, a natural intersection point for these two communities is a model where there is
a latent “true” ranking of the candidates, of which all the votes are just noisy observations. Consequently, it is natural to try to estimate the true ranking based on the received rankings, and such an
estimation procedure corresponds to a voting rule. (See, e.g., Young [1995]; Conitzer and Sandholm
[2005]; Meila et al. [2007]; Conitzer et al. [2009]; Caragiannis et al. [2013]; Soufiani et al. [2014];
Xia [2016], and Elkind and Slinko [2015] for an overview.)
Voting rules are just one type of mechanism in the broader field of social choice, which studies
the broader problem of making decisions based on the opinions and preferences of multiple agents.
Such opinions are not necessarily represented as rankings. For example, in judgment aggregation
(see Endriss [2015] for an overview), judges assess whether certain propositions are true or false,
and the goal is to aggregate these judgments into logically consistent statements. The observation
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

