Generalized Eigenvalue Problems with
Generative Priors
Zhaoqiang Liu
Wen Li∗
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{zqliu12, liwenbnu}@gmail.com
Junren Chen
University of Hong Kong
chenjr58@connect.hku.hk

Abstract
Generalized eigenvalue problems (GEPs) find applications in various fields of
science and engineering. For example, principal component analysis, Fisher’s
discriminant analysis, and canonical correlation analysis are specific instances
of GEPs and are widely used in statistical data processing. In this work, we
study GEPs under generative priors, assuming that the underlying leading generalized eigenvector lies within the range of a Lipschitz continuous generative
model. Under appropriate conditions, we show that any optimal solution to the
corresponding optimization problems attains the optimal statistical rate. Moreover,
from a computational perspective, we propose an iterative algorithm called the
Projected Rayleigh Flow Method (PRFM) to approximate the optimal solution.
We theoretically demonstrate that under suitable assumptions, PRFM converges
linearly to an estimated vector that achieves the optimal statistical rate. Numerical
results are provided to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1

Introduction

The generalized eigenvalue problem (GEP) plays an important role in various fields of science and
engineering [72, 70, 23, 21]. For instance, it underpins numerous machine learning and statistical
methods, such as principal component analysis (PCA), Fisher’s discriminant analysis (FDA), and
canonical correlation analysis (CCA) [85, 37, 61, 5, 28, 22, 48, 53]. In particular, the GEP for a
symmetric matrix A ∈ Rn×n and a positive definite matrix B ∈ Rn×n is defined as
Avi = λi Bvi , i = 1, 2, . . . , n.
(1)
Here, λi represent the generalized eigenvalues, and vi denote the corresponding generalized eigenvectors of the matrix pair (A, B). The eigenvalues are ordered such that λ1 ≥ λ2 . . . ≥ λn . Throughout
this paper, we focus on the setting of symmetric semi-definite GEPs.
According to the Rayleigh-Ritz theorem [70], the leading generalized eigenvector of (A, B) is the
optimal solution to the following optimization problem:
max u⊤ Au

u∈Rn

s.t.

u⊤ Bu = 1.

(2)

Or, in an equivalent form with respect to the Rayleigh quotient (up to the transformation of the norm
of the optimal solutions):
u⊤ Au
max
.
(3)
n
u∈R ,u̸=0 u⊤ Bu
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

