MetaAligner: Towards Generalizable Multi-Objective
Alignment of Language Models

Kailai Yang1 Zhiwei Liu1 Qianqian Xie2∗ Jimin Huang2
Tianlin Zhang1 Sophia Ananiadou1
1
The University of Manchester 2 The Fin AI
{kailai.yang,zhiwei.liu,sophia.ananiadou}@manchester.ac.uk
{xqq.sincere,zhangtianlin668}@gmail.com;jimin@chancefocus.com

Abstract
Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) focus on aligning to heterogeneous human expectations and values via multi-objective preference alignment.
However, existing methods are dependent on the policy model parameters, which
require high-cost repetition of their alignment algorithms for each new policy
model, and they cannot expand to unseen objectives due to their static alignment objectives. In this work, we propose Meta-Objective Aligner (MetaAligner),
the first policy-agnostic and generalizable method for multi-objective preference
alignment. MetaAligner models multi-objective alignment into three stages: (1)
dynamic objectives reformulation algorithm reorganizes traditional alignment
datasets to supervise the model on performing flexible alignment across different objectives; (2) conditional weak-to-strong correction paradigm aligns the
weak outputs of fixed policy models to approach strong outputs with higher preferences in the corresponding alignment objectives, enabling plug-and-play inferences
on any policy models, which significantly reduces training costs and facilitates
alignment on close-source policy models; (3) generalizable inference method
flexibly adjusts target objectives by updating their text descriptions in the prompts,
facilitating generalizable alignment to unseen objectives. Experimental results
show that MetaAligner achieves significant and balanced improvements in multiobjective alignments on 10 state-of-the-art policy models, and saves up to 93.63%
of GPU training hours compared to previous alignment methods. The model also
effectively aligns unseen objectives, marking the first step towards generalizable
multi-objective preference alignment. This project is open-sourced here.

1

Introduction

The recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) have focused on generating high-quality
responses that align with human expectations and values. At the final stage of alignment, LLMs are
supervised on human preference data via reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) [40,
22, 27], where a proxy, directly trained on human preferences data, is leveraged to provide scalar
rewards for reinforcement learning (RL) on the target model [22].
However, human expectations and values include a broad spectrum of heterogeneous and multidimensional objectives, which makes scalar supervisions inefficient for aligning diverse and inclusive human preferences [3, 24]. These drawbacks motivate further exploration into multiobjective alignment algorithms. Some intuitive methods extend RLHF into multi-objective RLHF
(MORLHF) [26, 19, 24]. Due to its substantial computational cost [19, 24] and the unstable nature
∗

Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

