Frustratingly Easy Test-Time Adaptation of
Vision-Language Models

Matteo Farina1,∗ Gianni Franchi2 Giovanni Iacca1
Massimiliano Mancini1 Elisa Ricci1,3
1

2

University of Trento
U2IS, ENSTA Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
3
Fondazione Bruno Kessler (FBK)

Abstract
Vision-Language Models seamlessly discriminate among arbitrary semantic categories, yet they still suffer from poor generalization when presented with challenging examples. For this reason, Episodic Test-Time Adaptation (TTA) strategies
have recently emerged as powerful techniques to adapt VLMs in the presence of a
single unlabeled image. The recent literature on TTA is dominated by the paradigm
of prompt tuning by Marginal Entropy Minimization, which, relying on online
backpropagation, inevitably slows down inference while increasing memory. In
this work, we theoretically investigate the properties of this approach and unveil
that a surprisingly strong TTA method lies dormant and hidden within it. We
term this approach Z ERO (TTA with “zero” temperature), whose design is both
incredibly effective and frustratingly simple: augment N times, predict, retain the
most confident predictions, and marginalize after setting the Softmax temperature
to zero. Remarkably, Z ERO requires a single batched forward pass through the
vision encoder only and no backward passes. We thoroughly evaluate our approach
following the experimental protocol established in the literature and show that
Z ERO largely surpasses or compares favorably w.r.t. the state-of-the-art while being
almost 10× faster and 13× more memory friendly than standard Test-Time Prompt
Tuning. Thanks to its simplicity and comparatively negligible computation, Z ERO
can serve as a strong baseline for future work in this field. The code is available.

1

Introduction

Groundbreaking achievements in Vision-Language pretraining [31, 14, 33, 39, 52] have increased the
interest in crafting Vision-Language Models (VLMs) that can understand visual content alongside
natural language, enabling a new definition of zero-shot classification. Despite huge pretraining
databases [34, 37], VLMs still face limitations, suffering from performance degradation in case of
large train-test dissimilarity [24] and requiring the design of highly generalizing textual templates [56].
Test-Time Adaptation (TTA) can effectively improve the robustness of VLMs by adapting a given
model to online inputs. Among the various TTA setups (such as “fully” [45], “continual” [47] or
“practical” TTA [49]), Episodic TTA [53] is particularly appealing, as it focuses on one-sample
learning problems and requires no assumptions on the distribution of the test data. When presented
with a test image x, the parameters θ of a model f are optimized through a TTA objective L before
inferring the final prediction, and reset afterward.
∗

Correspondence to: m.farina@unitn.it. Code at https://github.com/FarinaMatteo/zero.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

