Shared Autonomy with IDA: Interventional Diffusion
Assistance
Brandon J. McMahan1 , Zhenghao Peng1 , Bolei Zhou1 , Jonathan C. Kao1
1
University of California, Los Angeles
bmcmahan2025@g.ucla.edu pzh@cs.ucla.edu
bolei@cs.ucla.edu kao@seas.ucla.edu

Abstract
The rapid development of artificial intelligence (AI) has unearthed the potential
to assist humans in controlling advanced technologies. Shared autonomy (SA)
facilitates control by combining inputs from a human pilot and an AI copilot. In
prior SA studies, the copilot is constantly active in determining the action played
at each time step. This limits human autonomy and may have deleterious effects
on performance. In general, the amount of helpful copilot assistance can vary
greatly depending on the task dynamics. We therefore hypothesize that human
autonomy and SA performance improve through dynamic and selective copilot
intervention. To address this, we develop a goal-agnostic intervention assistance
(IA) that dynamically shares control by having the copilot intervene only when the
expected value of the copilot’s action exceeds that of the human’s action across all
possible goals. We implement IA with a diffusion copilot (termed IDA) trained
on expert demonstrations with goal masking. We prove a lower bound on the
performance of IA that depends on pilot and copilot performance. Experiments
with simulated human pilots show that IDA achieves higher performance than
pilot-only and traditional SA control in variants of the Reacher environment and
Lunar Lander. We then demonstrate that IDA achieves better control in Lunar
Lander with human-in-the-loop experiments. Human participants report greater
autonomy with IDA and prefer IDA over pilot-only and traditional SA control. We
attribute the success of IDA to preserving human autonomy while simultaneously
offering assistance to prevent the human pilot from entering universally bad states.

1

Introduction

As technology advances, humans continuously seek to operate more sophisticated and complex
devices (Cascio and Montealegre, 2016). However, more sophisticated technologies typically involve
complicated operational dynamics and high-dimensional control systems that restrict their use to
narrowly defined environments and highly specialized operators (Schulman et al., 2018). While fully
autonomous AI agents can be trained to perform these tasks, this approach has three key limitations.
First, the user’s goal is internalized and not easily deducible in most real-world environments.
Second, removing the user from the control loop reduces their autonomy, potentially leading to poor
performance and decreased engagement (Wilson and Daugherty, 2018a,b). Third, as the capabilities
of AI advance, it is important to consider how to create technologies that assist and empower humans
instead of replacing them (Wilson and Daugherty, 2018a,b).
Shared autonomy (SA) addresses these limitations by blending human (pilot) actions with assistive
agent (copilot) actions in a closed-loop setting. Prior studies demonstrate SA can increase human
task performance in robotic arm control (Laghi et al., 2018), drone control (Reddy et al., 2018), and
navigation (Peng et al., 2023). A critical component of prior work is an empirically tuned controlsharing hyperparameter that trades off copilot assistance with human user autonomy (Reddy et al.,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

