Ferrari: Federated Feature Unlearning via
Optimizing Feature Sensitivity
∗

Hanlin Gu2 ,

∗

Win Kent Ong1 ,
1

†

Chee Seng Chan1 , and

Lixin Fan2

CISiP, Universiti Malaya, Malaysia
2
AI Lab, Webank, PR China

Abstract
The advent of Federated Learning (FL) highlights the practical necessity for the
’right to be forgotten’ for all clients, allowing them to request data deletion from the
machine learning model’s service provider. This necessity has spurred a growing
demand for Federated Unlearning (FU). Feature unlearning has gained considerable attention due to its applications in unlearning sensitive, backdoor, and biased
features. Existing methods employ the influence function to achieve feature unlearning, which is impractical for FL as it necessitates the participation of other
clients, if not all, in the unlearning process. Furthermore, current research lacks
an evaluation of the effectiveness of feature unlearning. To address these limitations, we define feature sensitivity in evaluating feature unlearning according to
Lipschitz continuity. This metric characterizes the model output’s rate of change
or sensitivity to perturbations in the input feature. We then propose an effective
federated feature unlearning framework called Ferrari, which minimizes feature
sensitivity. Extensive experimental results and theoretical analysis demonstrate
the effectiveness of Ferrari across various feature unlearning scenarios, including sensitive, backdoor, and biased features. The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/OngWinKent/Federated-Feature-Unlearning

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) [1–3] allows for model training across decentralized devices or servers holding local private data samples, without the need to exchange them directly. An essential requirement
within FL is the participants “right to be forgotten”, as explicitly outlined in regulations such as the
European Union General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)3 and the California Consumer Privacy
Act (CCPA)4 [4]. To address this requirement, Federated Unlearning (FU) has been introduced,
enabling clients to selectively remove the influence of specific subsets of their data from a trained FL
model while preserving the model’s accuracy on the remaining data [5].
Different from unlearning at the client, class, or sample level [6–8] in FL, the feature unlearning
[9] holds significant applications across various scenarios. Firstly, in contexts where sentences
contain sensitive information such as names and addresses [9, 10], it becomes crucial to remove
these sensitive components to prevent potential exposure through model inversion attacks [11–14].
Secondly, when datasets contain backdoor triggers that can compromise model integrity [15–18], it
is imperative to eliminate these patterns. Thirdly, unlearning biased features becomes essential in
scenarios where data imbalances significantly impact model accuracy due to bias [19–22]. However,
∗

equal contribution; authors are listed alphabetically by first name.
corresponding author (cs.chan@um.edu.my).
3
https://gdpr-info.eu/art-17-gdpr/
4
https://oag.ca.gov/privacy/ccpa

†

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

