The Impact of Initialization
on LoRA Finetuning Dynamics

Soufiane Hayou
Simons Institute
UC Berkeley
hayou@berkeley.edu

Nikhil Ghosh
Dept of Statistics
UC Berkeley
nikhil_ghosh@berkeley.edu

Bin Yu
Dept of Statistics
UC Berkeley
binyu@berkeley.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the role of initialization in Low Rank Adaptation (LoRA)
as originally introduced in Hu et al. [19]. Essentially, to start from the pretrained
model as initialization for finetuning, one can either initialize B to zero and A
to random (default initialization in PEFT package), or vice-versa. In both cases,
the product BA is equal to zero at initialization, which makes finetuning starts
from the pretrained model. These two initialization schemes are seemingly similar. They should in-principle yield the same performance and share the same
optimal learning rate. We demonstrate that this is an incorrect intuition and that
the first scheme (initializing B to zero and A to random) on average yields better
performance compared to the other scheme. Our theoretical analysis shows that
the reason behind this might be that the first initialization allows the use of larger
learning rates (without causing output instability) compared to the second initialization, resulting in more efficient learning of the first scheme. We validate our
results with extensive experiments on LLMs.

1

Introduction

The pretrain-finetune paradigm (e.g., [7, 9]) has revolutionized deep learning, replacing task-specific
models trained from scratch with finetuning of pretrained base models. These base models, trained
on generic unsupervised objectives, learn powerful features that can be rapidly adapted to downstream tasks. The most effective models are consistently the largest ones [14, 25], with state-ofthe-art models reaching hundreds of billions of parameters. While many such models are openly
available (e.g., Llama by Touvron et al. [38]), full finetuning remains computationally prohibitive
for most practitioners. This has led to parameter-efficient finetuning methods, including adapters
[11], prompt tuning [20], and (IA)3 [24].
Low Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [19] has emerged as a leading parameter-efficient method, training
only low-rank adapter matrices added to pretrained weights, typically using Adam [3]. LoRA often
matches or exceeds full-finetuning performance [35, 39], though it may underperform on complex
generation tasks. While prior work has examined rank [31] and learning rate [44] hyperparameters, initialization schemes remain understudied. This work provides experimental and theoretical
justification for choosing between seemingly equivalent initialization approaches.
In standard LoRA training, one of the two LoRA matrices is initialized with random values and the
other is initialized to zero (see Section 2.1). Recently, in Meng et al. [48] the authors proposed an alternative initialization scheme to LoRA which uses the top singular vectors of the pretrained weights
as opposed to a random initialization and showed improved training on several tasks. To further improve LoRA training with quantization, Li et al. [34] introduced a new method called LoftQ for
computing a better initialization for quantized training [27]. However, to the best of our knowledge,
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

