Estimating Epistemic and Aleatoric Uncertainty with a
Single Model

Matthew A. Chan
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
mattchan@umd.edu

Maria J. Molina
Department of Atmospheric and Oceanic Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
mjmolina@umd.edu

Christopher A. Metzler
Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
metzler@umd.edu

Abstract
Estimating and disentangling epistemic uncertainty, uncertainty that is reducible
with more training data, and aleatoric uncertainty, uncertainty that is inherent to
the task at hand, is critically important when applying machine learning to highstakes applications such as medical imaging and weather forecasting. Conditional
diffusion models’ breakthrough ability to accurately and efficiently sample from the
posterior distribution of a dataset now makes uncertainty estimation conceptually
straightforward: One need only train and sample from a large ensemble of diffusion models. Unfortunately, training such an ensemble becomes computationally
intractable as the complexity of the model architecture grows. In this work we introduce a new approach to ensembling, hyper-diffusion models (HyperDM), which
allows one to accurately estimate both epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty with a
single model. Unlike existing single-model uncertainty methods like Monte-Carlo
dropout and Bayesian neural networks, HyperDM offers prediction accuracy on
par with, and in some cases superior to, multi-model ensembles. Furthermore, our
proposed approach scales to modern network architectures such as Attention U-Net
and yields more accurate uncertainty estimates compared to existing methods. We
validate our method on two distinct real-world tasks: x-ray computed tomography reconstruction and weather temperature forecasting. Source code is publicly
available at https://github.com/matthewachan/hyperdm.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) based inference and prediction algorithms are being actively adopted in a
range of high-stakes scientific and medical applications: ML is already deployed within modern
computed tomography (CT) scanners [10], ML is actively used to search for new medicines [29], and
over the last year ML has begun to compete with state-of-the-art weather and climate forecasting
systems [46, 36, 7]. In mission-critical tasks like weather forecasting and medical imaging/diagnosis,
the importance of reliable predictions cannot be overstated. The consequences of erroneous decisions
in these domains can range from massive financial costs to, more critically, the loss of human lives.
In this context, understanding and quantifying uncertainty is a pivotal step towards improving the
robustness and reliability of ML models.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

