On conditional diffusion models for PDE simulations
Aliaksandra Shysheya∗
University of Cambridge
as2975@cam.ac.uk

Cristiana Diaconu∗
University of Cambridge
cdd43@cam.ac.uk

Paris Perdikaris
Microsoft Research AI4Science
paperdikaris@microsoft.com
Richard E. Turner
University of Cambridge
Microsoft Research AI4Science
The Alan Turing Institute
ret23@cam.ac.uk

Federico Bergamin∗
Technical University of Denmark
fedbe@dtu.dk

José Miguel Hernández-Lobato
University of Cambridge
jmh233@cam.ac.uk
Emile Mathieu
University of Cambridge
ebm32@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Modelling partial differential equations (PDEs) is of crucial importance in science
and engineering, and it includes tasks ranging from forecasting to inverse problems,
such as data assimilation. However, most previous numerical and machine learning
approaches that target forecasting cannot be applied out-of-the-box for data assimilation. Recently, diffusion models have emerged as a powerful tool for conditional
generation, being able to flexibly incorporate observations without retraining. In
this work, we perform a comparative study of score-based diffusion models for forecasting and assimilation of sparse observations. In particular, we focus on diffusion
models that are either trained in a conditional manner, or conditioned after unconditional training. We address the shortcomings of existing models by proposing 1) an
autoregressive sampling approach, that significantly improves performance in forecasting, 2) a new training strategy for conditional score-based models that achieves
stable performance over a range of history lengths, and 3) a hybrid model which
employs flexible pre-training conditioning on initial conditions and flexible posttraining conditioning to handle data assimilation. We empirically show that these
modifications are crucial for successfully tackling the combination of forecasting
and data assimilation, a task commonly encountered in real-world scenarios.

1

Introduction

Partial differential equations (PDEs) are ubiquitous as they are a powerful mathematical framework
for modelling physical phenomena, ranging from the motion of fluids to acoustics and thermodynamics. Applications are as varied as weather forecasting [4], train aerodynamics profiling [70], and
concert hall design [76]. PDEs can either be solved through numerical methods like finite element
methods [43], or, alternatively, there has been a rising interest in leveraging deep learning to learn
neural approximations of PDE solutions [56]. These approaches have shown promise for generating
accurate solutions in fields such as fluid dynamics and weather prediction [37, 52, 54].
Some of the most common tasks within PDE modelling are 1) forecasting, where the goal is to
generate accurate and long rollouts based on some initial observations, and 2) inverse problems,
∗

Equal contribution.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

