Uniform Last-Iterate Guarantee for Bandits and
Reinforcement Learning

Junyan Liu
University of Washington
junyanl1@cs.washington.edu

Yunfan Li
University of California, Los Angeles
yunfanli@g.ucla.edu

Ruosong Wang∗
CFCS and School of Computer Science
Peking University
ruosongwang@pku.edu.cn

Lin F. Yang∗
University of California, Los Angeles
linyang@ee.ucla.edu

Abstract
Existing metrics for reinforcement learning (RL) such as regret, PAC bounds, or
uniform-PAC [Dann et al., 2017], typically evaluate the cumulative performance,
while allowing the agent to play an arbitrarily bad policy at any finite time t. Such
a behavior can be highly detrimental in high-stakes applications. This paper introduces a stronger metric, uniform last-iterate (ULI) guarantee, capturing both
cumulative and instantaneous performance of RL algorithms. Specifically, ULI
characterizes the instantaneous performance by ensuring that the per-round suboptimality of the played policy is bounded by a function, monotonically decreasing w.r.t.
round t, preventing revisiting bad policies when sufficient samples are available.
We demonstrate that a near-optimal ULI guarantee directly implies near-optimal
cumulative performance across aforementioned metrics, but not the other way
around. To examine the achievability of ULI, we first provide two positive results
for bandit problems with finite arms, showing that elimination-based algorithms
and high-probability adversarial algorithms with stronger analysis or additional
designs, can attain near-optimal ULI guarantees. We also provide a negative result,
indicating that optimistic algorithms cannot achieve near-optimal ULI guarantee.
Furthermore, we propose an efficient algorithm for linear bandits with infinitely
many arms, which achieves the ULI guarantee, given access to an optimization
oracle. Finally, we propose an algorithm that achieves near-optimal ULI guarantee
for the online reinforcement learning setting.

1

Introduction

In online decision-making problems with bandit feedback, a learner sequentially interacts with an
unknown environment: in each round, the learner plays an policy and then observes the corresponding
rewards of the played policy. Typically, the goal of the learner is to achieve good cumulative
performance, commonly measured by regret or probably approximately correct (PAC) bound. For
instance, in the online advertisement scenario, the goal of the website (learner) could be maximizing
the cumulative click numbers [Li et al., 2010]. Hence, the website aims to minimize the regret
that measures the cumulative clicks of the recommended advertisement compared to that of the
unknown optimal advertisement. In addition to regret minimization, the goal could also be quickly
identifying popular advertisements [Chen et al., 2014, Jin et al., 2019]. To this end, a PAC bound
∗

Corresponding authors

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

