Q-VLM: Post-training Quantization for Large
Vision-Language Models

Changyuan Wang1 , Ziwei Wang3 , Xiuwei Xu2 , Yansong Tang1* , Jie Zhou2 , Jiwen Lu2
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
3
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
{wangchan22@mails.,xxw21@mails.,tang.yansong@sz.}tsinghua.edu.cn;
{jzhou@,lujiwen@}tsinghua.edu.cn; ziwei.wang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a post-training quantization framework of large visionlanguage models (LVLMs) for efficient multi-modal inference. Conventional
quantization methods sequentially search the layer-wise rounding functions by
minimizing activation discretization errors, which fails to acquire optimal quantization strategy without considering cross-layer dependency. On the contrary,
we mine the cross-layer dependency that significantly influences discretization
errors of the entire vision-language model, and embed this dependency into optimal
quantization strategy searching with low search cost. Specifically, we observe the
strong correlation between the activation entropy and the cross-layer dependency
concerning output discretization errors. Therefore, we employ the entropy as the
proxy to partition blocks optimally, which aims to achieve satisfying trade-offs
between discretization errors and the search cost. Moreover, we optimize the visual
encoder to disentangle the cross-layer dependency for fine-grained decomposition
of search space, so that the search cost is further reduced without harming the quantization accuracy. Experimental results demonstrate that our method compresses
the memory by 2.78x and increase generate speed by 1.44x about 13B LLaVA
model without performance degradation on diverse multi-modal reasoning tasks.1

1

Introduction

Large vision-language models (LVLMs) [31, 53] have achieved outstanding performance in a large
number of multi-modal reasoning tasks such as visual question answering [45, 28], embodied
instruction following [1] and robot navigation [2, 16], which are benefited from numerous network
parameters and vast training data. Despite of the high accuracy and generalization ability across
different tasks, the extreme computational cost hinders the deployment on resource-limited mobile
devices in wide realistic deployment scenarios. Moreover, LVLMs sequentially generate the response
with multiple forward passes, which further increases the computation burden to accomplish the task.
Therefore, it is highly demanded to reduce the model complexity of LVLMs in practical deployment.
To reduce the model complexity, model compression techniques have been presented to accelerate
computation and save the storage space including pruning [18, 51], quantization [19, 13, 23], low-rank
decomposition [26, 20] and efficient architecture design [38, 17]. Among these methods, quantization
replaces the float numbers with quantized ones and substitutes multiply-accumulate (MAC) operations
with integer arithmetic for significant efficiency enhancement. Due to the intractability of the training
data and the unbearable training cost of LVLMs, post-training quantization [33, 36, 48] is leveraged
1

Code is available at https://github.com/ChangyuanWang17/QVLM

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

