SE(3)-bi-equivariant Transformers
for Point Cloud Assembly

Ziming Wang, Rebecka Jörnsten
Department of Mathematical Sciences
University of Gothenburg and Chalmers University of Technology
zimingwa@chalmers.se, jornsten@chalmers.se

Abstract
Given a pair of point clouds, the goal of assembly is to recover a rigid transformation
that aligns one point cloud to the other. This task is challenging because the point
clouds may be non-overlapped, and they may have arbitrary initial positions.
To address these difficulties, we propose a method, called SE(3)-bi-equivariant
transformer (BITR), based on the SE(3)-bi-equivariance prior of the task: it
guarantees that when the inputs are rigidly perturbed, the output will transform
accordingly. Due to its equivariance property, BITR can not only handle nonoverlapped PCs, but also guarantee robustness against initial positions. Specifically,
BITR first extracts features of the inputs using a novel SE(3)×SE(3)-transformer,
and then projects the learned feature to group SE(3) as the output. Moreover,
we theoretically show that swap and scale equivariances can be incorporated into
BITR, thus it further guarantees stable performance under scaling and swapping
the inputs. We experimentally show the effectiveness of BITR in practical tasks.

1

Introduction

Point cloud (PC) assembly is a fundamental machine learning task with a wide range of applications
such as biology [12], archeology [36], robotics [28, 20] and computer vision [23]. As shown in
Fig. 1, given a pair of 3-D PCs representing two shapes, i.e., a source and a reference PC, the goal
of assembly is to find a rigid transformation, so that the transformed source PC is aligned to the
reference PC. This task is challenging because the input PCs may have random initial positions that
are far from the optimum, and may be non-overlapped, e.g., due to occlusion or erosion of the object.

(a) Assembly of overlapped PCs

(b) Assembly of non-overlapped PCs

Figure 1: Two examples of PC assembly. Given a pair of PCs, the proposed method BITR transforms
the source PC (red) to align the reference PC (blue). The input PCs may be overlapped (a) or
non-overlapped (b).
Most of existing assembly methods are correspondence-based [2, 23, 4]: they use the fact that when
the input PCs are aligned, the points corresponding to the same physical position should be close to
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

