Prototypical Hash Encoding for
On-the-Fly Fine-Grained Category Discovery

Haiyang Zheng1∗, Nan Pu1∗, Wenjing Li2†, Nicu Sebe1 , Zhun Zhong2†
1
University of Trento 2 Hefei University of Technology

Abstract
In this paper, we study a practical yet challenging task, On-the-fly Category Discovery (OCD), aiming to online discover the newly-coming stream data that belong to
both known and unknown classes, by leveraging only known category knowledge
contained in labeled data. Previous OCD methods employ the hash-based technique
to represent old/new categories by hash codes for instance-wise inference. However, directly mapping features into low-dimensional hash space not only inevitably
damages the ability to distinguish classes and but also causes “high sensitivity” issue, especially for fine-grained classes, leading to inferior performance. To address
these issues, we propose a novel Prototypical Hash Encoding (PHE) framework
consisting of Category-aware Prototype Generation (CPG) and Discriminative
Category Encoding (DCE) to mitigate the sensitivity of hash code while preserving
rich discriminative information contained in high-dimension feature space, in a
two-stage projection fashion. CPG enables the model to fully capture the intracategory diversity by representing each category with multiple prototypes. DCE
boosts the discrimination ability of hash code with the guidance of the generated
category prototypes and the constraint of minimum separation distance. By jointly
optimizing CPG and DCE, we demonstrate that these two components are mutually
beneficial towards an effective OCD. Extensive experiments show the significant
superiority of our PHE over previous methods, e.g., obtaining an improvement of
+5.3% in ALL ACC averaged on all datasets. Moreover, due to the nature of the
interpretable prototypes, we visually analyze the underlying mechanism of how
PHE helps group certain samples into either known or unknown categories. Code
is available at https://github.com/HaiyangZheng/PHE.

1

Introduction

While deep learning based machines have surpassed humans in visual recognition tasks [1, 2, 3, 4],
their capability is often limited to providing closed-set answers, e.g., category names. In contrast,
humans possess the ability to recognize novel categories upon first observation without knowing
their category names. To bridge this gap, Novel/Generalized Category Discovery (NCD/GCD)
techniques [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11] are proposed to transfer knowledge from known categories to
distinguish unseen ones. However, current NCD/GCD methods operate under an offline inference
paradigm where the category discovery is often implemented by applying clustering / unsupervised
classification algorithms on a pre-collected batch of query data that needs to be discovered. This
severely limits the practicability of NCD/GCD techniques in real-world applications, where the
systems are expected to provide online feedback for every newly-coming instance.
To tackle this drawback, Du et al. introduce the On-the-fly Category Discovery (OCD) task [12],
which removes the assumption of a predefined query set and requires instance feedback with stream
data input. OCD poses two primary challenges: 1) The requirement for real-time feedback is
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding authors.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

