EgoSim:
An Egocentric Multi-view Simulator and Real Dataset
for Body-worn Cameras during Motion and Activity

Dominik Hollidt, Paul Streli, Jiaxi Jiang, Yasaman Haghighi,
Changlin Qian, Xintong Liu, and Christian Holz
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
firstname.lastname@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Research on egocentric tasks in computer vision has mostly focused on headmounted cameras, such as fisheye cameras or embedded cameras inside immersive
headsets. We argue that the increasing miniaturization of optical sensors will lead
to the prolific integration of cameras into many more body-worn devices at various
locations. This will bring fresh perspectives to established tasks in computer vision
and benefit key areas such as human motion tracking, body pose estimation, or
action recognition—particularly for the lower body, which is typically occluded.
In this paper, we introduce EgoSim, a novel simulator of body-worn cameras
that generates realistic egocentric renderings from multiple perspectives across
a wearer’s body. A key feature of EgoSim is its use of real motion capture data
to render motion artifacts, which are especially noticeable with arm- or leg-worn
cameras. In addition, we introduce MultiEgoView, a dataset of egocentric footage
from six body-worn cameras and ground-truth full-body 3D poses during several
activities: 119 hours of data are derived from AMASS motion sequences in four
high-fidelity virtual environments, which we augment with 5 hours of real-world
motion data from 13 participants using six GoPro cameras and 3D body pose
references from an Xsens motion capture suit.
We demonstrate EgoSim’s effectiveness by training an end-to-end video-only 3D
pose estimation network. Analyzing its domain gap, we show that our dataset and
simulator substantially aid training for inference on real-world data.
EgoSim code & MultiEgoView dataset: https://siplab.org/projects/EgoSim

1

Introduction

The newest generation of AI-based personal devices evidently requires an understanding of the world
from a user’s perspective to provide meaningful context. For example, Meta’s Ray-Ban glasses [1],
Hu.ma.ne AI pin [2], or the glasses demoed at Google I/O 2024 all share the wearer’s perspective to
analyze their surroundings. Such emerging devices in addition to existing immersive Mixed Reality
platforms have further spurred research efforts on egocentric perception tasks [3, 4].
While head-worn cameras have primarily been used for localization [5, 6], they are ideally positioned
to simultaneously capture the wearer’s arm motions, for example, to estimate upper body poses [7–9]
or detect user input from hand poses and actions [10, 11]. For egocentric pose estimation, previous
work has commonly used head-mounted fisheye cameras pointing down [12–14], which can capture
much of the upper body. This promise has spurred interest in egocentric pose estimation, for which
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

