Stable Minima Cannot Overfit in Univariate ReLU
Networks: Generalization by Large Step Sizes

Dan Qiao
CSE, UC San Diego
d2qiao@ucsd.edu

Kaiqi Zhang
CS, UC Santa Barbara
kzhang70@ucsb.edu

Daniel Soudry
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
daniel.soudry@gmail.com

Esha Singh
CSE, UC San Diego
e3singh@ucsd.edu

Yu-Xiang Wang
Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute, UC San Diego
yuxiangw@ucsd.edu

Abstract
We study the generalization of two-layer ReLU neural networks in a univariate
nonparametric regression problem with noisy labels. This is a problem where
kernels (e.g. NTK) are provably sub-optimal and benign overfitting does not
happen, thus disqualifying existing theory for interpolating (0-loss, global optimal)
solutions. We present a new theory of generalization for local minima that gradient
descent with a constant learning rate can stably converge to. We show that gradient
descent with a fixed learning rate η can only find local minima that represent
smooth functions with
√a certain weighted first order total variation bounded by
e + MSE) where σ is the label noise level, MSE is short for
1/η − 1/2 + O(σ
mean squared error against the ground truth, and e
O(·) hides a logarithmic factor.
e −4/5 )
Under mild assumptions, we also prove a nearly-optimal MSE bound of O(n
within the strict interior of the support of the n data points. Our theoretical results
are validated by extensive simulation that demonstrates large learning rate training
induces sparse linear spline fits. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to
obtain generalization bound via minima stability in the non-interpolation case and
the first to show ReLU NNs without regularization can achieve near-optimal rates
in nonparametric regression.

1

Introduction

How do gradient descent-trained neural networks work? It is an
All functions representable
by Two-Layer ReLU NN
intriguing question that depends on model architecture, data distribution, and optimization algorithms used for training [Zhang et al.,
GD with small 𝜂
2021]. Specifically, in the overparameterized regime with specific
random initialization of the weights, it was shown that gradient deInterpolating
GD with
scent finds global optimal (0-loss or interpolating) solutions despite
Solutions
large 𝜂
a
the non-convex objective function [Jacot et al., 2018, Du et al., 2018,
(when labels
n im
Mi
are
noisy)
b le
Liu et al., 2022]. It was also shown that among the (many) global opS ta
Benign
“Edge of Stability”
timal solutions, the particular solutions that are selected by gradient
overfitting
descent often do not overfit despite having 0 training error [Chizat
et al., 2019, Arora et al., 2019, Mei et al., 2019], sometimes even Figure 1: We show that "Large
if the data is noisy — a phenomenon known as “benign overfitting” step size selects simple functions that generalize."
[e.g., Belkin et al., 2019, Bartlett et al., 2020, Frei et al., 2022].
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

