W ILD G UARD: Open One-stop Moderation Tools
for Safety Risks, Jailbreaks, and Refusals of LLMs

Seungju Han∗♡♠ Kavel Rao∗♢ Allyson Ettinger†♡
Bill Yuchen Lin♡ Nathan Lambert♡ Yejin Choi♡♢

Liwei Jiang†♡♢
Nouha Dziri♡

♡

Allen Institute for AI ♢ University of Washington ♠ Seoul National University
wade3han@snu.ac.kr kavelrao@cs.washington.edu nouhad@allenai.org
∗
Co-first-authors † Co-second-authors

Abstract
We introduce W ILD G UARD—an open, light-weight moderation tool for LLM
safety that achieves three goals: (1) identifying malicious intent in user prompts,
(2) detecting safety risks of model responses, and (3) determining model refusal
rate. Together, W ILD G UARD serves the increasing needs for automatic safety
moderation and evaluation of LLM interactions, providing a one-stop tool with
enhanced accuracy and broad coverage across 13 risk categories. While existing
open moderation tools such as Llama-Guard2 [16] score reasonably well in classifying straightforward model interactions, they lag far behind a prompted GPT-4,
especially in identifying adversarial jailbreaks and in evaluating models’ refusals,
a key measure for evaluating safety behaviors in model responses.
To address these challenges, we construct W ILD G UARD M IX, a large-scale and
carefully balanced multi-task safety moderation dataset with 92K labeled examples
that cover vanilla (direct) prompts and adversarial jailbreaks, paired with various refusal and compliance responses. W ILD G UARD M IX is a combination of
W ILD G UARD T RAIN, the training data of W ILD G UARD, and W ILD G UARD T EST,
a high-quality human-annotated moderation test set with 5K labeled items covering
broad risk scenarios. Through extensive evaluations on W ILD G UARD T EST and ten
existing public benchmarks, we show that W ILD G UARD establishes state-of-the-art
performance in open-source safety moderation across all the three tasks compared
to ten strong existing open-source moderation models (e.g., up to 26.4% improvement on refusal detection). Importantly, W ILD G UARD matches and sometimes
exceeds GPT-4 performance (e.g., up to 3.9% improvement on prompt harmfulness
identification). W ILD G UARD serves as a highly effective safety moderator in an
LLM interface, reducing the success rate of jailbreak attacks from 79.8% to 2.4%.
Model: https://github.com/allenai/wildguard
Data: https://huggingface.co/datasets/allenai/wildguardmix

1

Introduction

Systems using modern Language Models (LMs) pose considerable risks if not adequately safeguarded [4, 8, 44, 15, 39]. Effective content moderation is essential to mitigating these risks by
filtering out undesired inputs [24], monitoring harmful model completions [16], and evaluating
effectiveness of model safeguards by measuring refusal rates on harmful versus benign prompts [30].
In this work, we introduce W ILD G UARD, a light-weight, multi-purpose moderation tool for assessing
the safety of user-LLM interactions. W ILD G UARD provides a one-stop resource for three safety
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

