The Art of Saying No:
Contextual Noncompliance in Language Models

Faeze Brahmanα∗ Sachin Kumarαγ ∗
Vidhisha Balachandranµ† Pradeep Dasigiα† Valentina Pyatkinα†
Abhilasha Ravichanderβ † Sarah Wiegreffeα†
Nouha Dziriα Khyathi Chanduα Jack Hesselδ
Yulia Tsvetkovβ Noah A. Smithβ α Yejin Choiβ ω Hannaneh Hajishirziβ α
α

γ

β
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
University of Washington
µ
δ
ω
The Ohio State University
Microsoft Research
Samaya AI
Nvidia

faezeb@allenai.org, kumar.1145@osu.edu
Code & Models: https://github.com/allenai/noncompliance
Data: https://huggingface.co/datasets/allenai/coconot

Abstract
Chat-based language models are designed to be helpful, yet they should not comply
with every user request. While most existing work primarily focuses on refusal of
“unsafe” queries, we posit that the scope of noncompliance should be broadened.
We introduce a comprehensive taxonomy of contextual noncompliance describing
when and how models should not comply with user requests. Our taxonomy
spans a wide range of categories including incomplete, unsupported, indeterminate,
and humanizing requests (in addition to unsafe requests). To test noncompliance
capabilities of language models, we use this taxonomy to develop a new evaluation
suite of 1000 noncompliance prompts. We find that most existing models show
significantly high compliance rates in certain previously understudied categories
with models like GPT-4 incorrectly complying with as many as 30% of requests.
To address these gaps, we explore different training strategies using a syntheticallygenerated training set of requests and expected noncompliant responses. Our
experiments demonstrate that while direct finetuning of instruction-tuned models
can lead to both over-refusal and a decline in general capabilities, using parameter
efficient methods like low rank adapters helps to strike a good balance between
appropriate noncompliance and other capabilities.

1

Introduction

With language models now serving millions of users via chat interfaces, there is an increasing need
for such models not to comply with every user request. The majority of prior work on refusal, or,
more generally, noncompliance, has focused on AI safety with methods developed to prevent models
from generating content that carries the risk of harm, such as generating offensive language, providing
dangerous (mis)information, or violating privacy, among others [5, 29, 23, 106, 10, 61]. To measure
model safety along these dimensions, several benchmarks have been introduced [92, 99, 86, 88].
In this work, we broaden the scope of noncompliance beyond the prior focus of safety. We consider a
wide range of contextual nuances and out-of-scope requests that models ought to be aware of and
∗
†

Co-first authors
These authors contributed equally and are listed alphabetically.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

