Take A Shortcut Back: Mitigating the Gradient
Vanishing for Training Spiking Neural Networks

Yufei Guo∗, Yuanpei Chen∗ , Zecheng Hao, Weihang Peng, Zhou Jie, Yuhan Zhang,
Xiaode Liu, Zhe Ma†
Intelligent Science & Technology Academy of CASIC, China
School of Computer Science, Peking University, China
yfguo@pku.edu.cn, rop477@163.com, haozecheng@pku.edu.cn, mazhe_thu@163.com

Abstract
The Spiking Neural Network (SNN) is a biologically inspired neural network
infrastructure that has recently garnered significant attention. It utilizes binary
spike activations to transmit information, thereby replacing multiplications with
additions and resulting in high energy efficiency. However, training an SNN directly
poses a challenge due to the undefined gradient of the firing spike process. Although
prior works have employed various surrogate gradient training methods that use an
alternative function to replace the firing process during back-propagation, these
approaches ignore an intrinsic problem: gradient vanishing. To address this issue,
we propose a shortcut back-propagation method in the paper, which advocates for
transmitting the gradient directly from the loss to the shallow layers. This enables us
to present the gradient to the shallow layers directly, thereby significantly mitigating
the gradient vanishing problem. Additionally, this method does not introduce any
burden during the inference phase. To strike a balance between final accuracy and
ease of training, we also propose an evolutionary training framework and implement
it by inducing a balance coefficient that dynamically changes with the training
epoch, which further improves the network’s performance. Extensive experiments
conducted over popular datasets using several popular network structures reveal
that our method consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

The Spiking Neural Network (SNN) has become a popular neural network due to its efficiency
and has been widely used in various fields such as object recognition Li et al. (2021a); Xiao et al.
(2021), object detection Kim et al. (2019); Qu et al. (2023), and pose tracking Zou et al. (2023). The
SNN operates by using binary spike signals to transmit information. When the membrane potential
exceeds the threshold, the spiking neuron fires a spike represented by 1; otherwise, there is no spike
represented by 0. This unique information processing paradigm is energy-efficient since it replaces
multiplications of weights and activations with simple additions. Additionally, this information
processing paradigm can be implemented in an efficient event-driven-based computation manner
on neuromorphic hardware Ma et al. (2017); Akopyan et al. (2015); Davies et al. (2018); Pei et al.
(2019); Guo et al. (2023a), where the computational unit activates only when a spike occurs. This
feature saves energy since the computational unit remains silent when there is no spike. Studies have
shown that an SNN can save orders of magnitude more energy than its Artificial Neural Network
(ANN) counterpart Akopyan et al. (2015); Davies et al. (2018).
∗
†

Equal Contributions.
Corresponding author.

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).

